DISCE VIVERE. LEARN TO LIVE. A brief Treatise of Learning to Live, wherein
is showed, that the life of Christ is the most perfect pattern of direction to
the life of a Christian. In which also, the well disposed may behold their
orderly passage, from the state of Grace, to the state of Glory. Perused and
Corrected.

EPHE, 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light. AT LONDON Printed by E. Short, for Cuthbert Burby, and
are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swanne.

To the honorable and virtuous, his very good Lady, the Lady Elizabeth
Southwell.
AMongst Arts and Sciences (Right virtuous Lady) there is none, without
comparison, more beseeming our Christian care, then that which teaches to live
well and godlilie whilst we are here, so when we are gone we may live
eternally. For most sure it is, that upon this moment of time, depends either
an unrecoverable loss, or a happy welfare in the world to come. And from
hence is it, that I call the well ordering of life in this world, A learning to
live: a learning, because we ought to make it a matter of labor, and study;
to live, because without good and godly life, we are said rather to be, then
live.

To stir up our dullness to this learning, I have thought good to lay before
the eyes of the well disposed mind, the Tenor of the life of Christ, the best
pattern for imitation that ever the world had. Children will follow their
parents. Nature does teach the Bees to go forth at the very voice of their
King or Leader: we may go to School to those small creatures, we have not
only the voice of our heavenly King and Leader, but according to his
humanity, his example also to call us forth to gather the pleasant sap of
several virtues, that so at the euentide of our age, we may return laden with
the sweet honey of holiness, unto that safe Hiue of everlasting peace.

From this most divine life of Christ our Savior, there do arise three
principal reasons, before other, for our better instruction in this lesson of
Learning to live. The first is drawn from the less to the greater, as thus, We
should be humble, meek, patient: Christ the Son of God himself was so. The
second is taken from his example, We should be helpful unto others, loving to
our friends, charitable to our enemies: this our Redeemer did. The third is
from the end, We ought to endure the crosses and calamities of the world:
Christ endured them, and so entered into his glory.

How little this Learning is thought upon, much less practiced, we see it too
apparently before our eyes. Of this Saint Chrysostom complained long ago, when
he willed men either to have opera secundum professionem, that is to say,
works according to their profession, or professionem secundum opera, a
profession agreeable to their works: for this default, there needs no farther
proof but experience, when some have little of Christianity, except the name.

Other Treatises (right virtuous Lady) may seem forcibly to call men to the
amendment of life; by this, in tabing a suruay of the life of Christ, they are
rather allured, then called, only when they remember, that of Christ they are
called Christians. In the whole Tract, if I shall but adone drop to the maine
Ocean, I have attained the farthest of my desires. None can sooner reprehend
the meandness of my labor, then I willingly reprehend my self. The
patronizing hereof I most humbly commend unto your Ladyships protection, whose
I remain ever in all devoted manner.

Your La. in dutiful sort to be commanded, CHRISTOPHER SVTTON.

The Preface to the Christian READER.
IF to live, were no other but to draw in, and to breathe out the soft air (as
the Wise man speaks) a needless labor were it (good Christian Reader) to
lay down any instructions unto the world of Learning to live; for this is
done naturally both of men and beasts, without any teaching, or learning at
all.

If to live, were no other but to cast about for the favor, and riches (as
some men are wont to call it, the way to live,) then would it soon follow,
the greater Machiuilians, the better livers. But somewhat more there is
required to live Christianly then so, somewhat more, I say (and that all shall
one day find) then either drawing in, and breathing out the soft air, or the
plotting to compass the pleasures and profits of the world. It was Balaams
wish, Let my soul die the death of the righteous: It should have Number. 23. 10.
first been his practice first to have lived the life of the righteous.

The time we spend as we do for the most part, consuming our days in vanity,
and our years in folly: (to say a plain truth as in the sight of GOD) is
rather a death, then life: for life is not that which is measured by the number
of years: It is the religious, honest, sober, and harmless conversation,
that draws to an honorable age amongst men here, and to eternal happiness
with God hereafter.

Now the general decay of this Christian course, is the general course of
these sinful days, wherein so many have just cause to cry out, The (...)
(...) world, a wretched world, an ungodly would; such as our forefathers before
us never saw? With ^he buyer, every one ca^isay, It is naught, it is naught:
but all this (says Saint Austen) Professio est, Aug. de Temp. Na. Sermon. 30.
non emendatio, A profession it is, but no amendment is seen. Religion is
become nothing less then Religion, to wit, a matter of mere talk: such
politizing is there on all parts, as a man cannot tell, who is who: so little
sincerity in regard we have of our souls, as if we had no souls at all.

When Plato saw the Argentines live so vnreformedly as they did, Surely these
men, quoth he, live as if they should never die. What soever men for fashions
sake may give out inwords, it is to be feared, there is in some no firm
belief of another world settled in their hearts. Eli said, this is not well.

Young men without obedience, old men without devotion, Christians without
charity, it would make ones heart to mourn, to consider seriously the
calamity of our time, when there needs no more, but as Phillip said unto
Nathaniel, Veni and vide, come and John. 1. 47.
see.

Without all peradventure Christianity is much out of frame, if we consider
things aright: we are generally Christians in name, but in action nothing
less: far from the old Christianity of the world, how so ever we are
ready to control all that ever lived, and will not stick to censure the
blessed Saints of heaven. Our boldness is great, and I pray God our security do
not mar all in the end.

Cornelius, his Almesgiuing and Prayers ascended up into heaven, where are
these to be found amongst us here in earth? In times past Christians vowed
them selves to all holmes of life, they served God in hunger and thirst, in
watching and praying, night and day, they cared not to be poor unto the world,
so they might be rich unto God: to be pilgrims, or as banished men upon the
earth, so they might be citizens in heaven. These holy friends of Christ, as
Confessors, Martyrs, Virgins, devout Christians of all sorts, men fearing God,
and eschewing evil, gave evident testimony to the world, whose servants they
were. It was once the complaining wish of Caesar, That we had such Soldiers
as were in the time of Alexander the great.

Viuitur nec Deo, Live we do, is it to God? I would to God it were. We pass
on for a while, More nostro, after a fashion such as it is, but is all this to
live Christianly? No verily: so a private estate in this world be provided for,
let all sink or swim for the world to come. We respect our selves only,
neglecting all others. Christ pleased not himself, says the Apostle, with us
it is otherwise, and yet we think our selves perfect Christians. In that
great knowledge we have (for we sin not so much of ignorance, as of
negligence) we know but little as we ought. What avails it to have
Pharaohes glory, and Pharaohes ignominy? Ahabs vineyard, and Ahabs
destruction? The rich man's life, and the rich man's death? What blindness is
it in seeking riches or honor; will thou perish, says Saint Austen, for that
which perishes? Thus we go on (and that which is worse) we cannot tell when
we shall make an end. Thus we live, and thus we die.

What other remedy in this estate of things (the disease being so general,
then with Iairus in the Mat. 8. 18.
Gospel, who comes unto Christ with his Domine, veni, et impone manum, Lord,
come, lay thy hand on her, and my daughter shall live: or to renew that
petition of the Prophet David, It Psalm. 102. 13.
is time Lord that thou have mercy upon Sion, yea, the time is come. All that
men can do in this case, is to observe the manner of loving friends, who in
visiting the sick party, every one bringes somewhat, by the grace of GOD to
further his health: for while GOD does afoord space of repentance, and the
happy light of his Gospel amongst us, we may not despair of any ones
conversion to advise men for the best, it is their care to whom God has
commended in his own sted a fatherly care of souls. There is a necessity
laid upon us all to live well: we run for a wager, we fight for a garland.

In seeking to repair devotion and piety, which this world has welneer lost,
we will be as ready as our adversaries themselves, and in honoring our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has honored us all, we will go with them hand in hand, if
not before them, in cleaning to the foundation, we hope one day to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, howsoever uncharitable,
vnpriestly, and unchristian Censurers in many spiteful Pamphlets give out
against us. It Is true, the sinfulnes of this age is great, with sighing hearts
we wish it were otherwise, and with the Publican say, Now God be merciful
unto us, for we are sinners, we are not as we should be, good God make us
better.

But sirs, are we alone in this defect of godliness? Your own Writers will
tell you, no: happily, your own experience can tell you, no, seeing iniquity
like the darkness of Egypt, has spread it self over the face of the earth.
Would to God this bitterness were left on both sides, and that contention were
once laid asleep, Moses would not have an Hebrew smite an Hebrew. There is a
common adversary of us all, let us fight against him who lies in wait like
a subtle spy, his desire is to make discord and trouble in earth, because
he can trouble heaven no more.

Well, let busy medlers content themselves, and serve GOD humbly in their
calling, let them cease to trouble the peace of this Church and Commonwealth
(which Jesus Christ long continue) remembering that of Gamiel, If this counsel
be of men, it will come Act. 5. 38.
to nou^ht, but if it be of God, you cannot destroy it.

Were we no other but plain natural men, God giving us reason and
understanding, we are thence moved to pass our time orderly whilst we are
here. It is our common saying: Better unborn, then untaught: but being
Christian men, merciful Lord, that we should not remember the happy hope we
all have, or ought to have.

In the Articles of our Creed, we mention an everlasting life after death,
and acknowledge a judgment to come: O good God, that we should live, as if
hell fire were no other but a Poetical fiction! Assuredly, we do our calling
open injury, acknowledging the holy Catholic Christian faith, when our
profession promises one thing, and our practice performs another.

Is it not wonderful, that we should even forget whose creatures we are? yet
this we do, all know their beginning was from God, and that after a while in
GOD they must end. Now for to spend this space between our beginning and our
end, in undutiful sort toward him, were in very reason unreasonable.

When we see a vineyard well manured and ordered, we by and by say, It has a
good Keeper: shall we not say the same of a life well ordered? It is a glory
unto the vine, when the branches are fruitful: it is a joy unto the Father,
when the Son is dutiful: we are the branches, Christ is the vine: we are
his children, he is our Father, Father which is above all, through all, and in
Ephe. 4 6.
us all. Being Christians, we are the Lords heritage, and the Lords heritage
should be holy unto him, wherefore the name Christian, says an ancient Father,
is a name of justice, a name of goodness, a name of integrity, of patience, of
humility, of innocence, of piety, and he rightly bears this name, who
never bears malice in his heart, who follows Christ's doctrine, and
endeuoreth Christ's example, that blessed pattern for imitation.

The skillful Painter, having now proposed unto himself some excellent work,
all his study and care is to express in as lively manner as he can the form
laid out before him: the life of Christ our Savior according to his humanity,
is laid out before us as a goodly table, our best Art and industry is
required to work according to this form, and to labor seriously until
Christ be formed in us, as the Apostle speaks, that is, until some form or
resemblance of him appear in us, who are his children, and bear his name.

Rude work, God knows, make they, who never regard the pattern set before
them, nor any way respect the well ordering of the pensill, and so draw such
monstrous and ugly forms, as themselves may be sorry to see: should I call him
a christian, says one, in whom Aug. de vit Christ.
there is no act of Christianity, no conversation of justice, who oppresses
the miserable, who makes many poor to make himself rich, whose mouth is
polluted with untruths, and so forth? whom do proud men fashion or shadow
out less then the son of God, who humbled himself that we might be exalted?
whom do revenging stomachs less resemble the^ him, who meekely prayed for
his enemies? Christ says, Have I been so long with you, and have John. 14. 9.
you not known me?

To call our selves a little to consideration, it cannot be denied that we are
as much (if not more) moved by good examples, as we are by good instructions,
but what say we to that teacher, who has both examples and instructions?

Then look we unto the life of Christ, says Saint Chrysostom, and we
shall find it the Philosophy of the simple, the nurse of young men, the meat
of strong men, the buckler of weak men, the physic of sick men, the book
full of divine instructions, sit for all men.

Those who apply themselves (says Saint Austen) to any of the liberal
Arts or Sciences, are wont to make choice of some especial Author, whose
precepts before other they observe and follow: what better Author then the
Author of all righteousness? what better learning, then that of which Christ
is the Teacher, his Church is the School, those which learn are Christians,
that which is learned is religion, and the end of this learning, is to live
eternally?

Wherefore in the setting down some plain and brief Treatise of Learning to
live, me thought there was no better matter or method, then only to mention
the most divine Actions of our Redeemer, that not so much my small labors, as
the life of Christ might lay down unto well disposed Christians, a good form
of Learning to live. The more ample and exquisite dilating hereof, I leave to
greater Clerks, my self am content for this time (being required where I might
not deny) as before of Learning to die: so now to treat somewhat of Learning
to live, and in both to submit my imperfections to better judgment, and my
meaning to the honest minded, who are wont to take good meaning to the best:
take therefore in good part, gentle Reader, this Treatise for our better
Christian Learning, to Live Christianly as we ought, taken out of the life of
Christ, the best pattern for imitation, that ever this world had.

To them who are passing through dark places, any light be it never so
little, may stand them in sted: To him who wandreth in unknown ways, any small
direction is acceptable, be it never so small, so it point him toward the way
wherein he should pass: The trauailer in a foreign Country, meeting with some
body that speaks his natural language, though it be but harshly, yet it is
some comfort unto him: We often pass in the darkness of our sensual desires,
and are sometimes blinded in the mists of worldly vanities: we stray we know
not whither, any small light, the least direction may in this case somewhat
help us: We are strangers in this world and from home, as the Apostle
speaks, to 2, Cor. 5. 9.
hear somewhat of our native language, that is to say, of heaven, and
heavenly things, though it be in the meanest manner, yet it may somewhat
affect us, especially, our affections being homeward.

If it be said, how should our weakness come near Christ his perfection, to
whom all things were possible by reason of his divine power? The answer is,
our good endeavors are acceptable. If we fancy unto our selves a secure
estate in that we are called Christians, it is showed we are far wide, and
how, (if in devotion we would see our spiritual passage from the life of
grace, to the life of glory, and observe that happy Christian course which
tends unto a thrice happy end) we are directed unto his virtues all along,
from virtue, to virtue.

Assuredly we honor him who has so much honored us, (for of Christ are we
christians, to have part with him) When our light does so Mat. 5, 16.
shine before men, as we glorify our Father which is in heaven. Which light
shows that our happiness is folded up in the bosom of hope.

And this is briefly the sum (good Christian Reader) of that which is
mentioned more at large in the Treatise following, of Learning to live, which
learning only teaches to become good men by the grace of God. It now
remains that we all apply our selves to the practice of this learning. Time
will away, Hippocrates exhorting some to the study of that learning which does
concern the health of the body, would have them make all possible expedition
they could, his reason was, Ars longa, vita breuis: Art is long, life is short.
The same may be said of that Art which concerns the health of the soul.
Should we wax white before we begin? God forbid.

Would to GOD men would more often meditate of the life of Christ, then
ordinarily they do: The birds of the air have nests, and the Foxes have
dens, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head: What Is that, says
Saint Austen? Marie ambitious, and soaring desires, subtle and ungodly devices,
have nests and dens in our hearts, but a remembrance of our Lord Jesus,
which should take peaceable possession of our souls, can have no entrance at
all, in which case we rather want tears, then cause of tears.

That every well disposed christian, who keeps a careful watch over his
soul, and is desirous to live worthy of his calling here, until he come to
live eternally, would begin with the best attention, his best devotion can
yield, to take a dilicent suruay of the life of his life, whose soule-sauing
love, is the Loadstone of our hearts: whose sayings and doings are a law unto
our actions, a Lanthorn to light our steps, the guide to direct our journey, a
Compass to steer our Ship, and last of all the Judge, for to end our
controversies. As the just live by faith, so the just live the life of faith.
Now they live the life of grace, one day they shall live the life of glory.

It is Christ, and Christ alone, who has made a full and joyful satisfaction
for our sins.

The God of patience and consolation, make us followers of God, as dear
children: Ephe. 5. 1.
and grant that we Romans 15 5.
be like minded one toward another, after the example of Christ Jesus, Amen.

If ought be worthy of thy observation, good Christian Reader, remember it is
Gods: if otherwise, it is mine own. Christopher Sutton.

The Contents of the Chapters.
1 AN exhortation mooning every devout Christian to the often meditation of the
life of Christ. 2 That the life of a Christian should be passed over in this
world, in a holy and virtuous conversation. 3 That the end of a Christian life,
is endless felicity in the world to come. 4 That the best direction to this
end, is to follow the example of Christ our Savior, who was not only a
sacrifice for sin, but also the most perfect pattern for imitation. 5 That this
example of Christ's life should ever stand before the eyes of our mind, for
our better direction in all our ways. 6 The first virtue to be learned in the
life of Christ, which was his humility. 7 What we learn by Christ's leading
into the wilderness, his fasting, and temptation there. 8 Of Christ's great
compassion toward the state of man, his continual doing good in the world,
and what instru^ions we hence learn. 9 How little our Savior esteemed
popularitie and glory of the world, and how by his example we learn to do
the like. 10 Of Christ's continual labors and travails in the world, whereby
we may take a suruay of our Christian condition. 11 Of his teaching the
multitude, and his actions before he taught, which does also teach us what we
should do. 12 Of Christ's visiting the sick, his feeding the hungry, and
curing all that came unto him, which does lay before us a most absolute rule of
showing pity and compassion. 13 Of the great meekenes of the Son of God, in
bearing the reproaches of the world, an instruction unto us of suffering
patiently. 14 Of Christ's most mild and penceable conversation amongst men,
which is our Christian direction of passing our time so in this world. 15 Of
the name of Jesus. 16 Of Christ's teaching his disciples to pray, and the
tenor of that divine form of prayer, so often to be used of all devout
Christians. 17 Of Christ's often praying, and specially in the Garden, when
his soul began to wax sorrowful, and what feruencie in devotion, we hereby
learn. 18 That christian men may take comfort amidst the calamities of this
life, by that of our Savior, John 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled:
where he armeth his Disciples with consolation against troubles. 19 How that
our Savior exhorting all that would follow him, to deny themselves, and take
up their cross daily, does concern us all that bear the name of Christians.
20 That Christian men ought to live in all orderly and dutiful obedience to
Princes and Governors. 21 That Christians may lawfully enjoy earthly
commodities, and possess riches, but how they should be affected toward them.
22 How Christ exhorts to forsake Father and Mother, and all for his sake. 23
Of Christ's many miracles, and that we learn by them. 24 What we learn by
Christ's most divine wisdom in answering his adversaries, and all that came
unto him. 25 Of Christ our Savior, what he did upon the Saboath, and
Festival days, and what Christians may gather for the observation of the
same. 26 Of Christ's weeping over Jerusalem. 27 Of his passion and suffering
upon the Altar of the Cross, for the sins of the world, and salvation of our
souls: how often, and with what devotion all Christian men should meditate
hereof. 28 Of Christ's resurrection from the dead, and how the verity hereof
does much strengthen our Christian faith. 29 Of Christ's Ascension up into
heaven, besides many good instructions, how hereby our hope of ascending is
confirmed. 30 Of the coming down of the holy Ghost, and how we shouldin all
Christian manner entertain this divine spirit, into the mansion of our souls.
31 How that exhortation of our Savior Christ, John. 12. 23. Walk while ye
have light, least darkness come upon you, does appertain unto us Christians. 32
How that, inferred upon the parable of the ten virgins, Math. 25. 13. Watch
therefore, for you know neither the day nor hour when the Son of man will
come, does expreslie appertain to all Christians in this life. 33 A loving
conference had with Christ, and the devout Christian man, touching the state
and joys of the life to come, promised to them that learn of Christ, and
follow him in this life.
Disce viuere. Learn to live.
The first Chapter.
An exhortation moving every devout Christian for his better direction in
learning to live, often to meditate of the life of Christ.
Whilst I was musing (says the Psalm. 39, 3.
Prophet) the fire kindled: what was this fire, but the love of God? what was
this musing, but the bellows to blow the sparks, and kindle the flame of
David's affection? which affection bred destre, which desire caused love, which
love moved delight, which delight brought forth labor, Lord, says he, what
love have I unto thy statutes? Psalm. 119, 17.
all the day long is my study in them.

Whereby we see that among the exercises of a devout life, there is none that
is wont more to eleuate or lift up the mind to a higher degree of perfection
then meditation. In meditation, what does more move man to love God, then the
reuoluing of his benefits? Amongst these benefits, was there ever any
comparable to that: So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
John, 3, 16
son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have life
everlasting?

So then, to meditate of the life of him by whom we have eternal life, is the
very life of life. What is there found that can more arm us against the
vanities and allurements of the world, or the tribulations and adversities of
the same, then continually to have before the eyes of our mind the memory of
his doings, and sayings, of his suffering and satisfaction made for the
redemption of our souls?

2 In which Christian meditation so many unlooked for motives to love God do
occur, when the devout soul does recount the joy and inexplicable happiness
whereunto all does tend, as they may see me, not only infallible testimonies
of grace present, but after a sort, gladsome presages to the believing heart,
even of future glory that is to come. Abraham saw Christ Ioh, 8, 56.
when the covenant was but promised, and yet it rejoiced his heart: we see him
now the covenant is performed, and shall we not rejoice? Simeon was a happy
man, who saw him with the Luk, 2, 30.
eyes of his body, and the faithful are happy too, who still by meditation see
him with the eyes of the soul.

3 Every man (says Sen^a) that lists to apply himself to reading and
meditation, may have private conference with Zeno, Seneca de bre^tate vitae.
Pythagoras, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and the Authors of good Arts, he shall
find them all at leisure to commune with him. But a thousand tunes more truly
may it be said of the devout soul, that she may daily commune and converse
with Jesus Christ the Author of her happiness, in calling to mind his love mixed
with so many labors, the scarres and marks of his suffering, which she may
behold, his divine precepts which she may observe, his loving comforts which
she may receive in all distresses incident in the life of man.

4 Is it not more acceptable to see God with the sheepheards Luk, 2, 16.
at Bethelem, when the Angels sing, then with Moses when he was flaming in the
fiery bush* Exodus, 3, 2. Math. 5, 1.
To hear him upon mount Tabor to preach blessedness after blessedness, then upon
mount Sinah, Exodus 19, 18.
when for lightning and thundering it was present death for the people to
approach? Is not the case altered? It was said as a testimony of the love of
God unto the Israelites. Did ever God come so near a Nation? How much more
then may it be said when he spoke unto us by Christ Jesus his son. Did ever
God come so near a people?

5 Wherefore what better mean of enjoying heaven before heaven, then to
meditate of the mystery of our redemption, then often to call to mind the
incarnation of the son of God, his netiuitie, his circumcision, his fasting,
his praying, at his labors and trau^es, his sweet conversation, his behavior
that was so mild and gentle, as all the malice of* his enemies could not wrest
an angry word from hun, his curing the sick, cleansing the Leapers,
dispossessing the devils, raising the dead, his preaching, his teaching, his
compassion toward all, and after all, his most innocent (yet sharp) suffering,
and all for our sins.

How should we often in soul go with the wise men to Bethelem, Luc. 2, 16.
Mat. 2, 11.
being directed by the star of grace, and there fall down and worship the
little king, there offer the gold of perfect charity, the frankincense of
devotion, the mirth of penetencie, and then return, not by cruel Herod, or
troubled Jerusalem, but another way, a better way, unto our long and happy home.

6 How should we seek him sorrowing with blessed Mary, and Luc. 2, 48.
never leave seeking until we find him? how should we accompany him with the
Apostles, beholding him doing wonderful miracles, how should we with the
women follow him unto the cross, and there condole his most bitter, yet
blessed passion, how Lu^. 23, 27.
should we descend in meditation whither he descended, rise early with Mary
Magdalen, come to the Luc. 24, 1.
Sepulcher and see his resurrection, with the men of Galile Act 1, 4, 10
wonder at his ascension up into heaven, and with joyful admiration expect his
coming again in the same form he ascended? Last of all, how should we with
the disciples continue in prayer, tarry at Jerusalem, or the vision of peace
semblably the church, waiting for the coming of the holy Ghost from above?
How should we ever hold him as Jacob did the Angel, not letting him go until
he bless us?

7 The more we love Christ, the more we meditate of his love, where our
treasure is (that is, the thing we most affect) there are also the cogitations
of our hearts: what greater treasure then Christ the very Mine, where do lie
millions of treasure? on whom should we rather bestow our hearts, then upon him
who is the joy of our hearts? or where our best labors, then where the best
reward of labors is had?

But to come to that which concerns the direction of lift, wherein the whole
world shall thou sooner find true humility, perfect charity, obedience,
patience without example, prayer, with many coadioyned and allied virtues, then
in the life of him who was the Lord of virtues? consider how humbly he behaved
hims^fe in the world, how fellow like with his Apostles, how merciful he was
to the poor, who seemed his special family, he despised none although
leapers, he flattered none though never so glorious, free was he from the
distracting cares of the world, whose care was his fathers will Ioh. 17, 4.
and man's good, how patient was he in bearing reproaches, how gentle in
aunswers, thereby to cure ^alue the envy of his adversaries.

Then have O Christian soul, faith Saint Austen, in the life of Aug. de ver.
dom.
Christ a most heavenly medicine to help all thy defects: what pride is there,
that his humility does not abate? what anger, that his gentleness does not
le^e? what covetousness, that his poverty does not salve? what heart is there
so benumbed, that his love does not inflame? in every way here we have what
to behold. What to imitate: what to admire, here we learn what to fly, what
to follow.

Where shall we find the misery of man better salued, the goodness of God more
manifested, love and grace more enlarged, then in meditating of the life of
Christ?

The loving Captain would that the soldier sometimes behold the wounds
received in his behalf, thereby to take comfort and courage. The martyr calling
to mind Christ crucified upon the cross, endures trying and frying flames of
greatest persecutions, so patiently, as if the soul exiled from the body by a
divine meditation, both body and soul were in part become senseless, and made
to live, not where they live, but where they love, that is to say, in Christ.

8 This made the holy men of God so full of devotion, so great despisers of the
world as they were, their chiefest care was to care for a time to come, their
continual meditation was the mystery of man's redemption, and the
accomplishment of their hope in an other world, for this cause, and upon this
learning Festus Act. 26, 24
thought Saint Paul had ouerstudied himself, when all his mind was so often
in contemplation, had Festus known the depth of this knowledge, he would have
thought the Apostle to have been learned indeed, he might have learned by
Christ's nakedness how to cloth him: by his meekenes, how to exalt him, by his
praying for his enemies, how to revenge him, that his stripes, his spear, his
thorns, his wounds, his cross, were more dear and precious then all the
diadems in the world.

When we behold Christ in his passion, we see innocence suffering for sin,
humility enduring torment for pride, righteousness for unrighteousness, what
charity was that, which amidst so many pains, besought God for the causers
and actors of his persecution? what silence was that, which unto false accusers
answered nothing? what love was Ioh. 19, 10.
that, which was prodigal of life, for his friend? no, for his very enemies?
Never was there any such love, as the love of the son of God showed?

9 Merciful Lord, what a spacious field do we enter, when we consider the
project of Christ's life? In whom we observe two natures, both resembled to
Jacobs ladder, whereof the one Genesis 28. 12.
part stard upon the earth, which was his humanity: the other reached up to
heaven, which was his Deity. The descending Angels by this ladder are Gods
inercies, the ascending are our penitent prayers, and therefore Christ is the
mean whereby God descends in mercy toward men, and men ascend by grace and
acceptance unto God.

We should often call to mind the life of Christ, but when labors and
troubles come, when by calamities we seele that we have offended, then we
fall to comparison: when we endure hunger, we think of Christ's fasting: when
we are tempted, we think of his leading into the wilderness: when we suffer
reproaches, we call to mind his suffering, and lift up our hearts to heaven, and
our souls to him, who bare our infirmities, and therefore we hope will best
respect the case of the miserable, of whom we may say with the Prophet, Who^
have we in heaven but thee?

10 Some are not a little delighted to read the lives of the ancient worthies
of the world, of Julius Caesar, Scipio, and such other, but these may sooner
delight the fancy, then instruct the soul. Come we to the life of Christ,
all their conflicts were but shadows, all their glory but froath, all their
pomp but misery to his conflicts, to his glory, who vanquished when he was
conquered, and overcame death when he suffered death, subduing the Prince of
darkness with all his power, and with a few mean Orig. li. 1. con. Cells.
men made a conquest over the whole world, by a force in outward show clean
contrary to all victory, to wit, by his word, which in the sight of the world
seemed feeblenes. What heart is not moved at the remembrance of his worthy
acts? who would not celebrate unto the Lord a sweet Sabbath of Meditation,
and hither bring all his prayers and praises? Surely we will do little for
him, who has done so much for us, if we keep not, at least a remembr^nce of
so many graces, so many mercies bestowed upon us? should we be weary to
meditate of his life, who was not weary to do, and suffer so many things to
restore us to eternal life?

11 God says, Deliciae meae cum filijs hominum, My delight is to be with the
sons of men. And the godly say, deliciae nostrae Hiero. in Regula Sanctimo.
cum filio Dei, Our delight is to be with the son of God. Saint Hierome
writes of certain holy women, so devoted this way, Vt caro esset pene nescia
carnis. That flesh (says he) almost forgot it was flesh, they did so dwell in
the contemplation of Jesus Christ, that they seemed in place only remote, but
in affection to join with that holy company of heaven, there beholding in
that splendent Theator the King of Kings, sitting under the state of glory.

The Athenians erected a place called Asylum, whither the poor and distressed
repairing, ^ght find refuge. How God has exalted our Lord Jesus unto the
right hand of his throne in glory, and there for his sake erected an Asylum of
grace, whither all sorrowful and afflicted minds repayring may plead
privilege, and a satisfaction against sin, hell, death, and the devil:
faith in him does tell us as much. When the accuser of the brethren does ^ay a
remembrance of their sins unto the charge of Gods chosen, and thereby seeks
to cast them down by despair, by and by they fly to meditate of Christ's
love, and how all-sufficient a sacrifice he was for the satisfaction of their
sins, and how ready he is to embrace in the arms of his mercy, and cover
under the shadow of his wings, all that cry and come unto him.

12 Would we have a president of all perfection to stand before us? why
Salomons wisdom is but ignorance: Sampsons strength, but weakness: Hazaels
swiftnes, but slownesse: Methusal^hs age, not a day, being once compared with
the perfection of the son of God. The loaves which Christ took were Mar. 6,
38. Lu. 9. 16.
but few in number, but when he brake them, and his disciples distributed them,
they did exceedingly increase and multiply.

The life of Christ when at first we consider the same, it seems not so much;
but falling to meditate thereupon, and to distribute it as it were amongst
faithful believers, it increases so wonderfully as we can truly say with
them in the Gospel. we never saw it after this fashion, in effect, we never
thought it so admirable.

13 The people in the wilderness were directed by a cloud in Exodus 13, 21.
their passage toward the land of promise: we have for our journey not a
material cloud, but the life of him that sits above the clouds, upon whom the
eye of our soul evermore fixed, we may go forward, or stay, as this heavenly
direction shall give us aim.

14 Last of all, how mindful, I pray you, we should be to meditate of Christ,
not only in respect of the time present, but chiefly for the time to come:
this was in Saint Paul's thought, when he thought of his departure hence,
desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Jacob leaving the world, his
mind was upon Shiloh, or on him whom God would send, when he said, Expectabo
salutare tuum, Lord I will wait for thy salvation: O Genesis 49, 18.
Jesus, says Saint Austen, whether I speak of thee, I write of thee, I read of
thee, me thinks I Aug. med.
am present with thee, as if a remembrance of his redeemer did wake with him,
and sleep with him.

15 The law was a shadow of good to come, this good was Christ: when the Sun
is behind, the shadow is before: when the Sun is before, the shadow is
behind: so was it in Christ, to them of old, this Sun was behind, and
therefore the law or shadow was before, to us under grace the Sun is before,
and so now the ceremonies of the law, these shadows are behind, yea they
vanished away: Joshua succeeded Moses, Christ the law, Moses dies, Joshua leads
the people, Joshua brings the people over Jordan, which Moses could not do. The
Fathers eat Manna in the Desert, we have the living 1, Cor. 10, 1.
bread which came down from heaven.

In blessing their posterities the Patriarchs mentioned the promised seed, in
comforting the distressed, the Prophets foretold the Savior to come, all
their solemn sacrifices were but figures, and signs of some excellent
subject, their many hymns and divine songs were reioycings at his coming
before he came, in their highest devotions nothing was more mentioned, then
that God would respect his people, and Abraham to whom in mercy, the
multiplying of the same mercy by the promised offspring, was mentioned: so by
this we see, the faithful all a long minded nothing more then him, in whom
all the Nations of the earth should be blessed.

16 For the believers under grace, surely they should be so addicted to
meditate of him who wrought the great work of their redemption, as that they
ought to have their hearts replenished with an incessant reuoluing of his love,
seeing their faith is confirmed by a consideration of his merits, their hope by
a remembrance of his promises, their duty by calling to mind his benefits,
their fortitude by a contemplation of his assistance, their lives directed by
his life, who was the mirror of the world for perfection and true holmes, the
Prophet Esaias says, This is the way, walk in it. Esa. 30, 21


Chap. 2.
That the life of a Christian should be passed over in this world in a holy and
virtuous conversation.
IT is the manner of Princes and governors, forthwith upon their inuestures to
places of greatest dignity, seriously to recount with themselves, to what
authority amongst men God has called them, what to do, how to govern, and in
conclusion which way to demean themselves, like themselves: that is to say,
aunswerable unto their place and calling. This care we find to have been in
king Solomon, who in regard of the dignity whereunto God had 2 Chro 1, 20.
called him, besought God before riches and honor, to give him an
understanding heart. No less care should a Christian man have, whom God has
in mercy called to the state of grace, a calling of excellency, no less care
I say, should h^ have forthw^th to sit down and consider for what cause he was
redeemed, to what end, what will oned^y be required at his hands, upon his
return by him that did send him hither, and preserved him whilst he is here.

2 When Naaman the Syrian was healed of his leprosy, and saw that by the power
of God he was from a ^aper become a sound man, to acknowledge this benefit,
well the knees of his body might bow in the house of Rimmon, a false God, yet
when 2 Reg 5. 18.
he came there he made a solemn vow, the knees of his soul should bend to the
true God, whom he perceived had done him good.

When Peter's wives mother was cured of her Fever, she Mat 8, 15.
rose up and ministered unto Christ, when the people saw the care of Iosuah,
which he undertook to bring them into the land of Canaan, Iosu. 1. 16.
they all said as it were with one heart, O Iosuah, all that thou commaundest,
we will do, and whither so ever thou sendest us, we will go. We have received
a greater cure then ever Naaman did when he received the cleansing from his
leprosy, or then (...) wives mother, when at Christ's word the fever left her,
some bending of our hearts, some ministering unto Christ should be remembered, and
let our Iosuah have his due, who is leading us to the land of promise.

3 When Zachary mentioned the love of God in visiting and redeeming his
people, in raising them up a mighty salvation, in delivering them from the
hands of their enemies, first showing what God had done for them, he then
consequently annexeth the end of all, and what they should do to God, to wit,
To walk Lu^, 1. 75
before him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life.

This the Apostle shows in more express words at large, the Tit. 2, 12.
grace of God has appeared, that brings salvation unto all, and teaches us
that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, that we should live soberly
and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed appearance of the
glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. Thereby showing our
first entrance into grace, and therewith the works of grace, and then in order
the appearance of glory. For what else does grace require, but the works of
grace? therefore we beseech God, that we fall not amongst thieves, as the man
that passed between Jerusalem and Jericho, which would spoil us Luk, 10, 30
of this precious garment, and the true use thereof, Lord (says David) keep
thy servant from Psalm. 19, 3.
presumptuous sins, that they get not the dominion over me.

What should the children of light have to do with the works Luc. 16, 18 Romans
13. 12.
of darkness, what should Christians walk according to the flesh, who are by
Christ their redeemer regenerate, and borne^ new according to the spirit?
Alexander (says Quintus Curtius) willed that the Grecians and the Barbarians
should be no longer distinguished by garments, but let Grecians, said he, be
known by their virtues, and Barbarians by their vices. The application is
plain, let Christians be known by Christian behavior.

4 When Almighty God had brought his people from the oppression of Pharaoh,
and that they were now toward a land which should flow with milk and honey:
Moses soberly advises the people after this manner, and tells them what God
does look for at their hands. And now Israel what does the Lord require of
thee, even Deuteronomy. 10, 12.
that thou serve him? If he be Deus tuus, then must he have adorationem tuam.
Is he thy God, then will he have thy worship? Saint Peter unto the dispersed
Jews, and converted Christians, says, you were not a people, but now are the
people 1. Pet. 2. 10.
of God and therefore should walk as the children of God, the night is passed
(says the Apostle S. Paul) where he resembles the law unto the night, by
reason of the dark mists and figures thereof: the day is come near, where he
resembles the state of grace unto a lightsome time: what follows, Let us cast
away the works of darkness, and put on the armor Romans 13. 12.
of light. All which, as it infers a dignity in that we are called: so
withal a duty that is required, a final sin in the world, is notwithstanding
great, in one professing Christ.

Saint Bernard thought it a thing prodigious in nature, to Bern. li. 2. consid.
ad Eug.
have the first place, and the lowest life, a high calling, and some abject
course of living: because the calling to place of dignity, does challenge unto
it self the greater exellencie. Quid prodest Aug. de vit. Christiana.
(says Saint Austen) vocari quod non es? What profits it thee to be called
the thing then are not? To bear the title of a Christian, and to be in action
nothing less? To be a Christian in name, but not in deed, to seem, and not
to be, to have the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau, one thing in show,
but another in substance: what do thou (says Saint Cyprian) rush in with a
blind headie zeal thou Cypr. de zelo and liuo.
know not whither, nor how extinguishing peace and charity the true lights
of a christian life? certainly these vices, they are as blemishes in the face
of our profession. Zeal without knowledge is a blind sacrifice, and knowledge
without zeal is a maimed sacrifice, neither blind or maimed should be offered
to God.

5 Aulus Fuluius perceiving his son gotten upon the wings of pride, and
associating himself with Cateline that firebrand of the common wealth, comes
and takes him aside, and schools him after this manner, Thou unthrift, have I
brought thee up for such an end? when we find our affections inclining to foul
desires, let us say unto our selves as Aulus Fuluius said unto his son, Is
this the end why God has given us our being, and well being, were we redeemed
from sin, to continue in the lusts thereof, were we freed from the servitude
of the world, to become servants of so bad a Lord? Why were we redeemed to good
works? (should so great a price bestowed for us be cast away? God forbid.)

To come to a consideration of our selves, and to call to mind our adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father: if God be our father, then must we remember what
he requires, (...), be you holy, for I am holy: the 1, Pe. 1 16
duty of the child is the fathers honor. We are resembled unto the branches,
and Christ unto the Ioh. 15, 2.
vine, every branch that bears not fruit, which fruit is good life, the
husbandman which is God, takes away.

We are compared unto fruitful trees planted by the water, Psalm. 1, 3.
or pleasant streams of Gods graces, and therefore should bring forth fruit in
due season. We may remember the curse of the bag tree that bare leaves, some
Mat. 21. 19.
show only of fruit, and that sentence denounced against the other that bare no
fruits at all. The Axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree that
brings not Luc 3. 9
forth fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire. The Axe, death, the
cutting down, the execution of justice, the casting into the fire, the
sentence of judgment. Now is the Axe, there will be a now: the Axe not a rod to
the root, not to the branches, cast it into the fire, and so there is somewhat
more then a cutting down.

Daniel said unto Nabuchodonozor, which John the Baptist in Dan. 4, 19.
effect said to every one who were fruitless, This tree is thy self: but for
the good tree which our Mat. 7, 17.
Savior says, brings forth good fruit, it shall be like the green Ier. 17, 7.
Olive planted by the house of God. Blessed is the man (says Jeremy) that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, for he shall be as a tree
that spreads out her roots by the river, and shall not feel when the heat
comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for the year of
drought, neither shall cease from Apoc. 10.
yielding fruit.

And thus as the negligent are resembled unto barrenheath, or trees twice dead,
and plucked up by the roots, as vain professors are compared unto trees which
bare leaves, or at least fruit goodly and pleasant to the eye, in show like
Apples of Gomorrah, which are gone as soon as you touch them: so are the
religious and devoted to the worship of God, most fitly likened to good and
fruitful trees, grafted upon the true Esa. 5, 1.
stock Christ Jesus himself, planted in that vineyard, whose keeper is the
Lord of hosts, and looks for at their hands better then wild grapes.

6 In the eleventh of the Acts and six and twentieth, were the Disciples first
called by this Act. 11, 26
name, Christians, a name of great sanctity, from annoynting, a ceremony used
amongst the ancient people of God, upon none but those whom they accounted
holy, and had an holy calling, as their Kings, their Priests, their Prophets,
and therefore should Christians be as John the Baptist, whose name was holy,
whose teaching was holy, whose life was holy, all agreeing in one. He was a
burning light, not only burning, says Saint Bernard, as zealous in seruencie,
but a light Bernard in nal. Johan.
also as conspicuous in charity.

But whence (says Isidor) have we this title? even from Christ are we called
christians, surely a great prerogative, he has graced us with his own name,
ciensed us with his own blood.

The Apostle says, we are bought or redeemed with a price, if it be so, then
are we his who has paid our ransom, and consequently are bound to do his
will willingly, who has bought out our freedom. We are not debtors, Romans 8,
12.
says he, to the flesh, as if he should have said, we are debtors, and owe
dutiful service to another Lord, and to live after his will. Sarah saw but
Ismael playing with Isaacke, and she said unto Abraham, put away the bandwoman
with her son, it is not safe for the soul to be dallying with the flesh,
cast out the bond woman, and her offspring or desires: the playing of Ismael
with Isaac, the holy ghost Ge. 21, 10.
by the Apostles, called a persecution. One says, This body of ours will not
let us to be right Philosophers, Gal. 4, 29.
but sure it is this corrupt nature of ours, unless we did repress the
affections thereof, it would not permit us, to be right Christians.

There is a serpent within us, says Macarius, that will entire Macari. ^om.
with an argument, a iucundo, the forbidden tree is most fair, forbidden
pleasures, forbidden ways are most delightful. Had we (says Saint Bernard)
stood by, when Adam was between the persuasion of his wife, and the precept
of his God, when the one said, Adam eat: and the other, Adam, Thou shall not
eat, would we not have cried out, and said, O Adam, take heed what thou
do, the woman is deceived? The counsel we would give to Adam, let us apply
to our selves, and never harken to the counsel of the flesh, seeing the
condition of Christians is to walk Rom 8, 1.
not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

The Apostle calls the desires of the flesh, deceivable, because Ephesians. 4, 22.
they deceive: and whereas other sins are mentioned by Gal. 5. 19.
one name, this of the flesh is mentioned by many, as adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, all these show how vile it is. It is said, fly from
sin as from a serpent: but of all sins, she fornication, says the holy
Ghost, for this serpent stingeth to death. He that will eat so often as he is
tempted by hunger, he that strikes so often as he is tempted by ^re, he that
will commit the sin of fornication so often as he is tempted by ill motions:
what has he, I say, not of a Christian man, but of a man, except the name?

7 But is it credible that Christian profession should in any age put on
m^sking attire, and play her part upon the stage, or that those who bare the
name of Christians, should endeavor like cunning ^uglers to cast a must before
the sight of the simple, work dissimulation in so fine a web, cast such gloss
upon all, as if all were holy, like hot Meteors in the air, which shoot and
show like stars, but are in deed nothing less: for these, deceive men they
may, God they cannot, nay they may one day find, they deceived themselves: if
they spend an hour or two now and then in godly exercises, though all the
week after they live in contention and eniue, they think themselves good
Christians.

In the Comedy of Menander there is a Hercules, but not true Hercules: in the
course of the world there is a Herod, that pretends worship, but intends the
life of an innocent babe: there is Mat. 2, 8.
an Ahab that proclaims a fast, thereby to compass Naboathes 1, Reg. 21, 12.
vineyard, but all is not gold that glisters. He is not a Jew which is
outwardly a Jew, neither is Romans 2, 29.
that circumcision which is outward in the show, but he is a Jew which is one
within, and the circumcision is of the heart, not in the letter, whose praise
is not of men, but of God. One man discerns another by his habit, God by his
heart.

The Arc, says Origin, was it pitched without only? no, but Orie. in Numb.
within and without. The kings daughter, says the Psalmist, was glorious, was
this glory outward? no, she was glorious within. The coat of Christ was
without seame: the conversation of Christians should be plain and honest
without dissimulation: least their calling suffer indignity amongst men.

Let vain boasters talk of profession so long as they will, and make religion
as they do, a mere talk: unless they show devotion to God, humble and
charitable behavior toward men, are they right Christians? no verily. When
one ill affected was now about to be saluing his sore fingers, a certain
Phisitien, perceiving by his countenance his liver was corrupt: my friend,
quoth he, seek to salve that is amiss within.

8 At the end of the day, shall it be said, call those discoursers? Mat. 20, 8.
no, call the laborers, give them the penny. S. James says, show me thy
faith by thy works, I am Iam. 2. 18.
a mortal man, and cannot search the heart. Have thou faith? let me see it by
thy actions of life. Is it a lively faith* Why, where life is, there motion is.
We are not (says Cyprian) Philosophers in words, but in works: he is not a
Physician, which is a Physician in name. It was said indeed unto him that came
to the marriage, amice, friend: but if we math Mat. 22, 12.
the sequel, it was in effect said, Amice and non amice, Friend in profession,
but nothing so in action, in name, but not in nature, how came thou in
hither not Greg. Mor.
having a wedding garment? When you see says Saint Chrysostom, the leaves
withered, Chrysostom. opere imperfect. ^o. 32.
you may guess the tree is not found at the root: when you see the actions of
life but so so, is all will at the root? Are we not rooted in faith, the bud,
the leaf, the flower, the fruit, all is from the root. The fire so long as
it is fire, it has heat, and faith so long as it is faith, it has effects.
Wherefore we must take heed that we deal not with our holy calling, as Amon
did with David's servants, when he visguised 2, Sam. 10, 4.
them, and cut their garments in the midst. Let us not separate those whom
God has joined together, a good profession, and a good conversation, good
learning, and good living. A man says Syrach, may be known by his look, and
one that has understanding may be perceived by his gesture, nay a man's
garment, and therefore much more his life declare what he is.

9 Look we into the lives of the former Christians, whose remembrance we
honor in our very thoughts, and whose virtues we cannot but ad^re, if we read
how they spent their time, we shall find that their whole course was a
continual exercise of piety: they were just in promise, they needed no other
surety but their word: they were moderate in diet, plain in attire, keeping a
Decorum in all their actions. They did not only with Simeon see Christ with
their eyes, but also take him up in their hands, and carry him about in their
lives: we are for the most Christians in show, they were Christians in deed:
we outwardly profess somewhat, but there is a heart within means nothing
less: they inwardly and outwardly were the same. Assuredly he said well that
said it, they were happy in respect of us, who received with humility one
uniform faith, upon this foundation they did build good life: we are still
hampering and hammering about the very foundation, and never settle our selves
to work, not as hirelings for a reward, nor as servant for fear, but as
children for love.

Tertullian setting down the Tert Apol.
hardest censure of their greatest adversaries, says, That excepting they
would not sacrifice unto their Idols: their holiness was such, as it made
their very persecutors to stand amazed at them, and to cry out: what a misery
is this, that we are more weary of tormenting, then these men are of enduring
torments? Nay, it made the greatest Emperors themselves to fear poor
Christians, as Herod did John Baptist, because he was a holy man, and one that
feared God.

Saint Basil affirms, that the very beholding of their constancy De quad.
Martyr.
in suffering, made many heathen men suffer with them. The devout life of a
poor Captive Christian woman (as Sozo^ne writes) Sozomen. lib. 7.
made a King and all his family embrace the faith of Jesus Christ: and
Eusebius shows, Eusebius, li. 9, cap. 8.
that Maximinius the Emperor, could not but wonder to see how sedulous they
were in doing good, when their very enemies were even consumed with misery,
they took from their own sustenance, and small store they had to relieve
them, they buried their dead, and never ceased to follow them with the works of
charity. They were so religious, so humble, so just, so charitable, as they
made great tyrants to give out Edi^ts with Nabuchodonozor, that none Dan. 3.
should worship any other God, but the God of the Christians. ^ulian the
Apostata, writing to Arsatius Bishop of Cappadocia, said, Christiana religio
propter Christianorum erga omnes ^uiusuis religionis mortales beneficentiam
propagata est. This same Religion which they call Christian, is spread far
and wide, by reason of the great beneficence, of those whom they call
Christians, do show to (...) (...) ortall men of what religion so ever, whence
we see that the greatest enemy of the faith of Christ, could not but
acknowledge the sincerity of former Christians.

Merciful Lord, to compare our coldness with their seruent devotion, our
negligence with their industry, our faint love with their burning charity, we
shall find such ods, as we may sorrow to see our own defects in this case.
Calling to mind the learning of the ancient Fathers, we may think they did
nothing but read: seeing their works, that they did nothing but write:
considering their devotion, that they did nothing but pray.

10 How was God glorified in these? and how is God glorified in us, when we
truly serve him? To this end Christ willed lys Disciples, that their light
should shine before men, and Saint Mat. 5, 16.
Peter exhorts, that by our good works we glorify God in the day 1. Pet. 2,
12.
of visitation, in effect, that we honor Christ by our Christian behavior,
which behavior, says Saint Cyprian, is to do the will of God, which will is,
Cyprian in orat. Domini.
that we have Stabilitatem in fide, modestiam in verbis, in factis institiam,
in operibus misericordiam, in moribus disciplinam, cum fratribus pacem, and so
forth. Stedfastnes in faith, modesty in words, vprightnes in action, in works
mercy, in manners discipline, and peace toward our brethren. Ought not our
vprightnes to be inwardly, because unto God, outwardly because unto the glory
of God?

By this, says our Savior, shall men know that you are my Io^n, 13, 34.
disciples, when he spoke of love: which love is the accomplishment of the
whole law. Every General in the field has his colors, whereby he and his
company are known. Holiness is Christ's banner, under which we all train
and keep a seemly Christian march, following Christ our Captain, and
finisher of our faith. Our enemies are the assaults of sin, and temptations of
satan: our weapons are the shield of Faith, the helmet of salvation, the sword
of the spirit. Our Ephesians. 6, 17.
conquest is a crown of glory: I have sought (says the Apostle) a good fight,
I have finished my 2. Tim. 4. 7
course, I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness.

11 Look we up into heaven, who are there rejoicing? who ^e now tryumphant in
glory, but those who were sometime militant in the works of grace? who are now
in that celestial society of Angels, and there be^olo Mat. 5. 8.
the presence of God himself, but the pure in heart, and those who sometimes
lived godly in the world? To cast our eyes downward: to whom is that woeful
dungeon of darkness so often denounced, but unto dissolute and loose
servant, who never think on their masters return, and the account which
will one day be required at their hands? The schoole^en do well distinguish of a
double punishment, the one Damni, and the other Sensus: The one of loss, and
the other of seeling: of loss, when they loose for ever in glory him, whom
they would not receive, so often offering himself unto them for a time: of
feeeling, they would not endure the pain of a little repentance, and therefore
shall suffer the punishment of eterna^l ^ame.

12 Of all (...) (say the Mathematicians) a circle is the most absolute,
because the beginning and end concur in one: such is our holy conversation,
which comes from God by grace, and ends in God by the works of grace: all our
actions are from him, as the beams from the Sun, as the smell from the
flower, as the sparks from the fire. The Sun is dispersed by his beams, the
flowers by their smell, the fire by the sparkles from thence proceeding. God is
seen in his creatures, ad^ured in his works, but most glorified in his
servant, the sons of men.

We know there is in man somewhat more then man, Christ said unto the
Pharisees, when the Herodians showed him a tribute penny, Whose Image or
superscription is this? when we f^d Mat. 22, 20.
in our selves a most divine and heavenly resemblance, whose Image is this? me
thinks we cannot but reply, assuredly it is our heauen^ Caesar's: and therefore
give we unto him the homage of our ^^arts, and if we have a thousand ^^arts,
let us pay them all in tribute. The Angels of heaven ^oke for us, Jesus Christ
himself the Lord of Angels expects us, whom he has chosen to be ^es of
glory, should we follow the world, then may we fear Luke. 14, 18.
the punishment of the world. What is it to gain a farm, with him who would
go to see his farm, and loose heaven? what is it to be married to the
momentarie pleasures of a sinful life, and for ever and ever to be deuorced
from Christ?

There are in holy scripture promises laid down of a happy state to come, it
may be well applied, which was misapplied in the trial of the holy man Job, We
do not serve God for nothing. As sure as God is God, the righteous shall
receive a reward. We know that man is immortal, and that his happiness is not
here, though that part which we see (says Philo the learned Jew) Philo de
^rica (...).
be mortal, and perish for a time, yet there is a time to come, when it shall
be raised, and there is a part in man which abides for ever.

13 Children when they are young, love their nurses more then their true and
natural mothers: but coming to ryper years, they then love where they
chiefly ought: we are a while addicted to the world, and loose our selves in
the love thereof, but upon mature judgment we see, that God only should have
our love, and duties of love. It is the manner of some Nations (says one) for
the inferior first to salute their superiors, and it is the custom again of
other Countr^es as a sign of benediction, going downward, for the superior,
first to salute the inferior. This custom Almighty God himself observes
with men: first he salutes us by his benefits, and then we salute him by our
obedience: first he loves us as a father, then we honor him as children.
Should we with the fed Hawke forget our master? or being full with Gods
benefits like the Moon, be then most removed from the Sun, from whence comes
all her light, and then by her imposition of earthly desires, become dark?
Has Christ done so much for us, and should we seem to be carried away into the
land where all things are forgotten? At that dreadful day of doom, the
greatest part of the evidence, says Saint Cyprian, that Satan will bring in
against careless Cypri. de opere and El^mo.
men is, the neglect of their dutiful serving the Lord Jesus, when he shall
say, O eternal Judge, for these, I never benefited them, I never endured
labor or travail to redee me them, and yet have they followed me, I no sooner
tempted them to evil, but they obeyed me: Thou came from heaven, and
enduredst many things in the world to win them, and yet they never followed
thee, thou did shed thy most precious blood to save them, and yet they
would never worship thee: hitherto Saint Cyprian.

14 Now, can we then omit the performance of our Christian duty? should it be
said of holiness, as it was once in another case, Audiuimus famam? We have Job,
28, 22
heard report of such a matter, and so let it go? will our lip-worship serve
the turn? the foolish virgins Ma. 15, 11 (...). 12. 43.
were found with their, Sic dicentes, so saying: but the good servants shall be
found with their Sic facientes: so doing.

Our Isaac will not only hear Jacobs voice, but come hither my Genesis 27. 22
son, let me have thy hands too, and then receive a fatherly benediction.

In the seventh of S. Luke, John sendes his Disciples to Luc. 7, 22.
Christ, to know whether he were the Messiah that should come into the world,
or they should look for another? the answer out Savior returns is this:
tell John what you have heard and seen, what you have heard only^ no, but
heard, and seen the blind see, the lame walk, the leapers are cleansed, the
poor receive the Gospel. He does neither affirm, nor deny, says Beda, but
would rather have his works testisse of Bed. in Lu.
him, then that he would testisse of himself.

Christ came from heaven to do his fathers will in earth, and 1. These. 4. 3
we here on earth do his will, who is ascended up into heaven: to whom was
that applied, but unto Christians? This is the will of God, even your holiness.

15 To comprehend many things with the circle of a short Eccl. 23, 27
conclusion, the sum of all is. There is nothing more sweet then to serve
God: when Pythagoras heard a vicious fellow, affirm he had rather spend his
time in wanton company, then amongst these sower Philosophers: no marvel,
said he, for Swine had rather be tumbling in the mire, then laid in the
cleanest places of all.

There is no peace comparable to that which is wont to accompany christian
conversation. It is said of the Dioscorides, men living far remote, yet
professing Christian religion, that dwelling in the midst of the se, yet have
not the use of ships: they live with such quiet and content in their estate, or
without any desire of seeking superfluity. Who shall ascend (says the
Prophet) Psalm. 24, 3. 5, 6.
unto the hill of the Lord, but even he that has pure hands, and has not
lifted up his mind to vanity, he shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of his salvation.

Nature has taught the Bombyx, a small worm, providing before for her end,
first to wind her self all in silk, and then becoming white and winged in
shape of a flying thing, she dies: let grace lead us in the same course,
first clothing our selves with that precious silk of Christ's merits, and then
become white for innocence and holiness of life: and last of all, with the
wings of faith and hope, prepare our selves to fly to that heavenly repose of
our everlasting rest.

Chap. 3.
That the end of a Christian life is endless felicity in the life to come.
MOst sure it is that the end of man, or man's felicity which is his end, is
not consisting in any thing here below, but in a state supernall, and
therefore to be sought above. It here remains that we enter a little into
the consideration of this end, as also of the mean precedent unto the same.

Infinite were it to show how the Philosophers of old, as men in a winters
night, amidst many strange and unknown ways, did run and range they knew
not whither: Infinite were it (I say) to set down, how they spent all their
life poaring in the dark, (if we respect the light of grace) in seeking and
searching out man's chiefest end. Some would have it to consist in pleasure: why
if pleasure were man's chief happiness, then beasts were happy: if sensual
life be man's end, then is he often ended by his end. Some would have it to
consist in riches, in honor, and the like: if man's chief happiness, and end
were placed in these, then were man worse then a clod of earth, or puff of
wind, because the end is ever better then those things which are tending unto
the end. Last of all, if man's chiefest good consisted in things mortal, then
where becomes the felicity of the soul, which is a substance immortal?

2 To leave these in the maze of their own fancies, and roauing in the air at
an uncertain mark, our Christian faith (blessed be God) teaches us to mount
higher, and to behold an other end, which cannot be worn out, and therefore is
not subject to fear: full of all happiness, and therefore is able to satisfy
our desires to the full. The difference then, between those who remained in
the foggie mist of Egypt, and them whom God has in mercy placed in the little
land of Goshen, is this: they to an uncertain, but we direct all our actions
unto a most sure and certain end: they hope for somewhat in show, we somewhat
indeed: they are about the delight of the sense, we in the perfect contentment
of the soul, in looking up to those joys, whither all our endeavors do
jointly run, as unto the sole period of all our being: well is that state
wherein nothing is wanting. Peter cried out (and we may all cry out with him)
Domine, bonum est nobis Mat. 14, 4.
hic esse; Lord it is good for us to be here: Being freed from sin we are made
the servants of God, our fruit is holiness, our reward is everlasting life.

3 Man is never more heavenly, then when he begins to consider his end, which
is to live in heaven. Wherefore what should we but take order with our 1, Cor.
9, 10.
selves, to bend all our actions to this end? To be indifferent to all
creatures, riches, poverty, or the like, as shall be most convenient for the
obtaining of this end.

Qui arat, arat in spe, all our plowing tends to the hope of this harvest. in
the mean time, what should we do, but often mind a supernall condition?
Almighty God has placed the earth under our feet, whence we may gather,
that earthly things should be least thought upon: the heart of man, which is of
a triangular figure, comprehends more then the earth that is only round.

The Philosophers can tell us, that above the superior sphere, nothing is
subject to alteration. But will we hear what the Apostle says, nay will we
hear what he was not able to say, concerning the excellency of this end? Eye
has not seen, ear has not 1, Cor. 2, 9.
heard, heart cannot conceive, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. The glorification of man is a state inexplicable, and therefore to
enter into it, were to wade into a bottomless Sea: faith only is the mean
whereby we can approach and see but the backer parts, as Exodus 33, 22.
Moses in the cleft, when the glory of God passed by.

It does not yet appear, says Saint John, what we shall be, 1, Ioh. 3, 2.
but that happy time will come when it shall appear, and then we shall be like
unto him: At that day shall the just shine as the Sun Ma^h. 13, 43.
in the kingdom of the Father. A marvelous saying of Christ our Savior, and
in humane sense almost incredible, that the children of God shall shine, and
become as clear as the Sun: they shall not need the light of the Sun, who
shall themselves shine as the Sun.

Here we are as the clouds, some higher, some lower, all go too and fro;
there shall we be as fixed stars in the firmanient of glory: here we are
fighting with enemies, there we shall be tryumphing without enemies: here
striving to overcome, there secure with victory: here in action, there in
contemplation: here in the way, but there at the end of the way.

4 The end considered, the mean pr^cedent unto this end remains to be
observed. For the mean, only this, Religion is the way leading to a Christian
life: a Christian life is the gate, whereby we enter into the confines of this
senctuarie, for therein first we take up the merits of Christ in the arms of
our faith: and next, walk with Simeon in the Temple or service of God, in all
vprightnes of life

Now whereas we desire the content of our will, naturally to be well, and the
exercise of our wit to have a certain end, and this end to be the particular
good, benefit, and welfare of all our being: let us in the name of God, resolve
upon the counsel of the Prophet Ieremi^, to seek Iere. 16, 6.
the good way, and walk therein, that we may find rest unto our souls. Man
who is immortal, what should he else tend unto, but an immortal end? Let the
Epicure propose unto himself pleasure, the Atheist plots and Castles in the
air, the Christian has where to rest his soul, knowing that the end of his
being in the world, was to serve God, and the end of serving God, is to enjoy
endless joys in the world to come. For it cannot be, that he for whom the
world was made, but that he should have some further end, more excellent then
the world, for the accomplishment of which, he never cease until he be
there, as all natural things tend unto the center, and when they are there,
they would not be removed.

5 Now whereas it is not a written law, but a law that is borne with us, which
we have not read, or heard, but drawn as it were from the pappes and dugges
of nature her self, to seek a state of happiness, knowing both wherein this
does consist, as also the way of attayning the same; how can we but go
forward in that happy course, tending as has been showed unto a thrice happy
end! In which course of a Christian life, says Saint Basil, there is a reward,
a reward indeed, (...): Basi^i. in Psalm. 114.
be it far above the work, and not according to the desert thereof, but the
magnificence of him that rewards the work, as in truth it is, yet can it not
but encourage us to go forward in the performance of the same. When King
Alphonsus was persuaded, as stories mention, not to attempt war for fear of
imminent danger: I fear not danger, quoth he, for who has ever attained
victory, without aduenturing dangers? Distrust, and fear of difficulty, does
often dissuade us from the prosecuting and pursuing of this reward. If all
difficulty should dismay us, then how should we attain our hoped end? for
who has ever attained the same end, since the foundations of the world,
without labor and travail? Christ himself went not up into glory, but first
he suffered pain.

One being asked whether he would rather be Socrates, or Craesus? the one an
industrious and painful Philosopher, the other a man flowing in all
abundance: answered, that for this life he would be Craesus; but for the life
to come, Socrates, thereby showing that here rich men are happy, but
hereafter good men are happy: now of the two, future happiness is the better.

6 By all this it has been proved, how desirable a thing it is unto man, to
attain his wished end, for the attaining whereof, he must apply himself who^y
heereunto, neither may the christian man of all other, think himself exempted
in this case. When Christ cured the blind man in John, 9 11
the Gospel, his least touching, nay, his word only was sufficient to have
restored him his sight: yet to show how he required induindustrie, the blind
man must go and wash at the poole of Siloam. The Apostle had received it by a
divine vision, that none with him in the ship should perish: what then, must al
be secure, and wilfully cast themselves into Act. 27, 44
the sea? No, that were to have tempted their preseruour, but when the case so
requires, every one must endeavor himself, to use the mean ordained to save
himself? We sail in this mortali life with contrary winds, sometime there is
a tempest, and anon comes a calm: the one is ready to make us doubt of God
by impatiencie, the other, to forget him by security. Therefore four
principal virtues we must ever exercise in this passage: The love of God, the
hate of sin, the hope of mercy, and the fear of justice, which shall ever
guide us in a right Christian course, unto our end, all the way meditating,
that God is an Ocean sea of infinite goodness, and that by this he first
created the world: by this he still guides it, by this he suffers many
injuries offered unto his most sacred name, by this he causes the Sun to
rise upon the good and evil, by this he makes the rain to come down upon
the just and sinners, by this he has ordained man so many means and helps to
come unto him: and last of all, by this he would not be alone in a state of
high excellency, but has vouchsafed his creatures, Men, and Angels, to be
partakers with him, and in a manner consorts of his glory. Could ever man so
much desire his own good, as he is now brought unto by the goodness of his
God? No marvel though Satan do so much envy this happiness of man, from
which he is miserably fallen. O the depth of the wisdom of the riches of the
mercy of God!

7 Who is able sufficiently to express the great dignity of our Christian
calling, the end whereof is so joyful? All the labor of a religious life, is
no way comparable unto the excellency hereof; our fasting, our praying (the
chief matter we are to attend) our serving of God is the best time bestowed of
all other: those things which are joyful when they come, do comfort us
before they come. Faith says, there is a great and costly banquet prepared:
Hope says, this banquet is prepared for me. Things of the world are subject
to mutability, strife, discord, envy, but the time will come, when the sheep
shall no more fear the wolf: the glorification of man in the life to come, is
such as he shall cry out with David, Lord what 2. Sam. 7. 18.
am I, that thou have brought me to this?

8 Tell me now, if there be any state or condition in the world, comparable
unto a Christian life, passed over in the exercises of devotion and piety,
seeing the end thereof is such as it is? what happiness do they loose that
neglect so great a price proposed unto them, for the vain pleasures and
sensual delights of a sinful life? It is said of one Lysimachus, who being
in battle against the Scythians, only for the satisfying of his appetite,
and procuring a little liquor to stay his thirst, gave himself over into his
enemies hands: when he was now leading away captive to perpetual misery, he
then began to acknowledge in these words, his own folly: O (says he) for how
little pleasure, what liberty, what felicity have I lost? seeing his
Countrymen return home with joy, and himself hayled along by his enemies to
remain in misery.

That men would consider Lysimachus his case, and not loose their eternal
liberty, for some momentary and fading delights, what a woeful case will it be
to see themselves leading to that rufull servitude, and to behold the servants
of God, going in triumphant manner to rejoice, and live with him in glory?
wherefore leaving all allurements, Phil. 3, 14.
let them go forward to the price of the high calling in Christ Jesus, knowing
that the trial of their faith (as Saint Peter says) is much more precious
then gold that perishes, 1, Pet. 1, 7.
though it be tried with fire, that it may be found to their praise and honor,
and glory of God, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom they have not seen,
and yet love him, in whom now (though they see him not) yet do they b^ue, and
rejoice with joy vnspea^able, and glorious, receiving the end of their faith
even the salvation of their souls. The mother of Lemuel exhorted her Pro. 31,
1, 2.
son, not to be woone with the vanities of the world, for why, he was a man
of worth: we are of worth, who are reserved to so happy an end. When the people
were in captivity at. Babylon, they ever made their prayers toward Jerusalem,
whither they did hope one day to return. Iosuah said, I and my house will Ios.
24, 13.
serve the Lord.

That there is an estate and condition of felicity in the life to come, none
will deny, vulesse he deny God: that this estate and condition, is the
pearl, for which we should sell all that we have, we know, or cannot but
know: that there is no attayning the end, but by the means, God and nature do
plainly show us. To conclude, the end of a Christian life, is not as
Anaxagoras dreamed, of the life of man, to behold the heavens, but to live in
heaven. Ostende faciem, et s^lui erimus, Lord, says David, show us Psa. 80, 19
thy countenance, and we shall be whole.

Chap. 4.
That the best mean of direction to attain this endless felicity, is to
follow the example of Christ our Savior, who was not only a sacrifice for
sin, but also a most perfect pattern for imitation.
CHrist, the Messiah and Savior of the world, as he became a Mediator
between God and man: so was he (...), or a partaker of both, for the
reconciliation of both: otherwise, merciful Lord, what had become of us
sinners? As he was God, the object of our faith, as man, an instruction of
life. As he gave himself unto the Father a sacrifice, by whom we were
redeemed: so did he exhibit himself unto all believers an example of
holiness, of whom he will be followed: so he pleased God by his sacrifice, and
bound man in duty by his example. Therefore was he the sum of the Law and
Gospel, the Law, teaching us what to do: the Gospel, what to believe: so in
Christ both believing and doing concur in one. The scope of the Law was the
avoiding of sin, and of the Gospel, a satisfaction for sin: the Law drives
us to grace, and grace enableth us to plead in Christ a satisfaction of the Law.

To show in the first place that he was a satisfaction for sin, it is an
oxioine so generally received on all parts, as all in a manner join hands in
this, Sanguis Jesus, The blood of Jesus cleanses 1, John. 1, 14.
us from all our sins. This is a sure confession of faith, upon which we stay
as the house upon the foundation: Adam eat the Apple, Christ paid the price:
the Aug. de ciuit. dei, lib. 19, 27.
foundation we know is first laid, because all stays upon the foundation.

The woman in the Apocalypse signifying the Church, she was clothed with the
Sun: this clothing was the righteousness of the Son of God. Our
righteousness (says Saint Austen) where is it? It is his righteousness that
must do us good: Sufficit ad iustitiam (says Saint Ber. epist. 119.
Bernard) solum habere propitium cui soli peccaui: It suffices for my justice
only, to have him reconciled, against whom only I have sinned: yea, says
Saint Jerome, when we confess our sins, which we cannot but do, Ierom. in
dial. cont. Pelag.
when we remember them: our righteousness consists not in merit, but in
mercy. Men may argue and toss matters to and fro, speaking this or that of
merit, but come to the touch, open the closet of the conscience, and ask what
is deserved; then the case is altered. The learned in the schools may debate
question, pro and contra, but come to their devotions, and there we find
Duran li. 2, di^. 88. quest. 4. Tho. Aduer. Genesis li. 1, ca. 44.
all meriting ascribed only unto mercy. Ask what may be done of others,
happily one thing may be answered: but ask in good earnest what they think
of themselves, they will tell us of another.

One of the greatest Clerks that this age has had, when he had long
discoursed of the contro uersie of justification, and therein left no stone
unturned, toward the folding up of all, has these words: Tutius est obliuisci
meritorum, and in solam Dei Bellar. li. 5, de just. cap. 1.
misericordiam respicere. It is more safe to forget merits, and to look only
unto the mercy of God. So when men have wearied themselves in matters of doubt,
they find (O holy Christ!) that thy only merits must stand them in stead.

2 To proceed then, and to show that as Christ was a sacrifice for sin, so
also an example of living: let us consider that the more diligently we trace
him in the steps of this his most holy life, the more we show our selves to
become true Christians. The chiefest pitch of our perfection, is to have some
resemblance of his holiness: he was without sin, and the less we commit
sin, the more do we resemble him: at least, let not sin reign in us. We
are promised to become like unto him in the state of glory, and what should 1,
Ioh. 3, 2
we but endeavor to have some similitude of him in the state of grace. The
Jews said unto him, Art thou greater then our Father Abraham? yes, that he
John. 8, 53.
was by many degrees?

3 In former ages, when Almighty God was removed from man, in the height of
his Majesty, ^ee never required at men's hand, that he should imitate or
follow him, (for how could a weak creature any way imitate him, who was
higher then the heavens, as the Apostle speaks?) Heb. 7, 26.
then man had only a law, which did bind him to conform his will to Gods will,
to will and love nothing but that which God willed, and required. Here might
man say, Lord, excepting thy law, how might I learn to be humble, poor, and
to despise glory, when thou art high, rich, and all glorious? This complaint is
now staid, see God in another form, and receive, O man, an example for thee to
follow, in these and all other virtues.

Those whom precepts do not so effectually move, we see them sometime induced
by examples: for example, never any of like efficacy, with this which the
son of God himself has given, of whose life it may be said. Respice, and
fac secundum primu^ exemplar, Exodus 25, 40.
Look and do after the first sample. Tell men of fasting and praying, they
will give you the hearing: tell them the godly in all ages have done this, you
begin to persuade: tell them their redeemer has done it, if any thing move,
this will.

4 And now to run a little over the whole life of the Son of God, see we
^ery age, every action therein (so far as our capacity is able to conceive)
and we shall find it a school of instruction, a perfect rule of most perfect
discipline: no where do we behold such a president of love, of humility, of
patience, of chastity, and in a word, of all virtues. Where is there true
wisdom, but in the doctrine of Christ; true fortitude, but in the passion of
Christ; true clemency, but in the mercy of Christ; true humility, but in the
obedience of Christ? he was made man, and walked in the world as man, that he
might teach man to live, as he taught him to believe. Before ever he preached
in words, he preached most effectually in works. O sacred Babe, heavens
bliss, and hels bane, lying in the manger at Bethlehem, and brought up in a
mean hostage at Nazareth! What else did he teach by all this, then contempt
of the world, his exile or banishment into Egypt, his being borne in the days
of cruel Herod? What do we hence learn, but patient suffering of
persecution? by his fasting in the wilderness, austeritie of life: by his
conflict with the tempter, h^w to withstand temptation: behold we his
contumelies offered of the Jews, calling him a blasphemer, a friend of
Publicans, a seducer of the people: what a lesson have we here of patience?
let us see his labors, and travails in the world: his iourneying from City
to City, how he teaches in the day, and is all the night praying: his
chastity, whose virgin mother brought forth chastity it self: his love, who
ever more charitable then he, who in the ^gues of death prayed for his
persecutors: his obedience, was there ever greater, as an innocent lamb he
became obedient unto death, even unto the death of the cross.

5 By his nakedness we learn to cloth us, by his gall and vinegar how to
delight us, by his wounds and pearsings how to pamper us, if we speak of the
world and worldly things, who less respected them then he? If we consider the
care of heavenly, thither tended all his care. If a^es, where was there ever
such an alms man heard of, that gave his own body and blood to refresh the
hungry? if bountifulnes, Paradise it self was granted unto a sinful suter at
the very first motion. What can a Christian heart desire, which is not found
with spiritual delight in the life of Christ? what virtue can he wish, but
there he shall see a lively image thereof?

Christ was the eye that was without moate, the white without stain, he was
the lamb without spot or blemish. The Prophets show his innocence before he
comes, and being come: the Evangelists approve the same: the Chronicles of
heathen men are not silent, the Romain^ Register makes report of Jesus, which
was called of the Nations, the Prophet of truth, a Lentulus ad senatum.
man goodly to behold, having a reverent countenance, his stature somewhat
tall, his hair after the color of the ripe hazell nut, from his ears
somewhat cripsed, parting it self in the midst of the head, and wauing with
the wind, after the manner of the Nazarites, his forehe^ smooth and plain, his
face without wrinkle mixed with moderat^ed, his heard somewhat co^ous, tender,
and divided at the chin, his eyes gray, various, and cle^re, he is in rebuking
severe, in instructing loving and amiable, merry with gravity, he sometimes
wept, but was never soene to laugh, in talk sober, and full of understanding,
sparing, and ^dest. Thus as ancient records have laid it down, we may behold
him according to that of the Psalmist, Goodly to see to above all the sons of
men. Outwardly his graceful behavior was such, while he walked in the
world, that the world it self did behold him with high reverence, and
admiration, yet his external feature compared with his inward graces, the
external was far inferior to that hidden excellency of his.

6 Enoch is commended for piety, Abraham for faith and perseuerence, Job for
patience, Isaac for meditation, Joseph for chastity, Moses for meekenes,
Phinees for zeal, Samuel for vprightnes; Toby for mercy, Daniel for prayer,
and devotion: and last of all, 1, Sam. 9, 2
Solomon for wisdom. Saul was higher then all the men of Israel by the head,
Christ the head of the congregation is above all: the lights of the stars are
many, but all are not comparable to the light of the Sun. Holy men have a
measure of grace, but the Son of man had grace without measure: wherefore
take the piety of Enoch, the faith of Abraham, the patience of Job, the
meditation of Isaac, the chastity of Joseph, the meekenes of Moses, the
zeal of Phinees, the vprightnes of Samuel, the mercifulnes of Toby, the
devotion of Daniel, and with these the wisdom Dan. 9, 24.
of Solomon, put them all together as a cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12, 1.
and Christ's example is in ste^d of all. Wherefore he is called sanctus
sanctorum. The holy of Heb. 9, 3.
holies: and in this sacred place (says the Apostle) was contained the golden
censer, the Arc of the Testament, the golden pot that contained Manna, the rod
of Aaron, that being dead budded again, the wings of the Cherubins
ouershadowing the mercy seat. So in Christ is contained the Arc of covenant
between God and man, with the censer, the acceptance of the prayers of the
Saints, with the golden pot that contained Manna, the blessed Sacrament, with
Aarons dead rod that budded again, the hope of the resurrection. The two
Cherubines that look face to face, the two Testaments both looking to one
mercy seat, to wit, Christ, whom Esaias calls the Prince of righteousness,
Aggai, Esaias. 9, 6. Aggai. 2, 8. Mal. 4, 2. Mat. 1, 21.
the desire of the Nations, Malachi^, the Sun of righteousness, the Angel,
Jesus, who shall save his people from their sins.

7 There was none of those beatitudes, says Saint Austen, Aug. in ser. in mont.
which our Savior spoke of in his first sermon upon the mount, (Matthew the
fifth and first) whereof Mat. 5, 1.
he was not only a teacher, but also a perfect and full obseruer, for Christ
evermore lived as he taught.

He exhorts to be poor in spirit, who poorer then he who became from being
equal with God, far lower then the Angels, yea a scorn of men, as the
Prophet speaks? He exhorted to meekenes, who more meek then he who was as a
sheep not opening his mouth before the shearer? he exhorted to mourning, who
has mourned as he mourned, who in the days of his flesh, did offer up prayers
and supplications, with strong crying, and tears unto him that was able to
save him? he exhorted to hunger and thirst ofter righteousness, who could
hunger and thirst more, then he who gave his life for the righteousness of many?
he exhorted to suffer persecution, who ever suffered more, or with more
patience then did the Son of God? Last of all, he taught his disciples to
leave al for the love of him, but he first left all for their love, when he
left his kingdom and throne in heaven.

8 It is said of Caesar, that in his greatest attempts, he used not that word
of authority, Ite, go you, but after a more loving and sociable manner he
would ever say unto his soldiers, Eamus, come, let us go. It was most true in
Christ before all other, he never but lead the way before his Disciples, in
all holiness, in all trials and tribulations, in all conflicts which are wont to
arise in the life of man. And therefore the Apostle wisleth us to run with
patience the race set before us, looking unto Heb. 12, 1 2.
Jesus, the Author and finisher of our faith.

9 What better example could ever have been given, then the example of Christ?
How could our pride be better suppressed, then by his humility? our disobedience
better lessoned then by his meekenes, our vanities better expelled then by his
labors, our impatiencie better qualified then by his mildnes? where have we,
says Saint Bernard, true justice but in his mercy, true fortitude but in his
constancy? Christ was made unto us, says the Apostle, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and 1. Cor. 1, 30
redemption. Wisdom by instructing us, righteousness by absoluing us from our
sins, sanctification by giving us of his spirit, redemption by purchasing us
life by his death.

That we should not love gold (says Saint Austen) Christ Aug. epi. 111, ad
Iulianum.
taught us to contemn gifts offered: that we should not fear hunger, he
fasted: that we should not distrust nakedness, he forbad his Disciples diverse
change of reyment: that we should not be dismayed at tribulations, he endured
tribulation: that we should not fear death, he himself died.

10 Before all these things, says the same Father, and for our better
instruction in all, as he taught us by his word, so was he our forerunner by
his works, and has leuelled and laid out the way wherein we should walk,
which way leads unto life; in the mean time, if we follow his steps so far
forth as we may, if his way be our way, his joys shall be our joys.

11 Neither do his divine actions only serve for the direction of our life,
but also minister many things tending to the constr^ation of our faith. His
birth was our regeneration: his victory over the tempter, our triumph: his
labors, our peace and quiet: his proyers our intercession: his poverty our
riches: his sores our salues: his wounds our medicines: his death our life.

That which was wanting in vo was supplied in him, and therefore says an
ancient Father, Opera (...) merita nostra, his works are our merits.
Whatsoever is written of him in the Gospel, whatsoever he did, or said, all
tends to our good, that we may together see, and know, in whom we may hope, of
who^ we may learn.

Stories make mention, how Themistocles by the only example of Miltiades, whom
he proposed unto himself to follow, of a vicious man he became very
virtuous. It was not the least praise amongst the Romans, for the younger of
best hope, toimitate such as were men of special note for wisdom and
government in the Commonwealth: He reby an opinion was bred, they would not
prove far unlike those whom they had proposed to imitate. It cannot but
preuasle much, that Christ should be the center of our thoughts, about which
they should role: the load-starre of our eyes, to which they should bend: the
guide of our journey, whom we should follow.

12 Wherefore generally in all our sayings and doings, let us ever have respect
to Jesus, if we speak to think how he has spoken: if we are silent, to call
to mind how he was silent: and let us do the same in all actons of life,
seeing his life instructed our life, who had modesty in his countenance,
gravity in his behavior, deliberation in his speeches, purity in his thoughts,
and righteousness in all his doings.

His life is the way, by which we must walk, the door whereby we must enter,
entering at the last unto our desired end; this end, is, to follow the Lamb,
whither Apo. 14, 4.
soever he goes: and therefore here to follow him, is but to begin to do
that in earth for a time, which we shall do hereafter in most joyful manner,
with that blessed company of Saints and Angels for ever above in heaven.

13 The sponse in the Canticles says, I am black, but marvel Can. 1, 5.
not, the Sun had made me so, the Sun, but what? the Sun of righteousness?
And how could that be? yes, his labors and travails in the world, his
reproaches and suffering made him, look with a sorrowful hue: He was wounded,
says the Esa, 53, 11.
Prophet, for our transgression, and broken for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him.

What needed he to be circumcised the eight day? what needed he fast so long in
the wilderness, and pray so often as he did, who was so pure, so innocent, so
powerful, but all to show it was for our sakes, whom as he redeemed from
sin, so has he also redeemed from the works of sin: and therefore without
all question, the more faithful we are, and the more devoted to his love, the
more destrous are we to show duties of love. Why is the holy Ghast so
plentiful in registring and enroling all his divine actions, so many, so
singular, but that hereupon should be inferred, These things are written for
our example? Now therefore, seeing that God has given us his son, as a
satisfactorie sacrifice for sin, and a most absolute example for the direction
of life, let us embrace him as our Savior, hear him as our Teacher, follow
him as our Leader, that so he may be unto us as God himself would have him be:
Pharao said unto the people, Go to Joseph, and whatfoeuer Ge. 41, 55.
he shall say unto you, do it.

Chap. 5.
That this example of Christ's life, should stand before the eyes of our mind,
for our better direction in all our ways.
THe skillful Pylot, as he often casts his eye to the storres, and Planets
above; so is his hand busy at the helm beneath. The Christian man between
contemplation, and action, faith, and good works, does the like: by faith he
looks up to Christ's deity, by good works, he practices the virtues of his
humanity: in the one, he worships him as God, in the other he beholds him as
the most absolute pattern for imitation, that ever walked amongst men.

2 Why? but is it possible for earth and ashes, any way to come near him, in
whom the fulness of the godhead dwelt, or is not his perfection inimitable?
Sink is never without a shift, and course wool, is that which will take no
die. Though we cannot be as strong as Sampson, as wise as Solomon, as holy as
Enoch, we must not let all alone. When we cannot be as Mary the blessed
virgin, let us be as Mary Magdalen, seeing we cannot have a clean heart, let
us have at the least a broken heart. We know there is no water without some
mud, no corn so clean, but it has some weeds, the clearest fire has his
smoke, and while we carry about these bodies of sin, we are Adams children:
This notwithstanding, it is the part of every good Christian man, to say as
Jacob, Praecedat Dominus, ego paulatim sequar: Let my Genesis 33. 14
Lord go before, I will softly follow after, as I may: or with the holy man
Job, Vestigia eius secutus est pes men's, My foot has Job, 23, 11
followed his footsteps.

Indeed we follow Christ, as Peter followed him, a long, a far off, or as
that tender infant did Luk, 22, 54.
his aged Father, Non passibus aequis, with short and unequal paces, yet we
know that even two mites are acceptable unto him, not what we ought, but Luk,
21, 2.
what we can, when a willing heart and good endeavors concur in his service,
are acceptable and rewardable with him, who is wont to take in good part the
veri^ intention, or well meaning of Aug. ser. de tem. 93.
our most meanest labors of all. A cup of cold water, of water a common
element: cold, on which we bestowed not so much cost as fire to heat it, shall
not with him want a reward. Moreover, the greatest blemishes in the child are
but small warts to the loving Father. First, God looks favorably upon Christ,
and then upon these who are joined with Christ.

3 Our Savior used this, a Ioh. 13, 15.
special argument, to persuade his Disciples to huminity and love, Dedi vobis
exemplum, I have given you an example. S. Peter speaking of his suffering,
says, Christ suffered, leaving us 1, Pe. 2, 21
an example. When the Apostle would have the Ephesians to follow him, he tells
them his meaning was, they should indeed follow Christ: Be ye, says he,
followers of me, as I follow Christ. When he would have them forgive Ephe. 5,
1.
one another, he would have them think of him, who has forgiven us all,
saying, Forgive you one another, as Christ forgave you. Saint John lays down
Ephe. 4, 32
the matter plainly, He that remains in him, ought to walk as 1, John. 2, 6
he walked.

Why did Saint Austen say, that every of Christ's actions was our instruction,
and Saint Ambrose wish, that the wise men of the world would be wise in deed,
and learn to follow Christ in lowlines of mind, that they would ever set
before them his example, who is gone before us to heaven? Therefore Gregory,
amongst other high and Greg. mor.
heavenly ends, Filius Dei (says he) formam infirmitatis nostrae suscepit, ad
hoc contumeliarum ludibria, illusionum opprobria, passionum tormenta tolerauit,
vt doceret Deus hominem: The Son of God took the form of our infirmity, bare
the scoffs of contumelies, the reproaches of irrision, the torments of
suffering, that so God might teach man. To this Isid. lib. 10. cap. 29, de
Ecclesi of ficiis.
Isidore adds, Christ ascended unto the cross, died, and rose again the
third day from the dead, to leave us a double example of suffering, and rising
again: of suffering, to conform our patience, of rising to confirm our
faith. For the confirming of our faith, we ought to cast off all unpediments to
come unto him, of whom we may say with the people of eld time: Cum ignoramus
quid agere debemus, hoc solum 2, Chro. 20. 13.
residui habemus, vt oculos nostros dirigamus ad te. When we know not what to
do, O Son of God, this only is left unto us, to lift up our eyes unto thee.

5 For worldly pleasures, those of the best sort, if they are honest, yet they
perish, if otherwise, we perish, only to follow Christ is man's chiefest good.
Abimelech the son of Iernbaall, in the ninth of Judges, goes to the men of
Sechem, and thus seeks to persuade them, I am of your kindred, of your bone
and Judge. 9, 1.
flesh; the men of Sechem answered, our hearts are moved to follow Abimelech,
he is our brother: we have somewhat more to move us, then these men had, if we
remember our selves well, and therefore may more truly say, We will follow the
Lord Jesus, he is our Savior.

6 The Eagle to learn her young ones to fly, does oftentimes flutter over
them, all to teach them to raise up themselves by little and little, and so
Deuteronomy. 32.
at last to be able to take their flight, and be gone. What do all the
precepts and examples of Christ our Savior, but houer over us, that we should
learn to lift up our selves from earthly affections, and in time ascend
whither he ascended, that is, to heaven?

The servant will follow his master, the soldier his captain, the natural
child desires nothing more then to manifest the virtues of his Father. Is he
worthy to bear the name of Christ, says Saint Austen, who does no way
endeavor the imitation Aug. de vita christiana.
of Christ's actions? In that we believe in him, we acknowledge him our God: in
that we do that which Christ did as man, we do that which Christian men
should do.

The holy Scriptures were not therefore given us, that we should have them in
books, or only read, or peruse them, and so no more, but the folding up of all
is, a pronouncing of them blessed that do his commandments, Apoc. 22, 9
and keep the words of these testimonies: Better is it with the Lacedaemonians
to do well, then with the Athenians to speak well, or only know what belongs
to well doing.

7 Christ has done his part, and conformed himself to us, our part remains
to conform our selves unto him. In the way of life, whom may we more safely
follow, then the way it self? Let the same mind be in you, says the Apostle,
that was in Christ: Phil. 2, 5.
the same, that is, in humblenes of mind, a resemblace of the same.

Whence is it that we are so soon cast down with every touch of adversity,
but that we do not deeply consider Christ's constancy? whence is it that we
are so easily carried away with every show of vanity, but in that we lightly
pass over Christ's contempt of the world? who, says Fulgentius, will not
despise his Fulgen. de con^. ad Theod.
cottage, when he sees a Senator despise his large and spacious buildings?
and who contemnes not earthly things to get heavenly, when he sees a Consul of
Rome do the same? yea, much more, what Christian man in the world will place
his whole delight upon a transitory estate, when he sees the Son of God
pass this life only seeking his Fathers glory in heaven.

8 Sure it is, that whereas our lives here are partly guided by precepts, and
partly directed by examples, then have we sufficient instruction in respect of
both, from the Son of God for the latter, to wit, examples by which we are
led, if we respect the general course of men: for (we say a long way by
precept, is by example short and easy) had we no precept in the world, the
only life of our Redeemer were enough for our guide and direction all the way.

The actual observation of whose precepts and manners, to wit, those manners
which he proposed unto man (for in his divine works we will admire him as God)
the observation of these, I say, is for three causes required at our hands:
first, for that they are fruits of our regeneration: secondarily, Testimonies
of our love toward him: thirdly, signs of our profession, seeing of Christ
we are called christians.

Our Savior reasoned with the Jews after this manner, If you were the
children of Abraham, John, 8, 39
then would you do the works of Abraham. In the tenth of Saint John, he
calls himself a shepherd, and we are resembled unto Ioh. 10, 14.
sheep: now although sheep, according to the Philosopher, be pecus erraticum,
a cattle given to stray: yet, says our Savior, Aris. de not. anim.
they will hear the voice of the shepherd, and follow him.

10 Now then awake O christian soul, says Saint Austen, Aug. de vita Christ.
awake, and imitate the footsteps of thy Lord, he teaches thee, who is the
way, the life, and the truth: the way without erring, the truth without
deceiving, the life without fading: the way by example, the truth by promise,
the life by reward, neglect not the following of so gracious a Lord. Now shall
the negligent be one day confounded? the valuptuous, to see him in glory, who
once lived in fasting and great devotion? the proud in seeing him exalted, who
refused earthly pomp? the covetous in beholding him Lord of heaven and earth,
who never followed the riches of the world, but now to live and reign for
ever? merciful God, what a strange sight will this be unto them, how shall
they be amazed in themselves, how often will they wish with sighs, they had
walked in his ways? Dionysius the elder, when he heard of the great folly
committed by his son, he calls him unto him, and reasons with him after this
manner, Did thou ever see me do as thou do, live as thou live? the same
may be said to men who follow their own fancies, did ye ever see Christ do
so and so?

11 When Mariners do want in the maine sea marks to direct their course by,
they take their mark, which is the surest way, from the heavens: in like
manner, if we had not examples (as we have many to this effect) yet the surest
mark to direct our ship by, is to look to him whose habitation is in heaven,
which will keep us between Scylla and Charybdis all the way unto the port of
Paradise: we stand in need of a guide, for how should the blind walk,
unless he have a helper to lead him? the weak and feeble stand, unless he
have an assistant to stay him? the wandering come into the way, unless he have
a conducter to direct him, which is Christ. Whom to follow, as whom to know, is
life eternal. John, 17, 3.


12 By that vision of Saint John, in the Apocalypse, where Apo. 5, 8.
he saw the four beasts, and the four and twenty Elders falling down before
him, who sat upon the throne, and pouring out their vyals, is understood the
church, and Christ the head of the Church (say the learned) and the duty of his
members in following him. In that it is mentioned, They follow him whither so
ever he goes.

First, he is called the Lamb, and therefore they follow him in Apo. 14, 4.
humility: this we see by their falling down.

Secondly, by mortification, for this Lamb was sacrificed, and they give their
bodies a sacrifice to serve him.

Thirdly, they follow him in love, he in love gave himself for the redemption
of sinners, and they have their golden vyalles pouring out charity unto men.

Fourthly, they follow him in devotion, he often prayed, and they offer sweet
odors and prayer unto God. Gedeon said unto all his troops and company, quod
me Judge. 7, 17
videtis facere, facite: our Gedeon says the same unto all believers, That
which you see me do, do ye. They cannot go amiss, whose guide is the way:
they cannot err, whose directour is the truth: they cannot perish, whose
preserver is life

If the children of Israel did learn many things of the Egiptians, only
because they dwelt amongst them, how much more should the faithful learn of
Christ, who is said to dwell with them, and in them.

Chap. 6.
The first virtue to be learned in the life of Christ, was his humility.
IT is said of those who excel in the Art of elocution, that they never find
less to speak, then when the matter is the most c^pioas, whereof they should
speak. Such is the enumeration of thy virtues, O holy Christ, which the more
we consider them, the more we wonder at them, and the longer we labor how to
express them, the less able we find our selves how to conceive them: (...)
these, of all other we stand amazed at thy humility, who being God from
everlasting, woulde^ take thy passage from the throne of glory, and here
arrived in a valley of tears, would exile thy self three and thirty years
from this thy majesty, and what more? would be borre man, and what more?
even as the meanest amongst men, and what more? would be circumcised
according to the law, who were Mat. 2, 1. Luk, 2, 21.
above all law, and what more? would become a servant, and so in subjection,
and what more? would be as an offending servant, and so suffer, albeit in
thy self far from all offense. And what more? would sustain reproaches,
and obloquie in the world. And what more? would undergo death: yea, a most
ignominious death, being the God of life, the Author of life, and life it
self. Here Saint Austen cries out. Quo descendit humilitas? Aug. med. sept.
O son of God, whither did thy humility descend? If thy own love drew thee
to this, it was thy goodness? if our love, it was thy gift.

2 Adam transgressed the law of his maker, and not only that, but Adam, and in
Adam, all his posterity (for we have not sin by imputation) not only
transgressed the law of his maker, but wilfully rebelled against the wisdom
of his God, which wisdom was God the Son, the second person in Trinity.
Adam thou and all thy offspring (because all are accessarie) shall rue this
contumacie offered with so great indignity, unto the Lord of heaven and earth:
what says our Jonas? for me is this tempest raised, O Father, for me is thy
just wrath incensed. Let me Ion. 1, 12.
be c^st out into the Sea: for me has this we begun; by me let it have an end;
let me be the Lamb slain, so these Israelites may be Apo. 5, 12
delivered; Sanguine quaerendi reditus, and must that poor posterity of Adam
have a return unto their lost Country by bleed? let me be the virginal
sacrifice: And will thou have an offering? let me be the Isaac that shall go
to one of the mountains of Moria. Of the two Goats, let me be the escape
Goat, sent to wander in the wilderness. O the humility, and love, and bounty
of the Genesis 22, 2 Leu. 16, 8.
son of God!

3 But to leave that which the Apostle says, Being equal with God, he became
like unto Phil. 2, 7.
man, and (sin only excepted) was even as one of us, to see a little his
estate and condition in the world: when he was borne, where was the place of
his birth, but at Bethlehem a little City? Math. 2, 1. Luc. 2, 16. Luc. 5, 10.
Luc. 15, 1. Math. 14, 19. Mat. 8, 24.
And where did the sheepheards ^ade him, but in a sorry Cottage, whose seat
was above the Cherubins? when he chose Disciples, whom did he choose, but
poor fishermen? when he walked up and down, who were his associates, but
Publicans, and for the most part the common people? when he would take repast,
where was his table, but upon the plain ground? what were his dainties, but
bread, and some few fishes? who were his guests, but a company of feeble and
hungry creatures? when he would take his rest, where was his lodging, but at
the stern of a ship?

4 Thou art deceived, O Jew, that expectest in the promised Messiah, pomp, and
glory of the world: look over all the ancient Prophecies of him, and thou
shall find it far otherwise. The Psalmist will tell thee, that he shall
become a worm and no man. The Prophet Esaias, Who will believe our report? He is
despised Esaias. 53, 3.
and rejected of men: He is a man full of sorrows. Zachary, Behold the King
comes in meek manner, Zach. 9, 9
and so along: Fear not Herod the loss of thy Diadem, this King is borne,
says Fulgentius, Non vt tibi succedat, sed vt in eum mundus vniuersus credat.
Fulg. de Epipha.
Not to succeed thee, (thou art deceived, if thou thus think of him) but he
was borne that all the world should believe in him: Fear not him to become thy
successor, believe in him, and he will be thy Savior. He came not to
possess the kingdom of others, but to give the possession of his own kingdom
to all believers. He came not by arms to subdue Kings, but by dying to give
them all a better kingdom for the time to come. He sought not others glory,
who for our sakes for sooke his own: he was hungry, and yet he fed many: he
was weary, and yet he refreshes all that are heavy laden: he was dumb, and
opened not his mouth, and yet was the divine speech of God himself. he 1, Pet
1 12 John, 1, 1. Math. 28, 18.
was of mean reputation amongst men, and yet was Lord of heaven and earth.

5 If you ask when he was? Saint John says. In the beginning? If you ask
what he was? he tells us, The word was God: if you ask what he did? he says,
John, 1, 1. 2 3, 4, 5.
All things were made by him: if you ask what he does? he shows that he
enlighteneth all that com^ unto him: If you ask how he came? he sets it
down in plain words. The word became flesh. If there were no other
testimonies to prove his Deity, yet John, 8, 56. Math. 28, 18.
this were sufficient: Before Abraham was, I am. To who^ all power in heaven
and earth, is given. This same is God, but this was given unto Christ. Mat. 28,
18.

If all things were made by John, 1, 2.
him, then was he the Creator, for no creature is the maker of all things.
Great is the mystery of godliness, says the Apostle, He 1, Tim. 3, 16.
was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory?

When his coming did now approach, Zachary was stricken dumb, he prophesied,
as if the prophecies of old now ceasing, behold him who was the end of them
all. John is more then a Prophet, the Prophets s^y, he shall come: John says,
behold the Lamb of God, as if, he is come. Behold him, from his cradle at
Bethlehem, to his cross at Jerusalem, Luk, 1, 22.
a myrror of true humility, so great, so mighty as he was, to become (to see
too) in mean manner a poor pilgrim amongst men?

6 Where are they that seek, and never cease seeking (for were not men happy,
if they could ke^p a mean in their music, which would make better harmony,
both before God and man) where are they, I say, that never leave seeking that
mountain-like height, Luk, 3, 5.
or superiority in the world? let them remember the world it self will have an
end. How great, trow you, was the pride of man's heart, when God himself must be
humbled to teach humility? Where is that grace that brings low every hill, and
makes plain the roughest passages? where is our time spent in the school of
Christ, since we took upon us in Baptism the name of christians, seeing we
remember so little our masters lesson, Discite ex me, Learn of me to be
humble and meek: take Mat. 11, 29.
up my yoke, this yoke it is a sweet yoke, for being taken up by humility,
it rather bears, the^ is borne. O Lord (says Saint Austen unto his f^miliar
friend) Aug. con. 8.
we profess much knowledge and learning. (This he spoke a little before his
conversion) and yet go on in flesh and blood, looking aloft, and ouerlooking
others: these poor souls, meaning them who lead an humble life, shall carry
away heaven from us.

We see the Lord of glory how lowly he was, when his Disciples were
discoursing, and debating the matter of ^perioritie, he brings in amongst
them a little child, setting him in the midst of them, saying, Unless you
become as little children, you are not meet for the Kingdom of heaven: Mat.
18, 3.
nay, which is more, himself is down at his Apostles feet, washing and
wiping them. What humility was this? But hence what would he have his
Disciples learn? Ye call me master, and Lord, and ye say well: for so am I, if
I then your Lord, and John, 13 5.
master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet.
For I have given you an example, that you should do, as I have done unto you.

7 To have seen him whom the Angels do adore, whom the powers and
principalities do worship, at whose very name every knee, both of things in
heaven, in earth, and under the earth, do Phil. 2, 10.
bend and bow, have seen him, I say, kneeling down upon the earth, and do
service at the very feet of his servants, could not but have been a sight
most admirable. If we ask the cause, himself has told us, even to teach us
this virtue of humility: of which virtue, Saint. Austen thus speaks. If you
ask, what is the first step in the way of truth? August.
I answer, humility: If you ask, what is the second? I say humility: If you
ask, what is the third? I answer the same, humility: These are as the steps of
degr^ in the Temple, whereby we descend to the knowledge of our selves, and
ascend to the knowledge of God.

The poor Publican humbly confessing his sins, and striking Luke 18, 13 Luk,
15, 21
his breast, as if his repentance came from his very heart, found mercy. The
prodigal Son humbles himself in his Fathers sight, and is received into
favor with him. The Centurion Math. 8, 8
was never more worthy, then when he thought himself most unworthy. Of all
other examples, the humility of the blessed virgin, (blessed amongst women, to
be his mother who was her maker) an Ambassador comes unto her from the King of
heaven with a high message, Hail full of grace, how could not the mother of
humility, (and yet Luc. 1, 28.
a tender virgin) but with bashful countenance, be told that she was full of
grace, and that she was so highly accepted of God? How did modest
shamefastness change her color, so often as her imagination varied; still
humbly conceiving of her self? How did she at last acknowledge the goodness
of God with all submission: Behold the handmayde of the Lord, with humble
obeysaunce unto that God, which had respected and regarded, as she says in
her Canticle, The humbleness of his hand-mayden? Thus we see how much
humility pleased God; when it pleased him so much to respect this virtue: When
in the fullness of time he sent his Son into the world borne of a Gal 4, 4.
woman.

8 Being borne, it was said unto the sheep^heards which were sent to see him,
Et hoc vobis signum, and let this be a sign Luk, 2, 12.
unto you, you shall find the child wrapped in swaddling clothes, end laid in
a manger. In seeking Christ, hoc vobis signum, you shall find him in humility,
he betook him to a poor Cottage, that he might teach us where we should
sometimes see him: he was not borne in the house of his parents, but in the
way, to show us that his Kingdom was not of this world, Et hoc vobis signum,
you shall find him in humility, he became meek that we might be made strong.
Poor, that we might be made rich. Uile* that we might be made glorious. The
son of man, that we might be made the sons of God. Et hoc vobis signum,
and this shall be a sign unto you, you shall find him in humility. Super quem
requiescit spiritus meus? upon Esa. 66, 2.
whom, says God, does my spirit rest, but upon the humble? to who^ do I look
but unto these? where did the Dove light? not upon the swelling waters, but
cropped a branch of Olive that had layne below. I thank thee, O Father, says
Christ out Lord, that thou have hid these things from the wise, and prudent,
and have opened them to Babes, and sucklings: what are these wise and prudent,
but the proud in their own eyes? What are these Babes, and sucklings, says S.
Austen, but the humble, and lowly? Humble Moses is made a ruler of Gods
people: humble Exo. 3, 10. Iud. 6, 15. 1, Sam. 15, 17.
Gedeon, the least in his family (as himself confessed) was by God made the
greatest governor. When S^ule was lowly in his own eyes, God exalted him, but
when S^ule forgot God, then when he should have remembered him, Saul soon
comes to ruin.

8 What art thou, O man, that liftest up thy self in pride? know that pride
cannot sit so high, but vengeance can sit above it, to pull it down. God and
pride, says Bernar. in medit.
Saint Bernard, cannot dwell in the same mind, which could not dwell in the
same heaven, and pride fallen from heaven, ascends no more from whence it is
fallen.

Old records make mention, that in Egypt there was ^ound the picture of
Senacharib, of whose 2. Reg. 18.
pride the scripture makes mention, having by his picture this inscription:
Learn by me to fear God, as if they would show the cause, and overthrow of
Senacharibs pride, as thus, Senacharib feared not God. We^ are wont of all
other, to call proud men fools, and not without cause, for they often exalt
themselves in their riches, in their honors, in their learning, and what not?
Plutarch says, that on^ Chares a mean fellow, waxed so proud, and began to
grow into such admiration of himself, because he had hurt Cy^us in the knee,
that in the end through very prdie, he became stark mad. The church stories
ma^e mention of Arrius a Priest, in the Church of Alexandria, a man of sharp
wit, that of very pride he sell to open and fearful heresi^. Let it be
remembered and written in the tables of our heart, God resists the proud. Iam.
4, 6.


10 The more dire^t the Sun is over us, the lesser is our shadow: the more
Gods grace is over us, and in us, the lesser is our shadow of pride, and
selfeloue. Had we Christian hearts to consider the humility of our Redeemer, and
how far he was from our haugh^e and disdainful dispositions, it would pull
down our pharisaicall humors, I am not as this man, and make us to remember
our selves, remembering Luc. 18, 11
that of the holy Ghost, He that stands, let him take heed l^ast he fall. 1,
Cor. 10, 12.


The soul is said to have senses in some manner as the body has, in steed of
seeing, it has faith: in steed of hearing, obedience: of smelling, hope: of
tasting, charity: and last of all, in steed of touching, humility: a sense of
a^l other is this touching most necessary, for this failing, life fails. The
Moale is said to live without seeing, the Fly without hearing, the Camelion
without tasting, the shellfish without smelling, but without feeling nothing
sensitive existeth. The same may be considered of the grace of humility, in the
life of grace.

11 The mother of Zebedes Math. 20, 21.
children comes unto our Savior, as a suitor for her Sons, that they
mighthaue superiority and sit next him in his Kingdom: she, as yet not fully
illuminated, thought, that Christ should bear a state in the world, sit as a
King in princely authority, and therefore would to take her tune, and lay for
promotion, that her Sons might be great about him, and bear some sway, as no
mean states: but all this while she was far wide. Christ as he never affected
superiority in himself, so did he teach others that those who were greatest,
should be as the least, and the chiefest as he that served, for he came not
into this world to have any high pre-eminence, in regard of worldly dignity:
but in lowlines of mind from his first entrance, until his departure unto his
Father, was the whole carriage of his life; whereunto, his doctrine accorded,
when he pronounced them blessed, who were poor in spirit: his reprehension
accorded, when he disliked Mat^. 5, 3. Luc, 14, 7.
their manner, who were wont to thrust, and strive for the highest places, at
seasts and other assemblies: he that contented himself with so mean and
lowly a condition, was able with one word to have showed as much state, as
ever Solomon d^d, when all the world in a manner did admire him: but we see how
much he respected humility.

12 Wherefore if we follow our heavenly leader, then must we humble our
selves. More saf^ (...) it to be upon the pauement, where we may walk surely,
then to be clyming upon the pinn^oles of the Temple, where, and whence we may
take a fall. Humility is the very honor of honor. Peter in humility and
fear, craves distance from Christ, Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man:
Hester that good woman, made a good protestation in her prayer, Tuscis Hester.
14.
quod detestor signum superbiae, God thou know I detest the sign of pride.
Lord, says David, I am not high minded, I have no Psa. 131, 1
proud looks: The Sp^rtans heathen men, were honored in the world for their
great humility and obedience: The counsel of the Angel unto Agar, may be
counsel befitting man's insolency, O Hagar, go humble thy self. It is a
temptation of Satan, Macha. ho. 27.
says Machariu^, thou art better then other, wiser then other, worthier then
other, harken not unto it.

13 When as Rebecca understood it was Isaac which came walking upon the
ground, down she comes from her Cammel, and covers her self with a veil:
she thought it unseemly her self Genesis 34. 65.
to be on high, and see her spouse content to go on foot below. When we
consider with our selves how our Lord and Master was so lowly and meek, what
should we else do, but be ashamed of our conc^tes, come down from lofty and
swelling desires, remembering that of S. James, Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, and he will Iam. 4, 10.
exalt you or that of Solomon, humility goes before honor: or if Pro. 15, 33
all this will not serve to learn us, to be humble and meek, yet let the fall
of Lucifer be a warning unto all, while they have a day to live, to take heed
of pride (...) for is it likely, that he who cast a proud Angel out of heaven,
will place a proud man in heaven?

Chap. 7.
What we learn by Christ's leading into the wilderness, his fasting, and
temptations there.
IT cannot but add courage and comfort unto the soldier, when he sees his
Captain in the forefront of the battle, to encounter and foil the enemy:
who is not animated in mind, when he hears of Christ's conflict, and
conquest, with, and against the professed enemy of us all? Men are wont to
read with delight, and mark with attention, the magnanimity of great
champions showed in assaulting their enemies in war, how they have gone forth
in the day of battle, and quited themselves like men, for the saving of their
lives and liberties: but what co^bate more joyful unto the Christian man, then
this of our Savior, who undertook hand to hand that great Goliath, which did
vpbraide the God of Israel. 1 Samuel 17, 10.


2 For the better observation hereof, we are here to consider four things:
First, Christ's baptism: Secondly, his departure into the wilderness: Thirdly,
his fasting: Fourthly, his conflict and conquest over the tempter and
temptation. In the first, we call to mind our regeneration in the fountain of
grace; in the second, our departure from the vanities of the world: in the
third, the mortification of the flesh: in the fourth, how to resist the enemy.
If we respect ou^ regeneration in the fountain of grace, we look upward
where we see heaven opening, and heart a voice testifying of every one, Hic est
filius meus dilectus, This is my beloved Son, in who^ Mat. 3, 18.
God was well pleased, and i^ whom we are well pleased. (...) we respect the
second, (our departure from the vanities of (...) world,) we hear that of our
savior, I have chosen you out of the Ioh. 17, 16.
world. If the third, that of the Apostle, Take no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts of it. If the To. 13, 14.
fourth, that of Saint John: And they overcame him by the blood Apo. 12. 11
of the Lamb: Watch, says S. Peter, for your adversary the devil 1, Pet. 5, 8
^s a roaring Lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour? Why does the
shepherd watch, but because the woolse watches?

3 And here, before we enter into consideration of our Saviors departure
into the wilderness, we may call to mind, how before his preaching the Gospel,
or ^lad tidings of salvation unto the world, he first prepared himself by
fasting, being thus prepared, he goes out against the Exo. 13, 21
enemy. Now, as the Ark of God went before the people in the wilderness, not
only to show them the way, but also to strike a fear and terror into the
hearts of their enemies: the same has Christ done for us all, and what he
wrought for us, he does work in us. Having entered o^ names into his family,
we ha^ the title and testimony to be h^* having this title and testimony, we
are led by his spirit: being led by his spirit we leave the world: leaving the
world, we f^ to fasting, and other exercises of piety: in these exercises of
piety, the tempter will assay us: t^ tempter assaying us, we l^ unto Christ,
who is gone be^, and has subdued our mortallnemie.

4 By Christ's fasting, w^ see how to arm our selves against this adversary,
that t^ flesh may be obedient unto t^ spirit, the spirit to grace, and (...) to
say as David, I come forth unto thee in the name of my God, 1, Sam. 17.
This fasting does much h^ the soul, which is the chief ^gent in this
battle, that (...) and body both together, (...) withstand the force of the
^mie. When two are combati^ if one step in to assist either p^tie, the party
assisted is like^ to prevail: Fasting helps (...) soul, Christ fasteth, and
is strengthened against the force of the tempter.

Physicians can tell us, then fasting there is nothing better for the body: and
Divines can show us, then fasting nothing better for the soul: in this combat
it is not the worst policy to weaken the enemy before we ^ght with him: the
flesh is an enemy. For this holy exercise of fasting, it beseemes no man more
then Christians. First, because they are men, not brute beasts, led by
sensuality, and therefore those whom temperance should ^de: Secondarily, that
they Romans 18,
^e men, yea Nazarites, set a part amongst men to serve God. Who are to live,
not according to the ^sh, but according unto the spirit, and therefore are not
to pass their lives as Epicures, ^or stuff themselves like woollpacks: Let us
eat and drink, to 1. Cor. 15. 32.
morrow we shall die. Thirdly, for that they are men now in the ^d, and
besieged ^aylie with a ^full adversary, and therefore should be sober, and
watching unto prayer. 1, Pet. 5, 8.


5 Christ fasted forty days, and was armed against the tempter, Christ fasted
forty days, and forty nights, whence we may gather, that we must be armed
against this enemy, as we^ in the days of prosperity, as nights of adversity.
He fas^ truly, giving us an example, and for this cause, says Saint Basil, is
fasting necessary for our spiritual Basil. de ^ud. Ieiu. Iudic. 9, 1. Ion. 3.
6. Exodus 17, 11. Hest. 14, 2.
combat. Who overcame the host of the Assyrians, Fasting Judith: who
mittigated the wrath ready to come upon a gre^ City? Fasting Ninevites: wh^
prevailed for the preservation of the people? Fasting Moses: who stayed the
intended destruction of many Innocents? Fasting Hester. That thou may^ learn,
O man, how necess^ a thing fasting is, against the enemies bodily and ghostly,
s^ Christ thy Savior, after his Math. 4, 2.
baptism, led of the spirit into the wilderness, where he fasted. (...) which
brought ruin unto the state of man, began the same by Gal. 5, 24.
eating: but he that brought recovery unto the ruinated state of Adam, began
the same by fasting. He in whom we all fell, did fall by yielding to
temptation, but he in whom we all rose, and being risen, are still preserved
from falling, did raise us up by vanquishing the Tempter, and temptation.

6 When one cures a sick man, he commands him not to do again in any case
the things that procured his sickness: Christ has wrought our cure, and
prescribes us a diet, Take heed that your hearts be not overcome with Luke 21.
34
surfeiting, and thus shows us what is hurtful to our health.

The sins of Sodom amongst other, were these, pride, Eze. 16, 49
and fulness of bread, which fulness was the very fuel of foul iniquity, that
followed. We must be either Ninevites, or Sodomites: Ninevites, and so those
that fasted and prayed, that God would have mercy upon them for their sins:
Sodomites, and so those who lived in all voluptuousness, and were consequently
consumed in their sins. The more abstinent at the table, the more continent
in the chamber. Moses that was fasting, saw God above in the mount: the people
Exo. 32. 2.
that were eating and drinking, committed Idolatry beneath Deu. 9. 16.
in the valley. As fasting is a most excellent mean of sharpning our devotion
to God: so on the contrary, sacietie and fullness, does often cause us to
forget him. They were filled (says the prophet Ose) as in their pastures, Ose.
3. 6.
and their hearts were exalted, therefore have they forgotten me.

They who are Christ's (says the Apostle) have crucified the flesh, and this
crucifying is for the Gal. 5. 24.
souls safety. The Champion loves his buckler well, and yet for all that, he
cares not how it (...) hackt and hewed, so his body be defended. It is no
matter for chastis^ng the outward man, so the man within the man may b^ kept
safe and sound.

7 Nourish the flesh, and nourish the vices of the flesh: nourish the flesh,
and give thy very enemy weapon to hurt thee: what more seemly then a temperate
man? what more unseemly then the intemperate, who is compared unto the bruit
beasts, the wolf, the Bear, and such like. There is not (says Solomon) any
great hope in him that loves banqueting.

But how abstine^ce is a mean to bring us to all virtues, it appears in those
three children, who being content with pulse and water, increased in wisdom
and understanding, above all the delicious wantons that were in Babylon.

8 A singular example may be seen in Christ fasting, Vt ^m vtilem, non solum
verbis, sed etiam exemplis instrueret. For so necessary instruction, says
one, Christ would not only teach us by words, b^ by example also.

What a goodly Christian art thou which disdainest Fasting, and see how the
Son of God endured such hunger for thy salvation? Should that flesh fast,
that knew not how to rebel against the spirit, and should not thine, that
knows to do nothing else? But thou will say, Christ fasted forty days and
forty nights, therefore should I endeavor to fast so long? A thing impossible.
Why nothing that goes into the man, deflieth the man? What Logic call they
this, which is a resoning without reason, and comes from the school of carnal
security. Though we^ fast not as Christ fasted, should we do nothing at all?
Though no meares are unclean of themselves, if some superstitiously put a
difference between time, and time, meat and meat, is there no order to be
observed? Is this fasting a matter only of policy? Which serves first of all
to s^ew our sorrow for sins past: Secondarily, fear of punishment for ^o
come: Thirdly, in that it serves for the castigation of the body: and in the
fourth place, for the humiliation of the soul. If we respect the first of
these ends, so did the people fast, Judges, 20, Iud. 20, 26
ver. 26: If the second, so did the men of Niniuie fast, Jonah. 3, ver. 5. If
the third, so did the Ion. 3, 6.
Apostle fast, in the 1. to the Cor. and ^th chapter. If the last, so 1, Cor. 9.
did the Prophet fast, saying, I have humbled my soul with fasting. Psa. 35, 16
Psalm. 35, 16.

9 Can the world better gra^e the old enemy of man, then to make light of
fasting, which Tertullian calls, A work of reverence to God? should we
carelessly Tertul de laud. ie^.
(besides those many precepts and examples in holy scriptures) pass over this
one example of our saviors fasting, which being duly considered, does (...)
much matter worthy of our Christian observation?

Christ, says S. Ambrose, wrought our salvation, not by Ambros. Tom. 3.
Epist. 10.
riot, but by fasting, and he fasted not to deserve grace to himself, but for
our instruction: for them that say we should not fast, let them show me
(says the same Father) why Christ fasted, but that his fasting should be an
example to us.

And here fitly is the number of forty days mentioned in christ's fasting:
Because the number of forty days, says S. Jerome, Hieron. in Ezech.
is often times in holy Scripture applied unto a time of penitencie and
affliction for our sins.

Forty days continued the waters of the flood, forty years Genesis 8, 4. Psalm.
95.
wandered the people in the wilderness: Forty days had the Ninevites to repent
them of Ion. 3, 1.
their sins: Forty days slept Ezechiel upon his right side, sorrowing Ezec.
4, 4,
for the Tribe of Judah: Forty days fasted Elias, when 1, Reg. 19, 8. Exodus
32, 2
he s^ed before Iesabell: Forty days fasted Moses when he received the Law
upon the Mount. Moses for the Law, Elias for the Prophets, Christ for the
Gospel, which all communed together, says S. Austen, and accorded in one.
Three sufficient witnesses to authorize fasting, and the number of forty days
fasting, which time, says S. Hier. con. Mont. nos secundum traditionem
Apostolorum vnicam obse^uamus Quadragesimam.
^erome, the church has kept since the time of the Apostles themselves. We
have the days of Lent, says Cyrill, consecrated to Cyrill in L^.
fasting all our life time, says S. Austen, we should tend to she course set
before us, but chiefly in Aug. Sermon. 64. de temp.
the days dedicated to abstinence: wherefore considering the excellency of
Christ's example, the devotion of the ancient Fathers, to both which we may well
think nouelty should give place

10 And now come we unto the conflict it self. The Tempter says, If thou be
the son of God, as yet doubtful of his Deity: When he heard that a virgin had
conceived and born a son, there he thought he was the Son of God: but when
he perceived she was espoused to Joseph, there he thought he was the son of
Mat. 1, 20 23. Luc. 2, 14. 16.
man. When he heard the Angels make that heavenly melody at his birth, there
he thought he was the Son of God, but when he saw the tender babe in
Bethlehem, with Mary his mother, laid in a Manger, there he thought he was the
Son of man. When he saw him circumcised, then he thought there appeared a
plain sign of his humanity: but when he heard the name of Jesus, Luk, 2, 21.
then he began to suspect his Deity. When he saw him baptized with the
multitude, he thought, sure he was the Son of man: but when the voice came
Mat. 3, 16. 17.
from heaven, then he heard otherwise, that he was the Son of God. When he
saw him fasting so long, and not hungering, then he thought he was the Son of
God: but when at the end of forty days he hungered, then he thought he was
the Son of man. And therefore in the first place, he assayes him by eating,
as man, with a conditional, if, to have hun show his power, whether he were
or no the Son of God.

But our Savior, when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he
proceeded no farther, that the power of his Deity as yet might be hid, seeing
that Moses and Elias, men, had before time fasted so long. Forty days without
hunger, was not of man; and yet afterward to hunger, was not of God: and
therefore the devil as doubtful what to do, tempted him after this manner, If
thou art the Son of God, that natural Son, and so equal to him in power,
Command that these stones may be made bread. There is a voice that has
testified of thee from heaven, that thou art the Son of God, can thou live
by this title or testimony? thy Father, either he sees not thy distress, or
he will not help thee: the best way is, help thy self, and look thou to
thine own safety, while the voice is testifying thou art staruing.

11 In this, or the like temptation, great is the subtilty of the old serpent;
wherein first he moves to distrust Gods providence: Secondarily, to trust in
our own power, and thirdly, to neglect fasting and patience, the exercises of
true pi^tie. Command that these stones may be made bread, As if, now shall I
see, whether he be the Son of God or no: If he turn stones into bread,
assuredly he is the son of God, if not, it shall plainly appear he is the
son of man; whereby he would at once both try him whether he were God, as
also allure him as man.

But the tempter meeting with Christ, met with his match, for he could not
gather the certainty of either, Man, says he, shall not live by bread only,
but by every Deuteronomy. 8, 3.
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

12 Does the Tempter thus leave? no, he assayes him again; this man fasteth,
lives devoutly in the wilderness, is not carried away with the temptation of
eating, surely he is good, and better then others, may he not be brought to
affect glory? This affectation of glory is wont to move the best. Now he takes
him to the pinnacle of the Temple, sets him on high, unto the Temple, a show
of holiness; on high, a place of eminency, a hundred to one, (thinks he) if a
show of holiness, if a place of dignity, be not a mean to tempt: If thou be
the Son of God cast thy self down, being the Son of God, thou can by
thine own power save thy self, if not, thou have the ministry of Angels to
save thee. The Scripture it self says it, and therefore doubt not, throw thy
self down, He shall give his Psa. 91, 11
Angels charge over thee: Casting thy selfdown, and the Angels saving thee, all
the world will give thee applause, and thou shall be so glorious as never was
any.

We see the drift of this temptation, when intemperancie does not take place,
when a mean estate beneath does not seduce, yet to be aloft, the tempter
thinks it a fitter opportunity of prevailing. But what does he say, Ego
mittam te? I will cast thee down? no. But, Tu te mitte: Cast thy self down,
to show that he can hurt none, unless any by consenting to temptation, hurt
himself: for he that desires that all might fall, can persuade, but not cast
down, his property it is to suggest, but our duty it is to resist his
suggestions a diabolical voice truly provoke to descend, not to ascend. The
tempter says in desperate manner, throw thy self down, but God says in hope
of mercy, raise thy self up.

13 In that he alleges scripture, or rather misse-alleadgeth holy writ, it
teaches us Act. 17, 11
with the men of Berea, to try whether it be so or no. We see it has been
the manner of deceivers, following this old deceiuer, to forge evidence, and
sometimes says Origin, to show themselves like subtle Pirates, who set up
lights near dangerous rocks, that the trauailer repayring thither, thinking
by the lights all is safe, is by that means entrapped, and taken of his
enemies. In this fashion, perverse men to strengthen their fancies use also to
deal, and force scriptures to the bent of their own opinions.

But consi^er we a little the place of scripture here alleged, taken out of
the ninety and one Psalm, all which Psalm, say the ancient Fathers,
concerns Gods protection of the faithful man, over whom he has appointed
the ministry of Angels. Now for Christ, who was God from everlasting, he
rather keeps the Angels, then the Angels him, and therefore no way was it
appliable unto him. They shall keep thee, that is to say, thy self, O man,
which art frail and weak, least at any time thou dash thy foot against a
stone, or fall away being stricken at the stone of offense: so in the first
place the text is not rightly understood, if we respect the state of the
righteous man, as the Prophet means: yet here is a contrary sense, he shall
keep thee in all thy ways, true, but not in all thy presumptions: He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, well, shall thou therefore tempt God the Lord
of Angels? Christ answered rather, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. In
the third verse of the same Psalm, it is said, He shall defend thee from the
snare of the hunter, and in the thirteenth verse, Thou shall go upon the Lion
and Adder, both which places concern our preservation from the tempter, which
he leaves out, and only inserteth (...) imperfect sentence, which Christ
soon answers, Non tentabi^ Dominu^ deum tuum, thou shall Deu. 6, 16.
not tempt the Lord thy God.

14 Has the devil yet done tempting? no, he takes our blessed Savior into
an exceeding high mountain, and there shows him the Kingdoms of the world,
with the glory of them at once, making a large promise to bestow them all, who
had not authority to dispose of any one: he will give kingdoms, but upon such
a condition, as should make any good dealer break off from coping with so bad
a bargayner. The condition is, he must be worshipped, what, should man forsake
the worship of God, and bestow that upon any but God, for riches or kingdoms
themselves? these were dear riches and Kingdoms in deed: no, says Balaam, I
cannot do it if he would give me a house Number. 22, 18.
full of silver and gold.

15 Hitherto has our Savior showed no sign of his Deity, the tempter takes
him to be man, and therefore tempts him as man, in the Desert where is hunger,
he tempts him to gluttony: upon the temple where was the chair of doctors,
he tempts him to vain glory: upon the high mountain, whence worldly things are
seen, he tempts hun to covetousness, which is indeed, as the Apostle says,
Idolatry: for here he would have worship.

All in vain was it to show Christ the glory of the world, who beheld it no
otherwise then Physicians are wont to do ulcers, and diseases of their
patients, he offers earthly kingdoms, to him who had in his own hands to
bestow heavenly, he would have worship of him who^ all the Angels do worship,
and at whose very sight himself did tremble.

And here is to be noted, that by this temptation upon the mountain, thou
may learn, that when thou art great and high, the devil sets before thee
great and high desires, and would have thee fall down, that thou may
accomplish them. Ambitio, says Saint Ambrose, domesticum malum, and vt
dominetur alijs prius seruit; curuatur obsequio, vt honor donetur; and dum
vult esse sublimior, sit remissior. This ambition has a domestical danger,
that it may rule, it serves: that it may be honored, it bends and bows in
giving honor: while it would be above others, it becomes inferior to others.

16 Let men know that all rightful power and pre-eminence is from God, and
that all ambitious power is of the tempter. In this temptation consider we
Christ's answer unto the tempter, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, Deu. 10, 20.
et ei soli seruies: Thou shall worship thy Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. And this answer Christ gives him with authority, commanding
him to depart, at which commanding the tempter leaves him, finding himself
every way confounded, and that his combat with Christ was ^mpar congressus,
he was not able to stand in this champions hands.

Now concerning the last assault, we may call to mind how quickly our savior
reiects him, when once he begins to mention Gods worship, whereby we are
taught to bear injuries offered to our selves, but no ways to tolerate
injury offered unto God. For the other temptation, says Saint Chrysostom,
Mitte te deorsum, Cast thy self down, Christ was not so much moved, did not
rebuke the tempter, but when he began to meddle with Chrysot. hom. in 4, Math.
Gods worship, and speak of casting that away upon worldly glory: Christ
sends him packing with a vade Sathana, anoyd Satan, and tells him, for worship
it was Gods only, and none but Gods.

17 Against the temptation of intemperancie, we learn these things, first,
not so much to respect the life of the body, as the life of the soul: for
should we regard the house, and let the householder pine away in misery? Should
the servant be adorned, and the Master himself become an abject? Secondarily
we learn, not to yield unto any persuasion of the tempter, for the necessaries
of a frail, momentarie and transitory life. Thirdly, that man does not live
by bread only, but by Gods sanctifying his creature, by his word. Fourthly,
that for the want of bodily sustenance we should not break out into
impatience, but depend upon Gods providence, and use the order that God has
ordained to maintain his creatures.

18 Against the temptation of vain glory, we learn, not to believe the
embracings of this deceitful Ioab, who when he knows any one to be given to
fasting, or any other exercise of Christian piety: he would make hi^ as the
boasting Pharisie, to say with contempt, Non sum ve ut ille publicanus, I am
not as yonder Publicane. We see when he has men on high, how he there mooues
them to tempt God by presumption, and seek by submission, but we learn also
in this case what to do. I am a man, and therefore can otherwise descend, then
by casting down my self, I will not tempt God, and neglect the means he has
ordained for my preservation, for a little glory I respect it not.

19 Against the temptation of desiring the greatest things in the world, I
learn to prefer Gods worship before all, and so to break off by his good
grace from evil motions of the ^end. Against all temptations in general: I
learn by this of our Savior, to resist temptations when they come. S. Basil
likeneth the tempter unto the Leopard, Basil. in aliquot s^ript. loco. hom. 21.
which has such a natural hatred against man, that if he see but man's
picture, he is ready to fly upon it, and all to tear it. Such is the enmity
of the red Dragon whom Christ vanquished, if he see but a picture or
resemblance of Christ in a good man, he is ready to rage against it: we see
him assaulting, but not prevailing.

20 By the order of these temptations, it is manifest, that the tempter first
begins with lighter, then comes to greater. First, he began with eating,
then he goes to the affectation of glory, and last of all, falls to flat
Idolatry: in all these Christ meets with the temptation in the beginning,
kills the serpent in the egg, ^ps vice in the blade, strangles sin in the
first motion. For the old serpent, says Jerome, is slipperie, and unless we
keep out the head of suggestion, he will get in his body of consent and all.

21 In these temptations, Christ repaireth, as we see, to a scriptum est, it is
written, a special lesson for our Christian learning: if we are tempted with a
desire of sinful delights, we may call to mind, we have a Scriptum est, to
answer this temptation: Not in chambering and wantonness. Romans 13, 13.
If we be tempted with an inordinate desire of riches, we have (...) Scriptum
est, Godliness is great 1, Tim. 6, 6
gain, if a man be content with that he has. If we be tempted with a vain
opinion of our selves, we have a Scriptum est: Behold, I am but earth and
ashes. If we be Ge. 18, 27.
tempted with a carelesnes of our estate and condition, we have a Scriptum
est, It is appointed for all men once to die, and after that Heb. 9, 27.
comes judgment.

Furthermore, we see Christ would not turn stones into bread: to learn us
not to consent unto the Tempter in any thing, no though it have a show of good.
There were many high places in Jerusalem, yet the temptation of the casting
down was from the Temple, the best, the holiest estate of all.

Christ would not cast himself down, though he might have saved himself
without the ministry of Angels: to show us not to seek supernatural means,
when God does lend us natural; we tempt him when we seek health without a
medicine, or victory without a combat: we tempt him when we may by reason
or counsel avoid some evil, and will notwithstanding explore his power: and
last of all, we tempt him, when we enquire too far into his wisdom, or
require that of him unlawfully, which he is wont to offer by means.

22 Christ would not hearken unto the temptation of win^ praise, whereby the
tempter seeks to draw many from God, and godliness, nor unto a desire of having
Kingdoms of the world, whereby he is wont to draw many for a great deal
less, and need not be at cost to offer so much to withdraw them from Gods
worship. What Christ did we see, and hence all may learn what they should do.

23 At the end of this conflict of our Savior, the Angels come unto him: at
the end, for so long (says Saint Chrysostom) as he was combatting, he
suffered them not to appear, nor to come near him, least he might have
seemed to have put the adversary to flight, by the help of Angels. At this
time the Angels minister unto him, as appliable to his Deity, in his agony
they are said to comfort him, as having reference to his humanity.

Another thing we here learn is, that the Angels do congratulate at
resisting the temptations of the devil. We see we have a great adversary, but
a greater Captain to stand with us in the combat. For the adversary, he does
assail the children of God by many means: in that w^ch is good, by pride: in
that ^h is evil, by abject fear: for the meek, he is over them: for the
stout and wilful by persuading good for evil, he is under them: he has
nets for every disposition: For the ambitious he has glory, for the covetous
gain, yea, for the most religious themselves he has some mean or other to
assail them.

24 I would you should know (says Saint Bernard) that no man whilst he
lives in this body can live without temptation. When the Apostle says, God
is faithful, which will not suffer you 1, Cor. 10, 13.
to be tempted above that you be able: he does not say, which will not suffer
you to be tempted at all, says Saint Austen, but which will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you be able. Satan sleeps not, but is busy to tempt,
and specially when thou art in the desert of the contemplation, and even carried
by the spirit of God in the wilderness, that is from the delights and pleasures
of this world: but we may be of good courage, our Iosuah goes in and out
before us; he was tempted, that we might not think much to endure temptation:
he overcame temptation, that in him we might have power likewise to overcome.
The tempter come unto him, not once, or twice, but the third time, to show
that our temptations are many: but how many so ever they ^re, we have these
comforts, which are more and of more efficacy: First, that Christ has subdued
the force of our enemy: Secondarily, that he takes compassion upon the
tempted, having himself endured temptation: Thirdly, that from henceforth he
will overcome him in his members, whom he overcame in his own person, being the
head of the body. Wherefore, as Moses Deuteronomy. 29, 30.
said unto the people, Dread not, nor be afraid, for your God fights for you:
So may it be said unto every Christian man, whose armor is the shield of
faith, the sword of the spirit, whose battle is temptation, whose grand
Captain is Christ Jesus our Savior, whose conquest is an immortal crown of
everlasting glory: be of good courage, pluck up a good heart, the Lord of
heaven and earth, is with thee, and for thee, in the conflict.

Chap. 8.
Of Christ's great compassion toward men, his continual doing good in t^
world, and what instructions we hence learn.
WHen we enter into consideration of the great compassion of the son of God,
toward the distressed state of man, we find it a work of inspeakeable
mercy. In the creation, Dedit te tibi, O man, God gave thee thy self, but in
the redemption, Dedit se tibi, God gave thee himself. In the creation of all
things necessary for man, only six days were passed: but in man's redemption
three and thirty y^res were expired: in the creation, pauca dixit, he spoke
few things; in the redemption of man, multa dixit, mirabilia fecit, he spoke
many things, he did wonderful things.

Adam in the state of innocence, for perfection left all his posterity far
behind: his reason was vncorrupt, his understanding pure, his will obedient: he
was for knowledge of heavenly matters, an excellent Diuin^: for the nature of
things, a deep Philosopher, for power, he had a whole world to command. Adam
had nothing which was necessary now wanting unto him, that when he saw he had
all things which he could desire in earth, he might then turn his desires
toward heaven: his duty for all, is to keep the law of his God. He has one
precept amongst these many blessings, this one precept is most undutifully
broken: Adam, unless mercy step in, thy felicity and the felicity of all
thy posterity is at an end: therefore behold a helper when thou art now in the
paws of the Lion, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Here
the Serpents hope is turned into a curse, and in Christ (who was to come) Adams
dread is turned into a blessing. Behold love, which affected Adam more, then
Adam did affect himself.

2 Now Christ the promised seed being come, he compares himself unto that
Samaritane, Luk, 10. 33
who took compassion upon the wounded man. This wounded man may resemble
humane nature: the Priest and the Leuite that passed by, the offerings and
sacrifices of the law, the Samaritane Christ, who beholding man in this case
with the eye of mercy, bound up his wounds, poured in the softning oil of
grace, and searching wine of contrition, lays him upon his own nature, and
righteousness thereof, takes out the two Testaments, brings him to the holy
hostage of his Church, commands his Priests to take care and charge of him,
and promises that one day they shall find, they have not lost their labor.

3 In consideration of man's fall (says Saint Bernard) mercy began to knock
at the bowels of God the Father, which mercy brought with her peace as a
companion: on the other side, truth accompanied with justice, began to
approach and contradict mercy. Between these sisters began a long
controversy: Mercy says unto God: O God, man, this creature of thine would
have compassion showed him, being now so miserable. No, says Truth and
Justice, Lord fulfill thy word: Adam, that day thou eatest, thou shall die,
Mercy replies, Genesis 3, 3
but thou have made me mercy, but if thou show no mercy, I am not: on the
contrary, Truth says, and I am truth, and unless I take place, I abide not
for ever. God the father commits the deciding of all unto God the son, before
whom Truth and Mercy speak the same things. Truth says: if Adam perish not I
perish: and Mercy says, if Adam be not conserved I languish. Well, let death
be good, and let both have that they desire, let Adam die; and yet for all
that, let Adam have mercy and live. O admirable wisdom! but how can death be
good, seeing the death of sinners is worst of all? Let one be found which of
love may die, and yet is not subject to death. The motion seemed good, but
where may any such be found? Truth seeks about the earth, and cannot find one
clean from sin, no not an Infant of one day: mercy goes up to heaven, and
there finds none that has this love, as to leave life for sinners; these
sisters return at the time appointed, not finding that which was required. At
the last, peace calling them aside and comforting them, says: You know there
is none that does good, no not one: he that gave Psalm. 14, 3.
you this counsel, when all is done, must surely give you help: whereat the
vmpire began to proceed, and calling the Angel Gabriel, said, Go tell the
daughter Mat. 21, 5.
of Sion, Behold, her king comes. Let these sisters now accord in one, and
let that of the Prophet be confirmed, Mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness Psa. 85. 10
and peace have kissed each other: now, Truth thou shall have thy right, for
Adam shall die: and Mercy, here is thy desire, Adam shall be restored to life. O
happy harmony, who ever read of such wisdom and love! it was Gods goodness to
think upon us, it was his bounty to relieve us: this is the fountain from
whence our rivers come, the Sea from which all our waters arise. Here mercy is
the wine that gladdeth man's heart, and love is the oil that makes him to have
a cheerful countenance. Martha said, Lord, he whom thou love is sick, John
1, 3
as if the love of Christ were enough to move him to a work of love. Thus much
of Christ's compassion toward the state of man in general.

4 For his continual doing good in the world, his pity was ever pardoning,
his wisdom was ever teaching, his liberality was ever giving, his compassion
was ever helping, all his teaching, whereunto did it tend but unto the
remission of sins? all this tends to our consolation.

For his sincerity of life while he walked in the world, Tertullian Tertul^ia
Apologet.
bids the Romans but read their own Registers, there they should find
mention of the faultlesse conversation of Jesus the son of the virgin Mary:
his doing good was in effect our good: look what was due to his obeence, to
wit love: to his desert, to wit reward: to his humility, to wit honor: to his
sorrow, to wit joy: to his death, to wit life: to his victory, to wit triumph:
all is attributed unto us. His merits became our merits, his suffering our
satisfaction, his joys our joys: he fed many in the wilderness with
material bread, and he imparted the bread of life unto whole multitudes that
came to hear his most divine doctrine.

If we respect his goodness, he was (...), goodness it self; if his clemency,
he was (...), placability it self: for curing the diseased, a Physician both
of body and soul: for releeuing those that were miserable, he was a
privileged place, whereunto al might repair: as infants unto their mothers
lay, where the dugs of mercy are never dry. Steadfast was he in love without
change: sufficient without want: free without desert, and ever more ready to
do good unto all, his love was over all, would al have accepted of his love.

5 This is a true saying (says the Apostle) that Christ came into 1. Ti. 3. 9.
the world to save sinners Was this benefit restrained unto some before others?
no, says S. John, it was for all sinners: he is the reconciliation for our
sins, and 1, Ioh. 2, 2.
not only for our sins, but for the sins of the whole world; says he. The
further any good reaches the more nobler it is, the commission of the Apostles
was, (...), Preach glad tidings: as it could not be Mark. 16, 15.
but acceptable, so was it large also, (...), preach it to all creatures,
according to that of the Psalm, their sound went out into all Lands: Samuel
said unto Psalm. 19, 4. 1, Sam. 29
Saul, thou have cast away the Lord: there is the very cause of thy reiection.
God, says the wiseman, has not made death, neither delights Wis. 1, 13
he in the destruction of sinners: he that would have all men to be saved,
and come to the 1, Ti. 2, 4.
knowledge of the truth, would not have the work of his own hand miscarie,
for he desires nothing more then the good of all. Wisdom lifts up her
voice to all that pass by: Turn you, Pro. 1, 20.
says the Prophet, from your unrighteousness, and you shall live: Eze. 33, 11
why will you die, O you house of Israel? The rich man sends his servant,
to call in all unto the Luk, 14, 23
great supper: his revealed will, calls all, and his will of well pleasing
respects all, Come receive the Kingdom prepared for you. Go into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels: a Kingdom
is prepared of God for men, not destruction, this is from men themselves: he
has has given a law to all, doubtless he excludes none. He who would have
gathered Jerusalem, as the Hen Math. 23, 37.
does her chickens under her wings, shows how much he respected her welfare,
if she would have harkened unto him. The Sun, says Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
hom. in Io. hom. 1.
extends his beam universally, if any wilfully shut their eyes, and will not
behold the light of the Sun, is the fault in the Sun? no verily, of this
mystery dispute he that will.

6 But to come to the life of our Savior, he went about, says Saint Peter,
doing good, Act. 10, 38
and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him: Nay,
his goodness showed it self toward his very enemies: for while they were
seeking to slay him, he sought to save them, he never regarded (...), his
own, but (...), the common welfare, and benefit of others. The candle being
enlightened, with what carefulnes did he seek the lost groat? what mountains
and deserts did he wander to find, and finding, to bring home man the stray
sheep, leaving the ninety and nine, or companies Luk, 15. 4.
of Angels in glory.

7 By this we learn, that we live not in the world for our selves, but
setting Christ's example before our eyes, how we ought, to endeavor that we
may in any thing we can be helpful unto others. Of all living creatures there
is none created to a more loving, and sociable end, then man: but amongst men
none more ordained to do good each to other then Christians: while we are in
the way, says Saint Austen, let us bear one another burden, that we may
rest together at the end of the way. In artificial buildings one stone does
bear up another, much more should the same be done in that building, wherein,
says Saint Peter, All the faithful are as lively stones. Nature has taught
1. Pet. 2, 5.
the Beauers to help one another in swimming, and the Crames flying over the
mountain Taurus, when the foremost is weary in beating the air, that the next
should succeed, and so in order every one to labor for the safety of them
all. Grace does teach us the same lesson, or rather the Author of grace: live
coals will 1, Cor. 12.
kindle the dead, the holy gift of Gods spirit, S Paul tells us we receive it,
to profit withal. And nothing is good unto us (says S Austen) unless we
communicate the same good to others.

8 We show whom we resemble, when we have compassion on some, and others save
with fear, Iud. 23.
pulling them out of the fire. We know not, how soon we may st^nd in neeede
of God, and therefore should desire nothing more then to show our selves
helpful unto others, a token we are living members, when we feel the
infirmity of sore parts in the body. Christ our Savior does not say, be
mighty, or wise, or workers of miracles: but be merciful as your heavenly
Father is merciful. It was the voice of Cain: Number quid ego Genesis 4, 9.
fratris custos? am I my brothers keeper? it was the answer of those that
conspired the death of the Son of God, Quid ad nos? Mat. 27. 4
what is it to us? ^ooke thou to it, as if they cared for no more but
themselves. It is the practice of worldlings, only to respect themselves, and
make no conscience like greedy Harpyes how they spoil others. In Pharaoes
dream the lean devoured the Genesis 41, 3.
fat, but in the course of these men the fat devour the lean, like flshes in
the Sea, where the greater do eat up the less; we are enemies one to
another, like the Madianites. It is a hard winter (they say) when one woolfe
deuoures another, yet this is usual with men. For these, says Origin, that
punishment, (misisti Origin. in illud Psalm.
iram and terra deuorauit ^s, thou did send forth thy wrath and the earth
devoured them) is verified in them: has not the earth devoured them, which
waking, do talk of earth, sleeping dream of earth? Inopiae multa, rapacitati
plura desunt. The poor man wants many things, but yet greedy ^aking rich
men lack more: Terra deuorauit eos, the earth has devoured them, Satan came
from compassing the earth: and these are compassing of earthly things, but
never think of compassing heaven.

9 David saw a poor woman but look with a sorrowful countenance, and she
needed not wait 2, Sa, 14, 5.
long for a day of hearing, himself comes and demands the cause of her
sorrow, saying, Woman what ayleth thee? For examples nearer home, the good
benefactors of old, that have left us so many monuments, were not their minds
set upon doing good? This says Philo, is to imitate God the fountain of all
goodness, when Philo de mund. fab.
we are rich, not to be rich unto our selves: when we are wise, not to be
wise unto our selves: to conclude, when we have all done, this shows whose
servants we are. Christ said, I have compassion on the multitude, a speech
like him that spoke it.

Chap. 9.
How little Christ esteemed popularitie, and glory of the world; and how by
his example, we learn to do the like.
ANd now, let us call to mind a little, how far Christ was from seeking the
glory of this world, to whose greater glory it was (says Origin) that Orig
li. 1. cont. Cells.
he appeared without glory: to whose strength, that he come in weakness. In
the sixth of S. John's Gospel, when the people John, 6, 15
would have given him the title and dignity of a King, he gat away into a
solitary place, nothing at all regarding that weather cock blast of popular
applause. Christ was no way inclinable to their disposition, who as Milles go
and grind no longer then the puff of wind holds: he fled from a kingdom
amongst men, for his kingdom was not (as him Ioh. 18, 36
self told Pilat) of this world.

2 And here we may in the first place observe, that even in this his humility
flying from glory, glory followed him: he was circumcised as a sinner, yet
named as a Savior of men; lying Luk, 2, 21 Mat. 2, 8.
in a manger at Bethlehem, he is adored of grave sages, dying as man, yet is he
worshipped and believed on as God: after many of his miracles, he specially
charged the people to conceal them: sometimes he steals away from Mat. 9, 30.
Ioh. 16, 15
the multitude, least per adventure they should magnify him.

3 O holy Son of God (says one) when the candle is lightened, why will thou
have it put under a bushel, why will thou not show thy glory unto men? was it
because thy kingdom was not of this world? True Lord, and therefore I rejoice
to see thee in humility. Until the age of thirty Bernar. in ser. de ver.
years we find, says Saint Bernard, (excepting only his disputing with the
Doctors in the temple) no other, but that our savior led a silent and a
solitary life. What, did he fear vainglory, who was the glory of the father?
He feared indeed, but was it in regard of himself? No, it was for us, who were
to be feared, and therefore would draw us by his precept and practice from
ambitious desires.

4 Although it was but seldom that he used reprehensions, yet we find that
there were none whom he did more often reprove, or more openly rebuke, then a
kind of men, Pharisei (so called) the Pharisees, h^uing their name of
separating themselves from other men. These we^ those whom he resembled to
painted Sepulchers, as being fair without, but foul within, whose vizard was
better then the face, all their holiness was no other but a show of holiness:
their corner counterfeit praying, to be seen of men: their Trumpet blowing
alms, to have a little glory. Our Savior could not away with this fashion,
and therefore wills his Disciples to pray in secret, that is, with a mind
(although seen) yet not caring to be seen of men, and to give their alms
plainly, without any respect had, either of reward or praise.

5 It is a wonderful case to consider, how we make this our chiefest jewel,
how all the sheaues of the field do fall down before a conceit of
preheminencie, where as nothing is more fickle, nothing more uncertain. All
that was showed, when all the glory of the world was showed: the word is (...),
which signifies no Mat. 4, 8.
other but a shadow, an opinion, a show. What is praise but a puff of wind,
which sometimes blows one way, and sometimes another, or as the Echo, which
makes a sound, but is indeed no substance? what is our mirth, but a little
Sunshine before a storm? What is our peace, but a calm before a tempest?
What is the praise of men, but a shadow of small continuance? a little after
look for it, it is gone. Those who are overcome with a little wine, show they
are men but of weak brains, so are those, who for some little praise for
virtue, wax high minded.

If in any thing a Christian man show himself what he is, then surely most
especially in being crucified to the flesh, and the world: the pleasures of the
one, the glory of the other. Three there were crucified upon the cross
together, two malefactors, and Christ in the midst: and three there are to be
crucified in Christ's members: the flesh, and the world, as the two thieves,
the spirit, as Christ in the midst. The flesh as the thief upon the right
hand. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh: The Gal. 5, 24.
world is the thief upon the left hand, according to that: The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. In the midst of Gal. 6, 14.
these is the spirit also crucified, according to that: A troubled spirit is a
sacrifice to God. The Psa. 51, 17
thief on the left hand was not saved, this is the state of the world, from
whence Christ has taken 1, Cor. 11, 32.
his, That they be not condemned with the world. The thief on the right hand
is saved, so is the crucified flesh with the spirit, when ^th are remembered of
Christ in ^s kingdom, and are with him (...) Paradise. When nothing delights
but God then is the world crucified to us: when as we seek contend in none but
in God, then (...) we crucified to the world: when we labor to bring others
to this, then are we crucified for the world

6 Thus in despising the world, and the glory thereof, we attain unto the
perfection of a Christian ^ate and condition of life. If there were no other
reason to ^e us to seek after heaven, and heavenly things, this one ^ight
suffice, that Christ did only this. Coming into the world, he never
followed the shows and shadows thereof. Again, if there were no other cause,
to make us little esteem of worldly vanities, yet that the continuance of them
is so mutable, this only were enough.

What is it, says S. Austen, Au. ep. 111
to be lifted up in this world, and in another world to be cast down? what, for
a short time to shine in glory, and hereafter to consume in misery?

7 Heereunto may be added, how little this worldly glory is worth, being fully
considered: first, because it is vile, according to that which Mattathias told
his son when he was dying: Fear not (said he) the words of a sinful 1. Mac.
2. 62.
man: for his glory is as dung. Secondly, because it is of no continuance,
according to that of the Prophet Esaias, All the glory of man is as the flower of
the field. Esa, 40, 8.
Thirdly, because it is deceitful, according to that of Baruch, Where are they
that sometimes had glory amongst men? as if he Bar. 3, 16.
should have said, they are no where to be found, their glory has deceived
them. Fourthly, because it is subject to alteration, according to that of Ose,
Commutabo gloriam eorum in contumeliam, Ose, 4, 7.
I will change their glory 2, Sam 17, 23. Hest. 7, 10
into ignominy. A chitophel for all his policy, Hama^ for all his sway, these
found the uncertainty hereof.

What was the cause (says Chry. hom. 4 ad pop. An tioch.
Saint Chrysostom) that the house spoken of in the Gospel, f^ll? Was it in
the wind, or the tempest, or the waters? No, what was the cause then that this
house fell? The Text says, It was builded upon the sand: the foundation was
not good. To ^ld upon hope of riches, or glory, is a weak foundation, the
house may seem goodly in fair weather, but when a storm comes, it is gone.
To let riches and glory go, and to build upon the Rock, Our trust in God
only, is that building which well never fail, what wind, what storm, what
waters so ever swel and rage against it: excepting our trust in him, all humane
respects are but froth.

8 Fie upon that folly that delights more to seem unto men, then to be in
truth and verity unto God: does not that wife displease her husband, who
adorues her self to please others? the same do they, who by these actions
only seek to please men. A strange practice there is in the world, that
goes about to alter that countenance which God has formed, so, and so, as if
he had not done as was meet, they think they would teach him how, and how he
must have made them. Christ said of the tribute money, whose image is this? the
same may be said concerning some, whose visage or countenance is this?

The workman is wont to grow out of love with his work, seeing it deformed by
others. How can we pray or look up to God, when we are not of that form he
has given us, or how can we lift up our eyes to heaven, but think impiety
shall not enter there? These think to deceive others, whereas indeed they
deceive themselves, and I pray God they do not one day find as much.

Pictures desire to make somewhat in show, they respect not any thing within,
but what is it to have a foul guest in a fair house, or a little praise and
glory with men, and to loose praise and acceptance with God? Saint Ambrose
says of Joseph, ^ulcher corpore, sed pulchrior animo, he Ambrose de Joseph.
was fair in body, but fairer in mind, which is best of all.

9 To glory in honor and praise of men, in building, in banqueting, is as
frivolous as to account none worthy of honor, but our selves. To seek for
ostentations sake to excel others, is mere vanity: Thy words, said Phocion
to a boasting companion, are like a Cypers tree, tall enough, but without fruit.

Go to the Sepulchers (says Saint Austen) and there show me a difference if
you can amongst the bones, between the rich and poor, between the master
and the servant, between the greatest senator and lowest subject? Lo this
Psa. 52, 7.
is he (says the Prophet) That put his trust in riches, as if he would infer,
you see what comes of putting trust in earthly things.

It is said of Herod in the Acts Act. 12, 23
of the Apostles, that he that gloried to himself of applause given him, what
becam of this? the holy Scripture tells us, he was eaten up with worms: and
Josephus also writing of his end, accords with the holy scripture, that it
was miserable: but first, says he, there appeared an Owl sitting upon his
head, and after he Joseph. lib. 19. de Ant. Iud.
was taken with the before named torments: he was a little before called a
God, now it appears he is a miserable man: where were all his Physicians?
they could not ease his pains, no, all his servants cannot defend him from
silly worms.

10 Christ told the^ that sought superiority above others, they knew not what
they sought. The people could not in any thing more displease the Apostles,
then when they would run in to sacrifice unto them: the just man (says
Gregory) when he is praised is then humbled, fearing he is not unto God, as he
is esteemed of with men: when he has done any thing amiss, he accuses
himself: if any thing well, he gives all the praise only unto God, according to
that of the Prophet, Non nobis, Psa, 115, 1
Domine, non nobis: Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
the praise. The Prophet teaches us to speak twice against our own praise,
we are so ready to praise our selves: yea in our best actions (says S
Ambrose) take heed of that same thief, glory, which would steal away from us
all acceptance with God: Si putaui aurum robur meum, says Job, if I Job, 31,
24
have thought gold my strength, if I have lifted up my hand against the
fatherless, if I have said to treasure, My trust, if I have exalted my self in
riches: by which kind of speech the holy man in effect says, I have not
thought gold my strength, or said to treasure my trust, or exalted my self in
riches, or lift up my hand against the fatherless.

11 Plutarch writes that it was the manner of vain glorious men, to have a
kind of Iester sing their praises in great assemblies, but how far godly men
have been from this foolishness, who could not abide such iarring enterludes,
we may easily perceive. Moses would not be counted the son of Pharaohs
daughter, Heb. 11. 24
though he might: Saint Paul would not count himself worthy of the name of an
Apostle: 1, Cor. 15, 9.
the rich man glories in his riches, but Saint Paul in his infirmities: the
proud man in his glory, he in a good conscience: the voluptuous man in excess,
he in being content: all the instruments with their noise, could not make the
three children fall down Dan. 3, 18.
before the Idol; nor all the popularity in the world make good men affect vain
glory, they know both what it is, and how soon it vanishes. Those who from
some high Turret or Tower, behold things far beneath under them think they
are great, but those above account them small and little: in like manner those
whose minds are elevated to heavenly things, and have their affections on high,
worldly glory seems to these so little, and so little worth, as they cannot
but wonder, why men near these in affection should so much desire it as they
do, being so transitory and variable as they are.

12 Where is Pharaoh, that gloried in his Chariots: does not Ex. 14, 48
his overthrow tell boasting Champions, that an host is nothing without the
God of hoasts? Where are the Giants that would Genesis 11, 4.
build so high, and glory in a name, does not Gods word tell us, they were
scattered and defeated of their purpose?

Is glory then so fleeting' then may worldlings say, farewell world, for as
much as there is no trust in thee, which failest the^ whom thou most fauourest,
they soonest fall when they think them selves surest. Farewell world, thou that
quarrellest, but do not pacify, in thee there is no joy without trouble, no
peace without discord, no love without suspicion, no rest without fear, no
abundance without blemish, no honor without discontent, no estate without
carfulness of mind.

Farewell glory of the world, for in thy delights promises are made and never
kept, in thy vineyard men labor, but are never rewarded. Farewell world, which
call the rash, valiant: the proud, seemly: the covetous, good husbands: the
babbler, cloquent: the wanton, youthful. Farewell world, which deceiuest all
that trust thee, which do promise to the ambitious, honors: to the greedy,
rewards: to the covetous, riches: to the young, tune: farewell, I say, vain
glory, which because thou art not of God, failest all.

13 It was before said, that our Savior told them that Math. 20, 22.
sought superiority, they knew not what they sought: we see the same true in
the condition of the world. When Gyges a great worldling, would feign know if
any man were more happy then himself (thinking him most happy which had most
riches, and most glory) it was answered him, that one Psophidius a poor old
man of the Arcadians (who was rich with a little, and had never gone all his
life time from the place where he was bred and borne, but there lived
peaceably) that this man was far happier then he. If heathen men could so
little esteem of earthly glory, what should christians do? whom should they
think most happy, but those who most mind the state of happiness to come, and
for worldly glory in the name of God let it go. The Church of Christ is not
triumphant, and glorious in earth, but triumphant and glorious above in heaven.

Toby sat musing upon the shore of the river Tigris, which Tob. 6, 1. 2.
with a swift stream ran by him; we sit down by meditation of the
inconstancy of worldly glory, which runs a long with a maine current,
calling to mind that glory which is everlasting in heaven.

Chap. 10.
Of Christ's continual labors and travails in the world, whereby we may take
a suruay of our Christian condition here.
THe sick man that is about to take some bitter medicine, when he sees but the
Physician himself begin unto him, it makes him the more willing to receive the
potion how bitter so ever: the labors end travails of this transitory life
have no doubt a very unpleasing taste to humane pallat, but seeing Christ the
Physician of our souls, not only took an assay thereof, but even drunk a
full draught for our redemption, we should be the more willing to admit the
receiving of this medicine.

When we consider his long watchings, wherein he passed Luk, 6, 12.
whole nights in prayer, his often iourneying from place to place to instruct
and teach in every City; his fasting, his suffering all a long from his very
infancy, his flying into Egypt, what shall we else behold in him, but a life
full of labors and travails, never ended but with loss of life? was it not
thy birth, O Christian soul, which was then to be brought forth, when our
Rachel Ge. 35. 18
travailed unto death? was it not thy cause, for which our Jacob endured Ge. 29
20.
so many years servitude? he who with one drop of blood could have redeemed a
world, would notwithstanding suffer so many labors, so many trauails, that no
labors whatsoever might dismay us.

2 At five several times did he so far proceed in labors, as there ensued
the effusion of his blood: first in his circumcision, there he began to
redeem us: secondly, in his prayer in the garden, there he showed how he
affected us: Thirdly, when he was scourged; there he cured us by his stripes:
fourthly, when he was fastened to the Cross, there he paid the price and
ransom for our sins: fifthly, when his side was opened with the spear, there
was an issue made for the streams and rivers of grace: all these were done for
our redemption, and yet remain for our instruction. By the first we learn to
labor in cutting off the unlawful desires of sin: by the second, to mourn
with sighs and groans for our sins: by the third, to mortify the pleasures
of the flesh: by the fourth, to be crucified unto the world: by the fl^t, to
have our hearts wounded with a daily remembrance of his unspeakable love.

3 The holy man Job suffered as great trials and troubles (we think) as great
might be: but for all that, Christ's were greater, for look we into his whole
life, see we therein every age, go we to every place, where he was conversant
in, nay, take we a view of his sacred person, and therein see we every part
suffering. Every age: in his infancy how cold and hard was his cradle at
Bethelem, how busy was he with the doctors in the Temple? To come to further
years, what hatred did he endure most undeservedly of the Jews, even hatred
unto the death? Every place: he suffered hunger in the Desert, resistance in
the temple, sorrow in the garden, contumelies in the Judgment Hall, and
erucifying it self without the City. Every part: his eyes suffered tears,
his ears reproaches, his taste suffered gal, his head pricking of thorus, his
hands, ye pearcing of nails, his whole body is sacrificed as an offering for
sin.

Now there is no reason that Math. 10, 25.
the servant should be above the master. When Ionathans Armor-bearer saw
Jonathan go 1, Sa. 14, 7.
up the hard and steepie rocks, he told him he would go with him: when we see
our Jonathan go before us in the trauails and labors suffered for us, should
we not be emboldned to endure labors, though no way answerable unto his? yet
such as are agreeable with the condition of our life, seeing we are going into
the land of promise by the desert of this world.

4 Strange it was, that David a man after Gods own heart, Psa. 142, 2
as the scripture speaks, should be so much afflicted as he was: Strange it
was, that Daniel a Dan 9. 23
man beloved of God (as the Angel told him,) strange it was, I say that these
of all others should be so much in labors and travails of the world, as they
were? But considering that the life of man is but as the days which go before
the Sabbath of rest, we do the rather less marvel.

We see the Son of God himself treading the wine press alone, Esa. 53. 3.
and a man full of labors, as the Prophet speaks we see his dearest friends
in the world, his own Apostles, yea the blessed virgin her self found this
life, no other but a state subject to many and great sorrows. What should we
otherwise think of it, says one, Tota vita Christiani hominis secundum
Euangelium, Crux and martyrium. All the life of a Christian man, according unto
the Gospel, is no other but a Cross, and martyrdom. This martyrdom, says
Isidore, is twofold, the one, In aperta passione, in Isid. Ety. li. 7. ca. 11.
open suffering, the other, In occulta virtute, in inward or hidden virtue,
that is, a mind ready to suffer

But how is it, says S. Austen, that Christ calls those that labor, to refresh
them? How is his yoke sweet when he calls from rest, to labor, and sends
those that are at qu^et to work in his vineyard? The rest that he gives (says
the same Father) is spiritual: John is banished into Patmos, but John hears
melody from heaven.

5 Besides these spiritual labors, we know Adam in the Genesis 2, 15.
time of innocence labored, and that God has made nothing to be idle, that
he will have no Ciphers in his Arithmeticke, or slothful servant in his
vineyard. Every thing in nature does accomplish his end, by a kind of motion,
and therefore much more man of all other, who by slothfulness does become a
very burden of the earth. For in this vice, wit, understanding, and all honest
endeavors lie buried, as it were, in a loathsome sepulcher, from whence arises
the unsavory smell of corrupt manners. In that Christ our Savior called Peter
and Andrew while they were fishing, James and John while they were mending
their nets, we may gather how he liked of labor, and thought them fit
for a laborious profession. Homo natus ad laborem, man is said to be borne to
labor, and therefore not to rest while he is here.

Scipio banished all idle Soldiers, and unprofitable people from his camp:
he sound it true by experience in the course and continuance of his wars,
which the Romans had with them of Carthage, that whilst they had enemies in
Affricke, they knew not what vices meant in Rome. The Christian man's life, as
it should of all others be far from vice, so withal should it be from this
slothfulness, the cause of vice. It was the Apostles rule, If any 2, These. 3,
10.
would not labor, he should not eat.

6 New between these two, to wit, the labors of the mind and body, we see
what we must frame our selves unto for the time of our continuance here: we
have set our hand to the plough, and in the first place let us take care of all
other things, that Gods husbandry go forward well with us, howsoever the
world go. This is the difference between the labors of the righteous, and
theirs, who weary themselves in the way of vanity. When the Prophet speaks of
trouble, which the first of these shall have, he speaks of deliverance. The
Lord delivers them, Psa. 34. 19
says he, out of all: but of the other he speaks after this manner, Great
miseries remain for the ungodly, and there is no mention at all made of their
deliverance. When he speaks of sensual men, he says, Non sunt in Psa. 73, 18
laboribus, what was the sequel? Ideo superbia tenuit eos.

7 Wherefore when the labors and sorrows of this transitory life grieve us,
we may think of deliverance, and of our arrival to that place where no
labors and sorrows are. The husbandman, says S. James, waytes for the
fruits of the earth, and should not we wait for the fruits of heaven? We
see Merchants for gains, soldiers for triumph, to put themselves into many
dangers, and yet neither does the Merchant always compass his gain, nor the
soldier always triumph: put case they do, yet are they not long to enjoy
either, if the earthly soldier do this, what should the heavenly soldier
do? It falls out otherwise in our labors, the gain is certain, the
triumph everlasting: Quodhbet opus (says S. Jerome) leave fieri solet cum eius
praemium cogitatur: Every work is made light, when the reward of the same work
is thought upon.

But here is a reward so great, that it cannot be measured, so precious, that
it cannot be esteemed, so permanent, that no continuance of time can diminish
it. Let us call to mind how sweet freedom is after a tune of bondage: It is
said of the faithful, that they shall sit with Abraham, and sitting
presupposes rest. The state of happiness to come, is called in the Reucla^ion,
The Supper Apoc. 19. 9
of the Lamb. The supper, and so the last refection after the labors of the
day. Trauailers having but sorry usage at their first bait in their journey
are wont to say, well, the best is we shall say at an other place: So when we
perceive we have not much rest here, we may say, we shall come one day where
the entertainment will be ^etter. God knows what is sit for passengers;
labor in the way, rest at the end of the way: it was the sentence of almighty
God, the woman labor in the fruit of the womb, the man labor in the fruit
of the earth.

8 Though Joseph spoke a little hardly to his brethren, and made them for a
time to travail Genesis 42, 7.
to and fro, yet he loved them never the worse. But these travels and sorrows
are surely hurtful unto men. King Cyrus was not of that opinion, when for a
punishment to the people of Sardis; he commanded them to spend their time in
gaming and feastings. Whereas the contrary has the contrary effect, eight
persons entered into the Arc, and eight only Genesis 7, 7.
came forth again at the end of that sorrowful deluge. Noah and his children
all this time little Genesis 8, 16
^hought of any other thing, then how the world was now in the chastising, and
therefore it was not a time for any other cogitations.

9 Having given our names unto Christ, it remains that we look for labor;
to them assigns he the crown, who fight the battle. When we suffer and
endure travails in the world for righteousness sake, it shows that we are
under Christ's standard, our watchword is, Be constant unto the end. It makes
men suffer the more patiently, when they see others suffer before them, but
most of all Christians, who behold Christ suffering before them, and for them.
Is it meet that thy servant should live in pleasure, when thou art full of
toil and travail? Is it fit that he should lie at ease, and thou sweat in
labors? What reason is it then, O man, that seeing the Lord Jesus, who is so
far above all earthly monarks, as the greatest Lord is above his meanest
servants: Is it meet that he who is not only thy master, but thy maker,
should pass his time in continual travail, and thou in continual e^se?
Heathen men were wont to say, that the Ants who live, and travail, and make
provision together, and have no law neither, as S. Ambrose speaks, to
command them, do show men how to become fit members of a Commonwealth. But
the care indeed of holy men, who were ever watchful, provident, industrious,
do teach us to become fit members in that mystical body, which is here
only militant.

It was said unto that laborious servant, O thou good servant, Thou have been
faithful over little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter thou into the
joy Mat. 15, 25.
of thy Lord. Thus we see Christ in labors, and travails of the world. Job is
fasting and sacrificing, while his children are Job, 1. 5.
banqueting.

Such as repine at labors and travails, show they make no other account, but
to live at al ease, and at quiet in the world, and forget how Adam has left
this heritage to his posterity, Labor, and sorrow. Certainly the laboring
man's life is commendable, his estate is a remembrance of Adam created to work,
his body is refreshed with rest, his health is maintained by travail, his
hungry morsels make him more thankful to God, then the greatest delicates of
the rich, his course bread, and small drink bring healthful nourishments. It
was not Adams case alone, but it is the case of every one in his calling. In
sudore vultus tui, in the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread. When
the people were delivered out of Egypt, God might have soon brought them by a
nearer way, into the land of promise, but it seemed good in his most divine
ordinance, that first they should for a time travail in the wilderness: we
labor while we are here, and when this life is ended, Then blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their labors. We are going to
heaven, and heaven we know suffers violence.

Chap. 11.
Of Christ's teaching the multitude, and his actions before he taught: which
does also teach us what we should do.
AT sundry times, and in diverse manners (says the Apostle) did Heb. 1. 1.
God speak in old time to our Fathers by the Prophets: but in these last
days has he spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made heir of al things,
who was the brightness of his glory, of whom also the divine voice from heaven
testified, Mat. 17, 5.
Audite illum* Hear him.

Come we unto his first Sermon upon the Mount, which if we devoutly consider,
says S. Mat. 5, 3, 4, 5, etc. August. in ser. in mon.
Austen, we shall find therein contained whatsoever does appertain to the
perfection of a Christian life: there see that poverty, which at one stroke
does cut down by the root all the solicitous desires of earthly things:
there see that meekenes, that does utterly exclude all hatred and contention
amongst men: there s^ those tears that do rebaptize the sorrowful and
repentant soul: there see that hunger and thirst which does bring everlasting
sa^ietie: there see that mercy that is ever helpful to the necessity of men,
and shall also receive mercy from God: there see that peace that causes all
concord, and unity amongst the faithful members of Christ Jesus. Last of all,
there see that patience that lifts man above the stars of heaven, to whom
these mistie clouds of this inferior Region, and storms here beneath are as
it were under his feet.

2 To proceed with his form of teaching, which was, Tanquam habens potestatem,
as one Mat. 7. 27.
that had power and authority to pearce the very heart, as may appear by those
words: but I say unto you, where he spoke as one that had power to command,
and enjoin the heart. Who could look into man, but the maker of man, or who
could enioine a law to man's thoughts, but he which knew their thoughts? The
Jews think, that only a false oath was unlawful: no, Christ will not have
them swear at all, Let your communication be, (...), yea yea, Mat. 5, 37
nay nay. Whereupon Saint Basil, Yea in speech, and yea in heart: nay in
speech, and nay in heart. Being asked of the Pharisees, whether it were lawful
for a man to put away his wife for every Mat. 19, 7.
cause? They could soon answer him themselves out of Moses law, concerning
the giving a b^l of divorce: our Savior shows the original of this, That it
was permitted only by reason of the hardness of their hearts, and therefore
opens the matter unto his Disciples, and sets down as it were a full
determination of this doubt, that he who puts away his wife, (except it be
for fornication) and marieth another, commits adultery: and Saint Paul so
takes it without further scruple: The woman is bound unto the man so long as
the man lives: By the law of coveting, the Jews understood the outward
signs, Non concupisces, id est, signa concupiscentis non facies, thou shall
not covet, that is, thou shall not do the signs of him that coueteth: Christ
tells them there was more required in this law then so: for why, not only the
outward, but also the inward man must concur in the observation of the same,
and therefore the very intention of the mind was to answer the default in Gods
consistory. But whence had our Savior this authority of teaching to move all
that heard him? First, from a profound habit of heavenly wisdom: next from a
most sincere manner of life he lived amongst men, this moved all that heard him.

3 To wade deeper into his doctrine, (which was all along lively, grave, and
full of majesty) the Evangelists themselves do sufficiently declare, and
manifest as much, according to that reply of the messengers sent from the high
Priests, Never man spoke as this man speaks, or that of John 7, 46.
Saint Peter, Tu Domine habes verb^ vitae, Lord thou have the Io^, 6, 68.
words of life. For the subject of his first doctrine, it tended to repentance,
to prepare the way to Christ. John preaches repentance, as if repentance were
the way to come to him: repentance makes us find the disease, and finding the
disease, we run unto the Physician: repentance makes us feel the burden,
and when we feel the burden, we fly unto him that can ease us: repentance
makes us accuse our selves, and if we accuse our selves here, says S. Austen,
Satan shall have nothing to accuse us hereafter. John preached health; Christ
brought health: John was a light, and a light is necessary before day: John
was a voice, and the voice goes before the word, the voice vanishes, the word
abides for ever.

As John taught repentance, so Christ also taught the same, to show that this
is necessary doctrine for the state of man, who by repentance should often times
commune with himself, debating Gods cause against himself, and his own cause
with the mercy of God. Genus mortis est (says Saint Austen) sine paenitentia
viuere, a kind of death is it to live without repentance. Ahab thought Elias
and his prophecyings 1, Reg. 18. 17.
did but trouble him, as in any think of the doctrine of repentance: but he
found, and they shall find, it will be their own sins that at the last
shall trouble them.

5 But to go forward, as his doctrine in this calling of sinners to repentance
was most peaceable, so was it also easy, plain, and perspicuous, even when
he treated of the profoundest mysteries: wherein he used neither pomp nor
pride of affected eloquence, yet was it ponderous, without either fear,
flattery, or by-discourses mixed with gall and bitterness: this plain and
perspicuous manner of speech bare with it a majesty, declaring from whom it
came, manifested in that, hoc fac, et viues, do this, and thou shall live.

He disanulled not the law of Moses, but rather ratified the same, that,
speaking of the circumcision of the flesh, which was the sign: he, of the
circumcision of the heart, which was the thing signified: in all which there was
a powerful operation: the Disciples reasoned, Did not our hearts burn while he
opened the Scriptures? Lu. 24, 32.
In this his teaching he also used parables, a form of instruction taken
(says Saint Jerome) from resembling one thing by another, which by a thing
known, is wont to draw the hearers to a more plain understanding, of things
unknown unto them, notwithstanding unto the perverse more intricate, and
mystical, according to that in S. Matthew, Unto you it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of Mat. 13, 11.
heaven, unto others in parables.

6 This one thing we may withal learn for our Christian observation, that
Christ's actions were every way answerable unto his doctrine, his words
preached holiness of life, his works preached the same, Coepit facere and
docere (says S. Luke) Act. 1, 1.
he began to do and teach: a long way by precepts, is by example oftentimes
made short and easy. He fulfilled in his own person whatsoever he taught
others to do, that in him the world might have a light, both of good teaching,
and good following.

7 For the application hereof, and what we may observe by Christ's teaching:
first, that he was the very Prophet, whom Deuteronomy. 18, 18.
God had promised by Moses to raise, whom all should hear, and hearing
follow. We often marvel at their hardness of heart, who having Christ
amongst the^, their ears were so dull they would not hear him, their eyes so
blind they would not see him, who came as he ought to have come according to
all the prophecies of old, let the Scriptures themselves in this case manifest
as much, and let all gaine-sayers for ever be silent. In the next place, we may
consider that Jesus Christ is the same for ever: many Christians would have
been glad, if it had so pleased God to have been present with those
eyewitnesses, in beholding their Redeemer: For what a joy would the (...) have
offered the beholders, his ^enerable countenance, his graceful behavior, and
to have heard his most admirable manne? of exhortation, which would have made a
Christian soul to dissolve it self, as it were, into commisera^.

8 (...) (...) (...) ^t all, for ^ ^
^ he had not so soon (...), but there was somewhat more behind, which was,
an et custodiunt, that is, a keeping of those instructions that they hear: to
show that the scope of his teaching was not to have his Auditors to hear only
or admire, but to keep and follow; not to discourse, but to practice; for he
shows that hearing, and keeping, and blessing go together.

In the law were those clean sacrifices which did chew the cud Leui. 11. 4, 5.
only? no, they must chewe the cud, and divide the hoof. Christ says of Mary
that heard the word, Mary has chosen the good Lu. 10, 41.
part, hearing is but a part, when the Prophet speaks of the Testimonies of
Gods law, he adds this, In custodiendo merces Psa. 19. 11
magna, In keeping of them there is great reward, he does not say, in audiendo,
in only hearing. The promises of salvation in holy scriptures are not so much
laid forth to the hear^, as to the (...)* ^ ^ practice to do his Fathers will
that sent: (...).

Thus* ^he joined in one, doing and teaching; so should we, believing and
following: that so a right faith, and a christian life, which are as it were
coupled together, we should in no case sever: You know these things, happy
are you if you do them. What soever we profess, we must not think to come to
heaven by doing nothing worthy of our Christian calling. It Is true (says Saint
Bernard) of good works, that they are not causa regnandi, Bernar. in cant. ser.
22
the cause of reigning, yet are they, via ad regnum, the way to the kingdom:
they do (...) inst^e before God, yet sure they do glorify God in his servants.

Chap. 12.
Of Christ's example in visiting the sick, feeding the hungry, and curing all
that came unto him, does lay before us a most absolute rule of showing mercy
and compassion.
WHether it were to behold our Saviors miracles, (for so came many of the
people, John, 6, 2.) or to be cured of their corporal maladies, so came a
multitude, Luke 6, 17. Whether it were of desire to commune John. 6, 2. Luc. 9.
17. John. 3. 2. Luc. 11. 3.
with him, so came Nichodemus, John, 3. 2. or of an affection to see him, of
whom so great fame went abroad, so came Zache, Luke 19. 3. Whether for these
causes, or any other: so it was that a company of people all together, came
flocking after our Savior in great abundance, as when some skillful Physician
repaireth to any populous City, the diseased of all other draw unto him: so
came they unto Christ, who was able, not only to cure their sick bodies, but
even to raise to life again their sick (nay respecting the life of grace,
their dead souls) looking upon all with the eye of mercy, showing he would
not the death of a sinner, that came to die for sinners.

2 Ancient and latter records, Magdeb. cent. 1.
make mention of an Epistle sent by Lentulus the Procensull unto the States and
Senate of Rome, in which he shows them, of one Jesus, who appeared in Jury,
going about, doing good, and healing all of what infir^ y so ever they were
taken. Josephus affirms he was a holy man (if I may, says he, call him a
man.)

Julian the Apostata himself confessed thus much of him, indeed, says he,
he cured certain blind men, and recovered some few that were diseased in
body: yea Julian, and that was enough to have made thee see him to be the
son of God, had thou not been obstinately blind. For was it ever heard
since the beginning of the world, that any, gave sight John, 9, 32.
unto men borne blind, except Christ the redeemer of the world? The great
power he showed in healing only by his word, the diseases of the body, might
have moved thee to believe on him for Ioh. 14. 11
the health and welfare of thy soul. Sae him, Julian, doing such works, and if
for no other cause, yet believe him for his works sake. The Centurion had
authority over his Soldiers, if he Mat. 8, 9.
said to one, go, he goes: to another, come, and he comes. Christ's
authority was as absolute over all diseases: if he said, go, they departed: if
come, they Mat. 8, 32 Luke 8, 29. Mar. 5. 8.
obeyed, but chiefly was he wont to command them to depart: and not only
diseases, but even his authority was the same over the devils themselves, whom
he cast out, bringing many tormented creatures into their right minds again.

3 Well did our savior Christ compare himself unto a Physician, and so was
he, for there was no disease so desperate but he could s^e it. He wrought
many (...)* (...) when he cured the soul of (...) he wrought a cure indeed
(...) effecting whereof, he (...) (...) (...) kinds of medicines: (...)
(...), by diet, when he fa^d forty days and forty Mat. 4, 1.
nights. The seeg^* by Electuarie, wh^ (...) most precious Mat. 26, 26. Luc.
22. 44. Mar. 15, 65. Isa. 19, 29 Luc. 23. Ioh. 19, 34
(...) (...) (...) his last supp^. (...) (...) (...) sweat, at his ag^e in the
(...). The fourth, by (...), (...) his face was ^etted (...) by the Jews. The
fifth, by p^tion, when he tasted vinegar mixed with gall. The sixth, by letting
of blood, when his hands and feet were pierced, yea, when his heartvaine was
stricken, his side goared with the spear. Heir was a cure of all cures, which
all the Galenists in the world may admire with reverence, and become his
patients, who was such a Physician for us all.

A strange kind of prescription he enjoined, every one of his patients must
keep it, Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, John, 5, 14.
least a worse thing come unto thee. Christ has wrought thy ^re, thy c^re must
be to observe a good diet, for the time to come, because the relapse is wont to
prou^ dangerous.

4 And here we may not omit to observe the (...) of Christ's curing: he says
unto the sick man in the second of Saint Mark, ^nne, thy sins are forgiven
the. The woman of Canaan Mar. 2, 9.
(...), Some of (...), have ^cy (...) me: my daughter is Mat. 15. 22.
^ ^rcy on ^ ^ c^se of her (...) (...) sickness.

The prophet David says, propter Iud. 5. 20.
i^quitate^ corripuisti homine^, Thou have corrected man for iniquity. Achior
said to Holofernes, enquire if this people have offended their God, otherwise
all our warring will come to nothing, unless he send a punishment upon them for
their sins. Which made Saint Jerome to say, Nostris Hieron ad He^dor.
peccatis barbari fortes facti sunt, By our sins are these Infidels made
strong: and therefore a mean to lessen our punishments, is to lessen our sins.

5 But to consider a little farther Christ's taking pity and compassion upon
the miserable, when some earthly King will visit his subjects, and people under
him, they all by way of gratulation bring him presents, and offer the best
gifts they can devise: but when the King of heaven came to visit his people,
they bring him in beds (says the Evangelists) all that were diseased, Mar. 2.
4. Mar. 9. 2. Luc. 5, 19.
those were Christ's presents, and he took them in good part too, when they
were presented unto him. It is said of David in the first of Samuel and two and
1. Sa 22. 2.
twentieth, that all who were indebted, distressed, or of a sorrowful mind,
came unto him. When we come unto Christ, we come unto him, to whom David
himself came, when he was distressed. Mar. 10. 50.
The blind man threw off his sorry cloak to run to Christ. The Centurion
comes for his Luc. 7, 6. Mar. 7, 34.
sick servant, it was a thing commendable to have a care of his servant in time
of his sickness. A man that was deaf and dumb is brought unto him, Christ
opens Mar. 7, 43.
his ears, loses his tongue, showing him the best use thereof, Go, and give
glory unto God. When the Leaper came unto him and said, Lord, if thou will,
thou can make me clean: why Leaper? Mar. 1. 40. Mar. 8, 2.
had thou come near any of the Pharisees, there was no other to be looked
for, but away: thou may not approach toward the Congregation, I will in no
case touch thee. Leaper, Thou art unclean. What does Christ? he gently
stretches out his hand, which was liberality against the covetous, which was
humility against the proud, which was pity against the envious, and last of
all powerful against the incredulous. If thou will (says this Leaper) thou
Mar. 1. 14
can make me clean? yes, he would, nay would to God we were but so willing
as Christ is. He touched him, he healed him.

When the Physician recouers the sick, who has the benefit, the sick party,
or the Physician? The Centurion thought Christ's word was enough, and this
Leaper that his will was enough: how willing he was to do good, we may see in
that when the sick were not able to come unto him, he went himself to visit
them, as he did to Peter's Mat. 8, 14. Mat. 9, 25.
wives mother, and the rulers daughter.

6 Amongst other works of mercy, his delivering those who Mar. 5, 8. Luc. 8,
29. Mat. 8. 32.
were possessed of devils was most admirable, and none knew the benefit
hereof better, then those who were partakers of this benefit. The evil spirits
cry out: Jesus, thou Son of God, what have we to do with thee? Sure
indeed: They had nothing to do with Christ, but Christ had to do with them,
to wit, to cast them out from men into Swine. Questionless (says S. Austen)
unless men did live like Swine, Satan could never enter into them, Christ
once cast out evil spirits, and there are (says Cassianus) many evil spirits
which Cass. de spi. ine.
we beseech him daily to cast out as the spirit of pride, the spirit of
fornication, and such other. Christ cast out seven devils out Luc. 7, 38
of Marie Magdalen, and so many soul vices, as 1. pride, 2. covetousness, 3.
luxury, 4. envy, 5. Luc. 8, 2.
wrath, 6. incontinencie, 7. sloth, does his grace daily cast out from us, and
still he is casting forth evil spirits.

7 Another testimony of his most loving affection toward the Mar. 8, 2. Mat.
15, 32.
sons of men, was his often refreshing the hungry: for he would not send them
away without refreshing, and specially in the wilderness, a place otherwise
far (...) to procure food for a multitude, and therefore he used the word,
(...), misereor, I have compassion: this he spoke when the people had now
far to go, and therefore without releese might have fainted by the way. By
all that which has been laid down, the nature of the son of God is
discovered unto us, how much he tendereth man's welfare, and specially how
ready he is to be helpful to all distressed persons, what infirmity so ever
they have.

8 Hence we learn, first of all to acknowledge his goodness: secondarilie, to
have recourse unto him in time of need, and thirdly, to be merciful un to
others by his example, who has been merciful unto us. The Apostles of our
Lord saw by his deed, and heard by his doctrine, how much he would have them
respect the Luc. 6, 36.
necessity of the miserable. Beati misericordes, blessed are the merciful
Man. 5, 8.
(^th he) and if he say ^. It shall be said unto those naked clothers, Come
receive the kingdom prepared for you. The holy Mat. 25, 35.
Ghost compares our deed^ of charity unto seed sown; they that sow
plentifully, that is, poe give plentifully. Now we know that after sowing, in
time comes Gal. 6, 7.
the harvest, and when the harnest comes, there are many for one, and the
husbandmans sowing is recompensed: ^eepe our seed by us, it will corrupt: cast
it forth, we shall have increase. By this, there is a kind of giving, which may
be called gayning.

The rich man in the Gospel, Lu. 12, 20.
cared for ^ing his Barnes, the Scripture calls him fool, he never cared
for ^ing the best Barnes, to wit, the bellies of the poor.

We may not think (says S. Chrysostom) that God made rich men for the profit
of the poor, but God made the poor for the profit of the rich: make you
friends (says the scripture) of wicked Luk 16, 9.
m^mmon, as if rich men should ^ their best friends, when they come to be
received into everlasting habitations: for God (says Gregory Nisen) seems
for to make them Porters of heaven. Luc. 16, 23
Abraham and Lazarus, rich and poor, both together by the grace of God, and
heed taken in time, shall rejoice together in the kingdom of heaven.

9 What more praise worthy in a Christian man, then where God has blessed,
industry gathered, and frugality saved; there by charitable deeds of mercy,
to pity the distressed case of others, seeing Christ accounts this as done
unto himself? When I was hungry, you fed me: if this may Mat. 25. 35.
not move us to be charitable and show mercy; good Lord what may? Whence is it
(says Nazianzene) that we live, that we Nazian. de pauper, amandis.
know God, that we look for another world, and joys in the same? Who has
granted us to look up and behold the heavens, the circle of the Moon, the
m^titude of the stars? who has given us the course of times and seasons, the
spacious air, the showers, fruits, meats, mansions, laws, ordinances to
contain us within the bounds of civil society? who has given us lands,
hereditaments, cattaile, goods possessions? but even he who would have us
merciful unto others, as himself has been merciful unto us? And therefore to
conclude with the same father, O man, give some what unto man: nay, give
something unto God.

Chap. 13.
Of, the great meekenes of the Son of God, in bearing the reproaches of the
world: which may be an instruction unto us of suffering the like patiently.
IN all discomforts of the world we learn by this to comfort our selves, when
we call to mind that Christ and we are partners: and that he has vouchsafed
to make us (unworthy that we are) his fellow sufferers, of which suffering of
his, how great that was which he showed with all meekenes in bearing the
reproaches of the Jews, that of the Prophet does specify, They rendered Psalm.
35, 12
me evil for good, and hatred for my good will.

And here consider we these together, when he did miracles, he John, 8, 32.
was a sorcerer: when he cast out devils, it was done by the power of the
devils; when he reproved sinners, he was a seducer: when John, 8, 48
he received sinners, he was their favorer: when he healed the sick, he was
a breaker of the Sabbath: what, and how many unjust contumelies endured Luke
15, 1. John, 5, 14. 15, 16. Lu. 23. 14. Luke 4, 29. Ioh. 10, 36. Math. 27, 65.
he of the Pharisees, who sometime cast him out of the City, accused him of
blasphemy, cried out upon him, that he was a man not worthy to live amongst
the^? Reading the Euangelises, we shall find, that all this Christ patiently
put up at his adversaries hands, when he was reviled he reviled not again, but
was as a Lamb before the shearer, as the Esai. 39, 7. Act. 9, 32.
Prophet Esaias speaks.

2 Come we to his passion, and what heart is able to conceine the mild
suffering of the Son of God? there shall we find his eyes full of tears, his
mouth full of gall, his ears full of contumelies, his heart full of sorrows,
and amidst all, himself praying for his persecutors: there is he derided and
scorned, Come down Mar. 15. 30. Mat. 27. 42.
from the cross, if thou be the Son of God. Whence (says Gregory) si tune
descendisset, nimirum insultantibus cedens, virtutem patientiae non
ostendisset: expecta^t paululum, tolerauit opprobria, i^isiones sustinuit,
patientiam seruauit, distulit admirationem, and qui de cruce descendere noluit,
de sepulchro resurrexit: plus igitur est de sepulchro surgere, quam de cruce
descendere; plus fuit mortem ^surgendo destruere, quam vitam descendendo
seruare: If Christ when he was reproched, had come down from the cross,
giving place to those who insulted over him, where had the virtue of patience
been? he expects a while, suffers a little reproaches, and derisions that
were offered him, and he that would not come down from the cross, rose by
from the sepulcher, and that was a greater matter to arise from the sepulcher,
then to come down from the cross, to destroy death by rising, then to save ufe
by descending. Of whose patience also Cyprian speaking, says, Oh how Cypr. de
bono patient.
humbly did he give place to his persecutors? how quietly bare he the
reproaches offered? he was crowned with thorns to crown martyrs with glory, he
was fed with g^l to give us Manna from heaven, he was loaded with reproaches to
clear us of blame: in the ninth of S. Luke, when his Luke 9, 54.
disciples would have had him call for fire from heaven as Elias d^, he
answered them meekely, nescitis cuius estis spiritus, you know not of what
spirit you are, or you cannot discern between spirit, and spirit.

That of the old Testament, and this of the new: that of requiring punishment
upon our enemies, this of forgiving them. In the Gospel by Saint John we read,
for all that the people a John, 11, 8.
little before were ready to stone him, yet Christ goes by and by to teach and
instruct them, as if he clean forgot any wrong intended at all against him.

3 If ever we call our best attention to observe, then let us do it in
observing Christ's patience, in bearing the reproaches of the world, seeing we
live not without some contuinelies amongst men, for howsoever we live we may
look for no other. The people, though Moses did never so Number. 21, 5
much entreat for them, yet they stung him with their tongues, but God stung
them for it with the tongues of flerie serpents. Joseph (says Saint Ambrose)
had two great troubles at once, Ambro. de Iosep.
the one was temptation, the other calumniation: the temptation he overcame,
but the calumniation was sorrowful for the time. David had many hard words
when Shemei did curse him: David bears all and bethinks himself, if this were
not 2, Sam. 16 11.
a chastisement sent from God. Fulgentius a reverent prelate being much
iniuried by some Arrians, when he was willed to convent In vita B. Fulg.
these malicious men before the magistrate: no, quoth he, I refer my cause to
another tribunal: Tertullian shows how the Christians bare with admirable
patience all reproaches, and Cyprian says, that their prayers were, that those
who persecuted Cypri. ad. Demetr.
them for a time, might at last come to the knowledge of God, and so rejoice
with them for ever in heaven.

Thus after the example of Christ, have the godly endured the hard usage of the
world, though the Seas rage, and the waves beat against the rock, they hurt
not the rock, but are themselves turned into froath. Mention is made of those
who write the natures of things, that the herb Dyanton, though you throw water
never so often upon it, you shall notwithstanding, ever find it dry. The
waters of tribulation may be poured out upon the patient, but they evermore are
the same. When certain heathen men asked a Christian, what fruit he had by
Christ? is not this fruit, said he, not to be moved at your reproaches offered?

4 In this case, men must refer all to God, Si tu tacueris, Deus loquitur: if
thou hold thy peace, God speaks for thee, and if God speak for thee, it shall
be better then thou can speak for thy self. Christ willed the man that was
cured to carry his bed, and as he carried John. 5, 8.
his bed, he carried reproaches too; who being a diseased man, lay without any
one grudging against John 9. 18. 19.
him, as the blind man, he, nor his parents were ever troubled of the Jews
while he continued in this blindness. Ezechiel must be a companion of Scorpions:
the prophet David shows that his enemies had sharpened their tongues like
swords.

God remove envy from the minds of christian men, for it is a diabolical
vice, and brings forth malicious contumelies, and the enemy of man has his
name of Aug. de doct. chris. Leuiticus. 19. 14.
accusing, or speaking (...) of others. In the law it is said, Non male dices
surdo, thou shall not curse or speak evil of any deaf man: and what else is
he whom thou ^amest in his absence?

The leaper was kept up seven days, that none should unadvisedly Leui. 1 ^9.
say he was a leaper, without trial: nay, he must be kept up seven other
days, that it might plainly appear whether it were so or no: to show, it
must be long before we censure others. See thou any fast, says S. Austen,
praise him not by and by, it may be done for glory: and take heed on the other
side thou dispraise him not, for this may be of his devotion to God, and true
holiness to him. They were the wicked Philistines that paid Iud. 16, 25
out Sampsons eyes, to mock and scoff at blind Sampson. It was the speech of
the proud Pharisey, Non sum velut hic publicanus: I am not as that publican: a
fancy Lu. 18, 11
there is crept into the minds of many, to discourse of their own profession,
and to discover other men's faults; like some kind of flies, that if there be
any sore part in a sound body there they light: The prophet David likens these
to the Aspe, a beast that is quick of hearing, but very ill sighted, weak, and
yet full of poison: let these men remember the malediction of Cham, and the
curse Genesis 9, 22. 2, Reg. 2. 24. To. 14, 10.
that came upon the mockers of Elisha, and the reproof of the Apostle, Why
do thou judge thy brother? much more, speak evil of him.

5 Trees well rooted bear all storms, and good men know how to bear the
reproaches of the world. Been sibi conscius (says Saint Ambrose) a good
conscience Ambro. de officiis.
at home, is not so much moved with rumors abroad. The wind does not carry up
and down the massy wheat, but the light chafe. We cannot better bestow our
patience then upon rebukes, or more show how we have profited in the school of
Christ, then by enduring evil sayings against us. The three children walked up
and down the flerie flames Dan. 3, 25.
praising God. The Apology of the righteous man, is, Lord, who^ have I in
heaven but thee? Truth Psa 37, 25
(says Tertullian) is a stranger in earth, where it has many enemies, and but
few friends. Patience is that sovereign virtue that ouercomes all; if
patience be in our calamities, they are no calamities: this is that virtue that
keeps the heart from envy, the hand from revenge, the tongue from contumely,
and often ouercomes our enemies without weapons.

6 When thou see the master of the house himself called Belzebnb, why
complainest thou of being iniuried and maligned? Let God be God, and do as
seems him best in bringing us to heaven. Behold our Redeemer, when false
witnesses came in against Mar. 14.
him, how he was silent, and spoke never a word. Have thou been stricken?
Christ received first many strokes: art thou mocked* so was he of the
Soldiers, and Herod's servants? Art thou betrayed of thy friend? so was he of
his own Disciple. Art thou falsely accused? so was he who was innocence it
self. O ye slow of heart, says our Savior to his Disciples, know you not that
he must suffer these things? (speaking of the Messiah to come) and so enter
into glory.

7 Whereas the vulgat text has Dilectus meus candidus, and Can. 5, 10.
^ubicundus, electus ex millibus: My beloved is white and ruddie, for (ex
millibus, of thousands) some translations say, sub sign is ^abens exercitu^
dece^ millium. Having under his banners an army of ten thousand: This whitenes
is purity, this ruddines his passions, the ten thousand under his banners, the
faithful that follow him enduring afflictions.

In the law, the Goat that must Leuit. 16. 22.
go into the wilderness, must first be presented unto the priest, who laying
his hands upon the head, and confessing the sins of the people, the Goat
forth with must wander in the Desert: upon him the iniquities of us all were
laid, how he wandered in the desert of this world, we are not ignorant, and
what reproaches he endured amongst men, we may not look for other, but to
endure sometime the hard censure of the world, which is for the most part ready
to interpret all to the worst. If any be humble, he is an hypocrite: if of a
plain meaning, he is of no capacity: if merry, he is dissolute: if silent, he
is melancholy: if he labor to do good, he seeks praise: if he will not
flatter, he is proud: if he give little, niggardly: if much, prodigal: if he
by mildnes exhort others, he is but luke warm: if he have friends, envied: if
enemies, pursued: so what so ever he does, he must have now and then at least
some censure or other, it is no new custom for envy to wait upon the best of
men's actions.

He that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the
spirit; and even so is it now, says the Apostle. What this persecution was,
Moses Gal. 4, 29.
tells us, surely no other but that Ismael was mocking Isaac. Genesis 21, 9.
whence we see that mocking and speaking evil is a kind of persecution, which
we should suffer, says Saint Peter, and why? Christ suffered for us, leaving
1, Pet. 2, 23.
us an example, that we should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was
there any guile found in his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not
again. Of all miseries in general it is true, moriuntur miseriae, viuit homo:
the miseries die, the man lives, the faithful see the end of miseries, as
Abraham did the day of Christ, a long, a far off, or some long time before
it came.

Chap. 14.
Of Christ's most mild and peaceable conversation amongst men, which is our
Christian direction for passing our time in this world.
FAthers are much delighted when they see in their children, and offspring, the
feature and similitude of themselves, when we are humble and meek, we bear a
similitude and resemblance of him who was the myrrour of all meekenes. Moses
was the ^ldest amongst the children of Number. 12, 3
men, yet in mildnes far inferior to the son of God, whose Angelical life
in the world was such, as all the world may admire. Behold (says Zachary) the
King comes in meek manner. Zach. 9, 9.
And Esaias says, He shall not quench the smoking fl^x, or break Esa. 42, 3.
the brusen Reed.

When the Angel Gabriell brought message from the Court Luc. 2. 6.
of heaven, concerning his conception and birth, the Angel came to Nazareth,
which signifies as set apart, so in some sense, and flower, conuement was it,
that Christ so odoriferous a flower, should be conceived at Nazareth which
signifies a flower, and there too of a virgin, so pure a flower; and then
too, when the spring began, a time of flowers. Christ was a flower for the
seemelinesse of his peaceable conversation, for the sweere savor of his love,
for the fruit of his passion. This flower began to grow in his conception, to
put forth in his birth; to flourish in his most holy life. This flower withered
for a time in his passion, but refloured more oriently again in his
resurrection. If thou will gather this flower; follow then the steps of his
sweet and peaceable conversation: If thou will have the operation hereof,
apply unto thy faith the comfortable savor of his passion.

2 The Prophet Esaias in the person of Christ, says, Spiritus Esaias, 61, 2
Domini super me, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me,
and sent me to show peace. This was spoken long before he came, and this of the
power of his coming, then shall the Lamb and the woolfe fee^e together, even
nature and grace.

Now when was he borne, but in the reign of Augustus, which, as histories
show, was a time of peace? his doctrine that should be taught in the world,
Luc. 2, 1.
the Apostle calls it the Gospel of peace: his Messengers that promulgate
this doctrine, are said to be the Messengers of peace: and he himself the
Author thereof, is called the Prince of peace.

To come a little to his conversation, which was aunswerable Ephesians. 2, 14.
to all this: When the blessed virgin began a little to expostulate the matter
with him, for loosing himself (as she thought) in Jerusalem, he mildly
answers her, That he must go about Luc. 2, 49.
his Fathers business. When Peter Luc. 22, 52.
drew out his sword, and stroke a servant of the high Priests cutting off his
ear, Christ cured this servant, and parted the fray with a peaceable
admonition, Peter put up thy sword. When the feast came that all went to
Jerusalem, Christ stayed a little behind, John 7, 10.
but for conformities sake he shortly follows after: when he spoke of paying
tole or tribute, Peter are the children free? Mat. 17. 27.
Yes Lord, yet go Peter (that we may offend no body) Pay custom for thee and
me.

3 Merciful Lord, how mild a demeanor was this? The Apostles were sorry when
they heard him tell that he should shortly depart from them, and so John, 14,
1.
might they well be, respecting the great benefit they had by his presence: for
if at any time they were fearful, he strengthened them; if ignorant, he
instructed them: when they were moved to wrath, he appeased them: when he saw
they were sorrowful, he comforted them: when he foresaw their troubles in the
world, he prayed for them: when they were doubtful what to do he directed
them: when they did well, he praised them: in a word, he governed them as a
Father, counseled them as a friend taught them as a master, and in all his
conversation so bare himself, as he wan their hearts both to love, and fear
him.

4 For other sorts of men, and first for the Pharis^es themselves, he would
not refuse to eat and commune with them. When Nichodemus came unto him, be
entered Luc. 14, 1. John 3, 2. Mat. 2^, 35.
into a familiar colloquie concerning regeneration, how he should be borne
again, a mystery to human reason. When another questioned with him of the
chiefest commandment in the law, he showed him the summ^ of the law, which
was, Love God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. For the
inferior sort of people, yea the very Publicans, a kind of men, which were of
all others most out of grace with the world, when these resorted unto him, he
received them, nay, when he saw Zacheus Luc. 15, 2. Luc. 19, 5.
one of the chief of these Publicans, was but desirous to see him, he would
go and abide in his house, more then be seen of him. What shall we say? how
meekely John 4, 21.
sat he upon the ground talking with a poor woman of Samaria? How graciously
did he speak unto the woman diseased with an issue of blood, she said within
her self, yet Christ heard; if I may but touch his vesture: she touched
Christ, and Christ by a saving grace touched her.

5 By all this of our Savior, we learn many things, we see that he who could
have called thousands of Angels in a moment, to avenge him of his enemies,
would notwithstanding quietly remit all. We may observe that he who was Lord
of heaven and earth, would for all that converse in sociable manner with the
meanest of men, yea with sinners themselves: that he who was freed from the
law, would for conformities sake show all obedience to the law: that he was
none of those crossing and tossing dispositions, who will live and die in a
strange mood of contradiction.

Poor sheep will live peaceably together, and men by unnatural bitterness
seek the ruin oftentimes one of other. A heathen Emperor forbad a couple of
troublesome fellows to take upon them any more the name of Christians. These
of all other should live peaceably within themselves: First, because Christian
men are members of one body, and members are joined together, and members
suffer together, rejoice together. Secondarily, for that they are heirs of one
hope, which is to be partakers in one of the Kingdom of heaven, should an
Hebrew smite an Hebrew?

6 Christ restrayning the letter of the Law, which permitted the hating of our
enemies, says, Whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, which word of
indignation Mat. 5, 22.
ah, signifies a mind set upon revenge and trouble, shall be in danger of a
council, as if he would have our very passions pacified, and therefore much
more our implacable humors, our choleric and hasty motions ever fretting and
fuming, and set upon revenge: which make men in a heat and rage become furious,
and in a manner Cass. de spi ritaracund
(says Cassianus) mad men. This was far from his manners, from his spirit
on whom the holy Ghost came in the similitude of a Dove. God never dwells any
where but in the Mat. 3, 16
house of peace, where his spirit takes up residence as in his proper mansion,
say peace be unto this house, was the Apostles salutation.

7 How much it concerns the condition of Christian men to be given to peace,
and to pass their time in this world in withdrawing themselves from
contentious desires, we may from hence easily perceive. O happy life void of
continual storms, which being far from boiling envy, and a restless
desire of revenge, with setting naught by the vain pleasures of this world,
can sit down in a calm and quiet contemplation of God.

Stories make mention of Cato, that after the age of flue and fifty years he
left Rome, and withdrew himself to a little village near to Picen, there he
passed the residue of his life, for the most part accompanied with his books,
only sometimes he would go and labor in the fields and vineyards near
adjoining: being on a time forth, one comes and writes with a coal upon his
door, O Cato, tu solus scis viuere! O Cato, thou only know how to live!
The like is said of Scipio Affricanus, in the greatest wars he enterprised,
he never lost battle: and yet he made war in Asia, Europe, and Africa,
sacked Carthage; when age came on, he betook him to a quiet and peaceable
kind of life, and therein passed the rest of his days, esteeming that course
of life more commendable then all the other.

If heathen men have so much addicted themselves unto peace, what should they
do whom God has called to a calling of peace, and therein to serve him truly
all the days of their life?

8 This notwithstanding, when the cause is just, the authority lawful, the
intent good, that God may be glorified, a right continued, and imminent dangers
avoided, it is and may be lawful for Christians to take arms, and so to do
is nothing contrary (as some have dreamed) to Christian peace. God has
assisted just war, the cry of the people was, Gladius Domini Judge. 7, 20
and Gedeonis, the sword of the Lord and the sword of Gedeon, but say these
men, He that Mat. 26, 51. To. 12. 19. Psalm. 45, 6.
strikes with the sword shall die with the sword: and vengeance is mine, I will
revenge: Indeed in the old testament it was true, accinge gladium tuum super
femur, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh: but in the new it is, pone gladium in
vaginam, put up thy sword into thy sheath: then the people entered into Canaan
by weapons, but we into heaven without sword or shield, and therefore in no
case we admit war amongst Christians.

True indeed (says S. Austen) Bellum necessitas, pacem voluntas, Aug. 107. a^
Boni^. Contr. Fa^. lib. 22.
war of necessity, peace voluntary: and of the two, our Christian desires
tend rather to peace, for war is no blessing, but a punishment: but yet the
premises observed, then vade and percute Amaleck, Go and strike Amaleck, but
in any case let not that (...) desire of superiority be the cause.

To answer the fancy of those men before mentioned, he which strikes with the
sword, whose condition is private, may feel the stroke of the sword. To take
vengeance in a cause of justice, is appertaining properly unto the public
magistrate, and so much do those testimonies of holy scripture infer.

For the lawfulnes of war, Euse. lib. 8. de vita Constable.
the practice of Constantine (who by the assistance of God prospered herein,
and prevailed against Maxentius, not so much in multitude, strength, or
knowledge, as by the divine assistance) does manifest the same; yet ever so, as
Christians rather desire peace, and deliverance from the disturbance, either of
defensive, but most specially of unnecessary and offensive wars; That there
be no leading into captivity, nor no Psa. 144. 14, 15.
complaining in their streets, happy are the people (says the Prophet) that
are in such a case, yea blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord.

When the building of the material temple began to go forward, Esra. 3, 3.
all Israel came together as one man: when the spiritual temple began to be
erected, Credentium Act. 4, 32.
erat vnum cor; of the believers there was but one heart: O that peace and
unity might so prevail, that strife and contention might be laid at rest,
that once Christ's last departure from the world might be remembered: pacem meam
relinquo vobis, my peace I leave unto you. Let this be Christians rule at
enmity with the serpent, at unity within our selves. If we will needs be
crossing, would to God we would cross our evil affections, which are too
ready to move us upon every light occasion to revenge, to ^r passionate, and to
infame any that has a show of honesty. Pacem habeto cum hominibus; cum vitiis
bellum, have peace with men, be at war, (if thou will needs war) with thy
own vices.

The oblations of the peaceable man are as Abels were, acceptable unto God:
wherefore, for all unquiet passions, for all ambitious desires, or for all
hasty of revenge amongst us Christians, may that of the Apostle be applied: I
would to God they were cut off that trouble us. Gal. 5, 12.


Sweet is the life that is free from boiling envy, happy is that man that
bears misery and hides the s^ine, that neither waxes proud in prosperity,
nor is too much cast down with adversity, but with that tranquillity of mind
which is wont to thank God for all, passes along peaceably to his eternal
happiness. While Solomon reigned, there was peace in Israel: while the grace of
God does rule and reign in our hearts, there is peace and unity in our lives.

Chap. 15.
Of the name of Jesus.
Jesus in Hebrew is interpreted a Savior, a name attributed unto the son of
God, a name had in much honor (says Eusebius) amongst the old Patriarchs, Eus.
lib. 1. Chap. 5.
a name brought from heaven by the Angel Gabriell, for Mat. 1 22.
though in the old law, others had the appellation of this name, as Iosuah the
son of Naue, and the high Priest which came Ios. 1, 1. Zach. 3. 3.
forth with the people after their captivity, yet had these their names no way
comparable to this of our Lord and Savior: for they were only Saviors of the
body, but Christ was a Savior of souls: The Prophet Esaias says, vocabitur
tibi nomen Esaias, 62, 2.
quod os domini nominauit. Thou shall be called by a name, as the mouth of God
shall name thee. A new name, according to a new redemption. For those others to
whom this name was given, they had it of men at the tune of their circumcision,
this was given of God before the conception, in their names was included the
saving of a multitude of people from some worldly servitude, but in this, of
saving people from their sins, et vocabis nomen eius Iesum, And thou shall
call his name Mat. 1, 21.
Jesus. O sweet name, who is so deaf that his ears are not filled with joy;
who so dead, that has not his senses raised up with delight, when he
remembers the message of the Angel, And thou shall call his name Jesus?

This name Jesus (says S. Bernard) it is honey in the mouth, Ber. in can.
sermon. 15.
harmony in the ear, melody in the heart: this name Jesus (says Anselme) is a
name of comforting sinners, when they call upon him, therefore himself says:
Jesus, esto mihi Jesus, Jesus, be my Jesus: this name is above all names,
First, for that it was consecrated from everlasting. Secondarily, for that it
was given of God. Thirdly, for that it was desired of the Patriarchs. Fourthly,
for that it was foretold of the prophets. Fifthly, for that it was accomplished
in the time of grace, magnified of the Apostles, witnessed of the martyrs,
acknowledged and honored shall it be of all believers unto the worlds end.
This name Jesus, it is compared unto oil; and oil has these properties, it
suppleth, it cherishes, it enlightneth, it makes look cheerfully; so does
this name of Jesus, it suppleth the hardness of our hearts, it cherishes the
weakness of our faith, it enlighteneth the darkness of the soul, dispersing the
foggy mists of discomfort: and last of all, it makes man look with a
cheerful countenance, as the Prophet David speaks, it makes him look
cheerfully toward the throne of grace.

Our Lord has many divine resemblances in holy scriptures, or names to
express his nature, sometimes he is called a shepherd, for that he watches
his flock; sometimes a Captain, because he defends his army; a Prince, in
that he governs his people; a light, because he illuminateth those that are
in darkness; a door, by which men do enter; a rock upon which they do build:
but in brief, this name Jesus includes all.

2 This name Jesus, is a name of intercession: Whatsoever you ask the Father
in my name: Ioh. 14, 13.
and therefore may that of the Prophet be remembered, Not unto us, Lord, not
unto us, but unto Psa. 115, 1
thy name give the praise; If God did so much for Abraham, for Moses and
David's sake, what shall he do for Jesus sake? This name Jesus, is a name of
power, for in this name the Apostles gave strength unto the weak, health unto
the sick, and wrought many other great miracles. Domine quam admirandum est
nomen tuum? Psalm. 8, 1.
Lord how wonderful is thy name in all the world?

This name Jesus, is a name of invocation, not only in a time of distress,
while we are living, to say with the blind man, Jesus thou son of David have
mercy Lu. 18. 38.
upon me: but with the blessed martyr Saint Steven, in our last extremities
when we are dying, Domine Jesus accipe spiritum meum, Act. 7, 59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

3 But how is it that at the hearing of other names of God, as Elohim, Elohah,
El, Eli, Elion, Jehovah, ^ah, Adonai, Shaddai, Zebaoth, which signify his name,
essence, power, omnipotency, we are not so much moved: and at this name Jesus
(the Apostle says) every knee shall vow, not only the k^s of our heart (which
Phil. 2.
at this name should bow and tend indeed) but every knee? the Apostle goes
further, saying, Of things both in heaven and earth, and under the earth: but
why at this name of God above other? because this name cost much when it was
bought by the blood, by the honor, by the life of the son of God himself,
and seeing it cost such a price, we ought with all reverence to be thankful
for it, he humbled himself in procuring it, and we therefore in receiving it.
Jesus, a Savior, therefore God; Christ anointed, and so the holy one of God:
Jesus in Hebrew for the Jews, Christ in Greek for the Gentiles: Jesus to save
sinners, and Christ in respect of us to kill sin, says Bonauentura. It is
the property of a Savior, first to encounter with the enemy. Secondly, to
help with counsel: thirdly, to give strength: fourthly, not to save once but
still: fifthly, not one, but many: sixthly, not for a time, but for ever: all
which our Lord Jesus has fully accomplished.

And sure most co^uentent was it, that he who came to save sinners, should have
a name answerable thereunto. For names (says Isidore) were given of old
Isuor. Etym. lib. 7. cap. 7.
according unto the properties of the persons named. And therefore Abraham was
so named, because he should be the Father of many Nations.

Esau rough, because such were his manners, and actions, and conditions.
Abishahar, brother of mourning, 1. Chro. 7, 10. Act. 12, 29
because such were his passions. Aristarchus a right and good governor, who
was companion to S. Paul. So to omit many other, we see names were given to
express the principal properties of those who were named, and therefore this
name Jesus, a name of saving, of which the Apostle says, There is no other
name given under Romans 10, 9. Act. 4, 12.
heaven, wherein we may bo saved.

The blind man said in the ninth of Saint John, The man that is called Jesus
did so, and so unto John 9, 11. Act. 25. 29.
me. Festus speaking of Saint Paul's doctrine, and the sum thereof: It is, says
he, of one Jesus, who was dead, and Paul affirms to be alive. Yea Festus, this
one Jesus was he, that lives and reigns for ever.

5 In this name (says Saint John, when he says for his name) are our sins
forgiven 1, John 2. 12.
us, and they circumcised the child the eight day, and called his name Jesus.
The child what humility Luc. 2, 21.
was here, when so high a Lord accepted so small a name? They called his name,
not gave him this name. We read in the Gospel, that the evil spirits did
shake and tremble at his presence, and no marvel, for assuredly his very name
is a terror unto them, and men of experience, and good proof do affirm as
much of this blessed name, Jesus.

6 In the old law Jesus was the expectation of Nations, but in the new, Jesus
is the salvation of the Nations. If at any time we have lost Jesus, what
should we but with Mary and Joseph seek him sorrowing? O sweet Savior
(says S. Bernard) Si non inuentus es inter cognatos tuos, quomodo inueniam te
inter cognatos meos? If thou were not found amongst thy own kindred, how
should I look to find thee amongst my kindred; or if thine own mother found
thee not but sorrowing, shall I find thee in rejoicing? but what are we
without Jesus? and therefore how should we seek him? When Jesus is present,
all is well, nothing seems difficult, but when Jesus is absent, all is hard
and uneasy: when Jesus speaks not inwardly, vile is all our consolation, but
when Jesus speaks one word only, there is felt great comfort. Did not Mary
Magdalen straight arise from the place whereon she wept, when Martha said unto
her, The Master comes, and calls for thee? Happy honor when Jesus
calls from tears to joy. How dry and hard art thou without Jesus? How
foolish and vain, if thou couetest any thing without Jesus? Is not this
greater loss then if thou had lost the whole world? What can the world
bestow without Jesus? to be without Jesus, is a grievous hell, and to be with
Jesus, is a sweet Paradise: If Jesus be with thee, no enemy can hurt thee: if
Jesus be from thee, no friend can help thee: he is most poor that lives
without Jesus, and he most rich who is well with Jesus.

There is great Art to know how to be conversant with Jesus, and wisdom to
learn how to possess him: be humble and at peace, and Jesus will be with
thee: be devout and quiet, and Jesus will not depart from thee, thou may
drive Jesus away, and loose his grace: if thou decline to external things,
and if thou have lost him, to whom will thou fly? what friend will thou seek?
without a friend thou can not long continue: and if Jesus be not thy friend
before all, thou will be heavy and desolate. Thou do therefore foolishlie,
if thou repose or rejoice in any other, thou ought rather to have the world
thine enemy, then to offend Jesus: wherefore of all things dear unto thee,
let Jesus be especially beloved. All things for Jesus, and Jesus for himself:
for him, and in him let all be alike unto thee. See thou never desire to be
praised or loved singularly, for this appertains only to Jesus, who has not
his equal: neither let another possess thee, or dwell in thine heart. Be
pure, and at inward liberty, without the implicatures of the world, if thou will bare thy heart to Jesus, and see how sweet the Lord is.

7 Finally, thou ought not to be cast down by any adversity, but patiently
to endure all that shall happen, remembering this happy name, Jesus, to which
thou may fly, as to a City of refuge. Jesus is the joy of us Christians,
he was Deu. 4. 43.
borne for us, given to us: he was the price of our ransom, and therefore our
redeemer: he was the Author of our being, the worker of our well being, and
therefore whatsoever we do (says the Apostle) let us do all in the name of
the Lord Col. 3, 17.
Jesus, In nomine Jesus, must be the beginning: In auxilio Jesus, must be the
prosecuting: In laudem Jesus, must be the concluding. It was once said unto the
blessed virgin, and it is still said to the believing soul, Ecce conci^ies,
behold, thou shall conceive and bear a child, and thou shall call his name,
Jesus.

Chap. 16.
Of Christ's teaching his Disciples to pray, and of that divine form of
prayer, so often to be used of all devout Christians.
THree principal exercises there are before other of our Christian piety
before God and man, alms, fasting, and Prayer. These we use as medicines, to
cure evils past, to drive away those that are present, and to prevent such as
are to come;

Alms, and fasting as two wings, cause our prayers to soar upward: yet,
says Saint Austen, we see that all cannot give alms, for that some labor
with want: all cannot fast, for some are faint by reason of natures
imbecilitie: but all may pray, if not with sound of words, yet with the
affection of the mind, according to that of the Prophet. My sighings are not
hid from thee. Whence we see that by our very groans, our devotion has a
vent, and the sparks go up to heaven.

2 Wonderful was the providence Exodus 39. 9, 10, 11. 12. 13.
of Almighty God, in ordering all things that did appertain unto the
Tabernacle, there was not any particular thing about it, but an express form
was set down, how, and after what manner it must be done. Now we have not a
material Arc or Tabernacle, (for these were shadows of things to come) we
have a form of worshipping God more excellent, with all things appertaining to
this worship. Christ our Savior has set all things in order about this
Tabernacle, and first of all concerning our first sacrifice here to be
offered, that is to say, prayer: this he lays down, with many circumstances,
as by the prayer of the Publican, to pray with humility, by the parable of the
widow, to pray with importunacie, by his commendation of the woman of Canaan,
to Luke 18, 13, 4, 5. Mat. 15, 28. Mat. 6, 6.
pray with feruency, by his refuting the pharisees, for their desire to be seen
praying, to pray secretly in our chambers, and other such like directions for
prayer: Whereby we may see that our devotion is no by-matter, whereabout the
son of God is long instructing us.

2 Now Christ begins, to teach his Disciples a form of prayer: when you
pray, Sic orate: Pray after this manner, Our Father, and so forth. Surely a most
divine form of prayer above all other in the world, and so much the more
excellent, by how much the more the Author theref Aug. Ser. 2. post pentec.
Tertull. in Orat. Do. Cyprian in Orat. Dom.
is above men, and Angels. S. Austen calls it, A prayer of prayers,
Tertullian, a Breuiary of our faith. O what prayer (says Saint Cyprian) is
more gracious with the father, the^ that which is delivered unto us of the
son? and how comfortably may we pray, when we do not only use his own
name to countenance our suits, but even his own words: And here we may
observe, that Christ sets down a prescript form of prayer, to show unto
us that all our prayers should not run upon indigested words, and senseless
Tautologies, as many unwisely have dreamed of voluntary praying, which does
much detract from this excellent part of Gods worship. In the sixth of the book
of Numb. 6. 24, 25.
Numbers, almighty God laid down unto the Priests a direct form how to
bless the people: In the second of Joel, the very Joel, 2, 12.
words are mentioned, which penitent finners should use in their conversion to
God, and here Christ (we see) prescribes a form of prayer, which for division
sake, may branch it self into a proem, and seven several petitions adjoined
unto the same.

When you pray, say after this manner, Our Father which art in heaven.

This proeme may inclusiuely be understood at the beginning of every petition.
In that Christ teaches us, to call God Father, we are in the first place
emboldened to make our suits unto him: least we might say as Abraham, what be
we which are but dust and ashes, to speak unto God? but when we consider him
as a Father in the very beginning of our prayers, we acknowledge his bounty,
and grace. For first this name of Father, is a name to move us to come unto
him: The wandering son said, Ibo ad patrem, Lu. 15. 18.
I will go to my Father. Secondarily, it is a name of privilege, he has
given us (says the Apostle) his spirit whereby Romans 8, 15. Mat. 9, 22,
we cry, Abba, Father. Thirdly, it is a name of providence, your heavenly
Father cares for you. But how come we to call God by a name of love, of
privilege, of providence? surely he that willed us, to call him Father, has
John 1, 12.
made him our Father, Potestatem dedit, etc. He has given us power to become
the sons of God. In the old law, God is called by the name of a Lord: ego
Dominus, I the Lord, there his people are called servant; now from the name
of Lord he is called Father, his people, from servants are become sons, and
all by the means of Christ: Ascendo ad patrem meum and patrem vestrum, I
ascend to my Father and your Father. Ioh. 20. 17


Now calling God Father, as it is a name of dignity (for it is thought to go
well with children of a rich and loving Father) so is it a name of duty, and as
he has the properties of a Father, to love, to care for, to pity: so should
we have of children, to honor, to serve, to obey: least it be said as it was
once of some, Nutriui filios, I have nursed children, Esai. 1. 2.
and they have rebelled against me.

4 Again, as we say Father, so say we our; as if when we pray, we pray all in
one (says S. Cyprian) noster Pater, our Father, a form of prayer presupposed
to be said of many: Let not the rich or mighty despise the poor, it pleases
Christ to have us all together to call God our Father, and therefore none ought
to disdain other, and as we say our Father, so in that we mention him to be
in Heaven, we confess what manner of father we mean, to wit, heavenly, and
that we be not degenerate children, we should be heavenly too.

In heaven, what more powerful then to have a Father in heaven? In heaven, and
therefore howsoever we are distressed in earth, the comfort is, we have a
Father in heaven: In heaven, and therefore if our Father be in heaven, then is
our inheritance in heaven. In heaven, and therefore praying Psa. 121. 1
we lift up our eyes unto the h^s, as the Prophet speaks. In heaven, not as
placing his divine power only there, which fills heaven and earth: but we
say in heaven, because there chiefly his glory does show it self, there he
blesses the Saints and Angels: Well then (says S. Austen) we have a Father in
heaven, let us not cleave to things here in earth, and thus much of the proeme.

5 In the first of the seven petitions, we say. Sanctificetur nomen tuum,
Hallowed be thy name. Beginning to pray, we forget our own necessities, and
make a petition for Gods glory, we remember we have the dignity to be
children, being children of such a Father, therefore by and by we pray for our
Fathers glory, Sanctificetur nomen tuum, hallowed be thy name: Christ sought
his Fathers glory, and Christians seek his glory, and the hallowing of his
name: it is Io^. 17. 4.
said of the wicked, polluistis nomen meum, you have polluted my Esa. 52 5.
name.

In that we pray that Gods name should be hallowed, it is not but that Gods
name was holy from everlasting, Be you holy, as I am holy, but in this, we
pray that the name of God may be hallowed both of us. and in us: of us, when we
say, unto thy name give the praise, in us when we live worthy of him. Many
have had a great and mighty name, but none a holy name, except God, and
therefore we pray, hallowed be thy name, not so much that we hallow it, as
Sanctificetur, let it be hallowed, that all Jews, and Infidels may honor God,
that his name may be hallowed, From the rising of the Sun unto the going
down thereof.

6 In the second petition we pray, adueniat regnum tuum, thy kingdom come, and
this petition we utter and mention (says S. Chrylostome) animis eleuatis, with
winds lifted up. Seeing Chryso. in Orat. Do.
we have a Father, and a Father which has an inheritance for us, and this
inheritance is in heaven, we therefore pray that we may once come to the
enjoying hereof, saying, adueniat regnum tuum, thy kingdom come. Seeing we
are here in the way where all is wearines, and on the contrary side, knowing
our inheritance is above, love which is impatient of delay, makes us desire the
coming of this kingdom. Now as there is regnum gloriae, a kingdom of glory:
so is there also regnum gratiae, a kingdom of grace. And as we do pray,
bidding all earthly riches and delights and honors farewell, for the coming
of the kingdom of glory above us, so also do we pray, leaving all sinful
desires for the coming of the kingdom of grace within us, that is, that his
spirit may rule and reign in our hearts, and there have the pre-eminence,
ruling and governing us as his subjects. And heerewithall we pray also, pro
regno ecclesiae suae, for the kingdom of his Church, that whereas Christ is
called a King, and his kingdom in the world is spiritual, we pray that his
Scepter may sway, that all may yield obedience and faith to his government,
rejecting the tyranny of the prince of darkness, and for all these severally,
or altogether, we pray, adueniat regnum tuum, thy kingdom come.

7 In the third petition, we pray, Fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done: this
may be called a petition of duty: for seeing we exspect in time to come a
kingdom in heaven, our dutiful desire is to do his will, who gives us this
kingdom while we remain here in earth. Like that of the Apostle, Lord what
will thou that I do? as if he were ready to do Act. 9, 6.
his will who called him.

Thy will be done, that is, not our obstinate and rebellious wills, but Lord thy
will: Impiorum est (says S. Chrysostom) volumus, and nolumus: we will, and we
will not (say the wicked) but thy will be done, the godly say. There is nothing
either more fondly loved, or more hardly resisted then our own wills, therefore
our desire is that we may cross our own wills, referring all to the will of
God. And this petition we pray with a sicut, saying, Thy will be done in earth,
as it is in heaven: This does show the feruentnes of our desire to do the will
of God: those of that joyful assembly do thy will above, and we desire to do
thy will beneath, or to begin for a time to do that here on earth, which thy
Saints and Angels do for ever in heaven.

8 Because we cannot continue the doing of Gods will here in earth, without
things necessary for our earthly condition, therefore in the fourth place we
pray, Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie, give us this day our daily
bread: wherein first we acknowledge, that we wholly depend upon Gods
providence, to receive all things necessary for the preservation of the life
present. Secondarily, that we crave them at his hands, when we say, da nobis,
give us, according to that of the Prophet, Te dante nos colligimus, thou
giving, Ps. 145. 15
we gather. And therefore with his giving, our endeavoring; with Gods
increasing, Paul's planting. Give, an action of liberality and love, give us
our bread, panem nostrum, panem filiorum, our bread, not ours as due, but our
bread, or the bread of us thy children, which thou art want to bestow, and in
mercy to give, quotidianum, daily bread: or as some say, (...), super
substantialem, our supersubstantiall bread.

We pray to day, Give us this day our daily bread, and if we live till to
morrow, we pray the same again, as if every day we look up unto God, that he
in sending things necessary for the life present, may in mercy look down upon
us. Some think this petition to be poor men's petition. No, rich and poor
must pray for this bread, for what are earthly creatures to maintain life
without his blessing. Who is the Author of life? Last of all, when we pray,
Give us this day our daily bread, We pray, Neque pro diuitiis, neque pro
delitiis, sed pro necessariis Chryso. in Orat. do.
(says an ancient Father) neither for riches, nor for delicacies, but for
things necessary unto life: according to the wise man's prayer, neither too
Pro. 30. 8.
much, that we do not forget God, nor too little, that we forswear him not:
only a competencie, and so be thankful unto the giver of all.

9 Having begged at the hands of God things necessary for the life present,
because (as the Prophet Jeremy says) our sins do make God take these Ier.
5. 25.
good things from us; in the fifth place therefore, we pray for the forgiveness
of our sins, saying: Dimitte nobis debita, nostra: Forgive us our debts and
trespasses. Whence we may learn, that our sins are debts and trespasses: for
when we sin, we run in debt, and commit trespass against God. We owe
him obedience, and therefore are indebted by our sins: we do him wrong, and
therefore are trespassers, which we beseech him in mercy to forgive, and so
this petition is (...), an acknowledgement or confession what we are, to wit,
sinners: We say not with him, spare us, and we will pay all, but Lord forgive,
and this we all pray (says Cyprian) because we all sin, Dimitte nobis debita
nostra, Forgive us our trespasses: ours, and therefore of our own committing:
we may not post off the matter as Adam did, with a mulier quam dedisti: The
woman that thou gave me caused me to sin, Genesis 3. 12.
whereas indeed the sin was his own, in giving consent.

This forgiving of our sins, we crave with a clause annexed, Sicut and nos
dimittimus debitoribus nostris, As we forgive them that trespass against us:
whereby we show of what spirit we are, in that we can find in our hearts to
forgive others, and therefore beseech God to forgive us. Cassianus writes,
that some in his time would leave out this Cassi. in orat. dom.
clause, as the Pelagians would have done the former, for which they were taxed
by a Council Con. Mileuit. sub Innoc. 1. can. sept.
for this foul default: we must think, Christ taught us a most heavenly
form of prayer, and impiety were it to alter the same: we must show mercy
that look for mercy, and forgive that look for forgiveness: wherefore with
charitable minds we say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.

10 When we have craved pardon for our sins past, we begin to be careful
for the time to come, and now in the sixth petition we pray against leading into
temptation, Et ne nos inducas in tentationem: The forgiving of our sins is a
procuring of good; the not leading into temptation, is a remoouing away of that
which is evil.

In this petition, first we acknowledge our own infirmity, ready to be led
into temptation: and secondly we pray for a preventing grace, that when
temptation comes, we be not overcome of it. Saint Cyprian reads it, And lead
us not, and suffer us not to be led: not that God does lead us, but we rather
lead our selves, in consenting to temptations when they come, whether they be
temptations of peace or persecution, afflicting or flattering, and of the two,
the latter are the most dangerous. Some of the ancient Fathers understand it,
that in this petition we pray to be delivered from all temptations whatsoever,
because we know not how soon we may fall: others by leading into
temptation, that we be not willing to consent, and be led or carried away by
temptations and so seduced, and this may be our humble petition, either for
preventing temptations before they come, or when they come, that they do not
prevail.

11 And this is an entrance to the seventh and last petition. Sed libera nos a
malo: but deliver us from evil. We pray to be delivered from all evil, that,
be it sometimes we fall into temptation, yet that we do not fall like the
Olephant, who falling rises not again. Being fallen, we pray to be
delivered, or to come forth. In praying to be delivered from all evil, does
include all dangers both of body and soul, present, or to come, that may
befall our selves, or others, (when we say, Deliver us) which we also insert in
the other petition, as not praying for our selves alone: and praying to be
delivered from all evil, we understand all mischances which may befall us by
Sea, or land, sleeping, or waking, from bodily or ghostly enemies: from fire
and water, from sudden or unprovided death, and any manner of danger, Et
libera nos a malo And deliver us from evil: to all which petitions we beseech
God to give his blessed grant, and so seal up all with a devout Amen.

For the clause of giving honor unto God, acknowledging his kingdom, power,
and glory, his glory being mentioned in the first petition, his power, and
kingdom in the second, we leave that clause unto a Christian meditation.

12 And thus have we heard Christ's form of prayer, which of all other is most
worthy of our continual Christian practice: First, for the authority thereof,
because it was taught by the son of God: Secondly, for the efficacy, for no
prayer more likely to prevail with the father, then that which is taught by
the son: Thirdly, for the divine order of the petitions: fourthly, for the
compendiousnes thereof, our devotion consisting not in a multitude of wards,
but in the affection of our hearts. We need not now say as one did unto Christ
our Savior, Lord teach us to pray as John taught his Disciples, meaning a
form of prayer: But Lord give us grace to direct all our prayers by this
divine form of prayer, and never cease to lift up our hearts and hands unto
thee.

Chap. 17.
Of Christ's often praying, and specially in the Garden, when his soul began
to wax sorrowful, and what feruencie in devotion we here learn.
IF ever the world were occasioned to call to mind the high devotion of the
Son of God, his often praying, and with that feruencie too, as never any
prayed, then most especially in these days, when Satan, evermore envious of
man's felicity, most seeks to possess the world with a dumb spirit: we may
call to mind that when the Wolf most lays wait to stop the sheep throat,
that no voice be heard of the shephe^rd, there in time the danger is very
great. For the passion of Jesus Christ, let us remember our selves, and think
a little more of calling upon God, by religious and devout prayer, remembering
who it was that spent whole nights in prayer, when he was laboring for the
sins of the world, and the salvation of our souls.

If the eyes of God do at all times, and in all places behold us, then most
especially when we present our selves before him in prayer, when both attention
of mind, and humiliation of body concur, actions most befitting humble
suitors. We often repeat that of the Prophet, O come let us worship, and fall
down before the Lord our maker, but do it not, by humbling of our bodies, for
to sue pardon for our souls.

To approach and enter unto the place of prayer, as if we came to sit in
commission with God, or would countenance him in his own house, is as
unseemly a custom as Christianity can yield. To dehort men now a days from
long prayer, we are eased of that labor, (which Christ used in refuting the
Pharisees) when so many care not how little they pray at all: nay which is
more, when some seem not to make so much account of this holy duty unto God,
wherein Christians assemble themselves in public prayer.

And yet for all this not only to speak of prayer, but of feruencie in
prayer, may be helpful to our Christian desires in serving God, seeing our
devotion is often so remiss, as we may seem rather to speak then pray;
seeing the very house of prayer is almost made nothing less, whereas our
repairing thither, minds us of a duty to be performed: therefore he that prays
not in the Church does as he that eats not at a banquet, that learnes not at
the School, that fights not at the war, that walks not when he is in his
journey. There is a matter of moment to be performed, that we pray, and after
what manner.

In consideration hereof, let us observe at this time Christ's praying in the
Garden, when his Mat. 26, 31.
soul began to wax sorrowful, as the Evangelist testifies.

In this his praying, we may consider these circumstances. First, that it was
solitary, for that he now left his Disciples, as he had oftentunes before
done, when he went out alone to pray: which does commend unto us solitary
praying. Secondly, he prayed with humiliation of Lu. 22, 41.
body: S. Luke says, he kneeled down and prayed; S. Matthew Mat. 26, 39. Mark.
14. 35.
and S. Mark, that he fell prostrate upon the earth: The Evangelists may
soon be reconciled, for it may seem he first kneeled, and afterward for
faintness he was feign to fall prostrate: and this commends unto us
humiliation in praying. When he raised Lazarus, and restored the dumb Ioh. 11,
41. Mar. 7, 34
man to the use of speaking, we find he lifted up his eyes to heaven, which
was sometimes his gesture in praying. When Moses prayed, he held up his hands
until the going down of the Ex. 17, 12.
sun, which holding up of the hands, David called his evening Ps. 141. 4.
sacrifice. When Steven prayed, he kneeled down according to Christ's example,
here in the second Acts. (...). 60.
pl^ce mentioned.

3 The third circumstance to be observed in this our Saviors praying, is, that
it was just, and right: for he subjected his will to the will of his Father,
saying, Situ vis, If thou will: which does teach us to commend our selves, and
all our petitions, wholly to the will of God.

The fourth, that it was with sorrow, for he was in an agony, and this does
put us in mind of that of the Apostle. The spirit helps our infirmities, for
we Romans 8. 26
know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit makes intercession for us
with sighs, which cannot be expressed.

The fifth, that it was with perseverance: for he came three times unto his
Disciples, three times and in three places was he tempted, and three times did
he here pray, and willed his Disciples to pray, that they enter not into
temptation. O what devotion was here? his last supper being ended, he goes
forth accompanied with his Disciples, and speaks unto them (as a loving father
upon his death bed, when he has not much to say) gives his children precepts
at parting which they should remember, when he is gone from them, of which
precepts, this was not the least, Watch and pray, that you enter Math. 26. 41.
not into temptation.

Peter, James, and John go with him: for those to whom he had before showed
the glory of his transfiguration, to them would he now show the humility Mat.
17. 1
of his passion, that as they had seen glorious things, so now should they
see humble things, to these he says: My soul is sorrowful, vsque ad
mortem; unto death, even to begin to fear death: or vsque, until, may be
taken indefinitelie, and so, my soul is sorrowful unto death, that is, until
a satisfaction for the sins of the world be made by death: or vsque, until,
may be taken inclusiuely, and so, My soul is sorrowful unto death, that is,
until the scandal of my death be turned again to the life of faith: Tristis
est anima mea, My soul is sorrowful.

Here Anselme cries out, Vnde hoc Deus mi? How comes it to pass, O my God,
that thou taking upon thee the nature of m^n, should begin to forget thou
art God?

4 Christ assumed this fear and sorrowfulnes for many causes: First, to prove
the truth of his humanity, for it is natural unto man to fear death, and of
this natural sorrow was our Lord sorrowful: yet so do we Mark. 14. 68.
understand him to be sorrowful, and to fear, not with that fear and
sorrow, which ordinarily drowneth reason, and causes man to ouershoote
himself, as Peter for fear of death denied his Mar. 8, 33
Master. This manner of fear was far from Christ, for he came for this
intent to suffer, and reproved Peter when he dissuaded him from going to
Jerusalem, and suffering there.

There is a kind of stepping back, naturally incident unto all, which at this
time appeared in Christ as other human actions did, his eating, his sleeping,
his hunger, and the like, all which were in Christ (finne only excepted)
properly as in man: now this sorrow and fear was otherwise in Christ, then in
us. In us for the most part the passion of fear does go before the rule of
the will, and the judgment of reason; but in Christ it did follow after, for
both the will and the judgment of reason went before: for when he hungered and
thirsted, he did it willingly, and of judgment, he feared willingly, he
sorrowed willingly, and of judgment. By this then, there is nothing to be
considered in Christ as constrained, but all is to be believed as voluntary,
and therefore fear and sorrow, as they were natural, so were they voluntary
and rational. Wherefore, the original of the text says, (...), Mat. 26. 37.
Coepit contristari, he began to fear, he began to be sorrowful, and not he
was fearful. Fear and sorrow began in the part sensitive, but came not to
the mind or understanding. For when the Evangelists say, His soul began to be
sorrowful, there the soul is taken for the part sensitive, in which are
passions. And here we may consider, that Christ could not die by nature, as
Adam could not die until he committed sin: (For the reward of sin, says
the Apostle, was death) but as he took upon him humane nature, so did he
also without our infirmities, suffer that voluntarily which was incident to
our nature, yea to our fall.

5 A troubled passion arises in the mind, either besides the decree of
reason, or in opposite manner against the decree of reason: The former of these
two is sometime incident unto men; although the best amongst men: the second,
to the imperfect only. A perfection far surmounting both was in Christ, for
that in him, sense was subject unto reason, reason unto will, the will to the
understanding, the understanding to God.

Christ was sorrowful, says Saint Jerome, not for any fear Hiero^. in Mat.
cap. 26.
of death, which nature refuses, but for the scandal of his Disciples, the
infelicitie of Judas, the ruin of the Jews, and thus it is not dissonant from
truth, says Saint Ambrose, if he Ambr. in Lu. cap. 10.
were heavy in soul for his persecutors. We see according to the judgment
of the ancient Fathers, how far our Saviors fear was from distrustful
thoughts or weaker passions, which to think to be in him, were most impious:
but in these sufferings being rightly considered, we see a most admirable
conueniencie in all, without fancying of unlearned and irreligious conceits.

6 To come to matter of instruction, for that is most hehoueful of all: In this
sorrowing of our Savior, we learn these things: First, to keep down by the
rule of reason, sorrows, and passions that arise in us, to restrain them, and
keep them in obedience unto the will. Secondly, no: to despair if sorrow and
fear at any time surprise us, even unto the suffering of death. Thirdly, to be
sorrowful for the state of others, after Christ's example. Fourthly, amidst all
our sorrows to repair only unto God, and commend our selves unto him as
Christ did, by prayer, and thus uniting our sorrows with his sorrows, we
shall the better bear them.

7 This done. Christ departed a stones cast from them, and there prayed,
Father, if it be possible remove this cup: he says Abba, Mat. 26. 39.
Father, and we too (says the Apostle) say Abba, Pater: twice Father, both
according to the Hebrew and Greek, showing that God is now Father of Jew and
Gentile. He says, If it be possible, referring the grant of his petition to
the will of God: if it may stand with the same will, and not otherwise. He
prays for the removing of that Cup, yet so, that looking to obedience, he
goes forward toward his suffering, and says, F^at voluntas tua: Thy will be
fulfilled. What of Mat. 26. 39.
humane desire he before mentioned, he now in action proceeds to relinquish,
as if he would say, Let not that be done which I have spoken according to
humane affection, but let that be done, for which I was sent into the world,
and now am willing to suffer. That which he required as man, to wit, the
removing of the Cup, he now leaves, as resolving wholly to proceed with the
will of God. But was the will of Christ any way differing from the will of his
Father? No verily, for he says, Non quaero voluntatem meam, sed voluntatem
John 5. 30
eius qui misit me. I seek not my own will, but the will of him that sent me,
and this manner of conditional prayer should be remembered of us in praying,
not our wills, but Lord, thine be fulfilled.

8 He prays the third time the same thing, showing that he goes to pray,
and to pray the self same thing too: not of forgetfulness, but of very
feruencie. Whereby we may observe, that to pray and pray again, is a part of
high devotion: The Dove went forth of the Arc the Genesis 8. 11.
first time, and returned sorrowful as she went out, still the waters were up:
she goes forth the second time, then the flood is abated, and she brings a
branch of Olive, a sign of quiet and peace, First, a sorrowful prayer goes
forth, still the waters of adversity are up: the prayer goes forth again,
behold the waters are fallen, prayer brings a crop of Olive, joy, and
tranquillity of mind.

9 At the end of Christ's praying, the Angels appear comforting him, they who
at this time seem to have presented themselves in the presence of God the
Father, astonished at the agony of his Son, came forth, and pray for the
remoouing of this Cup: answer is made, my son has of mere love and mercy,
undertaken the redemption of man by the effusion of his blood, which could be
brought to pass by no other means: which the Angels hearing, they returned to
Christ, and in honoring, they comfort him; and in comforting they honor him.
And here observe we three things: First, that our Savior prays long
before he receives an answer: to show, we must not by and by give over.
Secondly, that the greater his agony was, the longer his prayer was: to show
that in greatest agonies we should continue long in prayer. Thirdly, in that
the Angels came and comforted him, to signify that if we continue with
constancy, the Angels rejoice over us: In that the drops of blood came down,
it showed the greatness of our Saviors conflict, wherein he seemed both to
do, and to suffer: his blood was true blood according to his natural
existence, but yet myraculous and supernatural, if we respect the manner: for
it is above nature to pour out together water and blood, which Christ did both
alive, and dead: behold, O Christian soul, thy redeemer and Savior cast into
sweat for thy sins. In this it is manifest how bitter his passion was, whose
only thought so much changed nature. Of this our Saviors sweating may be
gathered these several observations, first, the greatness of his agony:
secondly, that this agony caused sweat, when it was a cold night: thirdly,
this sweat falling upon the earth, we may gather that the earth or men
inhabiting the earth, have benefit hereby.

2 Now was presented before the eyes of the Son of God, on the one side, Gods
just judgment and wrath toward man, yet vnappealed: on the other side, death
and hell as yet not vanquished: himself left as it were alone to enter the
conflict, putting forth his hand to receive the cup, and yet he begins to
pull it in again, but after a little while, goes forward with full resolution
to the work well begun, which he brought to a most happy end.

Let the devout man learn, in all the pressure of adversity, to set before him
Christ's agony in the garden; be it that doubtful objects between fear and
sorrow do much obscure our natural delights: here have we for times of
trouble a president to follow, but chiefly in the aganie of death, when sick
man are panting and laboring for life, they are said then, especially to
endure an agony, for then begins a conflict, nature drawing one way, and
obedience to the will of God another: the spirit goes forward, and the flesh
draws backward: besides, many thoughts occur about leaving the world, and
going to answer for our time here spent, with many other things seldom
before thought upon.

Our Savior was in an agony when death approached, whence Gregory says:
Appropinquante Greg. moral.
morte certamen adest, nec immerito: tune enim anima terretur, cum post
pusillum hoc inuenit quod in aeternum mutari non possit: Death approaching an
agony is present, and not without cause: for then is the soul put in great
fear, when after a little while she finds that which never will be changed or
altered.

1 In this agony of agonies and all other, we learn by our Saviors example,
to have recourse unto prayer, he prayed in the Garden, he prayed on the
Cross, to show that in times of distress, we should principally apply our
selves to prayer. Moses prayed at the Sea: Daniell prayed sitting amongst the
Lions: Dan. 6. 16 Job. 2, 8. Act. 16, 25
Job on the dunghill: Paul at midnight, when he was in the prison: and here
Christ our Savior in his agony, when he not only prayed, but with great
feruencie, alone, to show that the mind is best elevated unto God, when
sometimes in our sorrows we go aside to pray, as he himself here prays,
he withal exhorts his Disciples to pray, that they enter not into temptation:
and surely no better remedy against temptation then prayer: which prayer is
the very whip and scourge of evil motions.

When the these hears the good man of the house to cry and call for help, he
thinks there is no tarying for him, if good friends be within hearing.
Cornelius, Cornelius, Thy prayers are come up before God: Would thou Act.
10. 4.
exercise thy self in a spiritual life? pray: would thou attain the
sweetness of heavenly things? pray: would thou have God help thee in time of
extremity? pray: would thou be delivered from temptation? pray: Between
Babylon and Jerusalem there is a trusty messenger that often passes thither,
which is well acquainted in the Kings Court, and is very gracious with the King
himself, for he shall have audience and dispatch as soon as he comes. This
messenger is prayer, that even in the silence of the night ascends into
secret places, and comes unto God himself. Moses praying upon the mount,
has the rod of God in his hand, we praying have hold on the Cross of Christ
crucified: The brethren of Joseph besought him to show them favor, if not for
their own Ge. 50, 17.
sake, yet for their Fathers sake, Joseph heard them and wept.

Chap. 18.
That Christian men may take comfort amidst the calamities of this life, by
that of our Savior, John, 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, where he
armeth his Disciples with consolation against troubles.
Give wine, says Salomen, to those that have grief of mind: Pro. 31. 1.
Christ seeing his Disciples to have grief of mind (for why the shepherd
being taken away, the sheep will be scattered) he gives them the sweet Mat.
26. 31.
wine of consolation in these words, Let not your hearts be troubled. By which,
he that knew their troubled hearts, partly John. 14.
in that he had said, One of them should betray him, and partly in that he
had told them he must shortly depart from them, began now to comfort their
hearts after this manner, You believe in God, believe in me also.

Christ knowing that his own Apostles were left unto the injuries of the world,
that they had undertaken a military profession, and were to ^ght under the red
colors of his Cross, he here comforts them against afflictions, not so much
by taking away afflictions, that they have them not, as by strengthening them
when they come, that they faint not: to the outward man he foretells a
cross, but to the inward man a stay, or fortress: a cross to the outward man
that it exult not: comfort to the inward man, that it languish not, Let not
your hearts be troubled.

2 In this of our Savior, we see whereunto this his e^hortation tendes, not
that they should not be troubled at all, for that is above humane nature,
himself (as we have heard) was troubled in his agony: but the trouble here
spoken of, is that which hinders reason, dis^ayeth the understanding, is
opposite to peace and tranquillity of mind. When the soul is cast down by
distrust and heaviness, to shake off all this, Let not your hearts be
troubled: you believe in God, believe in me also. When an earthly Captain does
comfort his soldiers, the uttermost he can do is to strengthen them, as
Judas Machabeus did by exhortation: Christ not only does strengthen his
Soldiers, but he puts strength into them.

3 A noble Prince sometime of great devotion and valor, seeing his Army much
dismayed, when they beheld the huge multitude of their enemies coming toward
them, perceiving by their co^tenances that their hearts began to fail them,
ascending to an eminent place, he makes them a very hearty oration, which he
drew unto three heads: first, he shows, their cause was just, and that God was
went to prosper ^st enterprises: secondly, that their enemies were those whom
his, and their ancestors who now bare arms with him, had often foiled:
Thirdly, that being so few, if they prevailed against that huge multitude, the
v^orie would be glorious; howsoever, for himself he would die in the battle,
or return with triumph. His oration was no sooner ended, but a voice was heard
through out all the Army, every one crying, forward, forward, the event was,
they happily prevailed.

A multitude of crosses are ready to ass^e us in open (...), which may cause
our hearts to be troubled, but a most noble Champion have we that assures us
that our cause is just, that our enemies are those whom all Gods servants have
ever resisted; if we prevail, our conquest will be heavenly. Our Champion
himself (...) live and die in our defense, why should our hearts be troubled?
Nay, we have won the day: you shall have troubles in the world, but be of
good comfort, I have overcome the world: Ioh. 16. 33
forward, forward, in the name of God: our enemies are foiled enemies, our
battle is not so much to overcome, as to cleave unto him, who has overcome in
the assaults made against us: we are rather seduced, then vanquished in these
assaults, that we should not like Job's wife stumble at the adversities of the
world, as at a rock of offense, think our selves the rather out of Gods
favor, we may perceive we have undertaken a condition of life subject to
suffering.

4 Because Christ knew the hardness of suffering, therefore where he spoke of
suffering with him, there he spoke also of sitting with him in his kingdom,
You shall sit upon seats, judging the Lu. 22. 29 30.
twelve tribes of Israel. Like the Physician, who is wont to mix sweet
syrupes with his bitter potions, that the patient may be the more willing to
receive them: so our Savior here comfort his Apostles, not by promising to
take all troubles from them, but when troubles come, to assist and aid them.
Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow you Lu. 22. 31
as wheat, as if he would say, toss and winnow you he may, he shall, but
make thy faith fail he shall not? No, Simon, I have prayed for thee, Believe
in God, believe in me also.

By faith (says the Apostle) Moses passed the red Sea, and Heb. 11. 29.
by faith we pass the red Sea of many tribulations in the world: it was not
Peter's body, but Peter's faith, says Saint Ambrose, that walked upon the
waters. That which he said unto some, the Son of God says unto all, for
he ever spoke to the heart: Let not your hearts be troubled.

5 We may not promise unto our selves better things then our fellow servant
have tried, nay, then our Lord himself has suffered: Marvel not at this
(says Saint John) if the world 1. Ioh. 3. 13
hate you

Men might have been encouraged by the example of Camillus, Scipio, and
others, which have been hated even when they did well in the Commonwealth; and
Christian men might have for examples, the suffering of Esai, Jeremy, Micheas,
and other of the old Prophets, a cloud of witnesses might be collected in
this case, to show how they must look for troubles in the world, but our
Savior ^rgeth his own case only: You know that it hated Ioh. 15. 18.
me before you.

Marvel not at this, There be three things, says Thomas Aquinas, which we
are wont to Tho. Aqui. in 1. Epist. Ioh. cap. 3.
marvel at: The first, when any thing is great: the second, when it is new:
the third, when it is seldom. Now that the world, that is to say, the lovers
of the world, do not affect the children of God, it is no great thing. The
Physician thinks it no great matter if the Lunatike man, whom he binds do
strike or kick him, alas he is frenzy and knows not what he does.
Secondarily, it is no new thing, to have trouble in the world, we find it so
in Abel, and Isaac, and all from the beginning: Thirdly, it is no rare thing:
for there is nothing more common, and therefore our hearts should not be
troubled (that is to say, over much troubled) with the griefs of the world:
we must not cast away the Nut for the bitterness of the ^ind, Si non tribularis
fortass^ no^ inuocares, If thou were not troubled, peradventure thou would
not devoutly have called upon God, which is a principal part of Gods worship.

6 The world, and the tempter, both beast of giving pleasures unto carnal men,
but come to the performance, and these pleasures are very torments: Christ
promises tribulation in the world, but come to the inward man, and there we
find a world of joy. The root of the tree is bitter, but the fruit is
pleasant: Christ promises rest, Inuenietis requiem: you shall have rest, but
it is Requiem animabus, rest unto your souls: his burden it is light by love,
and we are made strong by grace, a burden this is w^nt to unburden sinners.
He that sets us in this journey, knows what is fittest for passengers, and
therefore we may endure with comfort these outward adversities when they come.
Foelix Lepra, (says one) happy leprosy was it that made 2, Reg. 5. 6.
Naaman worship the God of Israel in his heart. The sharp storms of the
winter, they make the trees bare, and the winds scattering the leaves, they
for a time stand as dead, yet there remains still life in the root: In like
manner afflictions of the world make the members of Christ seem desolate, and
the stormy winds of persecution scatter abroad the leaves of worldly
prosperity, yet there is life in the root, there is faith and joy in the heart.

7 There is a difference between the joy of worldly men, and the joy of those
whom Christ has, as it were, taken out of the world, that is, from the love of
the world: The former think felicity to consist in abundance of riches, in
pleasures, in glory, and such like, all this is but outward and momentarie,
like a little Sunshine in Winter, for one fair day it has oftentimes ten
foul, and such a number of troubles as almost the former pleasures are dashed,
and vanish to nothing. For the latter of these, they have indeed often outward
adversities, but such joys within, as if all adversities were nothing, and
this principally comes to pass by Christ's means: for whatsoever he
touched, he did sa^d (...) it, and therefore hunger, thirst, persecution, they
are not now so grievous, but work all for the good of the faithful. The
waters of Mar^ which were so bitter that none could drink them, Moses but Ex.
15. 23. 25.
casting in the wood that God appointed him, they became sweet: the crosses of
the world were grievous until Christ's Cross was put in amongst them, now
their taste is altered: A strange sight was it in times of persecution, to see
a few lambs to overcome by no other weapons then patience and faith a
multitude of Wolves, and to rejoice (as Tertullian says) in the midst of
Tertul. ad Scap.
torments. Wonderful is it to hear how Saint Paul endewed with grace from
Christ, does even challenge and prou^ke tribulation, and anguish, and hunger,
yea life and death, shall any of you all: and if he would speak like a man of
courage to all the adversities of the world: Shall you all separate me from the
love of Christ? Romans 8. 38
(...), you shall not: And thus we see how in Christ, we are armed with inward
grace against the world without, and all the troubles thereof.

8 Another reason which our Samour uses, is, I go to prepare John 14. 3.
a place for you, and therefore ^e of good hope: Moses to stir up the people
in times Deu. 11. 10.
of their distress, speaks unto them after this manner: The land you go to
po^esse, is not as Egypt, but a champion Country, and goodly to enjoy, which
the Lord visits with the early and the latter rain: We have promise of a
better land Genesis 46. 1.
then ever Moses promised: In my Fathers house are many mansions. Joan. 14, 2.
The journey was long and wearisome for Jacob, a weak and feeble person as he
was, yet by reason of inward joy he had conceived in his heart, he well endured
it.

Be it (says S. Austen) that we have not temporal deliverance Aug. lib. 22
cap. 22, de ciuitate dei
from troubles, this shows that we do not embrace Christian Religion for
the commodities of this world, but for the joys of a life to come, which will
make amends for all. The benefit of a calm is best welcome after a tempest,
liberty is wont to be most pleasant after a time of bondage, you shall sorrow
(says our Savior) but your sorrow Ioh. 16. 20
shall be turned into joy, your sorrow, and therefore not every ones sorrow:
yours, who have been faithful unto the end. When the Prophet David spoke of
the sorrows of this world, he calls them waters: Save me O God, Psa. 69. 1.
for the waters are entered even to my soul: Lord (says Peter) bid Mat. 14. 28.
me come unto thee on the water. The same Prophet in another place goes
farther, saying: The floods are risen O Lord, the floods Psa. 93, 4.
have lift up their voice, the floods lift up their waves, the waves of the Sea
are mighty, and rage horribly, but yet the Lord that dwells on high is
mightier. And surely unto trouble as unto the raging water has he said, Huc
Job. 38.
procedes, et non procedes amplius, hither shall thou come, and thou shall come
no farther: wat^s as they rage and swell, so be they often quench heat,
cleanse corruption, and they serve to temper.

In the nine and thirtieth Psalm, he utters with what great grief and
bitterness of mind he was urged to complain: yet remembering himself by whose
providence it came, he says: Obmutui, and non aperui os meum quoniam
fecisti: I became dumb, and opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing.

Chap. 19.
How that of our Savior exhorting all that would follow him to deny
themselves, and take up their Cross daily; does concern us that bear the
name of Christians.
BEing forewarned, and armed against the trials of the world before they come,
it remains that we be ready to undergo them when they come. Christ shows
us plainly what we must look for if we will be his Disciples, when he
gives out in open Proclamation, Who soever will follow me, let him deny Mar.
8. 34
himself. In the text of the Evangelist, having before spoken of his own
suffering, he by and by speaks of their s^ring, who would follow him: First,
that they should not think that his suffering did absolutely exempt them from
all crosses of the world, for Ego meam, vos vestra^: I have taken up my
cross, and you must take up yours. Secondly, he shows himself as a
careful Governor in the ship, who in a calm is wont to instruct the
Marriuers against the tempest likely to follow, and this he does as it were in
familia^ manner, by showing what himself had done, and then what his disciples
should do: First, what he would suffer, and then what they should suffer.

What Peter? and should I not go to Jerusalem? yes, it is not only my case but
thine, and the case of you all: Whosoever will follow me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me.

2 Here Christ speaks generally unto all, of what estate and condition so
ever, high and ^ow, rich and poor whosoever. When he spoke of some special
mysteries, their turning him to his Apostles, he says: Vestrum est scire: It
is for you to know: but speaking of the way to follow him unto his kingdom, he
speaks universally unto all, Whosoever, omnium est scire, it is for all to
know. Again, as he Mat. 13. 11.
speaks universally, so does he speak lovingly: Whosoever will, not as
^orcing any, but lovingly inducing all, leaving his followers to their own
willingness. Whosoever will, by which he does more effectually draw them, then
if he had used all the threatenings in the world.

The stayed men and gray heads in Israel, said unto Roboam, if 1. Kings. 2. 7.
thou speak kind words unto this people, this people will be thy servants:
Christ speaks kind words unto us all, and deals most bountifully with man,
according to the dignity of his person. He which having laid up rich
treasures to bestow amongst his friends, if he will or command the public crier
to say, this and this treasure is ready, to be bestowed by a bountiful Lord,
may it please you now to come and receive it: does he not now more persuade,
then if he should by a sharp Edict pull and draw men to receive this treasure
against their wills?

3 Again, he which has in his household two sorts of servants, the one free
borne and of his alliance, the other slaves and bondmen, when he requires any
service of the former, he speaks unto them mildly according to their
ingenuous disposition, but the other he commands absolutely as common
servants: We are as of the chiefer sort of Christ's family, if not having free
will, yet will freed by grace, nay, we are of his own alliance, and therefore
when he speaks unto us, he speaks lovingly unto them that love him, Whosoever
will: but unto his other creatures, as the heaven, the earth, the sun, the
Moon, he does not require but command them: so in the time of Joshua he
commanded the sun Iosu. 10. 1^
to stand still, in the time of Elias, 1. Kings. 17. 1.
he commanded the heavens to be shut: When some rebelle^ against Moses, he
commanded Nu^. 16. 30
the earth to open and swallowe them, but with man, to win his heart he
deals most gently, and calls after a mild manner, whosoever will: The antecedent
shows the manner of calling, the consequent a duty of him that is called, Let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily and follow me.

4 In this consequent we see that somewhat is required at our hands, if we will
be Christ's followers, as also what this is: to wit, the denying of our selves,
and the taking up of our Cross daily: and surely most aptly does out Savior
Christ after speaking of his own cross and passion, speak in the next place
of our crosses and suffering, least presuming of his suffering, we should be
over ready to flatter our selves, and count of nothing but liberty of the
flesh, and security of state, thinking that his suffering was enough: therefore
to take away this dangerous conceit, Christ speaks at one time, both of his
suffering and our suffering, of his passion as also of the means, how we
shall come to be partakers of the benefit of his passion, that is, by following
him. This following must be in the giving him the full possession of our
hearts: this giving must be with all willingness, for he will have
voluntaries too march under his banner.

The three children followed Dan. 3, 41. in cant.
God, and how? By going out of their place? the text says, they followed God
in their hearts. Rebecca was said to go and enquire Genesis 25. 22
of the Lord, whither went she? from the place where he was not, to the place
where he was? No, I the Lord (...) heaven and earth, she went not from place
Ier. 21, 24
to place, as it is not required to do in following Christ, but she went from
life, to life, from manners, to manners: from good to better: from grace, to
grace: and this is to follow him. Diversely, faith S Austen, did our August. de
verb. Sermon. 7.
Savior deal with thr^ sorts of men concerning their following him, one
offers himself, and is refused, Master I will follow thee; another that says
nothing, is called, sequere me, follow me; a third deferred when he was called,
and is blamed: the first respected his profit for all his profession; the
second said little, and was received to grace: the third minds temporal
things, when he might have had eternal.

In the world, suit is made to be followers of men that have countenance above
others, but to be one of Christ's followers, in sincerity and truth, is far
better, yet for this few care little at all. The poor followers of him in
humility, shall one day ha^ more countenance then all this worlds pomp is able
to afford. Small suite is made for this, nay, Christ himself becomes a suitor
to us when he calls, Whosoever will, the people said unto Joshua, the Lord is
our God, and we will serve him: so may we say, Christ to our redeemer, and we
will follow him.

5 Now what is to be done of him that will follow Christ? Marie two things,
the first, Abneget seipsum, Let him deny himself: the second, Toll^ crucem
suam quotidie, And take up his Cross daily. For the first, he that will follow
Christ, must love Christ, for he which requires a cheerful giver, requires
a cheereful follower: but how must he love Christ? as himself, yea more then
himself, for he must even deny himself, Abneget seipsum. And how must a man
deny himself, marie as Abraham did in forsaking his Fathers house, Adams
natural desires, that seem pleasant unto him.

We best see, says Saint Chrysostom, what it is to deny our Chryso. in hom.
Mat. 16.
selves, when we behold what men are wont to do in denying others: when any
casts off an unfaithful companion he neither rejoices at his prosperity,
nor is grieved at his adversity, he respects not at all what pleases him, or
what displeases him, as one that will have no more to do with so bad a nature:
the like is done in denying of our selves, that is, our sensual desires, to
grow out of love and liking of them, and cleans reject them.

To deny our goods, our friends, yea our very pleasures is very much: and yet
to follow Christ, we must go a step further, that is to ^it, we must Deny
our selves.

6 First of all we deny our selves, when we yield obedience in all things
unto God, 2. Sam. 15. 12.
which obedience is better then sacrifice. In obedientia, says Gregory,
voluntas propria, in sacrificio caro aliena mactatur, In obedience our own
will is sacrificed, in these external oblations the flesh of some other
creature is offered. In the old law they had many kinds of sacrifices which
were killed and offered. Now, says Origin, this manner is altered, in stead of
a Origin. in ^euit.
^ain, we kill our i^efull passions: in stead of a Goat, our unclean
affections: in stead of flying fowls, our idle thoughts and wandering
cogitations. All these must we kill in denying our selves, and the faithful
surely by suppressing the motions of sin, make Martyrs of themselves.
Secondly, we deny our selves, when we resist the prouocations of sin offered,
as Joseph did when Genesis 39. 7.
he withstoode evil, of who^ it may well be said, that it was as great a
miracle to see him chaste in that present provocation of his mistress, as it
was to see the three children walk without hurt amongst Dan. 3. 25.
the ^erie flames, so excellent a thing is it: so acceptable unto God, to deny
our selves, when prouocations of sin are offered. Thirdly, we deny our selves
when we put up wrongs and injuries of the world, saying with Steven: Lord
forgive them, or lay not this to their charge. Fourthly, Act. 7, 60.
we deny our selves when we cross our own wills, and relinquish our natural
desires, and when we begin to be Centurions over our own affections, and say
to this or that, Go, or come, referring our selves to the will of God, that so
not so much we live as Christ Gal. 2. 20.
by grace, may be said te live in us: Last of all, we deny our selves when
we cease to sacrifice unto the Net, or attribute any thing to our own
^ctions, much less to our own merits, and therefore least of all in the high
mystery of our justification, every one to say with the Apostle, By the grace
of God, I am, that I am: 1. Cor. 15. 10.
And again, Not I, but the grace of God in me And this is the sum of denying
our selves, being the first degree in following of Christ, Abneget seipsum, Let
(...) deny himself.

7 The second, Et tollat cruce^ suam quotidie, And take up his Cross daily Le,
him deny himself, and this denying must be done indeed: The word is (...),
that is, deny for all together, or deny for good and all. Let him deny
himself, by declining from evil: Take up his Cross, by suffering evil: and
follow me, by conforming himself unto me, and my laws pre scribed him. Let
him (...) himself, by renouncing his own will: take up his own Cross, by
bearing patiently lesser or greater persecutions: and follow me, by walking in
my ways.

Et tollat cruce^ suam, And take up his cross: It is not said, et ferat cruce^
s^, And carry his cross, but tollat, let him take it up, to signify, a
voluntary and willing suffering, because evil men may have crosses, but they
bear them, and do not take them up: they bear them grudgingly and
impatiently, not willingly and thankfully, as those do that follow Christ.
This Cross is said to be daily, because we can never live without crosses,
and therefore must daily prepare to suffer, or at leastwise have a mind ready
to suffer: It was not without cause our Savior pronounced a blessing to those
that suffer persecution, because to the judgment of the world they are subject
to a curse.

There is none lives, or can live, but he shall find either from himself, or
others, a cross to take up: The cross of humble men is injury, the cross of
religious men, is fasting and watching: the cross of rich men, is the contempt
of the world: of the poor, want and scarcity: so every one has his cross.
The days of Christ himself in the world were as Job spoke before of the
days of man, few and full of miseries, knowing that his Disciples should be
subject to the hatred of men, he tells them of taking up a cross.

In this we see that our Savior does not deal after the manner of worldly
rulers, who to have troops and trains follow them, are wont to tell of
pleasures and profits, and such like: Christ speaks of taking up a cross, of
suffering, of denying himself, if any will follow him. One would think that
this persuading were a kind of dissuading, and a mean rather to make most men
sooner forsake him, then follow him; and yet such was yt power of his cadling,
so great was the hope of ^ortalitie, as this calling of Christ styled the world
full of christians, not withstanding these cold rewards the manifold crosses
they were before promised to endure, yet they left al their hope that the world
might promise, and followed him by afflictions That same, Et sequatur me, and
follow me, does sweeten the most bitter and sharpest adversities of al: to
follow Christ, what else is it, but the greatest felicity that can happen unto
man?

8 But here we see we must expect a cross, as our Savior foreshewes us, that
we take not offense thereat when it comes. We see Christ suffered his own
Apostles to hunger to be in danger of tempests, to go forth in the world
amongst many enemies. Let it not green us to hear the gate is strait, and the
way narrow, because the end thereof leads unto lift. The crosses of the world
are many, as we see in Abraham, Genesis 12. 1.
who was feign to forsake his own Country, and live in fear among strangers:
in Judge. 10. ^0 1. King. 25 7.
Sampson, who was taken of his enemies, and scornfully handled: in Zedechias,
who in his old age had his eyes pulled out, and was saine to end his days in
sorrow heathen men make mention of Polycrates, of Samio, and of Cambyses, who
after much glory, suffered sorrowful crosses: but for the faithful, let not
the worlds crosses dismay them, the natural Sun is profitable unto us, not
only in Summer when it ripeneth our fruits, and is nearer unto us, but in
winter also when we sow our seeds, and the heat thereof is farther off: so is
it with the Sun of righteousness. Unto Tobie the bitter gall opened the eyes
of his body, but unto Nabucho donosor the bitterness of affliction opened the
eyes of his soul. The crosses of this world they are unpleasing to humane
palate, yet they are often medicinable: the engine is laid to the bulwark, but
the fortress is not woone: the tree is beaten with sto^es, but the root is
sure, afflictions assay the outward man, faith within it remains safe. In all
these, Christ sends first the oil of gladness in the state of grace, then a
full deliverance in the state of glory: first a reficiam is given to the
languishing soul, then a Satiabere, when it shall see God in glory.

Chap. 20.
That Christ's example does teach Christian men to live in all orderly and
dutiful obedience, to Princes and governors.
THe saying of the Greeks is true, (...), Order is ye mother and preserver of
things: for sure it is that the society of men consists in ^ling and
obeying, obedience is the virtue that teaches all their duty to God and man.
Government and governors are from him who rules and governs all. Where none
do guide others, what order can be looked for? where order is not had,
confusion will follow, and the success of confusion is plain ruin. Where ^en
shake off obedience, and live as they list, what peace can be preserved? Where
peace is not, what state either in Church or commonwealth can long stand? some
run headlong they well know not whither, in the bent of their own wills,
others are wauing up and down in opinions, all are as a body clean out of
course, and subject to a dissolution: on the contrary, where governors
ordain a law, and all harken unto the law (because a law without partiality,
does speak indifferently unto all) there is obedience, there is concord, there
is continuance in well doing.

2 Now for those of all other who live under the law of laws, to wit, the
law of grace: for those I say, before all other, to show all dutiful
obedience to rulers and governors, placed over them by God, what more seemly,
more Christian? branches of one vine, stones of one building, fellows in one
family, children of one Father, members of one head, nay, heirs of one
Kingdom: what more beseeming then amongst these people to obey rulers, and
rulers to obey God?

When Moses is praying, Joshua leading, Israel obeying, God blessing and
prospering all, O happy are the people that are Ex. 17. 17
in such a case! The water, says Saint Cyprian, that is separated Cyp. de vni.
from the fountain, dries; the bough that is cut from the tree withers;
the light that is removed from the Sun vanishes; the people all say, he
Iosu. 1. 18.
that will not obey Iosuah let him die. Christian Religion as it does bind men
in duty and devotion to God, so does it also contain them within the lists and
limits of duty and obedience toward man: knowing that the powers that are, are
ordained of Romans 13. 1 1. Pe. 2. 13.
God. The only example of our Savior Christ's obedience does overthrow at one
touch, the lofty and Babylonicall building of stubborn spirits, who refuse
conformity and obedience to government amongst men. At his very birth
obedience was Luke 2. 4. 27. Man. 17. Mat. 22. 21.
showed, when the B. Uirgine came to Bethlem to be taxed: his Circumcision was
his obedience to the law, his presentation in the Temple was the same, his
paying tribute, and exhorting others to do the like showed how much he allowed
and established civil obedience to superiors and governors, in giving every
one his due. The Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul exhort heereunto: the one
willing us to obey for Gods sake, the other for conscience sake. The practice
of the Primitive Church, not only in laying down their lives when rulers were
tyrants, but when the Church had the countenance of authority under those good
Emperors, Constantine, Iouiman, Theodosius, Valetninian, and others, shows
how dutifully and orderly Christians lived, for obedience Epist. Eleu.
citatur inter leges. Edu. prim.
above all Nations and people of the world. Eleutherius commends Lucius a
King of this land, for his governing the people according to the laws of God,
and Ambro. in Orat. fu.
S. Ambrose praises Valentinian for the same.

3 Now where is the opinion of those men, who thought themselves freed from
obedience by a vain surmise of Christian liberty: surely it is so slender, as
almost Sleyd. in com. de Anabapt.
it is not worth the refuting, the misunderstanding of some Scriptures, which
they have hammered in the forge of their weak brains, have caused them to
roue and range into humors, forth are they wont, to be stricken with a spirit of
giddines that would be singular and above others.

Princes of the Nations bear rule, amongst you it shall not be Lu. 22. 26.
so. What a far set consequent is this, and a silly reasoning, The Apostles
must not have a tyrannical authority one over another, as Nero, Caligula, and
such tyrants had, therefore Christian people should not live in obedience to
superiors? We are freed from the law, therefore called to Christian liberty,
but subjection takes away liberty? If free, then where is restraint? S. Peter
tells us that ignorant men pervert scriptures, the answer 2. Pe. 3. 16.
is plain: Christian liberty freeeth us from the bondage of the law, and the
servitude of sin, but most fitly agrees with obedience to rulers, and in
rulers to God himself, who says: By me Princes reign. The Apostle tells 2.
Ti. 3. 4.
us that in the latter days, Men shall be lovers of themselves, disobedient,
headie, high minded, having a show of godliness, and from such, he says,
Turn away. Saint Jude also says, These are Iud. 16. 17
murmurers and complainers, walking after their own lusts, but edify your
selves, says he, in your most holy faith.

4 The first precept is, Pear God: the second, Honor the King: as if the
wiseman would say, both go together. To show that we must homage our hearts to
our heavenly Father: It is so manifest as none cannot but know it, yet seeing
we live in that calamity of times, wherein men forget almost whose creatures
they are, we had need to be put in mind of this duty which we owe unto the king
of kings: Faith says, he is our Father; obedience says, Ergo worship him. Our
allegiance toward him is devotion and love, and nature has taught us to
acknowledge as much. The light which is borne with us does show us, we have a
duty to perform to the God of heaven. The greatest Emperors of this world are
his subjects, they have Dan. 7. 10
God over them, and men beholding what they do. Ask the poor and naked
Indians, they will tell us that religion is no matter of policy, and that
there is another magistrate then the magistrate of this world, to whom in
nature they yield obedience.

We are all Gods creatures by existence, his Clyents by law, his children by
adoption, his people by obedience. Thousand thousands serve him in glory, who
knows as verity, sits as majesty, loves as charity, and rules as equity.
Heathen Philosophers can tell us, it is ingrafted in man to pray, to offer
sacrifice: If we are distressed, we seek unto God: if we have want, we
crave succor of him: the submission therefore of our souls is the tribute we
should give, while the soul is the soul.

5 Now as we show our obedience to God, so ought we show obedience also to
those who have a subordinate power, and are set over us by God: it is not thee,
said the Lord to Samuel, but it is 1. Sam. 8, 7
me whom this people have refused. It is not so much the ruler set over them by
God as God himself, whom disobedient people refuse to obey: he that resists
the power, says the Apostle, resists the ordinance of God: Ro^. 13. 3 7.
because there is no power but of God. For the co^firmatio^ of this, we find
that God has punished from time to time murmurers and mutinous people, as by
that of Dathan, Corah, and Abiram, whom Numb. 16 32.
he made an example for others: and the Apostle S. Paul has reference to
this, when he says, Neither murmr you as some of them murmured, and were
destroyed 1. Cor. 10. 10. 11.
of the destroyer. These came upon them for an example. Wish no evil in thine
heart unto the ruler of the people, for the bird of the air shall disclose it:
Should we not honor them whom God has honored? And love them whom God has
loved? Do we not sit down under their government as under a shadow, keeping us
from the heat, and storms, when we are defended from invasion abroad, and
oppression at home?

When the Queen of the South came from far to hear the wisdom of Solomon,
beholding his princely order, and magnificent state, she had heard much, but
saw more: what does she, but by and by begin to magnify the Author of Salomons
estate? O blessed be the Lord thy 2. Chron. 9. 8.
God (says she) which loved thee, to set thee on the throne as King in stead
of the Lord thy God: because thy God loves Israel for ever, to m^ke thee King
to do equity and righteousness. As if she would have said: O Solomon, such a
state, such a government, such a peace, such a time, such a temple, such
wisdom, it is not of man, nor from man, Blessed be the Lord thy God which
loved thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel.

7 Affectionate were the hearts of the people to David their king, whom God had
set over them, what should David adventure himself? O no, better it were 1*
Sa. 18. 3
that many miscarie, yea, ten thousand, say the people (as it were with
tears of thankfulness:) God save our David, for i^ David go, the light of
Israel is extinguished: they would not the least hurt should befall him, who
was the stay of them all, and therefore as humble suitors seemed to beg his
preservation at the hands of God. Those of Be^hulia said to Judith; thou art
the rejoicing of our Iud. 14.
Nation, good Judith, thou have done much good in Israel, blessed be thou of
God.

The Apostle wills that prayers 1. Tim. 2.
and supplications and giving of thanks be made for all, for Kings and all that
are in authority, that we may live a peaceable life under them, in all
godliness and honesty. Great cause had the men of Israel to beseech God,
that Josias might continue with them: for if he were taken away, it was
because he should not see the evil to come. O, says the Prophet, save and
deliver David from the Psa. 144. 10.
hand of strange children, that there be no leading into captivity, nor no
complaining in our streets.

And thus should we add unto obedience love: to love prayer, for whom God
amongst men has set in commission with himself, to rule for him: His debetur
(says Tertullian) honor, propter Tertul. ad Scap.
excellentia^: timor, propter data^ potestatem: obedientia, propter morale
debitum: amor propter affectionis operatione^: To these honor is due, for
their excellency: fear, for their power given them: obedience for civil
duty: tribute for the preservation of peace: love for affection, which
brings forth prayer and piety: so what should Christians of all other in the
world, but honor them whom God has placed in his own room for the
establishing of his own laws, and worship here beneath amongst men, and
specially appointed over his Church, which is the company of Christian people,
for the quiet, and conservation thereof, according to that of the Prophet
spoken ^ong before, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Esa. 49.
23
nursing Mothers.

Chap. 21.
That Christians may lawfully enjoy earthly commodities, and possess riches:
but how should they be affected toward them.
MAn, who consists of two parts, the one earthly, the other heavenly, has
answerable hereunto means allotted him of God for the preservation of either:
and therefore first temporal things for the state being, and in good tune
eternal, for the time to come. Before God created man he first made him
provision: and God said, Adam have dominion over the fish of the Sea, the
fowls of the air, and every thing that moves upon the earth: and again,
Adam, I have given thee every herb bearing seed, and Genesis 1. 28. 29.
every tree in which is fruit: and so every thing serves Adam, and Adam is
only to serve God. Abraham's servant said, God Ge. 24. 35.
has blessed our Master Abraham meruailously, he has given him Sheep and
Oxen, silver and gold, men servants and maid servants. Jacob (speaking of his
two bands or great herds of sheep, and Cammels that went before him) says,
With my Ge^. 32. 10.
staff, (or without any provision at all, a poor lone man as it were) came I
over this Jordan: Lord I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies. As if Jacob
should have said, these Kine and Bullockes, these Asses and Foales, all this
substance round about me, They are the mercies of God, and so come from the
great storehouse of heaven.

There was a man in the land of Uz, called Job, an upright and just man, and
one that feared God and eschewed evil, says the holy Scripture: The next
thing mentioned of Job is, his substance Job. 1. (...).
was very great, yea, he was the greatest of all the men of the East, he was
withal just, upright, and one that feared God; he did not forget God, when he
should most have remembered him, that is, when he was blessed and prospered by
him: but as he abounded in riches amongst men, so did he also increase or
abound in devotion toward God, who^ he feared: Job did sacrifice every day:
Here was right possessing of earthly substance, rich and godly together, rich
in godly actions: this was a rich man indeed, when both met together. If
riches increase, there is the increase of riches, which are given from God
himself: Set not thy Psalm.
heart upon them, there is the use of riches, and with what prouiso we do
enjoy them.

2 To call in question whither Gods people may possess earthly commodities, is
an invention more strange then true: he which would have every Trybe a part
allotted for an inheritance, for them and theirs amongst his people, did entend
no other, but that they should successively have an inheritance to possess:
Ios 14 1. 2
and why? he has given the earth and earthly things unto the sons of men.
The laws of nature and Nations tell us, that amongst men there must be meum
and tuum: mine and thine: and the Gospel does well accord with this as
requisite amongst Christians, Accipe quod tuum Mat. 25. 14.
est, take that which is thine, or that which God has allotted thee out, and
given thee to enjoy: The Apostles say, where shall we buy, so there was
possessed wherewithal to buy. It was a mere irreligious, rapinous, and
scoffing devise of Julian, to spoil and pray upon both the goods of the
Church, and people of God, after this manner, If thou will be perfect, leave
all that thou have: only Nazi. Orat. contr. Iulia Mat. 19. 21.
seek treasure in heaven, this is fittest for men of your profession, who have
renounced the world. The like said Foelix that was a great agent under the
before named Theodoretus lib. 3. cap. 11. 12.
Julian, beholding the munificence, and ornaments of the Church, with what
sumptuous vessels is the son of Marie ministered unto? in short time this
unhappy Foelix did come to wretched end. The like said Auxentius, when he
would have the Church and Church possessions to wast and consume them as he
list: but S. Androse tells him, if Naboth would not leave his Fathers
inheritance, should I (quoth he) leave Christ's inheritance?

These be but shifts pretended, when the greatest persecutors of Christians
could formally tell them, Their God was no gatherer of money, or possessor of
riches, and that their account should not be for things transitory: wherefore
they did them good, in vnburdening them of these troublesome possessions, and
as for greater revenues down with them, down with them even to the ground.

3 There was no fitter way (as these men thought) of ruinating Christ's
religion, then by taking away those means whereby the exercise of Religion was
continued; and surely it was so, for soon would the public practice of
religion decay, were there not some means by temporal commodities for the
continuance thereof. To this end therefore endowments were first allotted out by
God to the the of Leui, and Ios. 13. 14
since has he stirred up good men, to show great bountifulnes this way.

The people never thought it a burden to bring unto the tabernacle, Ex. 36. 5.
and the well disposed have been glad they had somewhat to dispose for the
setting forth of the service of God; accounting it a mercy of God, they had the
honor to do good.

For the use therefore and exercise of Christ's Religion, we see in the first
place, not only how lawfully, but how religiously these temporal and earthly
possessions may be enjoyed, and that the Church may use lawfully those
benefits wherewith God has blessed her.

For the state of Christians in general, both the hungry conceit of those (of
whom Epiphanius Epiph. haer. 61.
makes mention in former times) and the running fancy of the Anabaptists of
latter time, who would bring in a mingle mangle, partly consisting of a
platonicall community, and affected poverty, is most dissonant from the state
and government of Christians, who should rather be helpful then chargeable to
others, and by works of devotion, hospitality, and such like honor God.

Pharao cries upon the Israelites Ex. 5, 10. 11.
to have them make their stint and number of brick, and yet takes away that
which might yield them means to accomplish their work: Christians must feed
Christ in the hungry, cloth him in the naked, harbor him in the
harbourlesse, let these men show how this should be done, if earthly riches be
not possessed? but riches (say they) are the Mammon of iniquity, Luke 16. 9.
and the possession of them is the root of evil. True, some men have hurt
themselves with weapons, not using them as they ought, as these do in
misapplying of holy Scriptures, therefore take away the use of both generally
from all? This is a far fet inference, and from the rule of common reason.
That riches are called the riches of iniquity, it is not so said, as if they
were in themselves so, but the default is, that oftentimes they become so by
the fault of those that possess them. It is not (...), the matter of money,
but it is, (...), that same love of money, that is, the root of evil. Satan
soonest prevailed with Judas that bare the bag, yea that loved the bag. This
was the cause of that our Savior spoke: How hard it is for rich men to enter
into the kingdom of heaven, because rich men for the most part are so carried
away with the love of riches: so that they oftentimes forget and forgo the
love of God for a little dross and baggage of the worth. This was the cause
that made the young man in the Gospel sorrowful, every word of our Savior
Mat. 19. 16.
was a sword that did pearce his heart, Go, and therefore make no delay: sell,
and therefore depart from hence out of hand; All that thou have, and therefore
thy whole substance: Give, and therefore freely bestow: unto the poor, and
therefore to them that cannot recompense thee again. The text says, He was
rich and went away sorrowful: and surely so it is, that rich men in these
cases are much sorrowful.

Christ our Savior likeneth Mat. 13. 22.
riches to thorns, and if riches be in covetous men's hearts, no marvel
though they have many sorrows, for the nature of thorns is, they are
pricking, and choking, and they grow thick.

4 Now though riches sometimes, and to some men are the occasion of evil,
(when we seek them to follow vanities, and live without controlement) it does
not therefore follow, that they are so generally unto all. True it is, that we
should not trust in such uncertain riches, nor stay our selves upon these
inferior and transitory things, but mind a state of all continuance to come:
yet this renouncing of the world in affection and love, does not enjoin an
utter contempt of all earthly benefits, which we may use to the good of our
selves and others, and yet sometimes forsake for the love of heavenly things.

When Christ our Savior said, Fear not them which can kill the body, he does
not exclude all reverence and fear to be given unto such, but the meaning is,
do not so fear them, as you neglect to fear him, which has power to kill
both body and soul. When he says, Labor not for the meat that perishes,
John 6. 27.
but labor for the meat which perishes not: He does not th^eby dehort us
from laboring for the meat which perishes, but this is spoken per modum
comparationis, by way of comparison, that is, do not so labor for the meat
that perishes, that you neglect to labor for the meat that perishes not: So
when he says: First seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness Mat.
6. 33.
thereof: It is not contradictorie to that of the Apostle: Provide before hand
things necessary: 2. Cor. 8. 2.
Provide for things necessary, has his time: so that our Saviors, Primum
quaerite regnum Dei, be first remembered: First seek the Kingdom of Heaven,
and the righteousness thereof. It was not said in solicitudine, in carefulnes,
but in labor, that is, in labor, thou shall eat thy bread: nay, it is not so
much the care, as the inordinate care of earthly things, which the Greek text
has, (...), that is there dehorted. The care for the life present and things
necessary thereunto, is in the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. 38
commended, but in the Evangelist the care of heavenly things is preferred: he
that provides before hand for things of this life, as he that gives his
virgin into marriage, does well: but he that provides for things
appertayning to the life to come, as he that gives not his Uirgine, does
better: The desires of things necessary for our aboade here are many, but
the desire of and for our heavenly being is more commendable: Rachell was the
fairer, though Lea was the fruitfuller, Ge^. 29. 17.
our only care to possess heaven and heavenly things, is like Marthas part,
which Christ said, should never be taken from Lu. 10. 41.
her.

5 This notwithstanding, a sufficiency for the maintenance of life, the
lawful use of worldly goods and possessions may be continued, so we use them
as Mariners do their oars, to help them along till they come to the Haven, or
as Wayfaring men do their staves, which willingly they lay aside when their
journey is done, the scope is, that we be indifferent unto riches, and think
of them in Christianity, as the Philosopher himself did concerning the state
of felicity: Si Arist. Eth. lib. 1.
adsunt, ornant; si absunt, non tollunt. If we have them, they help us; if not,
they do not undo us: because Christians can be rich with a little, and
content howsoever, having learned with the Apostle both to abound and to 1.
(...). 6. (...).
went; knowing that they brought nothing into this world, neither shall they
carry any thing out.

Think, and think again, Epist. ad Iulia. 11. 1.
(says S. Austen) That we Christians are not borne for this world, or to
enjoy the riches of the same: but we look for farther and better riches to be
received and possessed in the world to come.

6 It is the insatiable desire of riches which is so often reprehended: take
heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be Luke 21.
oppressed with the cares of this life, and that day come upon you unawares.
The Eagle died not so much of age, as of hunger: of all vices none does more
wax old with us then covetousness, what should we be so earnest upon the world,
which we must shortly leave? how should we use the commodities thereof, but
as the Egyptians did their bondmen for use only, evermore looking of greater
riches else where? When Judas Macabaeus saw his men ouergreedy of a little
gain, and thereupon to begin to desist from the battle they had in hand,
Judas wills them to follow on 1. Match 4. 17.
the pursuit of the enemy now flying; for, quoth he, in the end you shall
safely take the spoils, or at last you shall have riches enough: Let us not
stay upon these transitory things too long, forgetting the present occasion we
have in hand, but let us go^ forward in the course of Christian profession we
have undertaken, there will come a time when we shall take the spoil, and have
treasure to the uttermost of our desires.

7 The touchstone is said to try gold, and gold is said to try men: if one
should have offered Alexander the great a commodity to the value of twenty
pound, and showed him the mean and manner how to gain it; Alexander would
scarce have harkned, or given ear to such a motion, because his mind was up
pon gaining kingdoms and Empires. In like manner tell a heavenly minded man of
compassing great possessions, and laying up much treasure, he will not much
respect the discoursing of these matters, for why? he minds the getting of
greater matters, or the laying up of treasure in heaven: and after this manner
did Abraham and Jacob, and many others possess riches, having their minds ever
set upon better riches to come.

And here is the manner, how Christian men may enjoy riches, and hold earthly
possessions, Si nihil amando possidetis (says Gregory) etiam possidendo
relinquitis: If you do not love them as you possess them, you do leave them
in possessing them, Relinquere possumus etiam retinendo: We may leave them
even when we possess them. The reason is, we do not love them, or set our
hearts upon them, we rest content with that God has bestowed upon us, and for
that insatiable desire of game in the name of God let it go. A misery is it
under the Sun, men live poor, that they may die rich, and make no end of
gathering (they know not themselves for whom) so they may leave rich Executors,
but they respect not the state of their needy souls, there are riches that no
shipwreck can take from us.

Chap. 22.
How Christ exhorts to forsake Father and Mother, and all for his sake.
WHen we hear by that of Simeon, that Christ our Savior Was Luke 2, 32. John,
1. 17. 1. Cor. 1. 30.
the light of the Gentiles, That by him came grace and truth, that he is our
righteousness, we rea^ily harken unto all this, and can find in our hearts to
believe it, and we do well in so doing: but when we hear on the other side,
that in following Mar. 8. 34 Lu. 14. 26. John. 6. 60
of him we must take up our cross, deny our selves, leave father and mother,
and all for his sake we draw backward, and begin to say with the men of
Capernaum: Durus est hic sermo, This is a hard saying, and who is to endure it?
We persuade our selves we love Christ, and think we have discharged this love
in a little believing in him: No, it is not so: if we did love Christ indeed,
then would we forsake all strange love for his sake. When Ge. 29. 27.
Jacob loved Rachael, he left his kindred and Country. If we love Christ
indeed, then where are the properties of true love, in forsaking all for his
sake, and giving him ^ur hearts?

2 All creatures (say the Philosophers) desire their center, and do no where
rest but in their proper spheres; the spark of fire tends upward, the floods
and all waters have many turnings, and windinges, but they never cease until
they come into the Sea, that common receptacle of all waters: the soul of man
has her center, which is God: she never rests until she be there, and
when she is there, she would not be removed, Fecisti nos domine propter te,
and inquietum est Aug. medi.
cor nostrum donec perueniat ad te: Lord thou have made us for thy self, and
our heart is unquiet until it be with thee: we need not marvel to see men,
which are addicted to the love of the world or the flesh, or any thing (except
God) how they are often troubled and vexed, how they are weak, weary, and
full of discontent: the reason is, they are not in their proper sphere, which
is in the love of God. It is said, that when Christ came into Egypt at his
flying from Herod, that all the Idols there fell down: and sure it is, that when
the love of Christ does come into our hearts, all the Idol desires of the
world, and the flesh will fall to nothing: No man can serve two Mat. 6. 24
masters, that is, at one time two masters, commanding contrary things, so
does the love of Christ, and the love of the world. Wherefore let us leave the
one, and cleave unto the other: least leaning unto the one, we forsake the
other, and our selves be forsaken of him.

3 And should we not forsake all the world, for Christ's sake? Should we not
leave chafe for gold? Puddle water, for the fountain of life? Straw and
stubble for precious stones: nay, vile earth, for the heaven it self? when
Elizeus followed Elias his master, he left his Oxen plowing, 1. King. 11 20.
as if he had now a better husbandry in hand. When Christ called his Apostles,
they left their fishing (and yet continued a Ma^h. 19. 27.
trade of fishing still, for now they should be fishers of men) they followed
him. Peter says, Domine, reliquimus omnia: Lord, we have left all: what was
this Al, but some old Boat, and a few rotten torn nets, for these were now in
the mending? Was this that all? yea, and Peter left more too at this time then
Alexander the great could desire: for Peter left the love of the world for the
love of Christ, which was more, and of more worth, then many worlds. The
Apostles indeed, says Saint Austen, left not much, but yet look what they
were willing to ^eaue for the love of Christ, and we shall find it more then
many kingdoms. By this example of the Apostles, we learn to forsake three
things, for the love of Christ: by their Nets, the pleasures of the flesh,
which are wont to take men and snare them: by the ship, the riches of the world
which does carry us away from the haven of true rest: by their father and
mother, those things that are nearest and dearest to us in the world: all
these must we leave for the love of Christ.

4 There is a nearer conjunction between Christ and the faithful, then there
is with father and mother: of them we have Esse naturae, a being in nature:
but of Christ, Esse gratiae, a being in grace: of them our being, of Christ our
well being. To honor Ex. 20. 1. 2
father and mother is the fist commandment, but to honor God is the first
commandment of the law: to show, that to honor God is above all. It is
said, Man shall leave father and mother, Mar. 10. 7
and live with his wife: but he must leave father, and mother, and wife, and
all to dwell in love with Jesus Christ. S Jerome says, if my father stood
weeping on his knees before me, and my mother were behind me, pulling me
back; I^ all my b^hren, sisters, k^folkes, and children on every side were
about to (...) ^e in a sinfu^ life, I would despise them all, fling o^ my
mother, run over my Father, to go to Christ, who calls me.

Whosoever hates not his Father for my sake: a strange speech (...) 14. 26.
to hear charity it self speak of hate, and much more to exhort it: but
consider how it is spoken not literally or simply to hate (for how could he
speak so, that so much honored his Father and ^k. 2. 51.
mother, and gave a law for the performance of this duty of love?) but if
Father and mother will be loved more then Christ, or draw us from his love,
then (as God Genesis 12. 1.
said unto Abraham, get thee from thy own Country and kindred) so get thee in
this case from Father and mother, yea, go a step farther, and animam tuam, a
Gods name forsake thy own life; forsake Lu. 14. 27.
all rather then forsake the love of Christ: O take not away Benjamin says
Jacob, for if Benjamin be gone, the joy of Israel Ge. 42. 38.
is gone: O leave not the love of Jesus Christ, for if that forsake us, all the
world cannot comfort us. In the eight of S. Mathewes Gospel, one excuses
himself for not following Christ, saying, Master, suffer me to bury my
Father, he had a love to Christ, marie regard of his father stays him from
the performance of any duty, but our Lord admits no excuse of carnal affection
when he calls: the father, says S. Austen, is to be honored, but evermore God
is to be preferred, the father in earth should have honor, but the Father in
heaven more.

5 One compares the state of a distressed man unto that steward Luke 16. 3.
Damasc.
in the Gospel, who was called by his master suddenly to give an account of
great substance committed to his charge: this man not able in the world to make
any account, being afraid (his dealings had bin so slender) to look his master
in ye face, in this distressed condition he knows not what to do, he must
give an account, a great account, and a great account suddenly, at last he be
thinks himself of three friends he had, and he resolves in this necessity to
make trial of them, what they would do for him. He comes unto the ^rst of
these friends, opening his grief: this friend tells him that he could find in
his heart to do him good, but he had so many to pleasure, that he must n^des
be pardoned for this t^me, and so leaves him. This done, he comes unto his
second friend, and shows him as unto the first his miserable estate, prays
him to speak a good word for him: surely, says he, I would speak for thee,
but to tell thee a plain truth, when I come before thy M. I shall rather speak
against thee then for thee: now was this distressed man more sorrowful then
ever, he has one only friend which he had often iniuried, and therefore was
ashamed to go unto him, yet at last he comes and makes his moan unto him:
This friend had no sooner heard the case of this miserable distressed man, but
forthwith he goes and makethfull satisfa^tion, and account in his own person
for all the debt.

The first of these three friends is the world, which has so many to
pleasure, as the distressed sinner finds little comfort, if at any time he
crave help of it. The second friend is the law of God, which will rather
speak against him then for him. The t^ird is our Lord Jesus, the surest friend
of all, whose love is more dear unto us then heart can conceive; this is the
friend that will stand by us, when all fail us, and should we not therefore
forsake all for his sake? Should we with De^as follow the world, because it 2.
Ti. 4. 10
has a litt^e more pleasure then Paul? No, S. Paul's crown of glory will make
amends for all.

6 What should possess our hearts wholly, rather then the love of Christ? The
soul is as an house possessed of a tenant which is the love of God, that when
the desire of earthly things does come, there is no room, the house is taken
up before. Way faring men, when they see the I^ne fu^, they pass along:
Wandering desires, when they see our hearts full of the love of God, away they
go.

In the Gospel by S. Luke, a certain m^n says unto our Savior, Lord, I will
follow thee: Christ tells him that the Foxes had holes, the birds had
nests, but the Son of man had Luke 9. 58.
not where to hide his head. In effect if thou will follow me for pro^s sake,
and a little comm^dity here, thou art not fit to be one of my Disciples: for
if thou do follow me, it must be for loves sake, and this love for my sake,
must make thee forsake all: Non Gre. in ill. 1. Sam. 7.
attenditur quantum relinquitur, sed qua voluntate: It is not so much regarded
how much we leave, as with what will we leave all things in the world.

7 We read that so^ heathen Philosophers have left all earthly cares for the
love of learning: but much ^ore ^uld we do it in following Christ, because
too many cares of this world do much trouble us, as much serving did Martha.

Chap. 23.
Of Christ's many miracles, and what we learn by them.
THat we might learn to know him to be the true Messiah, which was sent into
the world, Christ confirmed his heavenly doctrine by many heavenly deeds, that
those whom his teaching could not move, at least his d^uine working might
compel. The people were content to hear his sermons, so they might see his
miracles, and Christ was content they should see his miracles, so they would
hear his Sermons. If I do not the works of my Father (s^yeth Ioh. 10. 38.
he) believe me not; If I do them, though ye believe not me, yet believe me
for my works sake. The works, which I do testify of me. By which we may
gather, whereunto tended the miracles of the son of God. These things are
written that ye might believe.

Let wavering minds but consider a little his admirable works in the world:
was it known from the beginning, yea, John, 9. 32
since the world began it was not heard, that ever any man opened the eyes of
one that was borne blind? Nichodemus says Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher John. 32.
come from God, for no man could do these myr^cles that thou do, except God
were with him: nay that which is more, Nichodemus, none could do them except
God were in him, and he in God.

To manifest that he had power in earth to forgive sins, he says unto the
sick of the Palsy, no more but this, fi^, d^mittuntur peccat^ tua, Son,
calling a poor miserable man son, and bidding him to be of good comfort. To
confirm that he was the bread of life, he feeds a great multitude with five
barley John. 6. 9. Mat. 8. 26. Lu. 18. 43.
loaves and two fishes, to show that he had authority over Sea and land, he
commands the waters, and they obey him. To make his power known over the power
of darkness, he charge soul spirits, who had taken up their dens in many
distressed creatures, to come out, and they beseech him not to cast them into
the deep. To declare plainly that he was the resurrection from the dead: he
raised Lazarus, who had laye^ four days in his Ioh. 11. 43 Ex. 7. 22.
grave. The Magitians of Egypt did some wonders before Pharaoh, but they came
not near to Moses doings, for they were but slender illusions: yet Moses
miracles ca^e far behind these of our Savior, they were so many, they were
so wonderful, as none but God could effect them.

2 And this order did our Savior Christ observe, that from the power of his
doctrine he proceeded to show miracles, that if his words could not prevail,
yet his works might. By which works it was evident how willing he was to
heal our infirmities, and how able to help all that still call upon him to
this end, therefore in the first place serve his miracles to show his power,
that he was God, and that there is no disease so desperate, which he by his
only word cannot cure: and in the second place, his goodness, that there is
none so miserable whom he will exclude, who excludes none.

Iosaphat the King, when he was at a great strait, and knew not what to do,
at last he resolved upon this: Ask counsel 1. King. 22. 5.
of the Lord, I pray thee, as if he should say, I will go seek help of God:
when we know not what to do, or which way to turn us for help, we may
resolve upon this, we will go to Christ, he was merciful on earth, and
showed many miracles in helping all that came unto him, and he is the same
still, sitting at the right hand of God in heaven.

3 But now observe we the manner of his working myr^cles, at one time he
speaks the word only, at another, he touches the diseased, sometimes Mat.
8. 13. Mat. 9. 24 Mar. 7. 36
he cures in presence, at another time being far absent. In some he is
lifting up his eyes to heaven, in others he prays openly, all which want not
a mystery, and appertain as well to the instruction of our faith, as the
direction of our life, and are as part of the Gospel, because they show unto
us good and joyful things. When the Prophets wrought miracles, they were
always praying: but we hear Christ commanding, 2. Ki. 4. 35. 1. Ki. 17. 2
and speaking the word only, and it is done. He commands the winds,
and the Seas, he charge diseases to cease, and devils to depart. Unto the
Leaper he says, I will, be thou clean. Unto the man John. 5. 1.
that lay by the poole Bethesda, Take up thy bed and walk: Unto the widows
son, Young man arise: And we may observe by the way that unto whom he gave
remedy, he often times enjoined a duty.

The Church story does mention Eus lib. 1. cap. 14.
a certain Letter written by one Agbarus an Edissean unto our Savior Christ,
the form whereof was this: Agbarus the Edissean to Jesus the good Savior in
the Country of Jury. etc. It is showed unto me, that thou and thy Disciples
do give health to mortal men without herbs, or medicines: for as the fame
goes of thee, thou do bring to pass that the blind see, the lame walk, the
Leapers are cleansed, that thou do cast out foul spirits, and even raysest
some dead amongst the people, these things when I heard them of thee, I began
to conceive this, to wit, that either thou were God, or at the least the Son
of God, come down from Heaven. In this we see that the miracles of our Savior
made the world to stand amazed at him, and the faithful to believe on him.

4 In the second of S. John, when Christ had turned water into wine (for that
was his first miracle) who did turn sorrow into joy, the law into grace, the
Evangelist says, he began to show forth his glory, and his Disciples John. 2.
11.
believed on him: for his miracles, they saw them and believed on him, we
hear them and believe on him: Blessed are they that believe, and have not
seen. Ioh. 20. 29.
And what else does the daily hearing of his divine miracles, but daily
increase in us faith more and more:

The Jews reasoned within themselves, If this man were a sinner, he could not
do these Ioh. 15. 24.
things. And Christ himself says, for the remoouing of their incredulity:
If I had not done the works which no other had done, they should have had no
sin, but now they have no excuse.

Some will say, holy men of old wrought miracles, at the prayer of Iosuah, the
Sun stood still. Ios. 10. 11. 2. King. 2. 4. 35. 1. King. 1. 17. 22.
Elias, and Elizeus did many great and wonderful works. It is so indeed,
says S. Austen, but if you mark the manner, these were far inferior to
Christ's miracles: These wrought by prayer, Christ by his own power: they as
holy men, he by authority as God: they when they raised one from the dead did
no more, Christ did many, and of all sorts. It was but Lu. 18. 34
his word, and his deed, unto the blind man, Receive thy sight.

5 Compare we a little Christ's miracles, with the testimonies of the Prophets
long before his coming: he has given medicine to heal our infirmities,
says Esai. The eyes of the blind, the ears of the deaf are opened, Esa. 35.
55. 56. Dan. 12.
the lame shall leap as a Heart, the dead men shall live, then shall he preach
the acceptable year, all which accord with his miracles in the Gospel.

Our Savior vpbraydeth the Cities of Bethsaida, and Chorazin, wherein he
wrought many miracles, which were so perspicuous testimonies of his Dettie,
that if they had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would Mat. 10. 20. 21.
have repented sitting in sackcloth and ashes. Why did the Pharisees so much
envy him, but for his glorious works, for which they should have loved him?
never did they pursue him Ioh. 11. 48. Lu. 23. 35.
more eagerly, then when he had now lately raised Lazarus from the dead.
Those who scorned him upon the Cross, could out of their own mouths judge
themselves, He saved others.

6 For those miracles of our Savior they ceased not in him, either alive or
dead. See what his power did: He was crowned with thorns, and now Kings and
Emperors do cast down their Crowns at his feet. What a death was that
which did such things which all the living could not do, by weakness he
overcame power?

Twelve Fishermen in short time subdue the world unto him, by suffering and
teaching men to suffer, by dying, and teaching men to die, he wrought miracles
in himself, and (as he before promised) he wrought by his power miracles in
his Apostles, he cured a woman that touched the hemme of his vesture, and Peter
Mat. 9. 21. Act. 5. 15.
cured diverse by his very shadow: Verily I say unto you, he that believes in
me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater then these shall he
do. Ioh. 14. 20
Whence we see what was done in believing on his name. The Primitive Church
had many miracles, trees newly planted are wont to require watering, The. in
Epist. 10.
but having once taken roole, that labor cease. We rejoice, (says Thomas
Aquinas) that we are past the beginnings, not to require signs again: Now
the faith of Jesus Christ is established in our hearts, dumb and deaf flesh
is not opened, but the dumb and deaf heart, by the operation of his word:
neither is Christ still without miracles, for he cured visibly and inuisibly
the blindness of the body, and the blindness of the understanding: he raised
three from the dead, and so does he still three sorts of dead sinners: The
first was the Rulers daughter, whom he raised, Aust.
putting forth the multitude in the presence only of her Parents: these are
those whom he rayseth from secret sins, known only to God and themselves.

The second was the widows Son, which was now carrying Mat. 9. 24 Luke 1.
14. Ioh. 11. 39
forth of the City, and Christ met him by the way, and raised him: these are
those who are going on in an evil course to the pit of destruction, but Christ
happily meets them, preventing them with his grace: being delivered to their
mother the Church, they become new men, and so live.

The third was Lazarus, who had been four days dead, and Christ comes and
weepeth, groneth, and calls at the Sepulcher: Lazarus come forth. These are
those that have layen long in their sins, and begin to savor, for these
Christ groneth and weepeth, and these he calls by his grace at their dead
hearts, ready to restore them to life, and at last they revive, and when
Christ rayseth these, he works a miracle indeed, and yet blessed be his name,
for he often works this miracle. In the time of Elias the child neeled
seven times that was raised from death, they leave seven capital sins that
Christ thus rayseth to life. In the Gospel by Saint Matthew, the woman of Canaan
says unto him, my daughter is distressed; but we say unto him. Son of
David, thy daughter our redeemed soul is distressed. In the Gospel by Saint
Mark, Christ said unto one that lay languishing, Take up thy bed and walk:
this does he say to many, the bed may resemble the body, wherein we lie
languishing while we do serve the desires of sin; we walk; when we serve
him in newness of life; we go to our own house, when we prepare our selves
toward heaven.

7 By six works of mercy, Christ wrought miracles ^an: the body, and by
those s^e also does he work miracles upon the soul, blindness is
ignorance and error, ^menesse is infirmity and way^rdnesse of the will,
Leprosy is concupiscence of the flesh, ^eafenesse, is obduration of the
heart, the separation of grace from the soul, is death: pou^tie is the defect
or want of the knowledge of God, the poor receive the Gospel. Some are blind
by ignorance, these he ^inateth by the light of faith: some are same by
unperfection, these he enableth by the strength of hope: some are Lea^ers by
contagion of sin, these, he cleanses by the merits of his death: some are
hardened by the obduration of heart, these he wakeneth by the calling of his
word, some are dead by reason of sinful life, these he raises in the inward
man to a spiritual life, some are needle and destitute of help, these he
adorneth and cloatheth with grace.

Christ (as was before showed) reproves those Cities for their unbelief,
wherein his miracles were done, by a woe: woe be unto thee Chorazin, woe be
unto thee Bethsaida, by Chorazin may be understood the state of rich men, by
Capernaum, of carnal Mat. 10. 20, 21.
men, by Bethsaida, the wise men of the world: some of these miracles does
Christ work in Bethsaida, in Chorazin, in Caparnaum, these should have
believed, but did not, these ought to believe, but do not: The men of the old
world were overwhelmed in the flood for their sins, when they had no other
law, nature was a law unto them: and of the Heathen, the Apostle says, that
the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and godhead Romans 1. 20
are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the
intent they should be without excuse, because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God. But what should we speak of miracles? if we open
our eyes and look abroad into the world, there we see them: If we enter into a
consideration of our selves, there we find them. The Jews required a sign
of Christ, when Mat. 12. 38.
they saw nothing but signs from him. Paulus Sergius in the Acts saw but one
miracle of Paul the Act. 13. 12
Apostle wrought upon another, and by and by he received. Paul's preaching. We
see not one, but many miracles wrought not on Mat. 10. 21.
others, but upon our selves. Christ began to vpbraid the Cities wherein his
miracles were (...), Incepit, he beg^n, as if he does still the same: but to
the use.

8. A diligent consideration of Christ's miracles does offer up unto our
religious thoughts many things worthy of observation, as first, they move to
give praise and glory unto God: so Exo. 15. 1.
did the Israelites when they saw themselves delivered by a miracle in the red
Sea: so did the people in the Gospel, when with astonishment they cried out;
We never saw it on this fashion: he has done all things Mar. 7. 37
well, he has made the blind to see, and the lame to go. When tenacitie is
brought to be liberal, then a withered hand is restored: when the means of
believing is given, the blind and Chrys^om. 41. in Ma. L^. 15. 31.
the dumb in soul are cured: when a sinner is brought from going astray, and
now called from an evil custom of life, then the deaf hear: when a sinner
is converted, one dead is raised: and for these miracles we give glory unto
God. Secondarily, they reach us to have recourse unto him in all time of
necessity: for when we see him full of pity and compassion, we learn not
to despair, but to trust in him: when we see he canforde whole multitudes in
the Desert, where otherwise there was little hope of succor, we learn how
powerful and how pitiful he is to relieve. Thirdly, these and the
consideration of them may serve as an invincible truth, for the confirmation of
our faith. The Centurion said: Surely this was the Son of Mat. 27. 54.
God.

Chap. 24.
Of Christ's most divine wisdom in answering his adversaries, and all that
came unto him, and what we learn thereby.
TO come in order from his doings to his sayings, for he began to Luke 2. 48.
Mat. 7, 28 John. 7. ^6.
do and teach in these, such was the divine wisdom of the Son of God, that
it moved all that heard him to admiration, for why, he always spoke to the
heart of man. When he was disputing in the temple, the Doctors were astonished
at his understanding, when he exhorted the multitude, the people were amazed at
his doctrine, when some should have apprehended him, they say, never man spoke
as this man speaks. And now Mat. 12. 42.
behold a greater then Solomon.

In the two and twentieth Chapter of Saint Mathewes Mat. 22. 16.
Gospel, the Herodians sent by the Pharisees, thinking men unknown unto him,
might sooner intray him, and that he would not so much beware of these as of
themselves, being men known unto him. These Herodians come with a question of
tribute, Master, thou teach the way of God truly, neither carest thou for
any man, how say thou, is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar? They call
him master when they mean nothing less then to be instructed by him: they
praise him, says Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Mat. hom.
^en their intent is to entrap (...), as flatterers are w^nt when they ^uld
br^e men ^hither they (...). We know (as if they ^ld say) thy ^eritie is
such, t^ sp^est none, no not Caesar himself; Dio nobis, Tell us, thy ^ledge is
such as thou can (...) re^ v^. Christ percei^ well rnough this ^eight
proceeding, (...) their praise, re^ their hypocrisy, and calling for a tribute
penny, bids them go and do their duty in the name of God to Caesar as they
ought to do, for that very inscription of Caesar's did show them as much.

These men being answered, the S^douces came unto him with a captious
question, putting Mat. 22. 25.
the case of a woman which had seven husbands, now to which of these should
she appertain in the resurrection? If unto any one of them, then ^urie was
offered unto the rest, which was eui^: if unto all, then must he admit a
plura^e, polyga^e, which was worse: and therefore they thought by this (...)
kind of question, to have strongly inferred against the resurrection, and to
have grounded our Savior at first dash. Christ soon disappoints them of their
purpose, which they missed of, and by and by shewe^ then they erred, not
knowing the Scriptures, that the resurrection was not to be considered with any
carnal conceit, that there was neither marying nor giving unto marriage, for
they were as the Angels of God in Heaven. By which answer they were at a Non
plus, whose wife of all? why nones at all: to which of them? to none of them,
There is no marying: The text says, they were put to silence, as if now they
had no more to say.

2 After this a Doctor of the Law asks him which was the Mat. 22. 36.
greatest commandment in the law, a question at that very time in controuer^e
amongst the Jews, concerning the precepts of the law moral, judicial and
ceremonial: Christ comprehendes all in brief, as Solomon ^d when he said,
The sum of all is, fear God, and to keep the Ecc. 11. 13
commandments. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind, this is the first and the greatest
commandment: The second is like unto this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Thereby showing him that the scope of the commandments, did tend
principally to love, and in this love ^od did chiefly require the very
affections of the heart, and therefore that they should not so much basic their
heads about needelesse questions, as apply their hearts to keep the precepts
of the law, which in a generality did consist in the love of our God, and our
neighbor, a short lesson, and yet we are all our life about it.

3 In the eight of S. John, the Scribes and Pharisees bring him a woman taken
in adulteris, and set her in the midst, saying: Master this woman was taken
in John. 8. 4.
adultery in the very act. Now Moses commands in the law that such should
be stoued, what say thou therefore: This they did to tempt him: If he
should have condemned her, then where is that mercy that all the world
speaks of to be in thee? If he should not have condemned her, then lo thou
art clean contrary unto Moses law: thus by a Dilemma they thought to catch
him. Christ sounds the secrets of their hearts, and wills them after
examination of themselves, to proceed to execute the sentence of Moses law
upon the woman. In effect the law is just, but let just men perform the
equity of this law. By which divine answer, they all stand mute and
confounded in themselves, fin^ing not where to reprove him, they slink away:
which answer says S. Austen, was just and gentle, Pu^iatur peccatrix, sed non
a peccatoribus, Let this sinner be punished, but not of sinners. When some
other of the Scribes said within themselves, he blasphemeth, Ter. lib. 5.
aduer. Marcio.
who can forgive sins, but God only? Christ knowing their thoughts, says:
whether is it easier to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, or arise, take up
thy bed and walk; here, says Tertullian, he shows he was the Son of man.

4 In the sixth of Saint Luke, a diseased man is brought unto Luk 6. 6.
him upon the Sabbath day, not to heal him, were want of compasiton: but yet
to heal him, were to give occasion to the Pharisees of murmuring against him:
murmr or not murmr. Christ does the poor man good upon the Sabbath day,
and shows them the end thereof: That the Sabbath was made for man, and Luke
23, 3
not man for the Sabbath. In the 22. of the same Gospel, Pilat the Judge
asks him. If he were the Son of God, Christ's answer is. Tu dixisti, Thou
have said it, Mat. 27. 12.
neither affirming or denying of himself. When he was in the Temple, the
chief Priests and Elders of the people, came unto him as he was teaching,
and said, By what authority do thou these things, and who gave Mat. 21. 25.
thee this authority? For Christ's authority to teach in the temple, there is
found this History. In ^.
the temple of Jerusalem, there were (...)* ordinary Priests, and as soon as
any of them died, the residue chose another in his place: now it happened that
Jesus for his singular doctrine and godliness, was chosen to be one: and there
is great likelihood that this should be true, considering that Jesus, at this
time and other times did preach in the Temple, which thing, the pride of the
Pharisees would otherwise have hardly endured it, and therefore we perceive at
this time, they did not long stand about denying his authority.

Christ asks them a question about Iohus Baptism. The Baptism of John,
whence was it? from heaven, or of men? they reasoned among themselves, saying:
If we shall say from heaven, he will say unto us: why did you not believe
him? and if we say of men, we fear the people, for all hold John as a
Prophet: then they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell, and he said
unto them, neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

5 The like question to this, proposed he at another time unto the Pharisees,
saying: What Mark. 12. 35.
think ye of Christ, whose son is he? They said unto him, David's: he said
unto them, How does David Lu. 20. 42. Psa. 110. 1
in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit at my right
hand, till I make thine enemies thy footestoole: If then David call him Lord,
how is he then his Son? And they could Mat. 22. 46.
not answer him, neither durst they from that day forth, ask him any more
questions. Thus our Savior Christ, whether he were answering or opposing the
Pharisees, they saw his divine wisdom was such, as they could not but wonder
at it, and no marvel, seeing he was the divine wisdom of the Father
himself.

When the Jews objected unto him, that he cast out devils by the power of
Beelzebub. First he Lu. 11. 15.
asks them by whose power the^ did their children cast them out? secondarily,
he shows their great error or malice, in obi^ting this against him, for if
he by the power of Beelzebub should cast out devils, then was Satan divided
against himself: if so, then could not his power stand, and therefore the
sum if our Saviors answer was this, Whosoever casts out de^s, the same is
cl^ane opposite or contrary unto Satan: But I, is you seen, cast them out, it
follows therefore contrary unto pour assertion, that I do this not by the
power of Satan, but by a power opposite unto his, and thus they saw themselves
sna^d in their own snare: And in the trap, as the Prophet speaks, they laid
for other, is their own foot taken. In the twelfth of S. Luke, when one said,
M. speak unto my brother to divide the inheritance with me, Christ says,
man, who made me a Judge? though he were a Judge both of quick and dead, yet
he refused to judge in a private inheritance, to show that his first co^^g was
not to judge, but to be ^dged, this notwithstanding Christians may be Judges in
matters of controversy, as the 1. Cor. 6.
Apostle requires.

In the 13. of the same Gospel, he went through all Cities and Towns,
teaching and iourneying toward Jerusalem, then said one unto him, Lord, are
there few that shall be saved? And he (...)* 13. 23
said unto them: Strive to enter in at the strait gate: This man asks of a
high mystery onelit known unto God, about which he needed not have troubled
his head: Christ answers not to what he asked, whether there were few, or
no? but to what he ought to ask, to wit, of entering in at the straight gate,
and therefore wills all that heard him to strive to enter in at that gate.
For questions or questioning, in needelesse or intricate matters, Christ says
unto his own Apostles, Act. 1. 1.
It is not for you to know, or to press into the privy chamber of his secrets
whose counsel is unsearchable: we should praise God in those things we
know, and wonder at him in those things we know not: he has given no man
leave to be over curious in his works, much less to meddle with depth of his
counsel. Concerning the number of the elect, or who they are, is more then man
should meddle withal, we know not how soon God in his endless mercy, may
call those who^ we are often over prove, to pronounce as vessels of wrath. For
such d^pths, curiosity is it to examine, presumption to determine,
impossibility to conclude, want of charity to censure. While God does afford
time of amendment, and space of turning unto him, what should we but in
christianity hope the best? When Peter said unto Christ, Lord what shall he
do? Christ answers, Ioh. 21, 22
What if I will that he tarri^ till I come, what is that to thee, follow thou
me? Harken unto that which does appertain unto thy self: and let that alone
which in the unsearchable purpose of God, does appertain unto others. S. Austen
shows, that it has been Aug in Genesis ad lit.
the manner of busy heads in all ages, because they would not be idle, and
specially of the Ma^ches, to bring themselves unto a laby^inth of a number of
unnecessary questions: as it is the manner of many now a days, unto whom
these answers of our Savior Mat. 19. 17.
before mentioned are sufficient? When Pilat asks what is truth, Christ
answers not he would not show what was truth (says one) to a desp ser of
truth.

7 When the young man said unto Christ, Good M^ister, etc. Our Savior says,
Why call thou me good? there is none good but only God? A strange answer
we would think, why Lord thou art God, and therefore well might he say unto
thee, good, but when we consider the matter thoroughly, we shall perceive that
Christ in this answer had reference to that which this young man thought of
him, not what he was, esteeming him on^e some good and just man, and no more:
again, we are taught by this answer to turn away the eyes of our mind, when
we are praised of others, and thought to be good of men, saying with our
selves, we are not worthy to be Iud. 16. 2.
called good: There is none good but God. Iudeth when she was praised of the
people, she turned their praise to the praising of God: so the blessed virgin
did, as has been said, when she was Luke 1, 46.
magnified, her soul did magnify the Lord, other magnified her, but she God.
In these and many other answers of our Savior to those that came unto him,
look how many answers, so many instructions have we, both for the
strengthening of our faith, and the direction of our life: Apertis pas^ur,
obscuris exercemur, says Aug. de vero. Dom. Sermon. 11.
S. Austen, by plain scriptures we are fed, by harder exercised, now in
Christ's most divine answers we learn these things.

8 First in that he so answered the chief Pharisees, that they could not tell
which way to turn them, it might make them well reason, whence is this
wisdom, surely it is not of man? S. Jerome says, Qui ad tantam sapientiam
credere deberent, mirati sunt quod calliditas eorum insidiandilocum non
inuenit: They ^ho should have believed at so great wisdom, only mer^ailed
that their subtilties of deceiving took not place, and so they left him
remaining still in infidelity and hardness of heart: O senseless men, have you
not heard with your ears the mighty power of God? In stead of reuerencing him
for his wisdom, how could you find in your hearts to speak evil of him? The
woman of Samaria, having but a little communed with him by the John. 4.
Well side, she leaves her water pot, and going into the City, and says:
Behold, a man that has told me all that ever I did, is not he the very Christ?

9 Secondly, for the direction of our life, we learn by this of our Savior,
to have respective care in answering others, sometimes as he did by silence,
and sometimes also as S. Peter speaks, being ready to give an answer 1, Pe.
3, 15
to every man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us, which our
Savior did observe Mat. 16. 16.
with such coldness and moderation, as he caused his gainesayers to be
confounded in themselves. This in part also he exhorts, when he wills his
disciples to be as simple as Doves, and wise as Serpents. In consideration of
both these manner of instructions, we may reply with that of S. Peter, when
Christ said, whom say ye, that I am? Mat. 16. 16.
Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, as
if he should have said, the prophets have foretold us of Messiah to come, Tu
ille es, Lord thou art he.

Chap. 25.
Of Christ our Savior, what he did upon the Sabbath, and Festival days, and
what Christians may hence gather, for the observation of the same.
FOr the better keeping in a religious remembrance from age to age some
special benefits received, as also for the necessary rest of man, sometimes
to be at leisure from bodily labors and travails of this life: so it was that
Almighty God did permit, Leu. 23. 1.
nay, expressly enjoin his people from age to age the keeping of the Sabbath,
and solemn observation of other Festival tunes, and seasons, as memorials of
some public benefit received from him, that in keeping and solemn
observation of th^se times of rest, the people for their parts might not only
call to rembrance Gods goodness past, but also direct their desires to the
obtaining of a future rest to come: when that here in earth did as it were put
them in mind of a joyful Sabbath, and festival solemnit^, they should one
day keep (by the grace of God) in the Kingdom of heaven. For this cause ^ly
did the Fasts which are appointed go before the Feasts, signify our
condition in the life present, but the feasts themselves our happy estate, to
be enjoyed in the life to come.

2 As concerning the Sabbath, and other festival times and Theoph. in Luc.
seasons, for every Feast was in a generality called a Sabbath, we find ^ath
continued all along ^till the coming of our Savior Christ, who did himself
ra^ the lawful use thereof by his own example upon the Sabbath days, he was
often teaching in the Synagogue of the Jews, and at other festival times, he
Luke. 6. 6. I^n. 5. 2. John. 1. 14
resorteth unto Jerusalem, as we find in the Gospel, there to keep (after the
manner and ancient custom of the people of God) their feasts appointed unto
them to be kept by the ordinance of God himself. Of this ordinance we read in
the three and twentieth of Leuiticus, And the Lord Leui. 23, 1
spoke unto Moses saying, speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto
them, the feasts of the Lord which you call holy assemblies, even these are my
feasts. There mention is made of the Sabbath, the Passover, the feast of
vnicauened bread, the feast of first fruits, the feast of tabernacles:
concerning all which, Moses not only mentions that God will have these
observed, but also sets down in particular with what circumstances, and the
manner how.

3 When as now in the first Table of the law, God had mentioned both his
external and internal Exo. 20. 1. 2, 3, 4.
worship in the two former precepts thereof, and in the third place, placed
reverence and honor to be done unto his holy name: that there might also be
a sanctified time, separated from others, for the observation of these holy
duties: therefore in the fourth commandment does he command a sanctified
and holy time, to show that as he had given laws for his worship, so would
he also ordain a tune for his worship: which time he would have to be holy,
which holiness he would have to resemble his ownerest: the 7: day sanctified by
him, his rest, so called in that he censed the seventh day, as it is said,
he rested, or ceased from the creation of the world, and was created toward
the end of the sixth day, that he might begin to lead his life upon a time
sanctified.

And this commandment God sets down in many words, as if he were the
longer expressing it, to teach his people to be the more careful in the
observing of it. The other laws were only negative, but this is both negative
and affirmitiue, not only showing, what we should be, but what we should
not do. Thou Exodus 20. 4. 5.
shall keep holy, and remember that thou keep holy, thou shall not labor,
and so forth, as is expressed in the law. When the Prophet would show either
wherein a people did honor God, or otherwise dishonor him, they mention it in
keeping or not keeping the Sabaoths, wherefore Esaias says, Blessed is the man
that Esa. 56. 2.
keeps the Sabbath. And when the prophet Ezechiel would show how the people
had cast off all reverence of God, he expresses it in this phrase of speech,
Polluerunt Sabatha mea: They have Eze. 02. 16.
polluted my Sabaaths.

4 What our Savior determines concerning this, who came not to break the
law, but to fulfill it, we may easily perceive. Mat. 5. 27
That part of the Sabbath which was ceremonial, we acknowledge to cease, but
for the law moral, that still to remain the same for the rest of our very
cattle, and therefore much more the servants, that live under us, and
principally for the religious use it has amongst Christians, that God may
still have a sanctified time, cons^rated before others unto his worship and man
a vacation from bodily labors, as agreeable to the condition of his estate,
which does require rest.

Mention is often made in the Gospel, whatour Savior did upon the Sabbath
days, besides his teaching, he cured many that came unto him, and had much
ado with the Pharisees in showing them their superstitious observation of the
same. The Luke 6. 6. Mat. 12. 9 Mar. 3. 1. Lu. 13. 14.
right use whereof he most truly observed in doing so many sanctified works
therein, in curing diseased creatures, which the Rulers of the Synagogue could
not brook.

In the fifth of Saint John, he John. 5 9. Ambro. de side lib. 4. Cap. 3.
sanatis iam manbabat officium.
bids the man that had long time layen by the pooles side, to take up his bed
and walk. Now this (says the Evangelist) was the Saboath day, if the man had
not been cured, how could he have borne his bed, who was before borne of
others? If it had not been upon the Sabbath day, happily there had not been
so many eyewitnesses of the power of God. In curing another upon the same day,
Christ took occasion to show the end of the Mat 12. 9.
Sabbath, that it was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: as also to
manifest the works of the Sabbath, what they were, and of what nature, to do
good upon this day, were it but to a dumb creature. Christ did not disallow,
and the Pharisees did not amiss in lifting out an Ox or an Ass from the
ditch upon this day, but how much more was it agreeable unto the sanctifying
of the Sabbath, to help a distressed man, and to loose one whom Satan has
bound, so many pears.

For the superstitious observation of the Sabbath, which the Jews used, it
grew, as we may perceive by our Saviors discourse with them, from very
ignorance of the very first institution. It was not said, Otio celebrabis,
Thou shall celebrate the Sabbath with rest, but Sanctificabis, Thou shall
sanctify, or thou shall keep the Sabbath with a holy rest.

Again, to show that charity, which is the sum of the law in general, is
to be preferred before any Law in particular, (for I will have mercy, and
Ose. 6. 6.
not sacrifice, says the Lord.) Christ our Savior, as we see chiefelie
aimed at doing good upon the Sabbath day, secretly to interuent thy
neighbor, or openly to envy a poor man's health, was with the Pharisees no
breach of the Sabbath, but to do good upon him, the Sabbath is broken. For the
kindling of fire, but chiefly the gathering of sticks, was it not punished in
a very high degree? and therefore not the least action to be done upon the
Nu^. 15, 36.
Sabbath day? these men considered not how the first institution required
strictnes, which in that instance is manifest, for the veterring of others:
contempt is one thing, necessity is another, Luke 6, 3.
which Christ showed in excusing 1. Sa^. 21. 6
his Apostles, when they were murmured at for plucking the ears of corn upon
the Sabbath day. The ignorance of the Pharisees did cleave only to the letter
of the Law: Christ adds a favorable dispensation, and confirms what he had
done: He that cured me, said, Take up thy John. 5, 10.
bed and walk, or he that bid me, will bear me out in that I do, He said
unto me, Take up thy bed and walk.

5 Doubtless with great Religion, did the old Israelites well observe and keep
the holy Sabbath Genesis 8. 4. Ex. 12, 41 Lu, 19, 37. John. 2. 11. Mat. 28, 1.
of the Lord, which day God himself sanctified from the beginning: as this day
Noe in the Arc rested on the mountains of Ararat: as this day the Israelites
were delivered from Egypt, when they rested from the oppression of Pharao: as
this day the people brought in Christ into Jerusalem with Palm boughs a
little before his passion: as this day showed he his first miracle at Cana in
Galilee: as this day after all his miracles rested he in the Scpulcher,
gloriously arising from the dead the day following, which day by the
constitution of the Apostles them Act. 20, 7. Apo. 1. 10
selves (and so Authors against whom no exception can be taken) the Church
celebrateth this day as her Christian Sabbath unto the Lord. This is therefore
called by S. John, Dies Domini, our Lords day, from the resurrection. (...).
Concerning the alteration hereof the prophet O see might seem to speak,
when he says: I will cause their Sabaoths and Ose. 2. 11.
Feasts to cease. The day of our Lord, says S. Austen, which Augu. de ciuit.
dei. lib. 22.
we keep as our Sabbath, it is not only a remembrance of his resurrection
past, but a type and figure of that eternal Sabbath which is to come. The
alteration therefore in part is as thus. They did celebrate their Sabbath with
a remembrace of the creation, we of the resurrection: they as a figure of
grace, when they should rest from the servitude of sin, we as a figure of
glory, when we shall rest from occasions of sinning

6 Eusebius shows us of certain men called the Ebionites, Eus. lib. 3. cap.
27.
which would keep the Sabbath with the Jews, and the Sunday with the
christians, like men who would be of all religions, when they are indeed of
none. Others tell us of the Petrobrutiani, a kind of men which would have no
solemn and sanctified Feasts, to the honor of God at all. The Jews were not
so superstitious, as these were irreligious. These men are gone, but yet their
fancies in some part remain: for the former, to wit, the superstitious manner
of the Jews in keeping their Sabbath, we see it refuted by our Savior, and
the right use to be kept, how and after what manner. The question has been
moved whether 1. Match. 2 34.
the Machabees did well in violating the Sabbath? the question rightly proposed
is otherwise: whether the Machabees in fighting that day did violate the
Sabbath? many began to wax scrupulous, Mattathias a good and godly Captain
saw it was no time to stand upon points, that now they must either fight it out
like men, or be murdered like beasts, to be hampering upon nice matters of the
law, when the enemies of God were ready to destroy the law and them, he
thought good to defend themselves, and offend their enemies, which was
approved, the case standing as it did. For the Sabaothes days journey, which
consisted as some say of two miles distance, for that the Act. 1, 12.
people placed their tents, or their uttermost parts thereof so far from the
Tabernacle, or that mount Oliuet was about that distance from Jerusalem,
whither the people on that day might repair, the discussing hereof is not so
necessary. For the travel of Physicians, or any in case of necessity, so it be
not ordinary upon this day, men need not be so scrupulous, I will not say
Jewish, as to say truth they are, if in this they remain opinionated. In the
Christian observation of our Sabbath to stand upon a number of curious
conceits, is without judgment and learning, and in part Pharisaicall. It were
to be wished that a serious and religious observation thereof, were in use
without farther frivolous devises of running fanciers.

There are other days for our vocation, the holy Sabbath is of our vacation to
God, the people Number. 28 9
upon other days offered a Lamb, but upon the Sabbath, two Lambs were
offered, as if that day our devotion should be doubled: Every day would David
worship God, yea and seven times Psa. 119.
a day would he call upon him, this is the day wherein we should call upon God,
more then ordinary, a day of prayer and meditation of reconciling our selves
to God and man, of doing good, and sanctifying a holy time with holy
conversation, therefore called the Lords day, because the Lord should chiefly
be worshipped upon this day.

7 In the second place for the observation of other festiual tunes, and annual
solemnities, it has been showed that Christ our Savior went often unto the
Feasts.

A little before his passion his disciples come unto him saying: Master where
will thou that we Mat. 26, 7.
prepare the Passover? As if they knew it was their Masters manner to keep
the Feast now approaching. For the feasts of the Jews there is no question, as
they were commanded of God, so were they ever solemnly kept of the godly: as
they had their 1, Cor. 5, 7.
feasts, so have Christians theirs. Christ out passover is offered for us,
therefore (says the Apostle) let us keep the feast. They had a passover, and
we have a passover too: they were delivered out of the bondage of Egypt, and
we are delivered from a bondage too: they kept a solemn remembrance, and we
have as much cause as ever they had to keep a solemn remembrance too. By
their feast of first fruits, the fiftieth Leu. 23, 10
day after the passover they held a holy assembly unto God: we who have
received the first fruits of the spirit, by the coming down of the holy
Ghost, at the Feast of Penticost upon the Apostles, hold a holy assembly unto
the Lord also. The other of our Christian feasts which concern the chief
points of our redemption, as the birth of Christ, his Circumcision, the
Epiphanie, and his Resurrection from the dead, have so good use in the Church
as the ancient custom, and Christian manner of the best, and best learned, that
have lived since the Apostles time, is of more sufficiency to make us continue
the godly use thereof, then all that the deuisers of novelties are want to say,
to draw us forced texts to the contrary.

Satan is subtle, and never more, then when he is changed into an Angel of
light: to take away a solemn remembrance of him, who shed his blood for our
redemption: To pass over the memory of his birth, without any solemn and
religious observation, were the next way to make both duty and love ^re cold
in Christians, and by little and little to forget all, (which we may tremble
to think) Christ Jesus and all. Wherefore we cannot but muse whereunto that
strange spirit ^d tend, which was ready to ^troule every Christian
constitution, which eagerly sought the euersion of our solemn and Christian
Feasts. These we Aug. de ciu. de lib. 10. cap. 4.
keep (says Saint Austen) least unthankfulness or forgetfulness should grow
upon us, and therefore a sin is it for men to spend their time, and trouble
the quiet of the Church, in seeking to overthrow the Christian use of solemn
and seemly observations. By our Feasts (says Tertul. ad Psysic.
Tertullian) speaking in the behalf of Christians against the Heathen) we
sanctify unto God the memory of his benefits, Epiphanius taxes Aerius for
denying Epipha. ho. 72.
Christian solemnities, they have little in them except boldness, which charge us
that our ancient rites come within the compass of S. Paul's reprehension. You
observe times and seasons: no, no, there is no such matter, they are far from
fatal sur^ises of constellation, or any other Heathenish respects. There is
Gal. 4. 10.
no such fear, God be praised, in these seemly observations: wherefore unless
we see them more strongly refuted then so, that is to say, by a few new names
for our feasts, there is no ca^ (...) the Church should still cont^ them in
Christian manner as she does, and so shall by the grace of God.

Christ our Savior himself has honored these times by his blessed birth,
his resurrection, and ascension up into heaven, at which times we honor him,
as at all times, so especially when we have Feasts consecrated to a
co^emoration of his goodness toward us, when we in love assemble, it is also a
mean by honest recreation, to increase amity amongst our selves.

8 Sometimes we celebrate the mention of the Martyrs and Saints of God, who
have lived (...) former times, and this we do by no other end, but only to
set before us examples of repentance, of faith, of piety: Besides, occasion is
offered of assembling our selves in public prayer, which the oftener we do, the
great^ is our devotion, abuse taken may, we see the keeping of these is a
commendable and Christian custom.

9 For the manner of keeping our Christian feasts of all sorts (...) general:
first the duties of devotion, as prayer, hearing the word of God, receiving the
Sacraments, require our special ^e, with these our laud and praise is offered
unto God, and therefore of the learned they are ^^^ied in Hebrew Kaggei, of
rejoicing: secondarily, at these times we extend as we may liberality unto
others, and therefore says Saint Austen, festival times would have
liberality, Aug. in A^e. Do.
which make many bless God for his benefits. Last of all, these solemnities
orderly observed, they do sometimes call us away from the wordinate carke and
care of the world, and move in our hearts many good and comfortable thoughts,
in calling to mind, the time will come, When we shall keep a Feast of Feasts.

Chap. 26.
Of Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, and what we learn thereby.
THat it went not with the son of God here in earth, as it did with King
Solomon, who spent his time in great royalty 2, Cro. 9. 9
in the world, or as it is said of Aristoxenus the philosopher, who led all
his life amidst instruments of music, we all know it fared otherwise with him,
who did seldom laugh in the world, and the world as seldom laughed upon him.
S. Luke tells us of his sad journey toward Jerusalem, Lu. 19. 41
how he passed the way weeping, and what small delight he took in the peoples
Hosanna, or all the troop about him: for as it is mentioned, while they were
singing, he was mourning. Christ was not moved with that which was without,
but respects that which was within, not yt present, but things to come move
him. He casts up his eyes to Jerusalem, and beholding the City, he had
compassion upon it, and wept for it: he wept for them which would not weep
for themselves. David says, Mine eyes gush out with water, because men keep
not thy law. Christ's eyes gushed out with watery tears, because they would not
keep his law, nay they would not accept his love. He saw the City, and
foresaw the ruin and misery thereof. He wept for it, foreshewing the
desolation, which would be lamentable, and this he does not so much by words as
by tears.

2 The prophets of old have sometimes spoken unto the sons of men by
sorrowful signs. Samuel when he would manifest 1, Sam. 15, 27.
how Saul's Kingdom should be rent from him, having the lap of his conte in his
hand, he rent it in the midst. Ezechiel to show Ezec. 4, 1.
the destruction of the people, takes a brick stone and lays it before them,
and portrayes upon (...) the Ci^e, and lays siege against it.

Christ at this time spoke little, but his tears prophesied great sorrow to
come; he came near the City, not so much in motion, as in commiseration.
David wept for Absolon, saying, Absolon, 1. Sam. 18. 33.
Absolon, O my son Absolon, I would to God I had dyed for thee! Christ did as
much mourse for Jerusalem, as ever David did for Absolon, Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
I would to God I had dyed for thee: no Jerusalem, I am now going to die for
thee O what should I do unto thee, that I have not done?

Many a time came Christ toward Jerusalem, but he never came weeping, as now
he did, because Jerusalem was never so near desolation (...) ruin, as now it
was, and therefore Christ never sorrowed more, then now, when they were
nearest destruction.

Was it for the overthrow of the walls, and goodly buildings that Christ wept?
no, it was for the sins of Jerusalem, which should be the cause of all this,
What affection was here in the eternal Son of God, to weep for sinful
men? Even then was he weeping, when they were most rejoicing and laughing.

The Physician most weeps when the frauticke man is, or seems to be most
merry, because he knows then the danger is greatest, and therefore gives
over to administer Physic any more, leaving him to be lamented of his good
friends.

3 O that thou had known in this thy day, those things that belong unto thy
peace! Which words were weeping words, and uttered with an interrupted voice,
and as it were for very sorrow breaking often in the midst, by a manner of
speech called Aposiopesis, when there was something more to be spoken, but very
sorrow would not suffer him to utter it. I weep, but O Jerusalem, which art
now rejoicing, if thou did know the things which do belong unto thy
peace, thou would as well weep for thy self, as I do weep for thee. Thou
have had a day of peace, but there is a day coming full of sorrow and
persecution. O Jerusalem, because thou would not accept the one, thou art
like shortly to rue the misery of the other! In this Christ lamented their
forgetfulness of their estate: in prosperity they remember not what is to
come after all.

And thus hear we a mournful Physician weeping for his wilful patient,
which would not be healed, nor receive help though it were offered with tears.

4 The most doleful desolation that came upon this City, so Egesi. Iose
mighty in promise, so glorious in fame, so rich in all abundance, is set
forth by those, who have mentioned the tragical end, which befell about the
fortieth yeele after our Savior suffered, the beholding thereof made Eleazar
one of the inhabiters, at the very time to break out into this, or the like
mournful oration. O Jerusalem, thou great and goodly City of the world,
where is now the beauty of Sion, the joy of the whole earth? where is thy
glory, where is thy magnificence, O Jerusalem? Where is that Sanctum sanctorum,
where are thy Priests who were attendant upon God as Angels? Where are thy
sages, thy young men? O from what glory art thou fallen, to what reproach and
infamy? O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! Who can read with dry eyes, the most woeful
end of this City and people? They refused the father and the son, and God
sent Titus and Vespasian, the Father and Son that never left them, until
they were utterly defaced! O Jerusalem, strongly did thy enemies besi^ge the,
but thy sins did more strongly assault thee. They sold the Savior of the
world for thirty p^e, and what followed in the captivity, thirty Jews were
sold for a penny. The Lord Jesus was apprehended upon mount Oliuet, and upon
mount Oliuet was Jerusalem first besieged: the Lord Jesus was crucified at the
Passover, and at the Passover was all Iewrie, as it were shut up in a prison:
Jerusalem sacked, and in such sort as the Romans themselves confessed, saying,
That unless this people had offended the God of heaven, they could never have
prevailed against them as they did. A ele^n hundred thousand, says the
History, changed life with death, and that within the circuit of a short time.

Thus have we heard of Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, and the cause which
moved him to weep, by which without farther application, we may consider (as
Gregory says) that their destruction is our admonition: If the natural
branches were cut off, the wild may fear. When Scipi saw Carthage burn, he
wept, being asked the reason, for that, says he, I know not what shall become
of Rome: who can but sorrow when he calls to mind that Jerusalem sometimes the
Garden of the world, is come to utter desolation?

5 For three causes did Christ our Savior weep, and at three several times.
First, Christ wept that we should have by so much the more our hope and
confidence in him when we see him weeping, which proceeded of mere
compassion. Secondarily, Christ wept to teach us to weep, and bewail our own
misery, as he did the misery of others. Thirdly, he wept, to show us when
we should weep, even then when we think our selves in greatest security.

At three times also did he weep, first in raising Lazarus, there he bewailed
man's misery. Secondarily, over Jerusalem, there he bewailed man's security:
Thirdly, upon the Cross, there he bewailed man's infirmity. If our Savior
Christ were seen to weep in the presence of others, we may easily conceive
that secretly in the days of his flesh, he often offered up groans, as the
Apostle speaks, with Heb. 5. 7.
strong crying, and tears unto him, that was able to deliver him.

6 Now what may we learn by this weeping love of Christ: Shall we see (says
Cassiodor) the Prince himself weeping, Cassidor. in Psalm. 50.
and we in the mean while solace our selves in pleasure? Is he a good child,
that beholding his father sit in sackcloth and ashes, will stand by laughing
and sporting as nothing moved? Shall the Son of God weep for thy sins,
and will thou delight thy self in vain mirth? O Christian soul mourn a
little, when the house is on fire we bring water, when the soul is ^lamed
with unlawful desires, we bring the tears of repentance. Call to mind that
doctrine of Christ, Blessed are they that mourn: Harsh doctrine, but sweetened
with a ^ssing: It was the prayer of Saint Austen, Aug. in med.
O God give me the grace of tears. And there is in godly minds, says S.
Ambrose, a certain delight to weep, flendi voluptas.

The unwise make but a sport of sin, says Solomon: their heart is as a
barren land, where Pro. 14, 9.
all remembrance of God is forgotten: but the wise man is conversant in the
house of mourning. Pharaoh and his host were drowned Exo. 14. 6. John. 5, 2.
in the Sea, as sin and the works of sin are in the tears of repentance.
Those who were diseased, found cure in the troubled poole. We lost our
felicity by delightful eating, and we recover our selves by mournful
chastening.

There is, says the wise man, A time to rejoice, and a time to Eccles. 2, 1 3
(...)
mourn: Many take their time of rejoicing, but cannot hit upon the time of
mourning. O that we did know at the least in this our day, those things that
do belong unto our peace, better is it to mourn here, then hereafter. When
we are moved to mournful, passions, let us remember with how small pomp and
pleasure. Christ passed his time in the world, who passed it in often weeping.
The two Kine carrying 1. Sa^. 6, 12.
the Arc, they lowed all the way as they went, and yet never stayed until
they came to the place appointed; we go on weeping in this vale of tears, but
yet keep on the way still, until we come unto our iourneyes end, and then an
end of weeping. Here as in Romah a voice is heard of weeping, and mourning,
hereafter they shall have all tears wiped from their eyes. The prophet
Ezechiel, when he came Eze. 44. 4.
to see the glory of the Lord in the Sanctuary, he was brought about by the
North, we pass along by many sorrows, and then come to see the goodness of
the Lord in the land of the living.

Of mournful events, Jeremy said, This is my sorrow, and I will bear it;
causes of weeping and wailing, are sometimes offered: Eli said, it is the Lord,
let him do as it seems good unto him: he that now goes forth weeping,
shall surely return, says the Prophet David, and bring his st^aues with him:
those that a time mourn with Christ, shall rejoice, when the laughing world
shall weep. Christ sowed in tears, it was, that we all should reap in joy.

Chap. 27.
Of Christ's passion, and his suffering upon the Altar of the Cross, for the
sins of the world and salvation of our souls, how and with what devotion all
Christians should meditate thereof.
ALthough in meditating the holy virtues of Christ our Savior, which worthily
require our most deuotionate consideration: we are much moved (I doubt it not)
yet when we begin Math. 26. 36.
to call to mind his passion, then ought we to be even carried away from our
selves, by admiring his goodness toward us: And here is it said to devout
souls, as it was to the disciples in the Garden: hic sedete, sit ye here. Let
us not say unto Christ, with the Jews, come down from ye cross, but let us
faste^ our selves to his cross Let us go with the blessed virgin to mount
Calu^rie, and stand by a while, beholding in mournful manner what is done, and
when we have beheld until they have done crucifying the son of God, then
with Joseph and Nichodemus let us take down and annoint his crucified body,
with the sweetest perfumes of prayers and praise our hearts can yield, putting
it in the new Sepulcher of our holiest meditation: of them who thus do, it may
be said as David said to those who brought him word they had honorably
buried their master Saul, Blessed are you of the Lord, the Lord recompense 2,
Sam. 2. 5
you this mercy: The Lord to recompense them this devotion, that thus do, And
blessed be they of the Lord, etc. who thus reverence the Lord of Lords.

2 And now to enter a while into the consideration hereof, Christ lou^dvs,
says the Apostle, and Ephe. 5, 25
gave himself a sweet smelling sac^fice and oblation unto God. Wherein we may
consider these three things: first, the moving cause, to wit, love, Christus
dilexit nos, Christ loved us. Secondarily, the offering which this love caused
him to offer, Obtulit seipsum, he gave himself. Thirdly, the end why he gave
this offering. Vt esse^ propitiatio Dei patris, That he might be a
reconciliation for man with God the Father. For the first, to wit, love, the
moving cause of all: if a mother love her child because it cost her pain,
never Mother bought her son with so great pain, as Christ bought us. What
greater love is there then for one to give his life for his friend, yet greater
was thy love, O holy Son of God, who gave thy life for us that were thine
enemies. Doubtless, says the Apostle. one will scarce die for a righteous
man, and yet one is found to die for us that were unrighteous, and then too,
when it was in his power to die, or not to die. These things may be considered,
that his love that loved sinners, that the Son of God his love to incite our
affection to him, he the had not sins of his own, a sign he suffered for
the sins of others.

The greatest perfection and force of love, say the Philosophers, is the force
unitive, and this was never in any so forceable as in Christ, when he would
unite unto himself his Church Ephe. 5, 25.
or Congregation, which accords with that of the holy Ghost, Let a man so
love his wife, as Christ loved the Congregation, The wife is chargeable, but
far more chargeable was the Congregation to the Son of God.

3 For the offering it self, it was himself, Aaron and all his sons, never
made such an offering as this was: he gave himself a sacrifice. Why was there
nothing in heaven or earth that could have been offered else? Was there no
other sacrifice to be had but innocent Isaac? Must none be approved to make a
reconciliation for man, but the son of man? was sin then so heinous, that
nothing could ^eanse the contagion thereof, but the death of an innocent Lamb?
Stand and hear a little, O sinful man, thy Savior himself speaking unto
thee: For thy sake do I suffer all this, for thy sake do I offer my self, as
thou see, a sacrifice upon the Cross: all this do I do for the love of
thee, thy sins are the thorns that pierced my head, the spear that opened
my side, thy delicates was the vinegar and gall that I drank, thy liberty and
looseness was the nails that fastened me to the Cross, see whither thy
sin, thy vanities, O man have brought me? Behold me suffering for thee, to
reconcile thee unto my Father. Does he not by this, O Christian man, inflame
thee with his love, strengthen thee with his merit, and comfort thy sorrowful
heart with his abundant mercy, if he were punished for us, then were we
punishable of our selves?

When now justice had taken place; and began to wax ^ercer and fiercer,
amongst the rest of the people, Aaron makes speed, takes the censer in his
hand, N^. 16, 47.
puts on fire, and goes quickly unto the Congregation to make an atonement for
them. This atonement has our Aaron made for us all, when he offered no other
offering then himself.

4 What has man more to offer, or to give then his goods, his honor, and his
life, all this has Christ offered and given for us: his goods, when he left
his kingdom in heaven; his honor, when he was reproched of men; his life, when
he yielded up the same for all upon the Altar of the Cross. But how many
indignities did he suffer before he came to the accomplishment hereof, when as
like a meek Lamb he was carried and recari^d from judgment, to judgment;
when he was mocked and scorned of all forts?

In his suffering it self we may consider, amongst whom, where, and when he
suffered: amongst whom, even his own people: Pilat said. Thine own Nation
has delivered thee unto Ioh. 18, 35
me. Where? at Jerusalem the Kings City, and there without the gate of the
same City, in a place called Cal^arie, where thieves, and murderers were wont
to suffer. When was all this done, but in the chiefest solemnity of the Jews,
at which time no ^all concourse of people from all places were assembled, and
might behold what was done? accor^ng to that, O vos omnes qui transitis per
viam attendite, si est dolor sicut dolor meus, O all you that pass by, behold
and see, if there were ever sorrow like my sorrow? From the hour wherein he
was sought for, and taken by Torch-light, and ^hornes, until the sixth hour of
his crucifying, that he gave up the ghost: one betrayeth him, another
apprehends him, one binds him, another leads him bound from Pilat to Herod,
from Herod to Pilat again: one seeks false witness against him, another
cries out upon him, he is not worthy to live: one scourges him, another
strikes him on the face: one clotheth him with purple, another puts on his
head a crown of thorns, a third gives him a Reed, mocking him, so they
never let him rest, until they have no more what to do against him.

5 When we have seen the manner of his suffering, let us consider how great he
was that suffered, even he it was, to whom Mat. 28. 18.
power over all things in heaven and earth was given: he, before whom the 24.
Elders fall down: he, whose countenance John a little after beheld to shine as
the Sun in his strength: when he saw him, and fell at his feet as dead,
hearing a voice, Fear not, I am the first, and the last, and Apo. 1. 18.
I am alive, but was dead, and am alive for evermore, and have the keys of
hell and death, And thus who it was that suffered.

6 Now for whom suffered he all this? Even for none other then sinful men.
For Christ suffered in the place of sinners, and with sinners, to ^ewe that he
suffered for sin^rs. Learn^, O man to hate ^ne which was so heinous, ^d as
often as thou art at ley^re to meditate of the passion (...) Jesus Christ the
Son of God, (which thou should daily do) for it is better, says one,
then thy fasting with ^ad and water: so often, I say, as thou do meditate of
^is passion, call to mind as the greatness of thy sins, so ^so the
greatness of his love, who dyed for thy sins, that as in the one thou may
bewail thy own wickedness, so in the other, thou may acknowledge his
bounty and mercy toward thee.

7 But of whom suffered he all this injury? Even of his own kindred and
acquaintance the people of the Jews. After all his miracles, and works of
mercy done amongst them, in curing their sick, cleansing their Leapers, and
healing all that came unto h^: after his feeding so many hungry people in the
Wilderness, teaching so many the way to salvation that came to hear him, now
they reward his pains and trau^ile with opprobrious contume^es, his
unspeakable mercy with bitter hatred, never leaving him until they bring him
unto the death of the Cross. Thus he sufferes not o^ str^ngers and
forrayners, but of his own neighbors, yea, his (...) brethren, as himself
calls them, It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to Mat. 15. 26.
give it unto dogs: By the one he understands the Jews, and by the other
the Gentiles.

8 Four things there are which we should meditate upon concerning the
passion of our Savior Christ. First, for imitation, calling to mind his
patient suffering, we should not abhor suffering, or murmr against
tribulations, seeing he suffered so great things as he did. Secondarily, for
compassion, we ought to consider with grief of mind, that our sins were
the cause of all this, and ^refore we should truly repent (...) of them.
Thirdly, for admiration, when we call to mind, who, for whom, and what he
suffered. Fourthly, for resolution, that (...), to give our bodies, as the
Apostle speaks, a sacrifice to serve him, who has given himself a sacrifice
Romans 12. 1.
to save us. And so have we (...) his passion, imitation to direct, compassion
to unite, admiration (...) (...) up, resolution to perfect our Christian love
and duty toward him.

9 To go forward, and to leave (...) the indignities offered him in the
indgement Hall, his scourng, crowning with thor^es, ^eting, spetting upon,
bearing ^s cross, and the like.

Now the greedy Soldiers begin to spoil him of his garments, exposing his
sacred body (...) naked unto the sharp and cold ^re, which cruelty was not
^ont to be offered, but to abject persons. Then begin they to fa^en him to the
cross, racking and ^ning his hands and feet, farther then naturally they w^d
extend, so cruelly are all parts of his body stretched, that the beholders
might tell all his bones, according to that, dinumerauerunt omnia oss^ mea,
They told Psalm. 22. 16. 17.
all my bones. Here is he fastened unto the cross with nails, at the hands
and feet, Foderunt manus, They dug my hands and feet. Inexplicable was this
suffering, the nails pearcing those places where the sinews me^te together,
the poise of his body every moment increasing the pain, now they offer him
^gar mingled with gall, according to that, they gave me gall to eat, and
vinegar to drink. Oh (...) mildly did he suffer all this? How should we be
consent to leave earthly things, seeing him stripped and spoiled of his
clothing? how should we crucify the flesh, and the concupiscence thereof,
when we remember his spare flesh to be fastened to the Cross? See we here
Abell killed of his brother, the serpent lifted up to heal all that are stung:
O most loving Savior, says S. Austen, that Aug. medit. 7.
which the sinner deserves, the ^cent suffers.

10 A superscription is written by Pilat, upon the cross, Jesus of Nazareth,
King of the Jews. Mat. 27. 37.
^at although ignorant co^men^ Christ in this superscription in three things.
First for the re^ssion of sins, in that he wrote Jesus. Secondly, for the
besto^ing of grace, in that he said of ^areth. Thirdly, for his po^t, in that
he called him King of the Jews, and this is written (...) three tongues, for
that of all ^ts coming, unto the Feast, ^ry tongue might confess Ie^s the
son of God.

It is written in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin. In Hebrew, (...) the Jews who
gloried in the Law. In Greek, for the Grecians who gloried in wisdom, and in
Latin for the Romans, who most gloried in dominion and power, as if Pilate
should have said: This is the King of all Religion, having reference to the
Hebrews: of all wisdom, having reference to the Greeks: of all power, having
reference to the Romans.

And these three sorts, says S Austen, may challenge unto them the dignity of
the Cross, to wit, all devout and religious rich or poor, all signified by
the Hebrews: all wise, who are noted by the Greeks: all mighty, who are
resembled by the Latins: So then the Religion, the wisdom, the power of the
world, confess Christ their King, Rex Iudaeorum, King of the Jews,
Iudaeorum, that is to say, of them that confess him, for so signifies Judah,
and this superscription is written in their hearts: he wrote King of the Jews,
not for that he was only King of them, but he was King of the Gentiles also,
even of all that do confess him.

11 And this tryumphant title or superscription is written in his death, to
show that for all his suffering death, he let not (...) Kingdom: The Jews saw
it to their shame, and therefore would not have it altered, which Pilat
refused, saying: Quod scripsi, Ioh. 19. 22.
scripsi: that which I have written, I have written: it is true, I will not
alter it, and Pila^ (...) the end found it true indeed, to (...) terror of his
wretched consci^ce, who having heard of the shouldiours the verity of the
re^ection lived in continual an^sh, until at last after disgrace received of
the Romans, he came to a desperate end, by ca^ng himself away, as
histories ^ntion.

12 While this was doing, to ^turne unto the manner of our Saviors Passion, at
this time (...) they not spare to reproach (...), and this was done by many,
first, by them that sat by and watched him: secondarily, by same of the high
Priests that came to mark him: thirdly, by those that passed by, and wagged
their heads at him: fourthly, by one of the thieves that was crucified with
him. S. Matthew says, they both reviled him: S. Luke mentions one only. It
seems, says Austen, that both of them began to revile him, of which S.
Matthew spoke, but one perceiving the heavens troubled, Mat. 27. 44. Luke. 23.
39. 40.
and other signs, moved with remorse ^esisted, and then only one of them
according to S. Luke reviled him.

13 Now they begin to repeat the words of the false witnesses: Thou could
build the Temple if it, were destroyed, If Mat. 27. 40. Mar. 15, 29.
thou be the Son of God save thy self. No, says Beda, Sesaluum facere
crucem descendere noluit, quod Christus est Dei electus: If thou be the Son
of God? nay, because he was the elected of God, he would not come down, for
therefore came he into the world. Believe ye him, rising from the Sepulcher,
which is more then descending from the Cross.

The other malefactor says unto him: Remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom. What kingdom was this? su^lie no temporal Kingdom, In regno tuo, In
thy kingdom, that is a better Kingdom then any here beneath, or that which
Tiberius now enjoys.

Great was the faith of this Chief, for neither the fear of the Jews now
present, nor the sharpenes of his own pain, the blasphemy of his Fellow,
the flight of the Disciples, the apparent in^rinitie of Christ's flesh, made
him any way to waver, but first he acknowledges Christ to be a Lord: secondly,
he prays to him, and therefore he acknowledges him to be of power: thirdly,
he acknowledges him to have a Kingdom. This thief could help himself but
in two things, his heart, and his tongue, which he does, with his heart he
believes, with his tongue he makes confession of Christ his Savior.

14 And now behold we our redeemer, yielding up his life for the sins of the
world. Let us consider a while his seven last words uttered upon the
Cross, which by some are divided into eight: Two of these he spoke for
sinners: Pater ignosce illis, and mecum eris in Paradiso, Father forgive them,
and thou shall be with me in Paradise: Two for the godly, Woman behold thy
Son, and to the same disciple, Behold thy mother: Two for the world, Sitie,
consu^matum est, I thirst, it is finished: Two for himself, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? and Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

15 The first of these was spoken in the act of his crucifying, when framing
himself to the Cross, he says: Father forgive them, they know not what they
do: Good to me, but hurt to themselves, and so is it with them that hurt
others, they know not what punishment they bring to themselves, and what crown
and garland to them whom they think they most hurt: They know not what they
do: He prays not so much for them who did know, or ought to have known him
to be the true Messiah, as for the Lay and illiterate people, who of a blind
zeal did, they knew not what: what greater miracle then this loving prayer?
here was a word of all patience and piety, full of love and unspeakable
sweetness, they say, his blood be upon us, and he prays ^t be not upon them,
Father forgive them: even now pierced with nails, crowned with thorns,
laden with scoffs and reproaches, and yet here amongst all, a Pater ignosce
illis, Father forgive them? and it was not without a mystery that he said,
father forgive them. By all this we learn to bear the greatest injuries of
the world, and to pray withal for our very enemies: what should dust and ashes
take upon it to revenge, when the Lord of Heaven and earth so meekely endures
all? what did the world ever see more patient, more charitable, then the Son
of God? Father, forgive them, ^ttying those that persecuted him.

16 The second word was spoken to the Penitent thief, Mecum e^is in Paradiso,
Thou shall be with me in Paradise, which we understand not to (...) spoken of
that earthly Paradise, from which Adam was expulsed, but of that Emperial
place, whither Saint Paul was taken up, where the Saints and Angels are above
in glory. By this saying, comfort is given to them that repent them of their
sins, and call for mercy upon Christ crucified: behold how bountiful
Christ is, he gives a thief paradise that does but ask it of him. Here one
worthy of punishment, and worthy to suffer death by his own confession,
receives mercy at the last instant, but yet no man ought by this example, of
set purpose to defer his conversion unto the last, the privilege of a few,
much less of one, does not infer a common law for all. Christ here gives
mercy unto a thief, and unto a thief at the last cast, to show there is no
place left for desperation: one example makes us bold, one finds mercy at
the last, that none should despair, and but one, that many should not pre^me,
but see the faith of this thief that finds mercy: a disciple denies his
Master, this thief acknowledges him, he sees Christ hanging upon the Eus.
Emis. de Beat. Latron.
Cross as man, and yet he prays unto him as God, he accuses his own
defaults, reproo^th the blasphemy of his Fellow, he acknowledges Christ's
innocence, the Jews that know the law crucify him, he seeeth him in all
contempt, and yet he confesses him a Lord, a king: to be a Lord requires
power, find a King rule, but here is neither to see to. He beholds him
suffering death, and yet he makes request unto him as the giver of life: they
who had before seen him raising the dead, waver, this man dying with him,
acknowledges the resurrection. What fruit, says Saint Austen, did Christ
here reap of a ^le tree: let any sinner show this man's faith, and we
dare show the remission of his sins, he had before stolen earthly things,
but now steals heaven: O admirable conversion! That which we should take
example of, is an example of comfort, of mercy, of hope, of forgiveness, of
confessing our sins, and with steadfast faithfulness of acknowledging the
Son of God, and craving mercy to be remembered of him in his kingdom.

17 The third word was, when he said unto his blessed mother: woman behold thy
Son. And to consider these two together, when he said unto the same Disciple,
behold thy mother, as if he should say unto the blessed Uirgine, hither to
have I obeyed thee, and cared for thee as a Son, from henceforth in my
steed, I will leave thee a Disciple. Unto the other, John thou have done me
service as a good servant, now do it where I will thee, behold her to whom
thou shall perform obedience, and care, as the son to his mother. And thus
Christ a Uirgine (says Saint Jerome) Hier. cont. Iouinian.
commits his Uirgine mother, to a Uirgine Disciple. This third word, is a word
of pity, and care, for to see him now in such dolours and pains, to take
care for his mother, was a token of much love, whereby he shows us, to help
our parents, and do them good, what in the world we can. But what a change
does the blessed Uirgine make, who has for the Lord, the servant: for the
Master the man: for the son of God, a son of Zebede? This change could not
but grieve her, and pearce (as Simeon had before Luke 2. 35.
said) her very heart. Woman behold thy Son, not naming her mother, which
very name Mother, might have increased her grief, beholding the passion and
departure of so dear a son, and might move her motherly mind to more and
more sorrow. The son crucified above, the mother mourning beneath, his
wounds wounded her heart, his piercing was her piercing, every stroke of the
nails struck through her breast, all this while not a word is mentioned,
weeping would not suffer her to speak, who at any occasion spoke seldom, the
longest speech she used that we read of, was her Magnificate, her deuotionate
speech with God.

The Nurse sees her youngling dying, the Mother her Son. In one day she is
deprived of a son, of a Savior, though not lost, yet left for a time, such a
parting, such a son, such a mother, such tears, such love never was, nor
shall be? On the other side, O loving disciple, beloved of the Lord of love,
thou art now left for a time, but never cease to mention love; or write of
love! Jonathan and David, Jacob and Benjamin, wept at parting: it follows.

18 From the sixth hour, there was a darkness unto the ninth, the Sun of
righteousness suffers Eclipse, the visible Sun, or the most clear light of
the world hides his beams, as not able to behold the Lord of heaven and earth
suffering, all creatures seem to suffer with him the earth trembles, the
heavens are all in black, as in mourning manner. The graves open, the rocks or
stones cleave asunder, the whole frame of nature is disquieted, when as now
the God of nature suffered. What a solemn and doleful time was this, some
strike their breasts, others stand wondering? The Centurion says, as it were
lifting up his hands to heaven: Surely this was the Son of God.

19 The fourth word, was about the ninth hour, when he cried, Eli, Eli,
Lamasabacthani, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Which for that he
spoke in the Hebrew, some standing by and hearing this, said, he calls for
Elias. These according to Saint Jerome were the Roman Soldiers, who
understood not the Hebrew, or peradventure some of the Jews themselves, who
by reason of the noise, could not well discern what was spoken. The doubling
of the voice, shows his double nature, his Deity spoke not this, which was
impassible: Like as the Sun shining upon the wood, the axe cutteth the wood,
but the Sun remains inviolable. His humanity spoke this, which suffered
and spoke at this time as human nature is wont to speak: when it thinks it
self forsaken, not that the Son of God was any way doubtful of divine
assistance, but to show how truly he bare upon him man's infirmity, (sin
only excepted) which thinks it self forsaken in times of grief. Here we
are moved to suffer with Christ, beholding insensible creatures themselves to
suffer with him. S. Ambrose says, Pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod
doleret. He sorrowed for me which had nothing for himself to sorrow.
Rational affection cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, Sensitive
affliction cried the same, and yet in Christ, a voice not of diffidence, or so
much of complaint, as of admiration. Behold O man what I suffer for thee,
behold the punishments wherewith I am afflicted, and when thou beholdest the
outward man, think also that the inward man is partaker of sorrow and
suffering: wherewith I am pierced, finding the ungratefulness of thee toward me
suffering for thy sins. Here we learn in times of extremity to offer unto
God our sorrowful sighs and supplications, and though we seem to the eye of
the world to be forsaken; yet we may take comfort in his mercy, who is near
unto all them that call upon him, as the prophet speaks, yea then, when they
power out faithfully their complaints before him.

20 The fifth word was, when Jesus knew that all things were now accomplished
which were spoken of him, this remained: They gave me vinegar to Psa. 69. 2^.
drink, he says, Sitio, I thirst, that the Scripture might be fulfilled
which was written of him: They gave me vinegar to drink, when it is said that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, we do not understand this causatiuely, but
consequently, as the Schoolmen speak, for Christ did not this, therefore
because the Scripture had spoken it, but therefore the Scripture spoke it,
because Christ in time should do it. When he says, I thirst, what was this
thirst natural, caused by the emanation of his blood, together with the
extremities of his sorrows? Which in part also is true, for his blood
exhausted, extremity of thirst followed: but there was withal in Christ a
thirst supernatural, and this thirst was the salvation of souls wherewith he
labored, as with a most vehement thirst, or desire. The Prophet says, Sitit
anima mea ad deum, My soul is a thirst for God. This thirst of Christ was our
health, our joy, O good Jesus, says Saint Bernard: Sitis tua salus mea, Thy
thirst was my salvation.

21 And here somewhat is added to his suffering, for when these men had hurt
him so much, that they could almost hurt him no longer, they give him sower
wine, upon a bunch of I soap a bitter hard, mixed with Myrrh and gall, such as
they had given him to drink, before his lifting up to the Cross: here they
deny that unto the Son of God, which they were wont to grant to greatest
malefactors, giving them at these times Wine to drink, but Christ has no
other but vinegar and gall. Behold what a Supper they give our Lord (for it
was now Supper time,) here was the banquet, our sins gave him gall to eat,
and vinegar to drink, O miserable men that we are, to seek delicates: here
are we taught to drink with Christ, the wine of devotion mixed with Myrrh, the
mortification of the flesh: and gall, the conpunction of the spirit. On the
other side, we must take heed that we give not Christ thirsting for our
salvation, vinegar mixed with gall, as these men did, that is, an evil and
sinful life, which is vinegar mixed with the gal of scandalous conversation.

22 The sixth word was, when he said, Consummatum est, It is finished, that is,
all whatsoever was spoken of my suffering is now complete, the honor of my
Father, the good of the faithful, all that I should do concerning my
obedience to his will, who gave me this work to accomplish, Consummatum est,
It is finished: Nothing remains in this suffering but now my dying, and now
I die. This our savior spoke, as having fought a good fight, and finished his
course: this he spoke as one having undertaken a journey, and now gone
through many passages, at his iourneyes end he says, Consummatum est, It is
finished: first lifting up his eyes to heaven, Fathy will: then beholding men
upon the earth; faithful men your health: then respecting the breaking of the
Serpents head, Satan the vanquishing of thy power: Consummatum est, It is
finished, O happy voice of the Son of God!

23 The seventh word was, father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: S. Luke
says, that he syed this with a loud voice: some of the ancient Fathers ^ke
our Savior was now ^ditating upon the one and thirtieth Psalm, and coming
unto ^se words in the Psalm, In ^us tuas commendo spiritum ^eum: He uttered
them with ^udible voice. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, and so gave (...)
the ghost. This was now (...) ninth hour of the day, when (...) Sun was
darkened, the ^th shook, the graves opened, (...) the Evangelists show. At ^s
hour Adam sinned. Hora (...) Adam peccauit, Christus ex^auit, The same hour
of the ^ay wherein Adam sinned, Christ ^ed: by dying, Christ opened the gate of
Paradise, which Adam (...) sinning had shut up against (...) and his. Adam in
the Gar^en lost life, and Christ in the Garden restored life, when he yielded
himself with these words unto his Father, Into thy hands I commend my spirit:
These words being uttered, he gave up the ghost, his eyes closed, his
countenance pale, his head bended down: heaven nor earth ever saw such a sight,
the God of life, the Author of life, and life it self becomes dead.

In this word we may consider many things: as first, that our departing
souls should be commended into the hands of our heavenly Father: Secondarily,
somewhat we have here for the strengthening of our faith, Christ bending down
his head, uttered these words; not of constraint, but voluntarily: who ever
lay down to sleep so peaceably, as Christ died, when he gave up the ghost?
Man when they are dying, they are scarce able to breath, at this time Christ
speaks with a loud voice. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit We see
what Christ's example does teach us to do in commending our departing souls
into the hands of God, how at the hour of his death, he prayed, he wept, and
spoke unto his heavenly Father.

And here also may the Christian man enter into a large field (...)
meditation, upon many things together. We were more insensible then the
senseless creatures, (...) we should not be moved with the passion of our
Lord; whose death was our life: consider we (...) great things the Son of
God has done for us, and suffered for our redemption: consider be how great
things they were which he suffered, how great his sorrows were, which showed
the greatness of his love, how ^eat his injuries were, when he was falsely
accused, mocked, spetted upon, buffeted, whipped, crowned with thorns, berest
of ^s clothes, burdened with his cross; pierced with nails, lanced with a
spear, and so dyed. They shall see him who^ they have pierced. When Joseph
said unto his brethren, I am Joseph whom you Ge^. 45. 34.
^d into Egypt, they were so a^onished they had not a word to say: when Christ
shall say, I am your brother, I am he whom you crucified, how shall they be
confounded that crucified him? But what joy shall they have who believe on him?
Up O Christian soul, and with the Dove make thy nest in the holes of this
rock. Behold the wounds of thy Savior. Come to this Arc, whither all
creatures repair to save themselves. Stand, and behold a little with the
devout women, the body of thy Savior upon the Cross, see him afflicted from
top to toe, see him wounded in the head, to heal our vain imaginations: see
him wounded in the hands, to heal our evil actions: see him wounded in the
heart, to cure our vain thoughts: see his eyes shut up, which did enlighten
the world: see them shut, that thy eyes might be turned away from beholding
vanity: see, those ears which were wont to hear the joyful hy^e of the
Cherubins, Holy, holy, holy, now have heard Esai. 6. 3.
a multitude of reproaches: see, that countenance which was goodly to look
upon, is spetted (...) and buffeted. The blood of (...) cried, justice,
justice: but (...) blood of Christ crie^, mercy, (...): Oh that we had hearts
(...) meditate of the passion of our (...)! There is nothing of ^ch we ought
more to think, (...) to speak, more to read, or (...) to meditate of, then
of this, ^ause the remembrance hereof ^tameth to the salvation of (...)
souls, increases faith, dri^th away despair, gives forti^e against the
afflictions of the ^ld, strengthens us against ^tatious, (...) the mind
(...) joy, causes a loathing of (...), and after a wonderful man stirs us
up to all devotion. This our Savior Christ him^fe well thought upon, when he
(...) so high a Sacrament so full (...) hauenly mysteries, for the ^tinuall
renewing in our hearts (...) this his most blessed, passion. (...) sweet Jesus,
should ever vn^fulnes of this love of thine ^pe upon us? Should not thy ^ous
blood soften our adamant hearts, who have delivered us from infinite miseries,
purchased by thy death? O infinite goodness, and freely offered! thy self have
offered thy self unto thy Father; a sacrifice for our sins, there is no
burden heavier then sin, this have thou eased us of: O blessed Son if God
while I live, says the Prophet, will I call upon the Lord, yea, as long as I
have any being. We will offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and
praise his name for ever and ever.

And thus we meditate of the passion of our Lord, who suffered death, to
overcome death: of which Saint Austen mentions Aug. S^rm. de Not. 3. et in
Psalm. 34.
a double cause, the one, that Christ died for us to deliver us, the other,
that those whom he redeemed by his death, he might teach by his grace, and by
his example instruct: for why did the head, says he, suffer, but to give the
body an example? Christ humbled himself unto death, even unto the death of the
cross: we ought also to humble our ^es to be crucified unto the ^ld, and the
world to us: unto (...) were our sins imputed, ^to us his righteousness: he
gave himself a sacrifice to save us, and we give our selves a sacrifice to
serve him.

Chap. 28.
Of Christ's resurrection from the dead, and how the verity hereof does much
strengthen our Christian faith.
Love, says Solomon, Cant. 8. 6.
is as strong as death, we shall see in the resurrection of our Lord this
verified, whom we have considered in his passion, dying for our sins: for
here we find that love which was stronger then death. Now behold we him, as a
Champion returning from the spoils after so many labors and travails, now
meet we him with gratulation. Our David 1. Sa^. 18. 7
has slain his ten thousand, our Eagle is renewed, our Phoenix is revived, our
Jonas is come safe and sound from the belly of the Whale. Our Sun that went
down in a ruddy cloud, is risen again with glorious beams of light: our
grain of corn that was cast into the earth, is sprung up and flourishes: our
Joseph is delivered out of prison: our Sampson Judge. 16. 3.
has carried away the gates (...) his enemies: our spouse is (...), the voice
of the Turtle is ^ard in our land, Christ our re^er is risen from the dead. He
is risen early, that was late in the evening laid in the Sepul^r after his
doleful passion? he is risen, he is risen, where^ with the Prophet, we say,
Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30. 5.


Christ hastened his resurrec^n, that his disciples might not (...) long dwell
in sorrow, he would ^t their mournful hearts should (...) reciue comfort. Christ
rose ^ly the third day, to have layen ^ger, might have bred doubt of (...)
rising, to have rose sooner, of (...) dying. Had only the sorrow^ Apostles, or
those women ^at came mourning unto the ^epalcher, the joy of the resur^ion? No,
this was the joy of thousand thousands, which may say with David. This is the
Ps. 118. 20
day of the Lord, we will rejoice and be glad in it. Look we unto the passion
before mentioned, there we see weeping, and wayling, sorrow, and suffering on
every side. The blessed virgin, the Disciples full of heaviness, now all is
turned into joy. The Angel appears in white, the women run and tell the
Disciples, they scarce believe Ioh. 20. 2. 3
either the Angels, or one another for joy. A little before, the stone is
refused of the builders, Deliver unto us Barrabas: now is Ps. 118. 22. Esa.
28. 16.
this stone the head of the corner, which ioynes together the building of two
nations, both Jews and Gentiles. A little before, we have no other King but
Caesar, now is he a King above all Caesar's: A little before, he trusted in
God, let him deliver him, if he will have him; Now is he delivered, and God is
with him, and he with God: A little before, is he a lamb ^ed unto the
slaughter, but now a Lion of the tribe of Judah: A little Act. 8. 32.
before, he was in humility, and Apo. 5. 5.
^ged of others, now is he risen to appear the Judge both of quick and dead,
at the right hand of God above in glory.

2 Wherefore O faithful Christian man rejoice in the Lord, yea, says the
Apostle, again I say, rejoice, rejoice in the resurrection Phil. 4. 14.
of thy Savior: for many are the benfites that hence ^rise. Now is thy Lord
returned from the battle, nay, from the conquest over the devil, sin,
hell, and death, thanks be unto God that has given us the victory by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Believe that his resur^ion 1. Cor. 15. 57.
was the cause of thy resurrection, for he which raised Christ from the dead,
shall also raise these our mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in us. If
thou consider this, thou shall have consolation against all fear and dread of
death, for thou may say, I know that my Redeemer lives. Again, I will lay
me down to sleep, and take my rest, for the Lord makes me to dwell in
safety. Because this was so beh^uefull a point for the stay of our christian
faith, Christ appeared so often unto his Apostles, after his resurrection
communed with them, as at other Lu. 2^. 32.
times: so then especially, when their hearts did burn within them as he
opened the Scriptures, showing them the verity of his resurrection. The
Apostles whose charge was to teach Act. 2. 24. 32. Act. 3. 26. Act. 4. 33.
glad tidings unto the world, the first tidings they taught, was the doctrine
of the resurrection.

The Evangelists do most diligently set forth unto us the resurrection of
Christ, as a thing profitable and joyful to all faithful believers, for in
the resurrection, we see how Christ is exalted, and what hope we have in him.
This they lay down with Mat. 16. 21.
many circumstances, both by testimonies before and after: before, that he had
told his Disciples he must die, and rise again: after, in that he was
conversant amongst them forty days, walked in the way with two of them,
communing of the things that ^re done at Jerusalem, (and surely in time of
sorrow to com^ne of Christ, and talk of him in our wearisome journey of this
life, shall much comfort us,) at this time, Christ walks with them, their
understanding is opened.

3 The women come unto the Sepulcher, and view every place thoroughly, they
find the stone ^ed away, the linen clothes ^aining, a sign his body was not
taken away, but risen, for these were together laid with his body in the
Sepulcher: the body ^ne, the Angels testify he is risen, what say the
Soldiers to this? First they confess a truth, afterward corrupted with money,
they give out, his Disciples had stolen away his body, while they were a
sleep. If they were a sleep, how saw they the Disciples steal away the
body? If they were not a sleep, how could a few weak fishers take away the
body from a band or company of armed Soldiers: but let them confess the
truth, as they did before unto the high Priests, and after when they were
charged, that they had seen a vision Mat. 28. 13.
of Angels, that he was risen indeed. So the verity is invincible, and the
joy great of the resurrection. We see a desire and love to Christ in Peter and
John, for why, they run to the Sepulcher (affection makes us diligent) the
women come with John. 20. 4.
sweet odors to anoint the body, we have no sweet odors, but many unsavory
sins to bring unto the resurrection, and there to offer up the incense of our
praise, which is the sweetest offering our hearts can yield. Mary comes near
her Lord, Christ says unto her, Woman, touch me not, not but that Christ had a
body tangible Ioh. 2^. 17.
after his resurrection, but Mary touch me not, do not so much affect my
presence here on earth, as my presence in heaven. By this we learn, to know
and honor Christ, as he is risen, and sits at the right hand of God above.
S. Paul writing to Timo^e, says, (...): Remember that 2. Ti. 2. 8.
Jesus Christ is risen from the ^ad: When the Teacher gives his Scholar many
lessons, if he give him one amongst yt rest with (...) Momento, Remember this:
he thinks that of all other of most especial regard, and worthy of the best
observation, and it seems the Apostle so accounted of the resurrection: for
what is there more necessary for our christian meditation, then here to call
to mind that it was he who did redeem Israel, that as he rose powerfullie in
himself, so also did he in those that believe on him, that he rose (...),
according unto the Scriptures, that he rose by 1. Cor. 15. 4
way of equity, for first he humbled himself, and then God exalted him,
giving him a name above all names. That he rose by way of Phil. 2. 10
power, for being without sin, death could not hold him: for it Act. 2. 14.
was impossible he should be holden of death.

5 He whom John not long before had seen as a sacrifice offered upon the
Cross, when he was, as the Prophet speaks, Esai. 53. 2.
without for me to look upon, now he sees him after another manner then
amongst theenes, now Apo. 1. 13. 14.
walking amongst the seven candlestickes: then clothed in purple, by way of
derision, now clothed as the Sun: then called a King by those that
reproached him, now called the King of Kings by them that honor him. Wherefore
as we have seen him in his humility, so with John also let us see him in his
glory. As we have seen him fighting for us in his passion, so let us also
behold him tryumphing for us in his resurrection, for all was for us. In the
passion and resurrection of Christ our Savior, consists the sum of all our
happiness, he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification:
unless he had dyed, we had not been delivered Romans 4. 25.
from sin, and consequently from death: unless he had rose from the dead,
we had not received comfort of rising again from the dead; his passion
removed away that which was evil, his resurrection brought unto us that which
was good. As in these two we have a double benefit, so have we a double
example: in his passion, an example of suffering, in his resurrection of hope,
when we have suffered. Which does show in us two lives, the one in the flesh
laborious, which we must endure, the other when we are delivered from the
flesh, which we must hope.

6 Now we must not only acknowledge with the mouth, or believe in the heart
this sacred truth of the resurrection, but we must also be raised up to newnes
of life: for thus much does the holy Ghost require of us in believing the
resurrection. We Romans 6. 4.
are (says the Apostle) buried with him by Baptism unto his death: that like
as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father: so we also
should walk in newnes of life. And this is the similitude which we do carry
of his resurrection.

This is to set our affection on heavenly things, or things that are abaue
where Christ fitteth at the right hand of God; and this Colo. 3, 1.
is the third thing that we should apply our selves unto, in believing the
resurrection from the dead, that is, first to rise with him from the death of
sin, and consequently to be raised by him unto a hope of the resurrection
unto eternal life.

7 It is wonderful to consider with how many strange enemies Christ had to do
at once, with the world, and the Prince of the world, with death, and sin the
cause of death.

Who would have thought that one sheep should have been able to have
withstoode so many Wolves, but yet hear the triumphant voice of the
conqueror. Death, where is thy sting? Hell, 1. Cor. 15.
where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the Law. The Apostle like a valiant champion goes forth, and offers
challenge and combat to all these, or any of them: Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods chosen? If Satan say, that will I, because they have
followed the ways of ungodlines: If the world say, I will lay to their charge
the many vanities they received of me: if the Law say, I will indite them
because of transgression: if death say, I will arrest them by reason of sins:
S. Paul answers them all with a short reply: Jesus Christus mortuus est, imo
resurrexit: Jesus Christ is dead, Romans 8. 34.
yea, he is risen from the dead, as if he would say, that same rising of
Christ from the dead, has bent you all of all your force, and now all your
Pleas are frustrate. Nay, how is the poor Captive comforted, when the Judge
himself shall say, Who shall detain this man? I have pa^ his ransom.

8 What a joyous thing is it now to be strengthened in the faith of the
Resurrection? First, in regard of the calamities of this life, for what shall
dismay us, seeing the members hope to be joined with their head? Secondly,
though this life be transitory and troublesome, yet Daniel shall be delivered
out of the Lions den: The Dove shall return to the Arc with a branch of
Olive, when once the flood and waters are fallen: Jeremy shall come out of the
pit whereinto he is cast of his enemies: Our noble David having gotten the
victory, is gone triumphantly to reign in Jerusalem, we all his people and
army tracing and trayning after him, we were detayned and held as captives of
cruel enemies, but by Christ the enemies are vanquished, and we delivered, how
are we delivered but by the son of God? was it not his suffering only that
was (as has been said) the removing of evil? Him self says, what profit is
there in my blood, if I goedowne to corruption? as if he would tell us, there
were something adjoined heereunto, to make his suffering glorious and
beneficial unto others, and this was his resurrection.

9 Every effect naturally does show his cause: The resurrection was the effect
of his deity, and therefore gave evident Testimony he was God. Again, his
resurrection confirms our faith, for so does S. Paul reason against the
Pseudo-Apostoli, if the dead 1. Cor. 15. 13. 14.
rise not, then is not Christ risen, if Christ be not risen, then where is our
believing? but Christ is risen, therefore there is a resurrection. The head
does not rise without the body: The head is risen, the body therefore shall
rise. So the resurrection of Christ is the cause of our resurrection, and he
rising, we all rise.

The Lord is King (says the Prophet,) Let the earth rejoice, end the ^es be
glad thereof. The first fruits being sanctified, all the other fruits are
hallowed unto the Lord: Thomas bring hi^er thy hand, and feel the print of the
nails: Blessed are those that have not seen, and yet do Ioh. 20. 27
believe. That which befell Christ's body (says S. Austen) the third day,
shall befall our bodies in the last day.

10 Four sorts were there, which beheld and heard the whole manner of our
Saviors passion, and resurrection. The first were a kind of men, which only
were present as spectators hearing and seeing what was done without further
observation, and these were many of the common people, which following their
own affairs, little respected that which was then a doing. The second, were
the Soldiers, who when they had watched the Sepulcher, seen the Angel of
the Lord, and the Earthquake, as men amazed went forth into the City, showing
what had happened, yet by and by corrupted with money, did not stick to tell
the contrary. The third, were the high Priests and Pharisees, these altogether
endeavoring to suppress the rumor of the resurrection, could in no case abide
that any should so much as mention it. The fourth, were the disciples of Christ,
and those believed on him: to these did he appear, to these brought he great
joy when they beheld him, and communed with him after he was risen.

11 After the same manner are there in the world four sorts that are
diversely affected toward this Article of the resurrection. Some as those of
the common sort, receive neither joy (...) sorrow, as if it did not appertain
unto them to have care or respect to this principal point of their Christian
belief: These have the name of Christians, but little consider what ever
Christ did for them. Some there are of the second sort, which do believe that
Christ is risen, they think of it, and speak of it, but they ^seuer not: for
going away, they (...) corrupted with the world, they speak the contrary, by
their works they deny, that there is any resurrection at all. These like the
Soldiers that kept the Sepulcher, follow the favor of the world, and are led
from truth to falsehood.

O unhappy men that for vile things of the world leave the joyful tidings
they have heard and seen of the Resurrection. Some there are, who with the
high Priests and Pharisees cannot endure the same of Christ, or those which
would set forth the honor of his Resurrection: And of these what shall we
say? When they hear this happy tidings, they labor to draw the minds of men
from the devotion thereof, these are the worst of all other. But some there are
which with the Disciples rejoice, and never rest until they come unto the
Sepulcher: for love rests not, and these see it so as it is told them, and
Christ by faith appears unto them: they are assembled with the faithful, and
not absent with Thomas, who by his absence had not with others at first the joy
of the Resurrection. They go not with Mary from the Sepulcher, but are there
weeping until his grace speak comfortably unto them, then they rejoice and
say: The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared unto us: And these are those
who have part in the ^st Resurrection, for on such the ^ond death has no
power. This first Resurrection is to re^ne Jesus Christ in true faith, (...) to
rise from sin by newnes (...) (...), and these also shall one day (...) part
in the second resurrec^, when they shall sit with ^ft that is risen before,
when ^ey shall live with him, and reign ^th him in the Kingdom of heaven. In
the mean time, Christ still inuiteth them (says Saint Austen) to that life,
where Aug. Ser. de tep. 114
there is no defect, no death: The Angels say, why seek you the ^ng amongst
the dead? If one ^ke a mine of gold in some place, where no such thing is to be
h^d, ^ee which well knows it to be (...), does he not say, why does this ^an
dig and del^e in vain? (...) labor is but lost, he makes ^ch, whereinto
he may des^d, as for treasure here it is ^ot: In like manner while we ^ke
our ^licity here, well we may dig and delue, and endanger our selves, but
here lies no treasure, wherefore we must set our affection in heaven, whither
Christ is risen and gone before us.

Chap. 29.
Of Christ's ascension up into heaven: besides many good instructions, how
hereby the hope of our ascending, is confirmed.
BEcause the asc^ion of our Lord was after all his travails, the farewell he
took of the world, his doings and sayings at this time would have at least our
Christian attention. S. Mark Mar. 16. 15.
tells us that he was giving his Apostles their commission, to preach the
Gospel to every creature, that they should have power as the working of
miracles, and the like, to con^rme this teaching by: so after he had spoken
unto them, he was received up into heaven. Saint Luke tells us, that he
gathered them together, commanding them not to depart from Jerusalem, but
there to wait for the promise of the father, which, said he, you heard of me.
And when he had spoken these things, while he was even Act. 1. 9.
now (as the same Evangelist says in another place) blessing the, he
departed from them, and was carried up into heaven, for a cloud took him out of
their sight, and they returned to Jerusalem from mount Oliuet, and when they
were come into an upper Chamber, they all continued in prayer and supplication
with the women, and Mary the mother (...) Jesus.

2 H^re we see a loving Master taking his leave of his io^ng family, h^re is
blessing and praying on both sides, here is comforting, and looking up to
heaven: though distance of place id^ separate them for a time, yet ^ue should
continue them as one for ever. The men of Ephesus wept abundantly, when Saint
Paul departed from them, being Act. 20. 38
chiefly sorry for the words that he spoke, that they should see his face no
more. But two men in white apparel, or Angels in men's form ask the
Apostles, why stand you gazing or looking up to heaven, and they tell them,
This Jesus shall so come, even as you have seen him go to Heaven. Act. (...).
10.


When Elias was taken up because his prayers had stood Israel in as good
steed as all the horses and chariots did against the force of their enemies:
The text says, Elisha cried: My Father, my Father, the chariot of Israel, 2.
Kin. 12. 12.
and the horsemen thereof, and he saw him no more. The Apostles of our Lord,
though silent, we may easily conceive, their hearts cried, Our Savior, Our
Savior. At the very instant, two Ambassadors from the Court of Heaven, to
prevent doleful passions, tell them that they shall so see him come, as they
saw him ascend, calling to mind what himself had before told ^m: Ascendo ad
Patrem mean, et Patrem vestrum, I as^d to my Father, and to your father.

3 He that ever gave his Disciples divine instructions, ceased (...) at the
last, even unto the very ^ant of his departure from (...), to teach them still.
His ^ing them what they should (...), where they should abide, in ^at manner,
in what place, his ^ing them, his gathering the^ ^her with one accord: all ^ch
might learn them many ^ns. And where does Christ ^ue his Disciples, but upon
^t O^uet, where he had of^ prayed with them, and they ^th him? from thence he
ascen^. When we have done our de^ons in this world, and done ^th the world,
when we have ^ssed our brethren by holy acti^s, assembled in prayer, given ^m
good examples, continued ^ongst them in one accord, from ^unt Oliuet, our last
devotion (...) prayers unto God, or (if prayers cannot be mentioned in words)
the lifting up of our hands may suffice, or if that fail, S^um corda; let our
hearts be on high: Our devotion and prayer is the mountain from which we
ascend, and for Gods sake (says Saint Bernard) let it not seem we arisome to
abide long on this Bernar. in ascensio. do.
mountain, let us raise up our minds and our hearts, and our hands unto
heaven, and let us ascend with our Lord ascending. Let us follow the Lamb
whither so ever he goes, let us follow him suffering, by mortifying the
flesh; let us follow him rising, by newnes of life, but most joyfully of all,
let us follow him ascending, by setting our affections Coloss. 3. 1.
on heavenly things, or things above.

4 How this Article of our Christian belief, Ascendit in coelum, He ascended
up into heaven, whither he has carried our nature before, does appertain unto
the stay of our Christian faith, is best perceived of faithful believers. The
death of Christ, says Saint Austen, is our viui^ation, his resurrection is our
August. in ascen. dom.
^e, but his ascension is our glo^cation: when as now the Angels themselves,
might seem to have sung Christ with a Psalm (...) heaven, Exultate domine in
vir^e tua, Be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength: And his Apostles
seeing him ascended up into glory, returned to Ierusa^m with great joy, and
there Lu. 24. 53
^tinuallie in the Temple, did ^de and praise God, because ^e sure faith had
shaken off ^andalous and doubtful sorrow, remembering his words, I go to
prepare a place for you.

How forceable testimonies are these? every one telling us what is the end of
our Christian be^fe. For as all other things in Christ were for us, he was
borne for us, he was given to us, is for us also he ascended, says Saint
Bernard. Where the bo^e is, thither shall the Eagles ^so be gathered together:
we are by nature a noble kind of creature, and of a lofty spirit, naturally
desirous to get higher and higher, and therefore we show of whose stock and
lineage we are, when we covet to ascend whither he is ascended, who is go^
before us.

And no small comfort is it, to have this assured, that howsoever we are kept
down for a time: yet we shall one day ascend to the full accomplishment of our
good desires.

5 In the mean time, what should we do but follow him in whom we ascend, in
the sweet smelling savor of his perfumes: knowing that pride cannot ascend
whither humility is gone: that hatred cannot come, whither love is ascended:
that (...) cannot approach where virtue is exalted: that impiety may not
appear, where holiness it self is seated: and therefore to follow him in
humility, in love, in virtue, in holiness, are as it were the steps of
ascending, to co^ unto the place whither he is gone before. It was once s^ide
unto man, Terra es and in terra^ Genesis 3. 19.
redibis, but now is it said, Terra (...) and in coelum ibis, earth thou art,
(...) yet into heaven thou shall (...), whither since thou art going, leave in
any case those allurements, which not only stay thy ^rse, but cast thee back
to thy ^tter peril.

6 And here it is not amiss to call to mind some several ver^es of our
Savior, precedent ^to his ascension, as first, if ever ^at of Samuel spoken
unto Saul, Obedience is better then sacrifice, ^re verified, then most truly in
(...) ascension of the Son of God. He was obedient unto his fathers will, we
see after all his ^ience how he is exalted to heaven, as if obedience were
the ^ay thither: Consumma^ opus Ioh. 17. 4.
^od dedisti mihi: I have accom^ed the work which thou ga^st ^e. Secondarily,
we may ^sider his humility according (...) that, Qui ascendit, descendit, Ephesians.
4. 10
(...) which ascended, first descen^d, to show that humility also in ^g down
to a lowly conceie (...) our selves, is the second step of following him in his
ascension.

Thirdly, we may consider his patient suffering, according to that, If we
suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Fourthlie, we may call to mind,
how familiarly this loving shepherd was conversant with his little flock,
until the very time that he left them: to show tha^ (...) pass our time, and
to end our time, in charitable and loving manner amongst men, is the way
whereby we follow the Son of God, ascending up into heaven. Last of all,
pureness or sincerity of life and conversation, is a degree of ascending after
him. If we will, says Saint Austen, ascend with Christ, we must leave our
faults, for with our Physician our faults ascend not, Quis ascendit in Psa. 24.
4.
montem Domini, says David, Who ascends unto the hill of the Lord, but he
that has innocent hands, and a pure heart?

7 We would be happy: I Aug. de temp. 141.
know it says Saint Austen, but why seek we not the way to happiness? Many
there are that would ascend, but few endeavor themselves to walk the way of
ascending, these with the Sons of Zebedee, would sit Mat. 20. 21.
on the right and left hand in Christ's kingdom, but they will not taste of
Christ's bitter cup in his passion. Others there are which fearing they cannot
as^d, have their whole hearts bu^d in the earth, where they are content to
abide. A third sort ^ere are, which so load themselves with the cares of this
world, and are so heavy that they (...) lift up their minds to hea^n, but even
as the Serpent whose breast is upon the earth, ^ere they abide, and go no
farther, ^d sure a lament able thing is it, that whereas Christ with so much
labor, has laid out a way for us, yet so few there are that follow him in
this way.

O that we would mark, and mar^ing keep the happy course of Christ's
ascending, for even in ascending many err: the Angel would ascend, but of an
Angel he became a devil: man would ascend in Paradise, but from a happy
creature he became miserable: both fell by affecting power, and knowledge, and
many follow this course; now Christ has taught us a true manner of ascending
as we have heard, he first descended, and then ascended: he ascended the
mount to pray and to teach: he ascended Math. 5. 1. Luke 6. ^2.
the Ass to weep: he ascended the cross to suffer, and after all, he
ascended heaven to reign in glory: These are the true degrees of ascending:
first, we must ascend to prayer: secondly, we must ascend the mount, to
learn the way to blessedness: thirdly, we must ascend the mount to
contemplate of glory, as he did when he went to be transfigured: fourthly,
we must ascend upon our carnal appetites, to weep for our sins: ^ftly,
we must ascend unto the cross, to be crucified unto the world, and so last of
all we shall ascend, in good time by the grace of God into heaven, to rejoice
with Christ in glory.

8 To all this, says S. Bernard, may be annexed this short form of ascending.
First, we must ascend to our heart, that is, to the knowledge of our selves:
then in our heart, that is, to acknowledge our own infirmities: next from our
heart, that is, from the love of our selves: and last of all, above our heart,
that is, to the love of Christ. What does our Christian love on earth: when
Christ our head is in heaven? The Lord is my portion, says David, If we love
Christ, why are not our affections with him in heaven? She said unto Sampson,
Thou have said, thou love me; if it were so, thy mind Iud. 16. 15
would be with me? For the Apostles, Christ was taken out of their sight, but
not out of their hearts, by his corporal presence he departed from them, but
for his spiritual presence he continued with them: and therefore as they in
heart ascended with him, so he still in spirit remained with them, by this his
spiritual presence, which was and is ever the same. And here we may observe,
how Christ departed from his Apostles: first, he leads them out of the City
by way of application, from the ^oncourse of sin: secondly, he leads the^
to mount Oliuet, a place of prayer: thirdly, he blesses them, or endueth them
with his grace at parting, this done, he ascends, and this doing, all
faithful believers ascend.

9 Thus we see how Christ ascends up unto his father, how, though he left
them as concerning his bodily presence, yet with his love, his grace, his
power, he was still with them.

Concerning the mystery of his ascension, it is very great and excellent, the
high and glorious King clothed with our nature^ is entered into his royal
palace. By this we that are flesh and blood, have a comfortable and sure
trust of our ascending up into heaven, and therefore we find cause of joy in
the meditation hereof, for four reasons: first, that we have an Advocate now
speaking for us at the right hand of God: secondly, that where he is, we shall
be, Assu^am vos ad me ipsum, I will take you unto my self: thirdly, that as he
has taught us what to do, so also what to hope: fourthly, that he has left
unto us a comfortable promise in the mean time: I ascend unto my Father and
your father.

10 And now as we have here many good instructions, so how our hope of
ascending is confirmed we see, that nothing may be more joyfully thought upon
then this, while we are here in this mortal body of ours. Esra and Nehemias,
show with how great desire the Nation of Nehe. 1. 1.
the Jews were held toward the earthly Jerusalem, after they had been a
while in captivity: with what desire should we be ^ed of our heavenly
Jerusalem, after our captivity here in this world? assuredly there is
nothing that we can meditate of with more joy, then of Christ's ascension up
into heaven, to the right hand of his Father, where he sits as now resting
for ever, which once was in labors of the world: at the right hand of
Majesty, which amongst men lived at the left hand of adversity. In He. 11. 25
the old law, the high Priest once (...) year entered the Holy of Holies: we
have an high Priest (says the Apostle) that is entered into the heavens, and
there makes intercession for us.

Chap. 30.
Of the coming down of the holy Ghost, and how we should in all Christian
manner entertain this divine spirit.
IT is expedient for you, says Christ our Savior Ioh. 16. 7.
unto his Apostles, That I depart from you, for if I depart not, the comforter
which is the holy Ghost will not come. It is expedient, that I depart from you,
that I depart. No marvel though the Disciples hearts at these words were full
of sorrow, to hear of their masters departure: but that this might be
expedient unto them, they could not but wonder how: Wherefore Christ by and by
tells them the cause why this should be, that is to say, his departure from them
was, that the comforter might come, Unless I depart, the comforter which is
the holy Ghost, will not come, It is expedient that I depart, because every
thing has his time: It was expedient that I should suffer to make a
satisfaction for sin: it was expedient that I should die, that you might be
delivered from death; it is expedient that I ascend, that so I may open you the
way to ascending: it is expedient that I depart from you, that so the holy
Ghost, which is the Comforter may come. But what is this, says Saint Bernard?
This is a great mystery, Unless I depart the Comforter shall not come: Was
the presence of the holy spirit so opposite unto the presence of Christ's
humanity (which was not conceived, but by the operation of the same holy
spirit, that now the one will not come, without the departure of the other?
What is this, Unless I depart? Ber. in as^ent. Do.
First, the head is glorified, then the members are graced The Ap^stles for his
bodily absence, shall have from henceforth the holy Ghost to supply his
presence, Behold I am with you unto the end. Genesis 1, 2.


2. In the creation when the earth was without form, Spiritus super aquas, The
spirit moved upon the waters: in the re^mption when the mind of man was without
form, the same spirit moved upon the sinful waters of our souls, Emittis
spiritum Ps. 103, 30
tuum, and creabuntur, and reno^abis faciem eorum: Thou sen^est out thy spirit,
says the Pro phet, and they are created, and thou shall renew the face of
them. God the Father said, Fiat lux, Let there be light in this greater
world: God the holy Ghost said, Fiat cognitio Dei in anima hominis, Let there
be the knowledge of God in the mind of man, of man this lesser world. God the
Father said, Fiat firmamentum, Let there be a firmament. God the holy Ghost
said, Firmetur voluntas in bono^, Let the will of man be confirmed in that
which is good. God the Father said, Let the waters be gathered together in one
place: God the holy Ghost said, Let many graces be united in one soul. God
the Father said, Fiant luminaria in c^lo: let there be lights in heaven. God
the holy Ghost said, Let the lights of faith, hope, and charity, be fixed in
the believing soul. God the Father said, Fiant volatilia, Let there be flying
fowls, God the holy Ghost said, Let there be Meditations in the mind of man
soaring upward. God the Father said, Faciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram, let
us make man according to our own likeness? God the holy Ghost has said the
self same: Let him be according to our Image, holy as I am holy, and thus we
see our Saviors saying verified, Expedit, it is expedient.

3 Again, if we respect our regeneration, we know what was our state by
nature, when the Apostle says, (...), The children of wrath, but now being
Ephe. 2. 3.
borne again by the holy Ghost we are cast in a new mold, and so are become
Filii Dei, The children of God. If we respect the powers and faculties of the
soul the intellectual part, and the will: the intellectual part to disce^ne,
the will to desire heavenly things, these were restored by the holy spirit. If
we respect our s^nctification, we were as Naaman 2. Ki. 5. 16
the Syrian, until our wa^ing in this Jordan, therefore is the spirit of God
called Spiritus sanctus, the holy Spirit, either to discern it from other
spirits, or else of the powerful effect when it makes us holy. If we respect
the darkness of our understanding, the holy ghost is called, (...), Illuminatio,
an ^lightning of the mind of man. If we respect the strengthening of our
^aith against terrors of conscience within, The spirit of God Romans 8. 16
does bear witness, says the Apostle, to our spirit, whereby we cry Abba
Father. If we respect the calamities of the world without, Christ promising to
send his Apostles, this holy spirit said, (...), The comforter or Advocate
Ioh. 14. ^6.
shall come unto you, to cheer up their sorrowful souls in all adversities.
If we respect the mortification of the flesh, the same Apostle tells us, that
we do this by the help of the holy spirit: If we respect the
understanding, it was deaf and dumb, until the holy Ghost said Ephata. And
what need we more to show, how expedient it was for us, and still is, that
we be partakers of the holy spirit? without the vital spirit, what is the
mortal body but an earthly carcass? without this holy spirit, what is the
soul of man, but a Sepulcher of sin? That there does dwell in us a living
spirit; our living actions show, that there is in us a divine spirit, our
divine actions approve, When heathen m^n did perceive that there was something
in them, which did move them to argue, to discourse, to compare things present
with things to come, they did straightway gather that there was in man, more
then a lumpish body, and therefore they inferred that there was a soul: but
when the children of God do find something within them, that makes them to
pray, to repent, that ^pes them from falling into a thousand vndooinges, they
straightwayes perceive that there is a man within the man, to (...), the divine
spirit of God himself. Motum sentimus, modum ^scimus, we feel the motion, we
know no: the manner. God gave the people Angels food from heaven, they called
it Manna, saying, Lord, what is this? Having di^ine N^. 16. 19.
inspirations from above, which we find moving in us good desires, we say, Lord
what is this? This is the holy Ghost. And therefore for this article of our
belief, it may be said, we do not so much heat with our ^ares, or see with
our eyes: Credo in spiritum sanctum, but find it true in our very souls, I
believe in the holy ghost.

4 That this holy Ghost is God, by our believing in him, we acknowledge as
much. Peter said unto Ana^ias, Why have Act. 5, 3, 4
thou lied unto the holy Ghost? he by and by adds, Thou have not lied unto
any man, but unto God, The holy ghost therefore is God. The Apostle S. Paul
says to the Corinthians, Know you not that 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20.
your bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost? He by and by wills them to
glorify God in their bodies: The holy Ghost therefore is God. Whosoever has
power of cleansing from sin, the same is God, but this power has the holy
Ghost; the holy Ghost therefore is God. Et tetigit labia, et abstulit peccati,
Esai. 6.
says Esaias, He touched my lips, and took away my sins. Last of all, to
whom so ever we give glory, the same is God, but as unto the Father, and unto
the Son, glory is given: so also is it unto the holy ghost. The Cherubins
cry three times, Holy, holy, Esa. 6. 3. 4.
holy, as speaking unto three, and yet in the words following. Lord God of
Hosts, as appliable unto one.

We marvel when we consider that men shall go to God, but we do not so
much marvel at this, that God does come to men?

5 A familiar thing is it amongst those that love to leave pledges of love,
Jonathan to show 1. Sa^. 18. 4
his love to David, left with him the coat that was upon him, and other
things, his sword, his ^ow, ^s pledges of his love: Elias when he was taken up
into heaven, left 2. Ki. 2. 14
^is cloak with his servant: our Jonathan has left with us a pledge of love,
a pledge of our hea^enly inheritance that is to come: ^ur Elias has left us a
cloak. O precious garment! our nuptial ornament, This is that clothing which
does cover our unrighteousness, let us make much of this garment, wherein we
John. 4. 15
come with Jacob for a blessing. When the woman of Samaria heard our Savior
Christ tell of a water, which being once drunk of, the party should never
thirst again, she said, Lord give me of this water: So when we do hear of
that spirit which does sanctify our souls, cleanse our sins, comfort our
consciences, ^minate our understanding, strengthen our faith, and is as a
pledge unto us of Gods divine love, nay of glory to come; as the woman said,
Lord give me of this water; so may we all say, Lord give us of this spirit.

6 The excellent effects of this divine spirit may be gathered by the manner
of the appearing of the same spirit, as in a cloud at our Saviors
transfiguration, in form of a Dove at Mat. 17, 5.
his Baptism, and upon the Apostles in fiery tongues. The cloud may signify
moisture, or the dew of heaven: The Dove the divine verities of humility, Mat.
3. 16
meekenes, and peace: the fiery tongues; of fiery, because the seven gifts
of the holy Ghost have the seven qualities of fire: it purges by the gift of
fear, it sof^eth by the gift of piety, it adorneth by the gift of knowledge,
^t makes solid by the gift of fortitude, ^t lifts up by the gift of counsel
it ^lightneth by the gift of understanding, it burns by the gift of charity.
Of tongues, to show that these gifts as they burn inwardly so do they speak
^utwardly: nay of cloven t^ngs, (...) it were one tongue divided in^ many, for
to show the diverse ^guages given by this spirit.

Furthermore, the appearing (...) the holy Ghost was visible in (...) tongues,
and sure it is, we ^st show signs of Gods spirit, (...) as it does kindle in
charity, so (...) it speak charitably. The (...) Ghost is re^embled unto the
John 3, 8. Act. 2. 2.
(...), and there was a mighty (...) at the coming down ther^* First, to
show that the doc^ino of the Gospel should now ^ake out into the world, and
that (...) none can keep back the force of the wind, so should none be able
to hinder the passage of this ^octrine. Secondarily, the wind ^ceably be^reth
down what^uer does resist it: so did the ^rking of this spirit. Thirdly, (...)
wind is wont to carry up the (...) against the main stream (...) swiftest
tides that run, so does the holy Ghost bear us up against the strongest
current of natural inclination. Again, the holy Ghost is resembled unto
water, because it cleanses. David calls it a right spirit, right Psa. 51.
10. Romans 8. 15. Ioh. 14. 26. Heb. 9, 14.
because it leads us the right way. The Apostle calls it the spirit of
Adoption, because it makes us the children of God* Sometimes it is called the
Teacher of truth, sometimes the eternal spirit, all which names ^oe tend to
show the diverse operations of the holy Ghost* as (...) the former appearance of
fire, (...) stre turns all things into fire, because it expe^eth the coldness
of our hearts, and bath burns with inward love, as also shines by outward
charity. It teaches, (...) directs, it comfort, it cleanses, in a cloud,
in a Dove, in fire, in tongues, in the wind, all which move us to pray with
the Prophet, Emitte spiritum tuum: Lord ^end forth thy spirit, and Ps. 103, 13
we shall be created. The light of Faith shall arise in us, our (...) shall be
confirmed in good, man^ graces shall be collected in one: our desires shall
mount vpwar^, and last of all, we shall be holy as is holy.

7 Contra^ise, without this (...) spirit what are we but as (...) men of Sodom
stricken with ^dnesse, not knowing which (...) to go? sorrowful is it to 1.
Sa^ 16, 14.
^ider the case of Saul, who ^en the spirit of God was with (...), he was a
man of courage (...) va^our, able to encounter (...) the enemies of God, but
(...) once the spirit of the Lord (...) departed from him, he was ^ressed as is
wonderful, he ^es to a Sorceresse, disgui^ himself, knows not in the (...)
what to do, nor which (...) to take, there was not a (...) in the field, nor a
corner in (...) house, that could hide him (...) his troubled conscience. E^
^ryed, My Father, my Fa^, but Saul might have cried ^en the spirit of the Lord
de^ted from him: O my joy, my (...) gone: his body died once, (...) his heart
often. The wife of ^es in her last breath cried, (...) the same might Saul have
(...) also, O the glory of God is 1. Sa^. 4. 22
gone? when the Prince remoueth, all the Princes troop and train, every one
is removing to accompany the person of the Prince: so when the Spirit of the
Lord remooueth, all joy, all faith, all knowledge, all love, at once
departs: Wherefore the Church does well and devoutly pray, Et spiritum
sanctum tuum ne aufer as a nobis, And take not thy holy Spirit from us. It was
Saint Austens prayer, Ve^ ^ancte spiritus, Come holy spirit, the cleanser of
the unclean, Aug. medi. 1, 7.
the comforter of the sorrowful, confirm me, that I may keep thee, keep me
that I may not loose thee. If Satan ^de the house once empty, he enters by
a foul spirit: wherefore besee^h we God that his spirit may ever keep
possession of our hearts.

Now as Christ promised his Apastles the coming of the holy Ghost; so did
he also show them how they should be prepared for the receiving and
conseruing thereof, for albeit this divine Spirit, were promised before, and
after the Resurrection, (...) he would they should be pre^red for it: that we
should (...) to use means for Gods ^ites promised. First, they (...) wait for
it: secondarily, they (...) wait at Jerusalem, and ^re in an upper room, what
(...) they do? they are assembled ^th one accord, what else? they (...)
assembled with one accord in (...): all which do show us (...) means of
preparing our (...) for the participation of the (...) Ghost: First, faith is
ne^rie, for the Apostles belee^: Act. 1. 1.
Secondly, hope is necessa^ for they expected the accom^ment of the promise:
Third (...) charity is necessary, for they (...) assembled in love, the Text
^eth, (...), with one ac^d: Fourthly, holiness of con^sation is necessary,
they were (...) upper room. The Spirit (...) God, says the wise man, Wis. 1.
11.
^eth not in a body subject to (...). Last of all, devotion is ^cessarie, they
were all assem^ in prayer. The seauentie Elders rec^ed of the spirit of the
Lord at the door of the Tabernacle, where God was worshipped. Nu^. 11, 24
When the Disciples were assembled in prayer, the place where they were
assembled Act. 4, 31.
moved, and the holy Ghost came down upon them, and here we see both of
receiving, as also the means of entertayning one and the same holy spirit:
Gregory says, In terra datur Spiritus, vt diligatur G^c. (...). 26.
proximus: e coelo da^ut Spiritus, vt diligatur Deus, The holy ghost is given
on earth, that we should love men, and the holy Ghost is given from heaven,
that we should love God. This love of God is never idle, but always busy
here beneath, it was Christ's own rule: If you love me keep my
commandments, it is a sign we love the great Emperor, when we keep his
laws.

Last of all, whereas the receiving of the holy Ghost is called 2, Cor. 1, 21.
2, Cor, 6. 5.
the earnest of the spirit, how many comforts are there which do hence
consequently ensue? when (...) substantiail dealer makes a bargain or
covenant, and in part of payment gives earnest before ^and, the residue behind
is as ^re at the day, as if the party ^ad it already down: God of his ^nite
love in Christ Jesus, ^ath agreed with believers for the receiving of heavenly
trea^re, or treasure in heaven, his holy spirit is before given in part of
payment, a good earnest, and of the rest behind, this earnest is ^fficient
assurance, which we (...) receive at that ^ay, when the ^onne of righteousness
shall appear, and all his holy Angels ^ith him.

Chap, 31.
How that exhortation of our Savior Christ, John the twelfth and thirty sieve,
does appertain to us Christians: Ambulate dum lucem habetis, vt non tenebrae
vos comprehendant, Walk while ye have light, least darkness come upon you.
THese words of our Savior Christ, spoken in the first place to the people of
ye Jews, are ^y way of appropriation appliable unto all, but most specially
unto them on whom the ends of the world are come. Walk while ye have light,
least darkness I^. 13, 23
come upon you: For in this remnant of time, Satan seeks in malice to
destroy men, and God in mercy to save sinners, by whom the day of grace is
fitly resembled to a time of light, Walk while ye have light. The children of
God are called the children of light: his Angels 2, Cor. 11. 14.
are called the Angels of light: his doctrine is called the doctrine of light:
you were darkness, says Ephe. 5, 8.
the Apostle, but now you are light, and are called to an admirable light. And
so after the some manner the time of grace is Ro^. 13. 12
a time of light, our co^nuance in this grace, is the light of life, which very
life has sometime^ the appellation of light, because when death comes as the
wise man says, ^ur light is lost, that ^cc. 22. 11
is, the continuance of life, which is light. And so in regard of the true
light, which is Christ Jesus himself, of his doctrine, which is a doctrine of
light, of his grace which is the benefit of light: of our con^inuance in the
world, which is a little continuance in the light: of these severally one by
one, or of all together. Walk while you have light, least darkness come upon
you: walk, and therefore no standing s^ll, least darkness come, therefore the
light will not be l^ng.

2 The light, says Saint John* John. 1. 5.
shined in darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not. It is no disgrace unto
the Sun, though Battes and ^ies cannot endure it, Christ's grace is the light
to guide our steps, his Gospel is the lantern to show our goings: if we
refuse to walk by this light, and while we have a time of light, and to walk
too while it is our last moment of light, our darkness is great, our error is
great. May we not fear a time of darkness? Have we any warrant to the
contrary^ yet a little while is the light with us: It is said in the
Canticles, I sought him upon Can. 3. 1.
my bed: was the spouse there found? That we find not: I sought him, but I
found him not, says the text. The Scripture says of Cains offering, it was
Post multos dies, after many days, as if we should say, it was long before
Cain came with his sacrifice, it proved unseasonable. Genesis 4, 3.
The stone upon the top of the hill may be stayed with little, but being once
in a violent course, it is a hard thing to stay it, we should in time return
unto God.

The evil thief upon the Cross, his care was for his body, Save thy self
and us: but his fellow upon the right hand, who made speed in calling upon
Christ, saying, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, his care
was chiefly of his soul. We had need walk, before our day of life be turned
into the night of death, before our light of grace be turned into the darkness
of justice. Our continuance stands at a great uncertainty, there is but a
little air between us and death, and they that think themselves most secure,
are sometimes s^nest of all deceived, and at last wish in vain, they had been
better advised. God met with Ex. 14. 28. 1. Sa^ 4. 18 Jude. 13. 2. Lu. 12. 19.
Pharaoh in the Sea, with Eli sitting in his Chair, with Holophernes lying on
his bed: The rich man when he said, soul take thy ease, yea take thy farewell
of case too. Here we leave one, and there another, and time is the ea^er out
of us and ours. The Sun though it seem to stand still, it is carried about
with a violent motion: The shadow in the D^all we see gone, but not going.
We never stand still, but are every evening tide of our life, nearer our
iourneyes end by a day. The Sn^yle though she creep never so softly, yet
comes she at last to the highest trees, and eats the green leaves at the
very tops thereof. Age will steal upon our youthful and flourishing days, and
therefore while we have light to walk, let us walk with God as Abraham did
when he lived in his fear.

When the people gathered Exo. 16. 21
Manna, they must gather it in the morning, for when the heat of the day came,
it vanished away. If we will gather our heavenly Manna, we must gather be^es
before the heat of the day arise, that is, before the day of mercy be turned
into a scorching day of judgment. Our state and condition here is as the
natural day it self, our youth is as the morning, the noonetide is our
strength, when the evening of age comes, then we make ready to take our rest,
so preparing our selves, we have life in patience, and a good departure in
desire.

3 It is said to the great folly of the Athenians, that they would never
consult of peace, until they were driven thereunto by extremity of war.
Greater is the folly of the sinful men, to be consulting of a state of peace,
when they are driven thereunto by necessity, never calling upon God, but in
time of sickness and adversity: n^y, that which is more, when the time of
calling is past* when the light is departed from them, and that happy
opportunity let slip: Walk while ye have light: At that black day they shall
find error unrecoverable, danger unavoidable, punishment unsupportable,
repentance unprofitable, grief inconsolable, into what a pitiful plight
shall the careless man see himself brought at this tune? It will be a sad
Catastrophe, or sorrowful end after all. O that we would now be, as we would
wish to be at the day of judgment! A foolish Mariner is he, that while the
weather is fair, will lie still, when the wind is now serving to further his
passage, and will never set forward until a dangerous tempest be come: of
these, says S. Ambrose, I will not determine how doubtful it is, whether Ambr.
de Agenda penit.
they shall attain the haven, only this I wish, that they set forward before
it be too late, when they shall not need to have any accusers, for their own
consciences shall article against them. The Prophet says, Misericordiam and
iudicium cantabo tibi domine. Lord, I will sing unto thee of mercy and
judgment, mercy in Christ's first coming, and judgment in his second.

The kingdom of heaven in the Gospel, is fitly compared to Mat. 24. 32.
the Summer: first, for that the Summer is a lightsome time, so is the kingdom
of heaven: secondly, it is a fruitful time, so is the kingdom of heaven:
thirdly, Summer is a pleasant and ioy^ull time, so is the kingdom of heaven:
fourthly, Summer is a quiet and peaceable time, so is the kingdom of heaven.
Christ puts forth unto his Disciples ^parable of the Fig tree, why of the
Fig tree more then others, says one? because it puts forth last of other
trees, and shows that Summer is near: Again, the Fig tree if it be good,
it is very good: but if it be otherwise, it is in the contrary extreme: If
naught, says the prophet Jeremy, Iere. 24, 3.
very naught. Such is the state and condition of men in the state of judgment,
if they put forth in time, they bring forth sweet fruits of everlasting joy: if
their estate be happy, most happy: if unhappy, the most unhappiest of all.

4 Some there are that are so delighted with the pleasures of the life present,
that they forget what a heavenly treasure they carry about with them, in these
mortal bodies, and what a great charge is in their custody to look unto while
they are h^re. The householder, says our Savior, Mat. 24. 43.
should watch for the coming of the thief: This thief may resemble unto us
the day of death, which comes unawares, the house is the body, the door is the
mouth and cares, the windows are the eyes, the treasure in this house is the
soul, let the householder watch, and not suffer his house violently to be
broken up: but let him be prepared to yield peaceable possession, both of his
house and treasure, when h^ gentle Lord shall require the same, because he
will give him state in a better inheritance for the time to come* wherefore
that spoken unto the people of old, may be considered, Redite ad cor, Turn
unto your hearts, or, now your hearts and you consider together what to do,
fall to an account with your selves, seek not life in death, stand with God,
and he will stand with you, lose not the opportunity of light, for some
sensual and perishing delights of the world* when these offer themselves, let
the careful Christian say this thou may do, but this is not that thou
should do: in the morning he s^yes to himself, what will thou do, and at
night, what have thou done, let him take sometime from the pleasures and
profits of the world, I say, to consider of these things.

Judas made the worst bargain that ever man did, which bought and sold, when
for a little earthly profit he parted with heaven, and for thirty pieces of
silver sold the Savior of his soul. He had heard Christ was transfigured,
Hier. in Mat. cap. 26.
and least in such a transfiguration he should be taken from him, be would make
gain of him while he had him. Let us never follow the trade of so bad a
Merchant, leaving for a few temporal commodities, that great and plentiful
storehouse of heaven, and the inestimable treasure which God has prepared for
them that love him. In this respect all of us are Merchants, that men would
fall to traffic for this pearl. It is not beyond the Sea, that any should
complain, how shall we attain it, thrice happy are they that come unto that
light, where the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, where
the light of the Sun shall be se^uen fold, as the Prophet Esaias speaks.
Wherefore O Christian man, if thou walk in the Esa. 30. 26
light, whilst thou have the benefi^ of light, Thy Sun shall never Esai. 6,
20
go down neither shall thy Moon be hid, for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy sorrow shall be ended. Sorrow thou
may for a time, but this sorrow should be heavenly, and heavenly sorrow
(says the Apostle) causes life. Of old time 2. Cor. 7.
repentant sinners, as we read in the Prophets, should put on sackcloath, and
sprinkle themselves Iona. 3. 5. Lu. 10. 13.
with ashes. Put on sackcloath, to show they have laid off all pomp and glory
of the world: sprinkle themselves with ashes to signify, they were no other
(b^ing compared to Gods majesty, who was now ready to take revenge upon
them) but dust and ashes. Again, howsoever they had before exalted themselves,
ye^ now they were come to a full consideration of their estate, what they were
under the hand of God. Yet a little while is the light with us, Only a little
while, and therefore the time of light, the time of walking is not long. O
blessed are they that make sure work for a time to come, that apply their
harvest while the sun shines, that walk while they have light, that by a
good life draw n^rer and nearer, unto that life which is void of all death,
unto the which the Lord bring us all in Christ Jesus.

5 The commination, if men walk not while they have the light, is, Walk least
darkness come upon you. Want of light is a punishment: When many of the Jews
saw the darkness at our Saviors Passion, they were much afraid, they smote
their breasts, and were in a manner at their wi^s end. If external darkness of
the world be so terrible, what is the spiritual or internal darkness of the
mind, to be deprived of the light of grace? Nay, what is the eternal darkness,
to be utterly dep^ued of all light of glory? It was said of him that had not
his wedding garment, ^st him into utter darkness, O do^efull dome, never more to
see the light of that joyful Son of righteousness? Who would not be
advertised in this case? our time is but short, our departure uncertain. What
is the end of our redemption, the fruit of our calling, but to walk before
God in holiness of life? beasts have eyes of the body to behold things
present, but men have eyes of the mind to foresee things to come.

In the second of Samuel, and second Chapter, Abner calls 2. S^. 2. 27
unto Ioab in the evening, to stay his revenging hand, Ioab says, had thou
called unto me, in the morning the people had departed back every one from
his brother: let us use this to our commodity, and for our learning* let us
call for help early, and not defer until the evening, thinking to strike in
with God in our last groans, when the most sensual are made so^er against
their wills. When Moses Exo. 9, 19.
foretold the Egyptians of a mighty great hayle, such as never was in Egypt,
those that re^arded not the word of the Lord, left their servant and cattle
in the field, and so were destroyed, but such as feared the word of the Lord,
amongst the servant of Pharao made his servants and his cattle fly into
their houses. These were preserved, as for the other the tempest destroyed
them. Have we not cause to be careful? Our sins carry us away as the wind. O
Lord, says the Prophet Esaias, we are the Clay, thou Esa. 64. 8.
art the Potter.

Chap. 32.
How that, inferred upon the Parable of the ten Virgins, (Matthew 25. 23.)
Vigilate itaque quia nescitis diem neque h^ram, Watch therefore, for you know
neither the day nor hour when the Son of man will come, does greatly
concern all Christians to consider.
SAint Matthew having mentioned Christ his coming to judgment, and the manner
in paradies, in the next place sets down by another parable, the
suddenness of this coming, although no mention be made of the time, when it
shall be, as the coming of a bridegroom at night, when none would have
thought him near: At this time suddenly there was a cry. The Bridegroom
comes: When some are received in, and other are ^uded, and for ever shut out:
(...) are found wise, and these are ^ose that prepared oil in their ^pes,
others foolish, and ^se were those, who had their ^ampes, but no oil in them:
all ^aue the name of virgins, all ex^t the Bridegroomes coming, ^t all are not
provided for his ^ddaine coming: therefore ^st any be taken unprovided as ^he
foolish were, Christ gives ^is adu^onition unto all: Watch Mat. 25. 13.
therefore, for you know not, the ^ay nor hour.

Man which is gone into a strange Country, having given authority unto his
servants, and ^lled his Porter to watch, those servants must be watching, that
at what time soever the Master return, he may find the^ so doing. There is
nothing more behou^ful unto the state of a christian man, then to arise from
the security of a sinful life, that spiritual Apo^xie, or dead sleepy disease
of the soul: the very word Watch, does not only import we have enemies, but
also require industry to prevent them, Watch and pray: Watch, and so use
industry; Pray, and so receive Gods assisting mercy. We know that while Jonas
slept, the ship was in danger of drowning: while Ishboseth slept, he Iona. 1,
5.
was surprised suddenly: while the husbandmen slept, the enemy 2, Sam. 4. 7
came and sowed ^ares: while Holofernes slept, his head was taken from him, all
which import many dangers, the ship, the soul, the surprising, the unexpected
calling to give an account, the envious sower Satan, the head, Christ Jesus:
this considered, Mat. 13.
had we not need watch? while the foolish slept, suddenly there was a cry at
midnight, when they would go and buy them oil, the bridegroom was passed,
and the gate shut, it was not the title of being called virgins. It was not
the repeating of the name Lord, Lord, that now served the turn: to show that
the name of holiness will not sustice* as the rich man's calling Abraham Father,
stood him in little s^eede. It is the watchful care of the wise virgin^ that
did them good indeed, the gate was shut to the foolish: what was this gate?
Even the gate of mercy, in respect of indulgence: the gate of grace, in
respect of acceptance: the gate of glory, (...) respect of entrance. Take heed,
says our Savior, watch and pray. David might have slain Saul ^hile he was
sleeping, but he 1. Sam. 27. 17.
^as pitiful, and would not, where he awakes him, and shows ^im the danger
he was in. The goodness of Almighty God to ^an is far above David's pity
to Saul. See the patience and long ^ffering of God, says the Apo^tle, Romans 2,
4.
to lead us unto repentance. Behold, I stand at the door, and ^nocke. God
knocke^h by his Apo. 3. 10.
grace at the door of our hearts: (...) his word at the door of our ^ares:
by his benefits, at the ^oore of our plenty: by his cha^sements at the door
of our sorrowful hearts, to raise and st^rre ^s up to vigilancie from the
sleep of sin, wherein he might have taken us, but that his mercy is to
spare, for a tune of grace, wherein we should be prepared for him: he knockes
to awake us, and strives to enter, if we sleep o^ and shut up the door, then
he departs, we cannot escape him either alive or dead.

2 Watch, for you know not the day, This day shall be as the days of Noe, of
Lot, while Noe was building and laboring, the world was rioting, and never
more secure: but Noe and his were saved when the rest perished. In Sodom,
there was eating and drinking, as if our Savior Lu. 17. 27
would have us hear what the sins of the men of Sodom were, that hearing
them, w^ might take heed of committing the like. It was not their eating and
drinking (says Beda) that condemned these men, but the immoderate use of
things lawful, neither is it so much mentioned what they did, as whereunto,
neglecting the judgments of God, they wholly gave themselves that is to say, to
eating, and drinking. Destruction came suddenly upon these, not that their
^ruction was not foretold, bu^ ^t it was not believed of any, ^re was not a
stroke given in ^ming the Arc, which did not ^monish the careless world of a
^d to come: though Noe were ^nt in voice, yet he spoke in ^rke, according to
that in the ^pel, If you believe not me, yet ^eue these works of mine: but
^uerse men beholding the Ar^ (...) the building, continued in their ^s, and
were suddenly swallowed (...) by that sudden destruction ^t came upon them.
No marvel ^gh men sin, to say true, it is (...) such wonder, seeing they con^r
so little the end of sinning, and (...) suddainnes of their own end, ^at
security is this?

3 This shall be, says our Sa^our, at the time when the Son of man comes,
Though it be ^uer so often foretold, and the ^ke be never so long a buil^ng,
though many speak by ^ce, and by works, for all that, nothing is thought upon,
sometimes a little is spoken of in this world about amendment of life, all is
but words.

For the coming of the bridegroom, we have in holy Scripture to consider
these three things: first, the signs going before, as the darkness of the
Sun, the Mat. 24. 29.
trouble of the creatures, and such others: secondly, the signs that do
accompante him, as the conflagration of the world, the sounding of the trumpe,
the resurrection 1. These. 4. 16.
of the dead. Thirdly, those that follow after, the going upon the right and
left hand, the separating of the sheep and Goats, Mat. 25. 33.
the joys of some, and the wofu^ misery of others, the one called with a
venite benedicti, Come you blessed: the other refused with an ^te maledicti,
Go ye Mat. 24 4
cursed. Lord, say the Apostles, where or when shall these things be, or what
shall be the signs of the coming of the Son of man?

4 For the signs precedent, (as so many Heralds before the coming of the
King of glor^) amongst other, trouble is described to be in those superior
bo^s, as in the Sun, the Moon, ^d stars, unwonted signs, and ^unge sights
repugnant unto ^ure shall be seen. These are (...) signs, because they signi^
the Sun and Moon shall (...) obscured, the stars shall fall ^n heaven,
their light shall be ^rcom of a greater light, which (...) the glorious
appearing of ^ust, like as the stars appear (...) at the rising of the Sun.
Concerning these signs, let the^ ^e also their mystical sense. ^he Sun
shall be darkened, ^t is, the love of Christ, the ^nne of righteousness, by the
^s and cloud of unpietie: the ^oone, or the Church with her ^ht from the
Sun, shall loose (...) light: the stars or teachers ^ll fall from heavenly
doctrine, (...) so forth. Let them have their ^alisence, and so let be consi^r
how the heavens frown vp^ us, and the earth trembles ^er us. Secondly, there
shall (...) trouble in the elements, and ^eat sorrow of the Nations, the Sea,
and the floods shall make a noise, and men shall be at their wits ends. The
confused noise of the waters, moving to and fro, the elements (as S. Peter
says) melting with heat, at all which 2. Pe. 3. 10
the hearts of ^en shall be smitten with great terror, there is no flying, but
all amazed, they shall not know what to do, nay, that which is more, the
powers of heaven shall be moved, seeing these Lu. 21. 26.
unusual effects to happen, they shall be moved, even the Angels themselves,
at the sudden transmutation and the incomprehensible majesty of Christ, what
shall the sprigs of the Desert do when the Cedars of Libanon be ^ken with fear?
If the pillars themselves shall shake, how may the weaker parts of the building
tremble?

5 When this little world, to wit man (for so is he called, (...)) is now
upon the dissoluing, he suffers fantasies, and many troubles, every part is
moved, every sense is altered, the whole body, Lord, how is it troubled! how
much more shall trouble and disturbance appear when this greater world is upon
disso^tion, and now giving up the Ghost? For the signs in particular, as
first that the lights of Heaven shall fall, the waters ^re, men's hearts shall
fail them for fear, and the rest, all which ^e show the violence of all,
shall be by the force of fire. The first judgment was with water, to ^le and
quench the heat of incontinencie, which then chiefly abounded: the second
judgment shall be with fire, against the coldness of love, and charity, which
(the world waxing old) shall, and both more and more decay. All earthly things
shall be consumed, for the end ceasing, those things which appertain unto the
end, cease. The Nations shall ^ourn, or, as Jeremy says, the tribes of the
earth, that is, those that have not their freedom in heaven, the Jews shall
mourn, the Gentiles shall mourn, Christians that loved the world more the^
Christ, shall mourn: the tribes of the earth, not the tribes of the Lord: for
these, they shall go (says the Prophet) to confess unto the name of the
Lord. The Psa. 102, 4
other shall bewail themselves in their faults, which they have committed in
their follies, but not corrected, in their glory which they have lost: and last
of all, in their punishments which they shall incessantly suffer.

6 For the signs that accompany him, as the sounding of the Trumpe and others,
what a noise shall this be, which the joyful creatures above in felicity, and
that woeful soul beneath in misery, and (between both) the dead body in the
grave shall hear? what a noise will this be that all shall hear at once in
most wonderful manner? The Captain wakeneth his Soldiers by the sound of
the drum: Christ shall waken the whole Army of the world, by the sound of the
trumpet; the trumpet to ty^orous and ill Soldiers is a dreadful hearing, but
to good and men of valor it is a cheerful noise, says Saint Austen.

Then shall follow the resurrection of the dead, Awake thou that sleep, and
come to judgment: The Sepulchers shall open, as they opened at Christ's
passion, not many, but all: not from the holy City only, but from all Cities,
and parts, and corners of the world, all that are in the graves, shall hear
the voice of the son of God. When we hear the thunder, we think there is a
God, when we hear this, we shall see it. Then shall the Son of man
appear, and all his holy Angels with him, then shall he to whom the Father has
committed judgment, come visibly in the clouds, in that very form to judge,
wherein he was judged: They shall see him whom they have pierced: The Apo. 1.
7.
good shall see him to exultation, the evil to confusion, and shame of their
own folly. Now is he called a Judge, who was before called the Son of man:
Now is he called a King, Dicet Rex, The King shall say, Go into everlasting
torment, prepared for the devil and his Angels: It is said, Benedicti patris
mei, not maledicti a patre, as if God blesses, but rejects none, did they
not reject themselves. Then Pilate shall not doubt, and ask the question, Number
tu Rex? art thou a King? Then the Jews shall Ioh. 18, 37
not say. Non habemus Regem, we have no King: Pilat and the Jews shall now see,
he is a King indeed, Even the King of Kings. Then shall he come clothed with
light as with a garment, he shall come with great power and majesty, his
Angels shall gather all together from the four corners of the earth, the whole
world shall fight against them, who fought against the Author of all things,
such as the King is, such shall be the power of his coming.

Now for the day and the of his coming, let none busy their heads, seeing it
is not known to the Angels of heaven.

7 For the signs that follow after, which are these: Then shall the sheep be
separated from the Goats, the tares from the wheat. Then two shall be grinding
in the Luke, 17. 35. 36.
mill, the one received, the other left alone: two in the field, one received,
the other forsaken.

The very place shall show every ones condition, some unto the right hand, and
some unto the left: Then come ye blessed, when Mat. 25. 37. 38.
I was hungry, ye fed me, when I was naked ye clothed me, counting all done
unto the needy, as done unto himself. Then shall the righteous say, Lord,
when have we fed thee, and clothed thee! by a kind of admiration, proceeding
from the greatness of the reward, as if we thought not we had done all this
unto thee. On the contrary part, the unmerciful shall not wonder after this
manner, because they knew Christ did hunger in the poor, and want clothing in
the naked, then shall not that be granted which is required, because that was
not performed which was commanded. So unto the just this coming of the Judge
shall be as Summer after Winter: but unto the unjust, as the Winter after Summer:
Solomon to show the estate of these, takes an instance from a young man, one
that thinks himself farthest Eccle. 11. 9
off, the Wise man tells him, judgment will come.

8 In all temptations i^ avails much to call to mind the day of judgment,
that a remembrance hereof should sink deeply into our hearts: If we would be
covetous, and desire that which is other men's: or ambitious, and seek the
glory of the world, let a remembrance of judgment come into our minds, Let us
say unto our own souls: O soul, there is a resurrection, and a judgment
that does expect thee. He that would not have then his wounds seen, let him
now seek to cure them: this is the time when the secrets of all hearts shall be
revealed. Adam when he sinned had the trees to cover him: when all shall be
consumed by fire, what can cover men? surely nothing. The world passes (says
1. Ioh. 2. 17
Saint John) and the concupiscence thereof: Wherefore whosoever cleaves to
these wo^ldly things, is in continual passage with the world, the whole
perishing, every part perishes. Take heed to your selves, says our Luke 21,
34
Savior, that your hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, and least that day come on you unawares: for as a snare
shall it come Luke 21. 35
upon all, which sit upon the face of the earth, that is, which delightfully
rest upon the love of earthly things. The godly truly pass ^uer the earth as
strangers and Pilgrims, but the worldly minded as Citizens and inhabitants:
to these this day is as a snare, because it takes them unprepared, but unto the
other it is a day of expectation, because it finds them ready.

9 If any skillful Physician should command us, saying, Take you heed, that
any of you eat not greedily of the juice of such and such an herb, if he
do, he shall dye presently: with what care does every one keep this
commandment, least by tasting of the forbidden herb he perish. But now
the Savior of our souls and bodies commands us to beware of the herbs of
surfe^ting and cares of this life, and how many of us notwithstanding do not
only, not fear to be wounded heerewith, but also wholly consumed? will we not
believe our heavenly Physician, Watch and pray always, Watch, not that the
sense of seeing only Luc. 21. 36
is here understood, but the watchfulnes of the understanding: Pray always,
not as if our prayers should not be interrupted by any necessities of the body,
as the Massilians dreamed, but pray always is understood every day, and at
all times, that no sin may hinder us from God and good works, and therefore
it is said, Vt digni habeamini, that ye may be accounted worthy Luc. 21. 36
to avoid these things.

10 Watch, for ye know not the day nor hour: Nemo quaerat quando venit, sed
vigilet vt paratum inueniat. Let no man (says S. Austen) seek curiously when
the Judge comes, but let him make himself ready against his coming: the
uncertainty of the time does cause fear: the ignorance of the signs may lead
into error: so we always live, that always we may be watchful. We may
know the signs, but ought not search after the knowledge of the time it
self: it is unsearchable. When we see in an old man the signs of age, we
gather his time is not long, when he shall die, we know not: so beholding the
world troubled, charity waxing cold, we know these are signs of a decaying
age, yet sometimes age continues, how long none knows, and this is the very
reason our Savior himself uses to stir us up to watchfulnes: Watch, because
you know not the day, nor hour when the Son of man comes.

If the Householder watch for the saving of his substance, how much more should
every one be watchful for the saving of his soul? In the Householder three
things are observed: first, he endeavors to know the deceit of the thief:
secondly, to provide for the custody of himself: thirdly, he cares that his
house be not broken up, and thus he watches, not one, but every hour of the
night, that at what hour so ever he be assaulted, he may be found stirring.

11 Those who look for the coming of the Bridegroom, have their lights in
their hands, that is, their shining works: these lights are burning, that is,
ardent in charity: they are shining, that is to say, giving good example of
piety: These watch in the day, that is, open the eyes of their faith, when the
light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ shines: these watch in the night, that
is, when the world is given to all iniquity, the works of darkness.

Four things there are which may make men to wake: the first is, the crowing
of the cocks, that is, the calling of those to whom God has said: O Son of
man, I have made thee a watchman: The Cock beats with his Eze. 33. 7.
wings, and wakeneth himself first: and then with his voice wakeneth others.
The second thing to make men wake, is the rising of the Sun, this Sun is
the light of grace: a shame is it for men to sleep, when as now long ago the
Sun is risen upon them. The Sun rises (says Ps. 104 23
the prophet) and man goes forth unto his labor, The night is past, To. 13. 12
and the day is come near, let us walk (says the Apostle) as in the day: The
third thing to make men awake, to, the fear of the thief, or the day of
judgment, which is as the coming of a thief in the night: the careless it
will seize upon and spoil them, but unto the watchful it can do no harm. It
was said unto the rich man, hac nocte, This night shall thy soul be taken from
thee. It was said of the bridegroomes coming: At midnight there was a cry
made, behold the Bridegroom comes, go out to meet him. The fourth thing to
make men awake, is care of their goods, we have a great charge under our
hands, and a charge of so great care, that we had need watch early and late.
For the careless, Solomon says, Sleep on, so shall necessity come upon
thee like an armed man. Pro. 6. 10. Pro. 24. 33
Many are so heavy a sleep, that no calling will awake them, there shall a
voice one day sound in their ears that shall awaken them, (I pray God) not
affright them, whether they will or no. That which I say unto you, says our
Savior, I say unto all: Watch. The night of death may steal upon men before
they be aware, the day of judgment will come when they think not of it:
Watch, for you know not the day nor hour. Watch, you know not when the Master
of the house will return: Whether in the morning of childhoode, or in the
third hour of youth, or in the sixth hour of strength, or in the evening of
age: Watch, for you know not the time: Should they sleep in security, until
they sleep their last? God forbid, God forbid.

Chap. 33.
A loving conference had with Christ, and the devout Christian man, touching
the state and joys of the life to come, promised to them that learn of
Christ, and follow him in this life.
Christ. AWake, Awake, O Christian soul, and stand up from the dead, how long
will thou sleep in this dangerous security of a sinful life? Arise, arise,
the light of my grace and truth has shined unto thee, how long will thou
prefer the love of this transitory world, before the love of me thy
Redeemer and Savior.


Christian man. O Lord Jesus Christ, thy mercy is great in staying for my
conversion, in vouchsafing to remember me so forgetful of my love, and duty
toward thee my Lord, now I wretched creature prostrate my self before thee,
Lord what will thou that I do?


Christ. If thy desire be to know my will (O my beloved) this desire of thine
does merua^lously please me: for my delight is in thy salvation: thou know
for thy sake I came from heaven, for thy sake endured I the griefs and
troubles of the world, for thy sake suffered I many reproaches of mine
enemies: I undertook thy dolours, to give thee my glory: I suffered thy death,
that thou might receive life: I was buried in the earth, that thou might
be raised up to heaven: now thy sins are more grievous unto me, then much
suffering I endured for thee: this is that I require, seeing thou would know
my will, give me thy life, for who^ I have given my life.


Christian man. Lord I perceive thy will, and my own weakness: how should
walk (as I ought) in consecrating my life unto thee?


Christ. If thou will dedicate thy self unto me, first love me always, and
above all things, next to know how thou should walk after my will, see thou
often meditate of my life once led amongst men: when thou will be humble,
think how I was humbled: when thou will suffer patiently, call to mind with
what patience I suffered: when thou would be obedient, think of my
obedience: when thou art oppressed with enemies, remember I had enemies too,
and call to mind that I prayed for them.


Christian. I see most merciful Savior, that thou requirest love above all
things, which I yield thee willingly (as I ought) but Lord, for to bear these
crosses of the world, I find it too difficult to humane nature, so as almost I
know not what to say.


Christ. If thou love me as thou say thou do, thou need not take
scandale at the troubles of the world. Thou know I dispose all things
sweetly, and great pe^ce there is to them that love me: should thou be
impatient at the least things, beholding me suffering great? Will thou a worm
refuse to endure a word spoken against thee, and see me laden with
reproaches? thou can for the love of the world suffer tribulation, rise
early, late take thy rest: and will thou do nothing for my love?


Christian. I beseech thee, O merciful Lord Jesus, strengthen me with thy
grace against all adversities, for I willingly yield my self unto thy will.


Christ. Be not afraid to suffer somewhat for my sake, behold I am with thee
for whom thou suffer. And behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me.
Apo. 22. 12
Consider what I have said, In my fathers house are many mansions, there have
I prepared a place for thee. Call to mind that the dearest friends I ever had
in the world, have endured the same sufferings.


Christian. O my Savior, I am more delighted in hearing, and believing this,
then I am able to express: I know not whether I may more rejoice to behold
thee dying upon the Cross, or reigning amongst the Angels, to see thee subject
unto all, or exalted above all. O sweet Jesus, how should I praise thee? I
remember that of the Prophet, Rectos decet collandatio, Praise becomes the
righteous. Lord I am not righteous, shall I not therefore praise thee? thy
poor creatures do the same, and therefore I will not be silent. O my God,
draw my mind from all earthly things, that it may only rejoice in thee. Where
are ye all my desires, come and enter the Courts of the Lord with joy.


Christ. Thou have, O Christian man, peradventure some taste of my love, in
that thou art so desirous to praise me, in that thou do as joyfully behold
^e borne of a virgin, as God from everlasting: In beholding me thy redeemer
suffering for thy sins, thy love is acceptable unto me, and shall find love
again in thy greatest labors: but the best is to come, when thou shall reap
the fruit of all, then no adversity shall touch thee, then shall thou behold
my presence in glory, and therefore let happiness move thee to seek happiness.


Christian. O sweet Jesus, when shall I sufficiently love thee? When shall I
duly remember thy benefits, thy meekenes, thy patience, thy bounty with all
reverence and devotion? If thou be my redeemer, where is my duty? if my
Savior, where is my affection? O good Jesus, seeing thou have done all this
for me, what shall I do unto thee? Nay, seeing thou have reserved such joys
as I am not able to comprehend, let me not live but to love and know thee.


Christ. It suffices that thy will o^ intention is good, which I respect more
then many sacrifices, when thou do offer me thy obedience upon the Altar of
thy humble desires, for which desires I have recompense, and thou shall find
as much, when thou come to receive the same: when for a cup o^ cold water,
thou shall receive a whole fountain of the water of life: when for two untes
thou shall have given thee the whole treasure of the temple, then shall thou
enjoy immediate fellowship with me in my kingdom, and where I am there shall
thou also be, then shall thou come from the troublesome sea of this life, to the
haven of rest, there shall thou see me, and enjoy me always, and every where:
blessed shall that life be, for the continuance thereof, it is eternal: for the
certainty, it is without change: for the place, it is in heaven: for the
companions, they are multitudes of saints and Angels: for the greatness of the
felicity, there is an everlasting Sabbath.


Christian. I am ravished, O my S^uiour, with the very meditation of thy
heavenly reward, when I consider that in thy presence there is fulness of joy,
and at thy right hand are pleasures for ever more. O happy and happy again,
are they which are once freed and set at liberty to come to thy Kingdom! O
Kingdom of all con^unce, seeing there is found joy without sadness, health
without sickness, abundance without want, light without darkness, life without
death, all good without any evil: all bitterness, all trouble, all punishment,
all discord, all fear is away. O joy, exceeding all joys, when shall I enter
into thee! O my redeemer, when shall I behold thee, the very end of my
desires? I now perceive there is a reward for the righteous, and therefore
what blindness does possess the minds of men, in loosing the fr^ition here of?
O what folly is it in the^, to spend their time in vanity: nay, in the harsh
discord found in the love of earthly things, and lose that joyful harm^me of
heaven, when all the Saints in that blessed society shall say, The Lamb that
was slain is worthy to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and praise. There they enjoy that perfect felicity,
where sorrow is never felt, complaint is never heard, loss is never feared,
when all labors and travails shall cease, then shall virtue show her self,
where vice shall not be able to look up or appear, then shall the world which
seemed before so glorious, be consumed to nothing, only the just shall then
receive a crown of glory. The consideration hereof is able to draw mortal
men from all the allurements of a sinful life, and to inflame their hearts in
the fire of the love of God: for who would not find in his heart to honor that
God which has prepared so excellent things, for those that serve and honor
him? Who would not turn all his endeauours, all his desires, to walk before
him in holiness of life, whose reward is without measure in the life to come?
This is the profit of this consideration, ^ely to move us to return love unto
him who has first loved us. And now O most merciful Jesus, I beseech thee by
thy sorrows which thou sufferedst, by thy blood which thou sheddest, yea, by
that infinite love which thou bear toward us, increase in us true love of
thee, O redeemer of the world.


Christ. Consider yet a little farther thy creation, and what excellency and
dignity thy Creator bestowed upon thee, we^gh with what love and with what
worship he is again to be honored. Surely when creating and ordaining the
universality of visible and invisible things, he had ^sposed to make humane
nature: with high counsel handled he the worthiness of thy creation, as one
whom he decreed to honor before all the creatures in the world: behold
therefore the highness of thy creation, and recount more and more, thy d^ty of
rendering love. Let us make (says God) man after our own image: Mark therefore
diligently, what it is for thee to be created to the image of God: understand,
that image is one thing, and similitude is another: for examples sake,
unreasonable beasts may have a similitude with man, but the image of man none
can have but another man. Man eats and sleeps, so do the beasts, beho^ a
certain similitude and community between diverse natures: Now the image of
man noue i^ateth, but another man of the same nature: The image then is more
worcester thy then the similitude. By this means shall thou have a likeness of the
image of God: if considering that he is good, thou study to be good: knowing
he is just, thou endeavor to be just: beholding his mercy, thou give thy
diligence to be merciful: and now harken how thou may be like unto him in
his image? God is always mindful of himself, understands himself, loves
himself: thou therefore for thy measure should be continually mindful of
God, understand God, love God, endeavoring to do this, which God always does,
and then begin to magnify him, as thou have well spoken of gi^ing him praise.


Christian. O most merciful Savior, I know, and truly acknowledge, that it
more becomes me a wretched sinner, to cast my self prostrate before the
Lord of heaven and earth, weeping and sighing for my sins, rather then to
praise him with a polluted mouth. Notwithstanding, trusting in his mercy
through thy only merits, O my Savior, I desire to praise him, beseeching him
not to despise an impure worm, a dead dog, an unsavory carcass. If the
powers of heaven cannot sufficiently praise him, much less man which is no
other but infirmity it self, and least of all my self, which a^ worser then
others.


Christ. To praise thy Creator thou art created, that intending hereunto, thou
may here always go forward, and live blessedly hereafter, for this
praise gives here righteousness, and there blessedness: when thou praysest
him, praise him with thy whole heart, praise him by loving, for he is the rule
proposed unto the Saints of praising. He praised the Lord with all his heart,
and loned God which made him. Praise therefore, and praise worthily, to the
uttermost of thy power, thy merciful God. Let no intent, no cogitation be
vacant from thee, let no prosperity recall thee, let no adversity with-holde
thee from praising him: let him be the end of thy desire, who is the reward of
thy labor, the solace of thy fading life, and the possession of thy true and
blessed life: therefore exercise thy self in his praise, to this end seruest
thou and all that thou have.


Christian. O Lord of mercies, seeing that he goes about to catch the
shadow, or follow the wind, that thinks to praise thee worthily as thou
deseruest, yet seeing the meanest of thy creatures, as the impure Frogs
croking in the Fennish Moors, praise their Creator: for although as the Lark
and Nightingale, they know not how to sing sweetly, nor as man, are no way
able to comprehend the least spark of knowledge, yet have they a resemblance
of praise. Now seeing all thy creatures praise thee, I should be sorry to
break the harmony. O would to God, that all sweet instruments of music (for
in them did the divine Psalmist praise thee) O would to God all earthly
melodies could go upward from my heart, and send unto thee condign praises.
But what shall I say? I know my self unworthy to set forth thy praises,
wherefore I beseech thee at the least, that other creatures more excellent in
place, may supply my imperfection: I wish and desire from my whole heart, that
the Or^es of the Planets, the starrie heaven shining with most pure light, nay
that the supernall Quire of Angels may do as they do, never cease singing
tha^ joyful Alleluia. For my self I could wish, that if it were so that my
youth ended, my age had equalled the age of Methusalem, yet that every year of
that long time, and every month of those years, and every week of those
months, and every day of those weeks, and every hour of those days, and
every moment of those hours, might have been wholly spent in landing and
praising God the Father who created me, God the Son, thee, O my Savior, who
have redeemed me, God the holy Ghost who have vouchsafed to sanctify me. What
shall I say? Because I cannot do as I would, yet will I endeavor to do as I
may, as long as I live will I praise the Lord: Yea as long as I have any being,
will I sing praises unto my God. When the hability of speaking shall fail, and
I shall not be able to pronounce thy name. O sweet Jesus: (...) at the least,
the lifting up of ^y eyes, or the moving of my fin^rs, shall be a confirmation
of ^y desirous affections to praise ^ee, O my redeemer. And I be^ch thee good
Lord, remember ^e, that it may be so. To whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, be all power, and glory, and honor, for ever and for ever,


Amen.
Laus Deo.
The Table.
A
ABraham and Lazarus, both rich and poor in joy. 211 Almes-deedes commended.
212 Ascension of Christ, the hope of our ascending. 480 Ascension of Christ
joyful. 484 Ascension of the faithful. 491
B
Blessedness in the life to come described. 555
C
Christians the children of light. 15 Christians resembled to fruitful trees.
26 Christians in show reproved. 28 Christians of old commended. 37. 38 Christ
only a satisfaction for sin. 64 Christ an example of all virtues. 69
Christ's sayings and doings went together. 197 Christ's labors in the world.
176 Christ began to do before he taught. 197 Christ's wonderful mercy in
curing all that came unto him. 201 Content to bear contume^es we Christians
must be. 213 Cross how every one have. 319 Christ the best friend. 357
Consideration of our estate necessary. 520
D
Description of our Savior Christ, according to his humanity. 72 Doing, not
hearing only required. 190 Devils dispossessed by Christ's power. 209 Devotion
decayed. 277 Denying of our selves what it is. 316 Despair not at all in
Christ's suffering. 449. 450 Day of judgment to be remembered. 543
E
End of man's hope is felicity. 49 Endeavor commendable, though we come not to
perfection. 48 Example of Christ laid down for us to follow. 87. 88 Earthly
possessions given of God to be enjoyed. 335
F
Faithful men see Christ. 5 Faithful believers spiritually conceive Christ.
18 Faith which has life is seen by motion. 34 Fasting commended. 121. 122
Fasting helps against temptation. ibidem Fasts before the Sabaoths and
festival days. 120 Forty days fasting ancient. 126 Feasts move our
desires to think of heavenly things. 408 Festival times to be observed among
Christians. 407
G
Gods benefits should move us to serve him. 20 God prouokes us with his
benefits to love him. 43 Gods goodness extended toward all. 154 Good must be
done one to another. 159 Glory how Christ fled from it. 160 Glory of this world
uncertain. 166 Gesture to be used in prayer. 277
H
Holy women given to devotion. 13 Humility commended. 96 Humility learned of
Christ. 97 Hate father and mother, how we are said. 351 Holy Ghost, the
coming down thereof. 495 Holy Ghost the manner of his coming, and the fruit
thereof. 500 Hearing and doing go together. 190
I
Joyful is it to meditate of the life of Christ. 11 Joy to the faithful to see
Christ in the flesh. 12. 13 Jesus a name of great efficacy. 240 Invocation to
be made in the name of Jesus. 248 Irreligion to take away temporal benefits
from the maintenance of religion. 339 Judgment, Christ's coming thereunto
described. 532 Just, the cause so being, Christians notwithstanding they are
children of peace, may take arms. 235
K
Knowledge of the coming of Christ to judgment, the year or day not
curiously to be sought. 538 Knowledge of intricate and needless matters
disallowed. 387
L
Life of Christ a direction for our life. 85. 86 Labors of Christians many.
183 Labor of body ought to be endured. 186. 187 Law, how we are delivered
from it. 328 Labors of Christ in the world. 176
M
Meditation kindles the fire of the love of God. 1 Meditation of the life of
christ, necessary in time of affliction. 7 Man's perfection before his fall
described. 147 Man reconciled unto God, and being forsaken, by what means. 148
Mercy of GOD manifested. 146 Miracles, what we learn by them. 375 Miracles
daily wrought in us. 376 Miracles how ceased. 370
N
Neglect of grace dangerous. 580 Negligence of our estate reproved. 600
O
Often to meditate of the love of Christ. 5 Our end attained by labors. 42
Order the preserver of things. 323 Obedience seemly amongst Christians. 325
P
Pride reproved. 108 Patience in Christ. 214 Patience in Christians. 221
Peaceable conversation agreeable to a Christian life. 233 Prayer a special
part of Gods worship. 288 Prayer a form thereof. 287 Prayer for those in
authority. 332 Primitive Church had miracles. 370 Passion of Christ to be
meditated upon. 432. 433 Passion of Christ should much move us. 458. 459
Q
Questions captious and difficult answered by Christ. 387. 388
R
Repentance necessary for christians. 105 Reproaches patiently to be suffered
214 Revenge of Christians not to be used. 213 Riches not evil of themselves.
338 Resurrection of Christ, and the benefits thereof. 462. 463 Resurrection of
the faithful. 470 Resurrection from sin. 471
S
Shadow, the Law was, and how by that of the Apostles. Heb. 10. 16 Sick soul
cured, and how. 110 Sabbath day the observation thereof. 397 The end of it, and
other festival days. 407
T
Tempter how to withstand him by Christ's example. 144 Temptations how to be
resisted. 145 Temptations never without, while we live. ibid, Travels in the
world necessary. 186 Teaching of Christ with great power. 191 Temporal
commodities are means for the continuance of religion. 340
V
Virtues of all sorts to be seen in the life of Christ. 8 Vice confounded in
beholding Christ's virtues. 54 Vanity to seek praise of men. 163
W
Works of charity commended. 211 Works of Christians what they are, 39 Worldly
things to be forsaken for the love of Christ. 351 Wisdom of Christ in
answering difficult questions. 386 Weeping of Christ over Jerusalem. 415
Weeping for our sins necessary. 420 Walking while we have light, (...). 523
Watch^ulnes very necessary. 526 Wise virgins signify wise Christians. ibid.
Z
Zeal blind, rusheth it knows not whither. 25
FINIS.

