A CHALLENGE CONCERNING the Romish Church, her doctrine and practices,
PVBLISHED FIRST AGAINST ROB. PARSONS, and now again reuiewed, enlarged, and
fortified, and directed to him, to Friar GARNET, to the Archpriest BLACKEVVELL
and all their adhaerents,

By MATTHEW. SVTCLIFFE.

THEREUNTO ALSO IS ANNEXED an answer unto certain vain, and frivolous
exceptions, taken to his former challenge, and to a certain worthless
Pamphlet lately set out by some poor disciple of Antichrist, and entitled, A
detection of diverse notable untruths, contradictions, corruptions, and
falsifications gathered out of M. Sutcliffes new Challenge, etc.

S. Paul's words concerning the followers of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Eo quod
charitatem Dei non receperunt, vt salui fierent; ideo mittet illis Deus
operationem erroris, vt credant mendacijs.

A praediction concerning Jesuits, Friars, and Popish mass priests, and their
swarming abroad in the would. Apocal. 9. And out of the smoke of the pit there
went out Locusts into the earth, and they had power given to them like unto
scorpions.

AT LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Sir Robert Cecill Knight.
THe public affairs of this State, right honorable, depending so much upon
your counsel and direction, I should not only wrong you, but others also, and
forget my self, if I should either hold you with any long discourse, or
importune you with the hearing of a private quarrel betwixt me and a certain
base and unworthy adversary, whose pleasure is to contend with me about
certain small quirks and questions. It may also seem a matter unworthy your
place and person, to offer unto you a small treatise concerning so small
trifles, the adversaries whole discourse, which I answer, being spent about
certain pretended untruths and falsifications, wherewith he would gladly
charge me, if he could. Yet forasmuch as this controversy grew first out of a
challenge made by me some two years since to Robert Parsons, a man, rather for
his hatred to the State, and treachery against his Sovereign, than for
learning, virtue, or piety, known to many: and seeing the author of this
quarrel now has enforced me to discuss some points both of Religion, and
State, not unprofitable to be well understood; I have made bold to present
this treatise ensuing, that contains not only my former challenge, but also
an answer to my adversaries frivolous objections, to your Honors hands.

The whole is divided into diverse chapters, of which diverse do contain entire
discourses, whereof you may choose, and read one or more, as your great
occasions, and laisure will permit. and none there is, I hope, so barren, but
it may yield some fruit. But if it may please your Honor to peruse the whole,
you shall then better understand, not only the occasions of this quarrel, but
also the justice of our cause, and the vain cauils, which our adversaries make
against us, for want of better matter, when as we without all circumloquution
charge them with haeresie and falsehood in matter of religion; and disloyalty
and treachery in matter of State.

Your Honor shall also thereby perceive the great weakness of our adversaries
cause, and the poverty of the principal actors in the same, who abandoning
the maine points in controversy, begin now to pick quarrels, at words,
allegations, points, quotations, and other by-matters, and ceasing to join
with us, and like Divines to argue, and dispute, fall to plain calumniation
and railing. for having some years past written diverse treatises, not only
against Robert Parsons, but also against Robert Bellarmine the chief Patriarch
now of all the Papists, and having published a challenge against Rob. Parsons,
and proved, that his consorts the Papists are neither good Catholics, nor yet
true Subjects; yet do I not find any, that dare encounter me hand to hand, nor
have I received any answer to any purpose, nor have I yet encountered any, that
has opposed himself to any discourse or argument of mine. Parsons, he is
content to be silent, and he that has put forth the pamphlet called The
detection, albeit he could not hold his peace, yet could he not say much,
being of the number of those idle fellows, qui nec tacere, nec recte fari
possunt. he does only except against certain allegations, and by-matters, and
quotations of my challenge; but the discourse it self, and the conclusions
thereof were either too heavy for him to lift, or too hot for so frigide and
maleficiat a fellow to touch.

If then law does justly praesume him to be guilty, that being arreigned at
the bar stands mute; then is it not to be praesumed, that either Rob.
Parsons is clear, or his cause good, or that his clients are such, as he
pretends, again, if Decius in l. ^, ff. de reg. iur. and Barth. in l.
quaesetum.. denique. ff. de fundo instructo.
lawyers say true, that exceptions confirm the rule in cases not excepted;
then has my adversary confirmed the maine discourse against Parsons, and his
adherents, having not said any thing unto it, but only excepted against a few
places, whereof he takes 13. to be untruly alleged, and 13. to be falsified.

Furthermore, if in the very places, where my adversary thought to win
greatest advantage, he has gotten nothing, but rather showed his own
ignorance and malice; I hope all indifferent men will well allow of the rest,
and grant, that I have used more than ordinary circumspection in this labor.
for do what a man can, yet may either marginall notes be misplaced, or words
stand disorderly, or things be mistaken. Finally, if to answer the adversaries
objections, and to encounter him in his turn, I shall be able to charge not
only Bellarmine, Baronius, Parsons and such like mean fellows, but also the
Pope himself and the Church of Rome with untruths and falsifications, which
can not be answered; then Gods justice will appear, that has brought them
into the pit, which they dug for others, and I hope they will henceforth
forbear to charge me, and other honest men with lies, and falsifications,
finding themselves most guilty, and us in respect of themselves most innocent.
Of all men the detector shall have least reason to make a challenge concerning
untruth and falsifications being able to answer nothing in a In an answer to
a calumnious relation, the Papists stand charged with diverse falsifications,
and yet dissemble the whole matter.
cause, where he is defendant, nor able to justify that pamphlet, which
himself has published.

But of all these matters your Honor shall then be able best to judge, when you
shall have read the discourse ensuing, and compared his exceptions with my
challenge, and my answer with his vain exceptions. all which I do present to
your Honor, as much esteeming your judgment in such cases, and desiring to
have my cause heard and tried by men of such integrity, and judgment, and
little weighing the vain cauils of others, if my labors be approved by men of
such gravity and wisdom.

The work as far as it concerns my adversaries exceptions is not great, nor
the controversy betwixt mine adversary and me material. but the fault was
not mine, but his, whose trifling pamphlet at this time gave me no better
subject to work upon. yet this profit may the readers reap by it, that they
shall hereafter not need to fear either the vain brags, or great words, and
titles which the Papists do arrogate to themselves, seeing they are demasked,
and declared neither to be true catholics nor loiall subjects, if they hold
the grounds of Popery.

But whatsoever this treatise is, or may effect, I beseech your Honor to accept
it as a token of his devotion, that is a member of that University, whereof
you are Chancellor. and as you do succeed your worthy father in that place, so
I beseech God, that you may not only succeed him, but also surpass him, if it
be possible, in his zeal and pious care to advance true religion, and
learning. During his time, although none of Baals priests durst either look
into the University, or show himself abroad in this realm, yet did they
secretly keep in corners. but by your Honors care and vigilance, according to
her Majesty's late Edict, we do hope to see them not only repressed, but also
quite expulsed, and returned to him that sent them.

What their errors are, and what they deserve, it may in part appear by this
treatise. the rest we refer to those, whom it concerns. And so loath to
interrupt the course of your more serious congitations and actions, I end,
beseeching the God of heaven to bless you with his heavenly graces, and as he
has used you hitherto, as a notable instrument to advance religion, learning,
and justice, so to grant, that all that love true religion, learning, and
justice may long enjoy your help and favor.

Your Honors in all dutiful affection MATTHEW. SVTCLIFFE.

The Preface to all indifferent Readers, wherein not only the purpose of this
treatise is declared, but also diverse points of the adversaries Preface and
first chapter, that fell not within the compass of any order, examined and
refuted.
ALthough the quarrels and cavils of false teachers and haeretikes, gentle
reader, proceed from the fountain of their malice, and are set forward by the
suggestions of satan, who by all means endeavors to trouble the peace of
gods church, and to shake the faith of such weaklings, as are not firmly built
upon the immooueable rock Christ Jesus: yet it pleases God oftentimes, by his
unsearchable wisdom, to dispose men's evil purposes and actions to his great
glory, and the advancement of religion, and the great good of his church, which
those men thought to ruinate. Etiam sic veris illis catholicis membris Christi
malo suo prosunt says Saint Lib. 18. de ciuit. dei. c. 51.
Augustine speaking of haeretickes, that contumaciously resist the truth, and
seek to defend their pestilent and wicked opinions. Whereof although I had no
great experience before this time; yet now by the frivolous, and vain cauils
of a certain corner-creeping disciple of antichrist against my late challenge
made to Robert Parsons, disguised under the mask of two letters, and calling
himself N. D. I find to be most true. For whereas heretofore my challenge
was not known to many, and now began to be forgotten of such, as first had
read it. I doubt not, but this vain cauiller, by his vain exceptions will
cause the same to be both more diligently read, and better remembered, than it
was like to be otherwise. for I do not believe, that any man will offer me
that wrong, that he will condemn me, before he has both read, what I have
written, and examined the matters wherewith I am charged.

Secondly, because he has alleged, that I deliver out matters upon mine own
credit, and without proof, I have taken occasion to peruse my former
challenge, and to fortify the same with diverse authorities and arguments, and
so to publish it: assuring thee if any thing now want proof, that it is of
that nature, that it is of it self most evident, and needs no proof, being
either known publicly, or confessed by the adversaries themselves.

Thirdly, this miserable fellow, that makes himself party against me,
seems rather to betray the cause of the papists then otherwise. For taking
upon him to debate some matters in my late challenge, he is neither able to
contradict my arguments, whereby I proved, that the papists were neither
catholics, nor the true church, nor maintained the old Christian faith, nor
has he ability to discharge his consorts of the crimes of haeresie and
treason, wherewith they stand charged, and now by his silence seem to be
convicted. So that I doubt not, but if the pope may understand, and be well
informed of this prating fellows treacherous dealing in his cause, that he
will either punish him, as a false traitor to his See, or at the least command
him to silence as a weak idiot, and foolish pleader, in matter of religion.

Fourthly, he does greatly grace my writings against his father Robert Parsons:
for if he be not able to except against more places then six and twenty, or
thereabout: it is clear, that I have said true in the rest, and that I have
argued, and alleged authorities to good purpose. For if I had offended, I
doubt not but I should have heard of it. And because you shall not suspect that
these are but surmises, rather than firm conclusions; I do before hand tell
you, that this vain bangler will not hereafter undertake to answer my
challenge from argument to argument, allegation to allegation, testimony to
testimony. Behold then o miserable papists, your poor distressed proctor, and
let the cacolike conuertite sisters relieve him with some good words of
comfort, that in his needless quarrel has overthrown himself and his
cause, and has done me more favor, than I shall be willing to requite him in
haste.

Fifthly, he does discover the vanity of his own bragges in his most miserable
pleading. I require no more learning, says Detect. Chapter 1. p. 8.
he, then the understanding of Latin; no more labor, than to open the books,
and view the places quoted; no more conscience, then that the tongue can truly
report, what the heart thinks: and yet when it comes to the iumpe, with all
that little learning he has, and withal his labor could he not fasten any
one untruth, or falsification upon me; as shall sufficiently appear by my
answer. beside that, it is ridiculous to talk of learning and understanding of
Latin, when in most of the places by him touched, I speak English, and allege
not the fathers words. in the rest it will appear, that his provision of Latin
is not superabundant. this sentence therefore he has translated out of the
pretended bishop of Eureux his discourse, although it fit not his purpose in
any sort.

Sixthly, He is a very vain fellow to demand of us such a conference, as passed
in France. for well might he have seen, if he had not wilfully shut his eyes,
that the case is not like: and the reasons he might have understood, if he had
not been senseless, they being so plainly laid down in my refutation of his
father Robert parsons his calumnious relation sent us from Rome (very wisely)
of matters done in France. Further he might well have remembered, if he had not
been forgetful, that I offered the papists more then was demanded, for I did
not only promise to deal with Parsons, or any of his consortes in any private
conference, but also in public writing, which might not only be viewed of
all men, but also remain to posterity as a testimony against those, that
should be convinced either of untruth or forgery, and which being extant in
print neither we, nor our adversaries should be able to alter, or deny, or
misreport any thing, that is written, as is the ordinary course of Popish
Parasits in such conferences, and to show, that I meant to perform as much, as
I promised, I began to object certain epistles and canons forged not by such
base threadbare companions, as himself, but by the popes and church of Rome. I
showed also, that they had falsified the scriptures, and published infinite and
montrous lies in their legends read publicly in the church. finally I put
Robert Parsons in mind of the notorious clipping and corrupting of fathers of
late practiced by the papists by their rubarbatif and expurgatorie indexes. but
he like a wise fellow kept himself close and would no more hear of the
matter, thinking it was better, as the old proverb teaches, in this Carian to
make trial of this hard adventure, and to The proverb, In care periculum
facito: teaches that in base fellows it is best to try dangerous experiments.
thrust this ass down headlong from the rocks, knowing well, that if we
should overcome him, or come to the taking of him up, we should find nothing
but the carcass of a dead ass. wherefore then is our adversary so desirous of
a conference, that doubts to try his manhood in justifying his friends
falsehood and forgery concerning matters already laid to their charge? Protrusit
asinum in rupes. Horat. ep.
again when he sees our readiness to answer, why is he so slow to object?

Finally where he thinks to triumpth most gloriously and to lead my brother
Willet, and me both captives and fast chained at the tail of his chariot,
there he does most pitifully disgrace himself, and free us, and mar all that
he medleth withal.

For first speaking of falsifications, he compares them to Christ, and such
men's incredulity, as will not believe him, he compares to the incredulity of
Thomas, that would not believe Christ's resurrection, before he saw and felt
manifest signs of it. the sentences alleged out of fathers and other authors,
says Praes. fol. 5.
he, be so mangled and maimed etc. as no protestant, I am sure will believe,
until feeling and seeing with Saint Thomas convince his incredulity. is not
this a brave gallant then, trow you, that compares truth to falsehood, the
feeling of Christ to the feeling of falsifications?

Secondly where the maine controversy betwixt me and Robert Parsons in my
challenge, is concerning the church of Rome, and where this blind baiard might
see, that I have alleged diverse strong reasons to prove, that the
congregation of Romanistes under the pope and cardinals, is not the true
church of Christ, there, all this notwithstanding, my adversary smoothly
dissembleth the matter, and takes that as granted, which he poor fellow can
never prove, and says, that my brother Willet, Fol. 1. praef.
and I employ our forces in assaulting the impregnable sort of gods church, and
battring that rock, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. as if
the congregation of the malignant, and wicked rabble of antichrist could be the
true church of Christ, or as if the gates of hell had not long since prevailed
against the pope and church of Rome. our adversary therefore taking this for
granted, that is the controversy, if without controversy I have not
demonstrated, that the church of Rome is not the true church, shows, that he
is pregnant with folly, of which he will not be delivered before he die, and
that his face is as hard as the rock, of which he talks.

Thirdly he calls popish religion Catholic, and affirms Fol. 2. praef.
it was planted here by Gregory the great, who by succession received it from
Peter, etc, and that it was always visible since Christ bearing still sail in
the tempests of all persecutions. but he should do well, to show how true
religion can be visible. for our savior Christ says, John 4.
that true worshipers worship God in spirit and truth. but spiritual worship
and true internal devotion is not so easily seen. unless therefore our
adversary suppose popish religion to consist in the popes mitre, and in coules
of monks, and such like external matters; he shall hardly prove religion to be
visible. Again, he does greatly wrong the popish cause, if he affirm popish
religion to have been planted here in England by Gregory, and be not able to
answer my challenge, and to demonstrate those novelties, and late received
fancies, which I have mentioned, either to have been taught by Gregory, or at
the least by his disciples to have been planted here in England. Furthermore,
seeing in my challenge I do prove, that popish religion is not catholic, and
give for justification of that point notable instances, such as our adversary
shall not be able to answer; is it not notorious impudency, to take this, as a
matter either proved, or confessed, and slily to call haeresie catholic
religion? finally, I must entreat some plain dealing papist to admonish this
detector, or rather detractor of ours, not to say, that Gregory received the
popish religion, that now is maintained by the pope of Rome, and was first
established in the conuenticle of Trent, from Peter; or that all, that is
taught in Gregory's dialogues, or epistles came from Peter; or that the Romish
church, that now is visible in the pope, cardinals, monks, and swarms of
friars, and in Romish ceremonies, has borne sail in the tempests of all
persecutions. for it is the pope, and his bloody inquisitors, that do persecute
others, and are not persecuted. and if this be a qu^ty of the church, to bear
sail in tempests of persecutions, certes the pope and his retinue cannot be
the true church, that for many hundred years have lived in all pomp, iolitie,
and pleasure. but if the Romish church be so well able to bear sail in
tempests, it were much to be wished, that the pope and his cardinals would
sail to the Indiaes, where we might hear no more of them, and that they would
take our adversary with them, who percase would prove a better swabber, then a
disputer.

Fourthly, In the beginning of his Praeface, he says, he will present to his
readers view a representation, or lively pattern of a conference, that is,
notable untruths and falsifications, etc. and these also he avouches he will
gather out of master Willets, and my writings. wherein I would pray all
moderate papists to consider with indifferency this fond speech of this most
miserable popish creature and proctor. he calls notable untrueths and
falsifications a pattern of such a conference, as he desires. If then he
desire a conference, he must needs desire untruths and falsifications, if his
words have any sense. I know, he hops to pick them out of our writings. but
if he find any, they must be such, as are uttered by himself, and his
conforts, and not by us. in the mean while his fellows are sorry to see him
speak so foolishly of conferences, untruths, and falsifications.

Fifthly, He Fol. 1. praef.
talks also very idelly of back doors, and deceitful entries, such as
Daniel detected in Bells idolatrous priests. which, if I did not know the man's
great simplicity, I would have imagined to have been foisted into his Praeface
by some back friend to popish religion, to the great disgrace of Romish
priests, that by back doors, and deceitful entries play many lewd parts with
their nonnes in Spain and Italy, and with recusants wives, maids, and
daughters, where they are lodged and interteined in England, as shall be
prooved by particulars, if any (...) to ask me the question. These also do
worship idols as brutishly as the Daniel 14. in the Latin translation.
Babylonians did Bell, and set up the images of saint Anthony, and saint
Dominicke and other saints upon altars, as the Babylonians did their god Bell.
finally they burn incense to their idols, and crouch to them, and offer
sacrifices before them, as the idolatrous priests did before Bell. There rests
therefore nothing to make them all like to Bells priests, but, now their frauds
and cousinages and idolatries and impieties are discovered, that some zealous
prince would do with the popish priests of Baal in England and other places,
as the king of Babylon did with the priests of Bell in his country. and that
would make an end both of the whole controversy, and of this idle fellows
brabling.

6 Likewise under the title of his book he sets down this verse. Hierom
14.
falsely says the Lord do the prophets prophecy in my name. I have not sent
them, nor commanded them, nor spoken to them. they prophecy unto you a lying
vision, and divination, and fraud, and the deceit of there own heart. whereby
it seems he was hired, to speak shame and reproach of his own most lewd
companions, coming directly from antichrist, and not from Christ; of the
church of Rome, that in liew of Gods word reads fables and lying legends; and
of the pope, that in his lying decretales brocheth the deceits of his own
heart, neither can this prophecy be expounded of any so fitly, as of the false
priests of Baal, that come with faculties from the pope without any one word of
authority, or lawful mission from God; and that prophecy lying visions of the
restoring of the idolatrous religion of papists, and preach the fancies and
deceits of there own hearts, out of their masters conie^turall and false
dictates. I know he aims at us. but having chosen this sentence for an
ornament of the front of his lying pamphlet, he must be content to take it to
himself, and must for any help he shall have of us, necessarily be forced to
apply it to his friends, where it is best deserved.

7 Talking of suposed falsifications he says, three things make a falsary:
first changing of the truth into falsehood, secondly craft and malice, and
lastly damage or hurt. and to prove his words true, he alleges the names of
Hostiensis and Panormitan: two ancient canonistes. but unless he acquit
himself the better, in talking of falsification it will be proved, that he
has falsely alleged these two authors. no man certes ever talked more simply
of falsity, and falsaries, then this falsary. for, not either change of truth
into falsehood, is falsity, no albeit it be craftily done, and with detriment to
some person (for then should every malicious and hurtful liar be a falsary
also; and the authors and approuers of the Romish legends and breuiaries
should also be notorious falsaries, having told many gross malicious lies to
the great slander and hurt of religion) nor has our adversary rightly defined
a falsary. for a falsary is he, that in writings adds or detracteth, or
alters any thing fraudulently, as appears by the gloss in c. in memoriam.
did. 19. and as the Romanistes show themselves to be by their expurgatory
indexes. but says our detractor in the margent, in the french copy printed by
Hierome Verdussen it is so. but this is contrary to the text. beside that, we
are no more to believe the print of Hierome Verdussen, then of Julian
Greenesleue. if our adversary will make such crakes, he must bring us better
authors then Hierome Verdussen, or the popish reporter of the conference
betwixt M. Plesu, and Eureux. is it then likely, that our adversary should
convince us of falsification, that albeit himsefe commits many gross
falsifications, yet knows not what this word means? which may also appear
in this, that he charge me with falsification in the first and second place
noted page. 47. and 51. where I do not so much as allege any writing, or any
man's words, but only quote Augustine and Epiphanius in the margent, to show
that my assertion may be proved out of their writings.

8 His metaphors, and profound allegorical speeches he uses to draw from
women's rocks. as though says he, he had not towe enough to his rock. which
shows that this companion is better seen in women's rocks and frockes, then
in any point of divinity. beware therefore you of the cacolicke crew, that such
gallants come not near your wives, daughters, nor maids, that they play not
with you a trick of their cacolicke religion, if you believe not me, believe
Palingenius, that would have such mates excluded out of men's houses, that mean
to keep their women chaste.

9 And although this is the man's great simplicity and weakness; yet would he
needs encounter at one time M. Willet, and me both together. nay, as if we were
nothing in this giants hands, with great arrogance he sets also upon M.
Thomas Bell, a man while he was yet a popish priest, among them accounted the
most learned, sufficient and grave man among their company, and now well known
by his learned works not answerable, at the least not answered, to have much
profited since. but what is it, that our wise adversary obiecteth, that he
should cry out so loud against Master Bell? what is the Gordian knot, that he
supposes to be insoluble? forsooth, because he says, that the bishops of
Rome, until the days of Saint Augustine, and long after, were very godly men,
and taught the same doctrine, that Saint Peter had done before them: and yet
affirms also, that pope Syricius was seduced by Satan, published wicked
doctrine and taught the flat doctrine of the devil; and that pope Sozimus
brought in superstition, and falsified the decrees of the Nicene council. so
to maintain the usurped primacie of the Church of Rome. as if M. Belles
propositions might not well stand together. for he says not, that all the
bishops of Rome were good and godly men, and taught true doctrine until S.
Augustines time; but speaks indefinitly of the bishops of Rome without
adding, all; which manner of speech in materia contingenti, is not to be taken
absolutely and universally, but for the most part. and so no doubt saint
Augustine speaking of the bishops of Rome understood it, knowing that
Marcelline sacrificed to idols, and that Liberius was an Arrian. and we may
say also, that the apostles of Christ were good men, although Judas was a
traitor, and lantern bearer to the Jews, as some popish writers say, that
betrayed Christ, and much of the nature and condition of this detectour of
falsifications, and detractor from honest men, and a very lanterner of
Antichrist, and a traitor to his country. let him therefore beware he be not
taken passing through back doors, like the idolatrous priests of Bell, and so
for his gordian knot, be taken tied in a Tyburne knot.

10 I need not say much of our adversaries form of writing, or frame of
sentences. for it appears every where, that he did not know the difference of
pneuma, and periodus; nor could distinguish betwixt colons and periodes,
commaes and colons. his whole discouse is liker to nothing that I can imagine,
then to the way between Chard and Honiton in the west country, that is, rude
and rugged, up hill and down hill, and very unequal. but to let that pass,
yet may I not pass in silence, that Praefat. fol. 1.
speaking of the great commanders and princely pilots, that sit at the stern
of the common wealth, he seems to communicate her Majesty's sovereign
authority to inferior persons, and does not once vouchsafe to acknowledge her
princely power, or to name her among the governors of this state. and yet such
disloiall traitors, that acknowledge the popes supreme authority, and deny her
Majesty's power, as being excommunicate by the popes scuruinesse, (our fellow
percase would say holiness) are not sought out, nor brought to such a trial,
as their offenses deserve.

By this therefore it may appear, that, as our adversary has no ability to
disprove any point of religion, which we hold, so he has utterly shamed his
consorts, and the crew of papists, that hitherto have made great brags of this
their champion, and of his invincible arguments, all hard and knotty, like the
haft of a dougeon dagger. he has also utterly shamed himself in meddling with
these matters, being a man not read, nor any way fit to discourse, or handle
matter of co^trouersy: the which, that it may further appear, I purpose, god
willing, not only to justify my former challenge, which this poor menowe would
nibble at, but also to discharge my self honestly of all those untruths and
falsifications, which the detractor maliciously goes about to charge upon me.
Wherein, that I may proceed more formally, and not only skin this dead dog,
whose overthrow shall help us nothing, but handle somewhat else, that may make
for the advantage of true religion, and the instruction of the ignorant; The
order and chief propositions, and chapters of the discourse ensuing.
I will, God willing, declare, first that the church of Rome that now is, and
which embraces the doctrine of the pope and conuenticle of Trent, is not the
true church of Christ Jesus. and secondly, that the doctrines and traditions of
the Romish church, which the church of England refuses, are mere novelties
and late devised fancies, for the most part. thirdly, that the papists are no
true catholics, nor hold the catholic faith, and that it is a great wrong
offered to Christ's church to call them catholics, unless it be, as we call
dead carcases, men. fourthly, that papists maintain many both old and new
haresies and points of doctrine contrary to the word of God, and to the
catholic faith. fifthly, that they are idolaters. finally, that such as have
died in the popes quarrel in England were unnatural traitors, and no true
martyrs, and that such priests also as come from Rome with commission and
faculties from the pope, are traitors and enemies to their prince and country,
and so to be reputed and taken, and not otherwise. All which points, one or two
excepted, I handled in my last challenge, this challenge thus justified, I
shall God willing presently encountre our detractor, and answer first his
objections concerning untruths: secondly his quarrels concerning supposed
falsifications: thirdly his vain and childish observations. and to show the
vanity of our adversaries pleading, and how much the papists are to shun all
conferences, and disputes concerning lies, and falsifications; I will also for
further evidence against them set down, first certain notorious lies, and
forgeries committed by the popes and church of Rome: and next such lies and
forgeries, as are committed by their principal agents. and herein first I
will declare Bellarmine to be most guilty in this point. the next place shall
contain Baronius his cardinal leasinges. after them I will note certain
notorious lies and forgeries contained in the writings of other papists, yea of
Parsons himself, and of this Momus, in his new nothing, which he calls a
detection of lies and falsifications. finally to answer his observations, I
will also discourse of such things as in our adversaries, and their writings
seem worthy to be observed. and all this, to let our adversaries know, that
they had more need to defend themselves, then to press us; and to take the
beams out of their own eyes rather, then to epsy motes in our eyes.

As for his railing words, and rustical and uncivil behavior, I leave to be
censured by the archpriest in his next general synod: which if he do not, I
will refer him over to be answered by master Kempe upon the stage. and if he
desist not his railing and rusticalitie either upon the archpriests admonition,
or master Kempes censure; I assure him, I will set a fellow to answer him, that
shall so currie him and his consorts the papists, and that shall in such sort
tippe up their vilanies, that the whole fraternity of asses shall curse him
for braying so uncivilly. I hope also, that some odd priest or other, out of
his grammar dictates will admonish him, to look better to his grammar rules,
and tell him, that he has falsified a verse out of Horace, and made a gross
fault in it. This is the only verse in the book.
for where Horace says, quid dignum tanto feret hic pro missor hiatu: our wise
Page 4.
adversary has, quid dignum tanto proferet promissor hiatu: both altering his
authors words, and committing a fault in the verse, and marring the sense.

His reproachful terms omitted, and his small errors pardoned, there is
nothing in his pamphlet, which I have not answered, and, I hope in that sort,
that he shall not be able to take just exception against any thing I have said
or done. it may be, that he will be offended, for that not being able to speak
by letters, and finding his name to be E. O. I do name the baby sometime
detector, or detractor, sometime ectaticall owliglasse. I have great reason to
do it. for I do perceive, that he is a desciple of Robert Parsons, who in his
pamphlet of reasons, for not going to church, calls himself John Howlet.
what then can be more consonant, then that his disciple, that goes about to
imitate him in his pride, railing, and phrase of speech, though very
vnhandsomly, should be called Owliglasse alias Howlyglasse, and ectaticall,
that is leapt out of his wit into a little fit of foolery? if he like not this
name, then let him set down his own name, and for my part he shall not hear
worse then his name, unless his faults deserve it.

Both this challenge, and the answer to the detractors exceptions, presuming
upon thy indifferency I recommend to thy reading. much I will not request at
thy hands, and small favors are easily granted. Examine, I pray thee, both my
answer, and my adversaries objections, and yield to neither side more then is
proved: compare his great brags, with his poor talent of writing, and his
scornful terms with his slender matters, and thou shall easily perceive,
that short answers may serve such simple arguments. it may be, that thou and I
differ in opinion. yet never refuse to yield to truth; nor resolve to defend
disloialty or error.

I have, as thou may see, dealt plainly, and profess openly, that I will
not maintain any error, whereof I can be convinced. if the adversary would
take the same course, there might be an end of this contention. Rob. Parsons
began this quarrel, albeit he has first given it over. the ground of his
pleading standing principally upon the title of ancient and catholic religion,
and the innocence of massing priests, and friars, and their consorts, I gave
him a short issue in my former challenge, and offered to prove, that popish
religion established in the conuenticle of Trent, and now received by the
church of Rome, is neither ancient, catholic, nor true. if they cannot prove
themselves to be catholics, why do they entitle themselves catholics? if
their relsgion be new, why do they brag of antiquity? if they be
haeretickes, why are they not ashamed, to take to themselves the praerogatiues
of the true church? if the Iebusites and rheir consorts be combined with
foreign enemies, what reason have they to challenge the favor due to subjects?

Upon occasion of an ecstaticall fellows importunity, I do renew the same
challenge again, and by all means provoke Robert Parsons to answer. and
because percase he is busy comploting of matters against his country at Rome,
I address it also to Friar Garnet and the archpriest Blackewell, that are
nearer at hand, and not unacquainted with the worthy volume of exceptions lately
published against me. If Parsons have not laisure, let one of them answer. it
is a shame to begin a quarrel, and to give it over first. for one bout they
have no reason to refuse me. if they pretend want of books and laisure, they
know Doway is not far off. They have begone to cry out of falsifications and
untruthes, let them therefore make trial, how they can answer for themselves.
Parsons was wont to be ready to plead for others. now therefore he has no
reason but to plead for himself. In time past he and that false traitor Allen
filled men's ears with their clamours, contra persequutores Anglos. let them
therefore defend their consorts, that are preditores Angliae, and enemies to
their country. no man has greater cause to defend traitors, then traitors. If
they refuse to answer for themselves, or to satisfy others, I hope for
modesty sake hereafter, they will neither arrogate to themselves the title of
the church, nor the shelter of catholic religion, neither can they with
honesty vant of antiquity, or accuse true men of heresy, whereof themselves
are most guilty. finally if shame restrain not their tongues, yet fear of
punnishment may keep them in temper, being declared to be professed enemies to
their prince and country, and a pack of rinegned english co^spiring with the
enemies of this state, and combined together for the overthrow of religion and
the realm.

If my adversary and his consorts shall no way be able, though otherwise
willing enough, to clear themselves of most malicious libelling, lying, and
forging, I trust they will hereafter spare me, a plain fellow, and one that no
way stands in need of such poor shifts for the justification of my cause.
And I doubt not, but with shame enough they will for ever hereafter cease to
make any challenge concerning lies and falsifications, having so evil success
in this first encounter.

If I have cleared this state from all imputation of injustice in the
proceeding against Jesuits, seminary priests, popish rebels and their
adherents; neither have the magistrates reason to suffer Robert Parsons his
libels to fly abroad to the slander of the state, nor any good subject to
allow of his calumniations, and most wicked libels.

If it do clearly appear, that Robert Parsons and his treacherous consorts
are linked and combined with foraine enemies, and by no means will submit
themselves to her Majesty's laws and authority, those that have the custody
and execution of her laws, committed unto them, I doubt not, will have a
watchful eye over the proceedings of such slippery companions, and with great
constancy and resolution maintain her Majesty's authority, and execute her
laws against such as wilfully impugn it. the late edict published against
this vermin, does show that the state is not only well acquainted with their
lewd practices, but also resolute to punish such wicked practisers, and
plotters, as hitherto have abused her Majesty's great clemency toward them.

If it appear that the Iebusites and priests teach haeresie, and lies, it
behooveth all true christians to avoid them. Saint John in his second epistle
does give us warning not to have any familiarity with them, or so much as once
to bid them God speed. the church Apocal. 2.
of Thyatira is reproved for permitting a wicked false prophet to teach and
seduce Gods people. and our savior Matthew. 7.
Christ gives us warning of false prophets, that come unto us in sheep
clothing, and inwardly are ravening woolues. these false massepriests devour
many widows houses, and abuse the simplicity of many young youths to their
utter ruin and destruction. and yet that is not the woorst. for they do not
only overthrow their worldly states, but also destroy their souls, and lead
them headlong into hell.

If the popes agents under pretense of religion have entangled their folowers
in diverse practices of faction and treason, I hope all English, albeit
otherwise favorers of popery, will better look, how they engage themselves in
treason. they come from foreign enemies, and depend upon them; and though they
talk of religion, yet their intention is wholly for the pope and Spaniard, and
their course is irreligious and factious.

If popish religion founded in the conuenticle of Trent, and taught by late
popes and their proctors be catholic, and ancient, then will it be an easy
matter to show it, and to answer our objections, where we prove the contrary.
if our adversaries fly trial, and will not join with us, and directly
answer; then have all papists and others, reason to fly from such false
teachers, and heretics, and to abandon all their wicked haeresies. there is no
agreement betwixt Christ and Belial, 2. Cor. 6.
betwixt truth and error, light and darkness. if they can show themselves, that
they are no idolaters, they will clear themselves: if not, why do they seek
to erect altars of Baal in every corner? and why do not all Christians avoid
to communicate with the priests of Baal in their idolatrous mass? 2. Cor. 6.
there is no agreement betwixt the temple of God and idols, neither 1. Cor. 10.
can any drink the Lords cup, that does participate at the table of devils,
or devilish mass. but what should I talk of the Lords cup, when these
idolatrous priests take the Lords cup from all that follow them?

If the adversaries be clear of lying and falsification; then will they answer
plainly and directly, as I have answered them. if their lies and forgeries be
made notorious to the world, he is not very wise, that will trust such lying
and forging companions.

But what should I need to declare that briefly, which at large is proved in
the discourse following? read only diligently, and examine carefully, and
judge indifferently. and so leaving thee to thy meditations, and referring thee
to the touch of both our adversaries accusations, and our answers, I beseech
God to give thee true understanding of his saving truth. and that he will
give thee grace, if thou know the truth, to persevere constant unto the
end: if thou cariest a preiudicate affection toward popery, then to see into
the deformities, impostures and abuses of popish religion: and that in the end
it will please him, to discover all frauds, impostures, conspiracies,
trecheries and vilanies of the popish faction, and to let thee see the
damnation of the great whore, and the abominations of Babylon. Adieu.

Thine in all Christian affection, MATTHEW. SUTCLIFFE.

A CHALLENGE concerning the malignant church of Antichrist, and false doctrine,
and lewd practices of Papists, Directed to Rob. Parsons, Friar Garnet, G.
Blackwell the Archpriest, and all their adhaerents.
CHAP. I. That the Church of Rome that now is, and that embraces the doctrine
of the Pope, and conuenticle of Trent, is not the true Church of Christ Jesus.
THe Church of God being 1. Tim. 3.
the house of God, and Ibidem.
the pillar and ground of truth, and Galat. 4.
the mother of all faithful people, as the Apostle teaches us; it is no
marvel, if all congregations, that profess Christian religion, do also
challenge to themselves the name, and title of the Church. Inst. lib. 4. c. vlt.
Singuli quique haereticorum coetus, says Lactantius, se potissimum
Christianos and suam esse catholicam ecclesiam putant. even the couenticles of
heretics do imagine themselves to be true Christians, and entitle their
Congregations by the name of the Catholic church. and that this is true, the
papists afford us most evident proof. for albeit in many points they know not
the voice of Christ Jesus, but follow a stranger, that without all color
challenges to himself to be Christ's vicar; yet very confidently and proudly
they call themselves Christ's true catholic church, and challenge to
themselves all those prerogatives, that are due to his most holy spouse.
neither do they only challenge to themselves the title and name of the Church,
but also exclude all others from the same: and as Leo said, speaking to
certain monks of Palestine, ecclesiae nomine aduersus ecclesiam armamini: so
we may well say of these blind zelators of popery, that in the name of the
Church, they fight against the true Church of Christ Jesus.

That the papists adhering to the pope of Rome, and embracing the doctrine of
the conuenticle of Trent, are not the true church of Christ Jesus, it may be
proved by diverse invincible reasons. Christ is built only upon Christ Jesus,
as a principal rock, and a foundation most sure and immoouable. No man, says
the 1. Cor. 3.
Apostle, can lay any other foundation beside that, which already is laid,
which is Christ Jesus. for he is that Isai. 28.
corner stone, that is placed in the foundation of Sion. he is that Matthew. 16.
rock upon which the church is built. Super hanc petram, quam confessus es,
says S. Sermon. 13. de verb. Dom.
Augustine, super hanc petram, quam cognouisti, dicens, Tues Christus filius
Dei, aedificabo ecclesiam meam, id est, super meipsum filium Dei viui
aedificabo ecclesiam meam. he says the church is built upon Christ Jesus, whom
Peter confessed. neither do the fathers mean otherwise, where they affirm
the church to be built either upon the confession, or faith of Peter, or else
upon Peter himself. for all these do either indirectly understand Christ,
whom Peter confessed, or Peter's faith concerning Christ. but the Romish church
that now is, is built upon the pope, and upon his See and doctrine. Est Petri
seeds, says In praefat. in lib. de pontif. Romans
Bellar. lapis probatus, angularis, pretiosus in fundamento fundatus. he Lib.
2. de pontif. Romans
says also, that the Pope is the foundation of the building of the church, and
goes about to prove it by certain words of Hierome, although that good
Father never thought of any such matter. Sanders his rock of the church.
Sanders does endeavor to prove, that the Popes of Rome are the immovable rock
of the church. Turrian likewise because Christ said, aedificabo ecclesiam meam,
and, non aedifico ecclesiam meam: concludes, that the popes of future times,
and not only Saint Peter were understood by that rock, upon which the church
is built. seeing then the church of Rome is built upon a foundation diverse from
the foundation of Christ his church, and relieth upon the pope as much, or
more, then Christ Jesus; it cannot be the true church. for if the papists say,
that Christ is the chief foundation, and the Pope is the next, they cross the
scriptures, that make Christ the sole foundation, and only attribute the name
of foundation to the apostles and prophets, in that they built all upon Christ
Jesus, and taught that, which immediately they received from God. but the Pope
receives nothing immediately from God, nor does he now preach Christ, as did
saint Peter.

Rome is built upon the popes and their see, against which the gates of hell
both have already, and may further prevail: as appears by the Chapter Si papa.
did. 40. where it is supposed, that the Pope may draw with him innumerable
souls into hell. and In Matthew. 16.
Lyra confesses, that diverse popes have proved apostataes from the faith. and
that finally is proved by diverse particular examples, as of Marcellinus, that
sacrificed to idols, of Liberius, that fell into Arrianisme, of Honorius
condemned for a monothelite, and diverse other popes, that fell into diverse
heresies, and forsook the true faith. neither do I think the papists will
deny, but that some of their popes for diverse impieties and wickednesses are
damned, and cast down to the nethermost hell. How then can that be the true
church of Christ which is built upon a foundation, against which the gates of
hell have prevailed?

Arg. 3.
The true church of Christ is never without her head. for Christ Jesus, who is
the head of the church was yesterday and to day, and the same for evermore. he
is the head of the church, and shall always so continue, and of him his church
has continual dependence. but the church of Rome is often without her head
the pope, and has no such dependence on him, but that she may well subsist
without him, as the continual vacation of the papacy does show, and Lib. de
auferribilitat^ papa.
Gerson does confess. the church of Rome therefore cannot be the church of
Christ, unless we will grant, that the church of God may be without a head, or
that the church of Rome never wants a head.

Arg. 4.
The church of God also has but one faith. for as there is but one Lord,
Ephesians. 4.
so there is but one faith, and one baptism. but the faith of the church of
Rome is not that one faith, which was professed in the apostles times, and in
the primitive church, as appears by the doctrine of faith published in the
wicked conuenticles of Constance and Trent, and by ihat profession which Pius
the 4. decreed to be exacted of all that are promoted in schools. for neither
did the first christians admit all the traditions, which the church of Rome now
calls apostolical, nor the 7. sacraments and usual rites practiced by the
church of Rome in the administration of them, nor the sacrifice of the mass,
or transubstantiation, or the rest of the doctrine therein contained. if any
papist think otherwise, let him show me, either any such like faith, or prove
me any such doctrine to have been in the ancient church of Rome. or else we
must needs believe, that this doctrine was first published by the conuenticle
of Trent, and by Pius the 4. by name, but a wicked man for doctrine and life,
and by other popes confirmed.

Arg. 5.
The grounds also and foundations of the catholic christian faith are diverse
from the grounds and foundations of the faith of the church of Rome. the Ephesians.
2.
apostle says, that the household of God and citizens of saints are built upon
the foundations of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief
corner stone. neither does he admit any other foundation. Saint Apocal. 21.
John shows, that the wall of the city of God has twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the twelve apostles. and this, because upon that doctrine,
which they delivered, the faith of the church is built. for as Lib. 3. aduers.
haeres. c. 1.
Ireneus signifies, the canonical scriptures which she apostles left unto us,
are the foundation of our faith. neither may we think, that Peter was more the
foundation of the church then Paul, or the rest of the apostles. at dicis,
super Petrum fundatur ecclesia, says Lib. aduers. J^ui^.
Hierome licet id ipsum in alio loco super omnes apostolos, and cuncti claues
regni coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos ecclesia solidetur.
Theophylact also without giving any prerogative to one, says, In Ephesians. 2.
the church is built upon the apostles and prophets. neither do the ancient
fathers either allow, or mention any foundation beside Christ Jesus, and the
apostles and prophets, who in all their writings do preach Christ Jesus. But
the faith of the Romish synagogue is now built upon a diverse foundation. for
first they acknowledge unwritten traditions, to be a foundation equal to the
written word of God. Sess. 4. council. Trid.
traditiones ipsas tum ad fidem, tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel oretenus
a Christo, vel a spiritu sancto dictatas, and continua successione in ecclesia
catholica conseruatas pari pietatis affectu ac reuerentia (scilicet ac
scripturas sacras) suscipit ac veneratur. the conuenticle of Trent makes
traditions as well concerning faith, as manners, to be equal to the written
word of God. whereof it follows, that we must as well believe the fashions and
ceremonies of the Romish church, as the written word of God. Demonstrate
conabimur says Lib 4. de verb. dei. c. 4.
Bellarmine, scripturas sine traditionibus nec fuisse simpliciter necessarias,
nec sufficientes. he denies also the scriptures to be a perfect canon, or rule
of our faith without traditions. next they receive the popes decretals, and
upon their determinations do they build their faith: as C. inter. did. 19.
etc. sancta. did. 15.
appears by their decretals, though counterfeit. and Jn praefat. in relect.
princip. doctr.
Stapleton sticks not to affirm so much in express words. Alij nunc a
Christo missi says he, eorumue doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti
apud me locum habebunt. and ibidem.
again, Christianae religionis fundamentum habemus ab ipsis literis
euangelicis and apostolicis aliud. We have says he, another foundation of
Christian religion, diverse from the writings of the apostles and prophets. can
then the Romish congregation be the church of Christ, that even in the maine
foundation of religion is departed from the church of Christ?

Arg. 6.
The principles likewise of ye doctrine of the Romish church are diverse from
the grounds and principles of Christ's true church. for we have showed in our
last argument, that the true church has no canon or rule of faith, or certain
principle of faith, beside the canonical scriptures. but the church of Rome
admits the books of Judith, Tobia, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, of the Machabees
by the ancient church accounted apocryphal, as In epist. ad Paulin. in prolog.
in proverb,
Hierome, In Synops.
Athanasius, and diverse of the ancient fathers (...) witness. It allows also
the old latin translation of the bible, though different from the original
books. the same also admits for principles of faith, the sentences of
popes, the doctrine of the Romish church that now is, the traditions of the
Romish church, the consent of fathers, and diverse other grounds, as Stapleton
disputes in his books, De doctrinalibus principijs.

Arg. 7.
Never certes did the church of Christ speak evil of scriptures. Lib. 3
aduersus haeres. c. 2.
Irenaeus says, It is the property of heretics, when they are convinced by
scriptures, to fall into dislike of them, and to accuse them. as for the
children of God, they cannot either calumniate, or lightly esteem their
heavenly fathers testament, or refuse to hear his voice. but the scriptures
contain a declaration of the eternal testament of our heavenly father; and
therefore they are rightly called his testament. in the scriptures also God
speaks unto us. and therefore, if we be Christ's sheep, we cannot but hearken
to his voice. My sheep, says our John 10.
Savior, hear my voice. but the Romish church is still carping at scriptures,
as if they were neither sufficient, nor perspicuous. Lib. 4. de verl. die c. 4.
Bellarmine says, they are neither necessary, nor sufficient without
traditions. Praefat in re^act. princip. doctr.
Stapleton denies them to be a sufficient foundation, or rule of our faith.
the authors of the annotations upon the Rhemish testament do call them most
blasphemously, a killing letter, and signify that the reading of them is
pernicious. Censur. colo^.
others slander them, as if they were a nose of wax, or a matter and subject
of contention.

a god on the earth, or Christ's vicar general, or universal bishop. but the
church of Rome admits all this. the canonists exalt him like a god. Epist.
ad Gregorium 13. ante princip. doct.
Stapleton calls him supremum numen in terris. generally they call him
universal bishop, and condemn all that hold contrary.

Gal. 1.
without addition, alteration, or corruption, and the apostle pronounces him
accursed, Aduers. haeres. c. 34.
that teaches any other Gospel, than that which he taught. Vincentius
Lirinensis says, that this is the property of catholics, to keep the faith
and doctrine of the fathers committed to them in trust, and to condemn
profane novelties. Catholicoru^, says he, hoc fere proprium, deposita
sanctorum patrum and commissa seruare, damnare prophanas vocum nouitates, and
sicut dixit, and iterum dixit apostolus, si quis annuntiauerit, praeterquam
quod acceptum est, anathematizare. but the papists keep not entire the
original writings of the old and new testament, nor allow them as
authentical, neither will they yield the canonical scriptures to be a perfect
and sufficient rule of faith, nor do they allow the law of God to be a perfect
law, nor do they keep Christ's institution in the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, distributing the kinds of bread and wine to the communicants, but have
unto this rule added unwritten traditions, and the determinations of popes
concerning matters of faith. they have also increased the numbers of
Sacraments, and added many precepts and rules not received in the Apostolic
church.

Christ Jesus speaking of his sheep, says, They will not follow a stranger,
but fly from him: for that they know not the voice of strangers. The apostles
gave unto Christians a special charge concerning this point. If there come any
unto you, says S. Epist. 2.
John, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither salute
him. Tantum apostoli, and horum discipuli, says Lib. 3. aduers. haeres. c. 3.
Irenaeus, habuerunt timorem, vt neque verbotenus communicarent, alicui eorum
qui adulterauerant veritatem. Let us separate our selves, says Cyprian, as
far from them, as they separate themselves from the church. The true church
certes can not embrace erroneous doctrine, neither can any heretics be
accounted Christians. Si haeretici sint, says De praescrip. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian, Christianiesse non possunt. But the Papists communicate with
heretics, as Liberius, Felix, Vigilius, Honorius, John the 22. and 23. whom in
my treatise De pontifice Romans I declared to be heretics. they do also embrace
the heresy of Angelicks, in worshipping angels; of the Collyridians, in
worshipping the blessed Virgin; of Marcion, Valentinus, and others, in denying
Christ's true body in the Sacrament to be solid and palpaple; of the
Pelagians, in magnifying their merits and the force of free will; of the
Carpocratians, in burning incense and worshipping the images of Jesus and Paul;
and diverse others, as we shall hereafter particularly declare.

S. George, Cyricus and Iulitta. for these are condemned by the censure of
Gelasius, who testifies, that the old Church of Rome received not any such
legends. but the latter Church of Rome, and papists of our time do admit these
legends, and out them they gather their traditions, which they make equal to
the word of God.

Est fons veritatis, says Instit. divine. lib. 4. c. vlt.
Lactantius, speaking of the church, hoc est, domicilium fidei. that is, she is
the fountain of truth, she is the house, where true faith dwells. but the
church of Rome, that now is, is not only a receptacle of lewd opinions, but
also the mother and mistress of lies and vanities. and so Petrarch for above
two hundred years doubted not to call her. Madre d'errori, e, tempio
d'haeresia, says he. which authority albeit they regard not, yet the same
which he avouches, is proved first, in that the church of Rome avouches
lying traditions: as for example, the tradition concerning Ember fasts, and
fasts upon Saints vigiles, concerning the ceremonies of the mass, concerning
the words, and aeterni, and mysterium fidei, thrust into the words of
consecration of the challice, and such like. secondly, the same approoueth
lying and forged decretals, as for example, C. Constantinus. did. 96. and c.
ego Ludouicus. did. 63. and c. quis nesciat. did. 11. and infinite more of
that nature. thirdly, the same gives credit to Caesar Baronius his most lying
and fabulous narrations, and the popes have commended them by solemn
decretals: although we doubt not, but to make the vanity of them appear
partly in this discourse, but far more at large hereafter. finally, the same
admits most lying legends, and now and then permits them to be read
publicly in the church. as for example, the legends of Catherine, Clement,
Gregory called also Thaumaturgus, Peter Martyr a dominican, S. Catharine of
Siena, S. Christopher, and diverse others. in the legend of S. Catherine, In
breuiaer. To. in fest^ Catharinae.
they write, that she was a maiden of Alexandria, and so well learned, that at
the age of eighteen years, she passed the most learned, and in dispute
overcame fifty Philosophers, and that also she converted Faustina the
empress, and Porphyrius a captain of the emperors, to the faith. they say
also, that she broke the tormenting wheel with her prayers, and that after her
death her body was buried in mount Sinah by angels. in the feast of S. Clement
in the Romish breuiary, we read that Clement Peter's successor was by Traian
sent into the wilderness of Let Parsons tell us, where this is.
Cersona, and that there he saw a lamb make a well to sally out of the top of
the mountain, and that he being cast into the sea with a millstone about his
neck, the sea fled three miles from the shore, and that in the very same place
a little chapel was found in the sea, where his body was bestowed. On the
festival day of Gregory of Neocesaria the church of Rome In breuiar. Romans
appoints his legend to be read, where it is said, that he caused the river
of Lycus to keep within the channel, by planting his staff on the bank, and
that his staff grew presently into a great tree. in the rituall books of
Sarum, we read that Gregory the first delivered Traians soul out of hell,
which if it were true, why is it now crossed out of the new books: if false,
how hapeneth it, that the church of Rome so long believed that tale? I'n
breuiar. Romans in fest. Petr. Mart.
Peter Martyr one of Dominickes order, as they write, and I think believe, did
keep his virginity both in body and mind, and in that sort, that he never
felt himself defiled with any mortal sin: they tell us, also, that he did
fast so long, that he could scarce open his mouth to eat. They tell us further
many wonders of Saint Nicolas, Valerian and Tiburtius, Lucia, Christopher and
other saints. in the Historia Lou^bard. del volto santo italic.
legend of Ieames of the colepit (for else I cannot tell how to English Iacobus
de Voragne) we read, that a certain picture of our savior, did lift up his
foot, and cast off his slipper to a certain pilgrim, that devoutly stood
before it, and would have offered somewhat, having nothing to offer. Of Saint
Catherine of Siena they say, that she was betrothed to our savior Christ. all
which points are very incredible, and not to be found in any authentical
writing. If then the church of Rome publish and teach these fables and lies;
then is she no mistress of truth, but of lies. if Robert Parsons will say,
they are no lies, I would pray him to declare us the truth out of authentical
histories.

is an argument certain, or an evidence of things not seen. est fides says
the Hebr. 11.
apostle, sperandarum rerum substantia, argumentum non apparentium. and it is
built on Christ Jesus, that is truth, and on a rock, that is unmouable.
neither need we long profes for this point. for the adversaries themselves
confess this to be true. Nihil, says Thomas Aquinas, cadere potest sub fide,
nisi inquantum stat sub veritate prima, sub qua nullum falsum stare potest. and
afterward he says, quod fidei non potest subesse aliquod falsum. if then the
faith of the church of Rome be grounded on falsehood; then is it no true faith.
and if that churches faith be no faith; then is not that church the true
church. but that the faith of the church of Rome is built upon diverse false
positions, it may easily be proved. for first the same believes, that the
traditions of the church of Rome are either descended from Christ or the
apostles for the most part, and namely such as concern the canon and
ceremonies of the mass, fastes, praiexs for the dead, prayers to saints and
such like secondly it believes all the determinations of popes concerning
faith and manners to be true and infallible, as for example, that it is
necessary for every christian to be subject to the Pope, that he has power to
depose kings, to give power to cutthrotes, to kill kings, to dispense with the
uncle to marry his niece, with the brother to marry his brothers wife, and such
like. thirdly, that church believes what is contained in the breuiary and
missale, as for example the stories, or rather legends of Saint Christopher,
Saint George, Saint Catherine and such like. finally, the same must believe
whatsoever the Pope shall determine to be, de fide. But among such traditions,
determinations and legendes, there are diverse both false and ridiculous fables.
neither can it be denied, but that the Pope, has determined, and may also
determine falsely and contrary to the faith. and this is showed in my books de
Pontifice Romans at large. Lib. 4. de pontif. Romans
and cannot be denied, unless Robert Parsons can prove unto us, that all the
Popes decretales concerning matters of faith and manners, and all the traditions
of that church, and all legendes are true: which to him will be a matter of
some difficulty.

habet vrbes legis, prophetarum and euangelii, says Saint In Mich. lib. 1. c.
1.
Hierome. and again, non est egressa de finibus suis, id est de scripturis
sanctis. he Ibidem. c. 7.
says also, that it is the property of heretics, to fly to men's
commandments and the leaven of the pharisees. S. Lib. 19. de ciuit. Dei. c. 18.
Augustine also concureth with him and says, that the city of God believes
the holy scriptures, that are called canonical: but of other reports, he
says, she doubts. but the church of Rome will not be bounded within the
limits of holy scriptures, neither will she acknowledge the canonical
scriptures to be a perfect rule of faith. the same also from scriptures flies
to unwritten traditions, and is much soured with the leaven of the pharisees,
and mixture of Popish and Jewish ceremonies devised and established by men.
finally the same does rather, or at the least as soon, believe the
determination of the Pope, as the letter of holy scriptures. for in the Pope,
Stapleton places the chief authority of the church, and last resolution for
matters of faith.

Theodosion, and Symachus, and the seventy interpreters, and in all the Latin
translations, the vulgar and old edition not excepted z yet did the true
church never burn the scriptures. for that was practiced by Dioclesian and
other persecuters of the church, and by heathen men, rather than by any, that
carried the name of Christians. but the church of Rome has caused Gods holy
word to be burnt under pretense of false translations, which notwithstanding
she was never able to prove to be false. she does therefore plainly declare
her self to be the synagogue of Satan, and not of Christ.

as by word. In Psalm. 86.
S. Hierome says, that scriptures do not only belong to priests, but also to
the people. Non scripserunt, says he, speaking of the holy apostles, paucis,
sed vniuerso populo. and our savior, where he commanded his auditors to
search the scriptures, meant, that it should be lawful for all to read them.
finally, what is more unreasonable, seeing the scriptures contain Gods holy
laws, and his eternal testament, than that the laws of God should not be red
in a known tongue, and that it should not be lawful for children to
understand their heavenly fathers testament and last will? but the Romish
congregation prohibiteth the scriptures to be publicly read in vulgar tongues,
and Index libr. prohib. a Pio 9.
prohibiteth all translations, but such as themselves set forth, which are most
wicked and perverse. The bloody inquisitors have also burned diverse poor
people for reading scriptures in English, as appears by the Registers of
Lincoln and London in king Henry the eighth his days. Finally Nauarrus a
brave Romish doctor teaches, that it is mortal sin for a lay man to dispute
of religion. Laicus disputans de fide, says In primum praecept. c. 11.
Nauarrus, peccat mortaliter.

John 4.
teaches us, that all true worshippers, do worship God in spirit and truth.
Venit hora and nunc est, says our savior, quando very adoratores adorabant
patrem in spiritu and veritate. And God by his prophet Isay 29. and Matthew. 15.
Isay does condemn his people, that honored him with their lips, their hearts
being far from him. The apostle also Coloss. 2. would not have Christians
condemned, in respect of meat, drink, and holy days; and reprooueth those
that make decrees concerning touching and tasting, and such like ceremonies. he
does also utterly 1. Cor. 14.
condemn prayers in a strange language, and not understood of those that use
them. but the worship of God which the papists use, and most commend, does
wholly consist in external ceremonies, as knocking, lifting up of the
Sacrament, censing, lights, and such like. they also rather honor God with
their lips, then their hearts not understanding what they say, and thinking,
that to gaze on the mass, is to serve God. finally, they have many decrees
concerning meats, drinks, saints days, and also concerning touching and
tasting, and such like. is it not then apparent, that they are no true
worshippers?

Exodus 20.
Christ does worship but one God, according to this commandment, Thou shall
have no other gods but me. and according to the words of Matthew. 4.
Christ, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
but the papists worship the images of God, as God himself, and give as much
honor to the image, as to the original. Cum Christus, says P. 3. q. 25. art.
3.
Thomas Aquinas, adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est quod eius imago
sit adoratione latriae adoranda. Seeing as Christ is honored with divine
worship, says he, it follows, that his image is also to be worshipped with
divine worship. and friars in their sermons speaking to the crucifix, are wont
to say to it, Thou have redeemed us, thou have reconciled us to thy father:
which Bellar. de cult. imag. lib. 2. c. 23.
Bellarmine himself can not deny. he confesses also, that images may be
worshipped with that honor, that is due to the original. Admitti potest,
imagines posse col^ improprie, vel per accidens, eodem genere cultus, quo
exemplum ipsum colitur. they also worship the Sacrament with divine worship,
and fall down before it. but neither are images, gods; nor is the Sacrament,
God. Finally, they confess, that the worship of service, or doulia, is due to
saints. and this they will not deny. how then can they show, that they worship
and serve one true God?

The catholic church only, says Instit. 4. c. vlt.
Lactantius, does retain the true worship of God. neither can any society be
termed Gods church, which reteineth not Gods true worship. but the papists do
not retain Gods true worship. for first they worship God according to the
doctrines and commandments of men, which our Savior Matthew. 15.
Christ condemns. secondly, they give divine honor to creatures, as we showed
in our last argument. thirdly, their worship consists principally in the
sacrifice of the mass: which is nothing else, but a mass of many
superstitions, impieties and blasphemies: as I have showed particularly, and
largely in my treatise of the mass against Bellarmine.

Jesus Christ is perfect God, and perfect man; and that Christ Jesus is
ascended up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of his father. for these
two points are articles of our faith: the first being in terms contained in
the creed of Athanasius, the second being expressed in the apostles creed. but
the papists attributing to Christ in the sacrament such a body, as is neither
visible, nor palpable, and can neither see nor feel, nor help himself nor
others, being oftentimes devoured by mise and other brute beasts, cannot show,
how these qualities can be in a perfect man. neither can they show, that a
perfect man is both in heaven and in earth, and in many places at once: or that
the flesh of Christ can be properly in heaven and earth, and not only
believed, but also apprehended with men's hands and teeth. Co^tr. Eutyth. lib.
4. c. 4.
Vigilius says, that the flesh that is in heaven, is not in earth. Fulgentius
writing to Thrasimundus, says, that the body of Christ has the properties of
a true body. De resur. carn.
Tertullian teaches us, that the body of Christ is in the palace of heaven.
neither may we suspect, that he supposed, that Christ's body might at the same
time be in earth. Saint Lib. 10. in c. 24. Luc.
Ambrose says, that we touch not Christ with corporal handling, but by faith:
and that we are not to seek him on the earth, nor after the flesh, if we will
find him. finally, the scriptures and fathers do teach us, that Christ is so
ascended into heaven, that we do not enjoy him here on the earth according to
his bodily presence: as I have declared at large in my treatise against
Bellarmine concerning the real supposed presence of his body in the sacrament.

Christ Jesus, and not by the works of the law. arbitramur iustificari hominem
says the Romans 3.
apostle, per fidem sine operibus legis. and Romans 4. si qui ex lege haeredes
sunt, exinanita est fides. and this is the faith likewise of the fathers. Dial.
1. contr. Pelag.
tunc ergo iusti sumus, says Hierome, quando nos peccatores fatemur, and
iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito, sed ex dei consistit misericordia. and
that we are not justified by charity, or by our works, it may be proved by
the testimony of saint Epist. 29. ad Hieronymum.
Augustine. plenissima charitas says he, quae iam non possit augeri, quamdiu
hic homo viuit, est in nemine. quamdiu autem augeri potest, profecto illud quod
minus est, quam debet ex vitio est, ex quo vitio non est qui faciat bonum, and
non peccet. neither may we suppose where the fathers do speak of justice of
works, that they mean any other justice, but such as declares us justified,
and which, without remission of sins, cannot stand before God. but the
papists both believe and teach contrary, as appears by the Sess. 6.
acts of the Trent council, and frivolous disputes of Lib. 4. de iustific. c.
10. and seq.
Bellarmine who endeavors to show, that man is able to fulfill the law, and
that our works do justify us. whereupon it follows, that contrary to the
apostles intention, we are justified by the law, if he say truly.

Si Abraham ex operibus iustificatus est, says the apostle Romans 3. habet
gloriam, sed non apud deum. and Romans 6. stipendium peccati mors, gratia autem
dei vita aeterna in Christo Jesus domino nostro. likewise the scriptures show,
that when we have done all we can, we are to acknowledge our selves to be
unprofitable servants: and that our sufferings are not worthy of the glory,
that is to be revealed. and this the church of Christ also believes, and has
from time to time believed. tua peccata sunt, says Augustine in Psalm. 70.
merita dei sunt. supplicium tibi debetur, and cum praemium venerit, sua dona
coronabit, non merita tua. and Hilary in Psalm. 51. non illa ipsa iustitiae
opera sufficenrent ad perfectae beatitudinis meritum, nisi misericordia dei
etiam in hac iustitiae voluntate humanarum demutationum, and motuum non reputet
vitia. but the papists hold, that we may trust in our works, as appears by
Bellarmines dispute, lib. 5. de iustific. c. 7. and say, that all sins do
not deserve death, and that eternal life is due for our works.

Christ says the Ephesians. 2.
apostle, is the head of the church, and he is savior of his body. neither is
the title of head of the universal church due to Peter. Peter the apostle
says Lib. 4. epist. 38, ad Joan. Constantinop.
Gregory, is the first member of the holy catholic church, and Paul, Andrew,
and John, what are they but heads of diverse parishes? and yet all are members
of the church under one head. Saint De agon. Christ. and in Psalm. 9.
Augustine says, that Christ Jesus, that is the mediator betwixt God and man
is head of the church. but this title of mediator only belongs to our
savior. Yet the Romish church does acknowledge the pope to be her head: and In
gloss. in c. vnam. de mayor. and obed.
Bertrand blasphemously says, that Christ had not been discreet, if he had
not left a vicar general behind him. and this does Praefat. in lib. de pontif.
Romans and lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 31.
Bellarmine very well allow, and prove it to be due to the pope. is that
congregation then the true church, that has either two heads, or a head beside
Christ Jesus?

Bellarmines preface before his treatise de pontifice Romans and does take the
pope to be her foundation. Lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 31.
Bellarmine among other the popes titles does reckon this for one, that he is
fundamentum aedificii ecclesiae, that is, the foundation of the building of the
church.

Oseae 2. God speaking to his church says, sponsabo te mihi in fide. the
church also being Christ's spouse harkeneth to him alone, and of him is most
dearly beloved. en dilectus meus, says the Cantic. 2.
church, loquitur mihi, surge, propera amica mea, columba mea, formosa mea, and
veni. Cyprian says that the church cannot be drawn to like of an adulterer:
adulterari non potest, says De unit. ecclesiae.
he, Christi sponsa, incorrupta est and pudica. but the Turrecrem. lib. 2. c.
28. and Aquin. in 4. sent. did. 38.
church of Rome does acknowledge the pope of Rome to be her spouse; and Lib. 2.
de pontif. Romans c. 31.
Bellarmine does maintain, that the pope is justly entitled, the spouse of
the church. and that this is not without the allowance of the pope it may
appear by the popes own C. intercorporalia. de translat. episc. etc. quoniam.
de immunit. ecclesiae.
words, where he challenges this title of spouse to be due unto him. and yet
I hope he will not say of the church, sponsabo te mihi in fide: nor, propera
amica mea, columba mea: nor does the true church say of the pope, en dilectus
meus. what then rests, but that the church of Rome should be the whore of
Babylon, Apocalyp. 1.7. out of whose cup the nations of the earth have drunken
so many abominations, and that the pope should be the lover and spouse of this
adulterous and unchaste congregation.

quae sursum est Jerusalem, says the Galat. 4.
apostle, libera est, quae est matter nostra. so likewise are her children. for
it is a rule of law, if the mother be free so likewise are her children. but
the church of Rome is necessarily tied to the obedience of the pope. C. Vnam
sanctam extr. de maiorit. and obed.
Boniface the 8. determines, that it is a point necessary unto salvation, to
be subject to the pope. and Lib. de eccles. milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine does exclude all out of the church of Rome, that live not under the
subjection of the pope. finally, it is the common opinion of all papists, that
such as acknowledge not the popes authority, are Ibidem. c. 5.
schismatikes. is it not then manifest, that those that live under the slavery
of Antichrist are not the true church?

vnus est legislator and index, says saint Jacob. 4.
James, qui potest perdere and liberare. but the church of Rome does
acknowledge the pope for a supreme judge and lawgiuer, and hold that his laws
are of power to bind the conscience, as Bellarmine teaches his disciples,
lib. 4. de pontif. Romans c. 16. and that is the common opinion of all casuistes,
and the groundwork of those, that work on men's consciences. can this then be
the true church, that lives in such bondage?

Mary, to the archangell Michaell, to saint John Baptist, or to the holy
apoples Peter and Paul, and to all the saints of heaven. the confessions of
saint Augustine are extant and to be seen. so likewise are there diverse
confessions to be found both in the writings of the fathers, and public
liturgies, and yet can we not find any of this nature. nay in the form of the
mass, prescribed by Ordo Romans cap. de forma celebrat. missae.
an ancient order of the Romish church, we do not find that form of
confession, that is now used. neither can Robert Parsons or Bellarmine, or any
of that faction show, that any christian was wont to say, confiteor deo
omnipotenti, bea^ae Mariae semper virgini, beato Michaeli archangelo, beato
Ioanni Baptistae, sanctis apostolis Petro and Paulo, and omnibus sanctis. do
they not therefore, that use this form in all their masses, show, that they are
not the true church, that join angels and saints with God, and seem to
confess, that they know our sins, and that they are our judges, and have
power to pardon our offenses?

and that may be proved by Iustines 2. apology directed to Antoninus, by
Dionysius supposed to be the Ariopagite, and all ancient forms of liturgies.
for we do not read in any of them of more sacraments than two. but the popish
congregation has made evangelical sacraments of matrimony, order, and
penance: of which, the first two were instituted in the old testament, and the
third is an act always necessary for obteining of remission of sins, but
never accounted a sacrament, as wanting a sacramental sign, and also ^ormall
institution. they have also made sacraments of confirmation, and extreme
unction, and given them both signs, and forms, which notwithstanding were
never known in ancient time. are they therefore not likely to prove a new
church, that have instituted diverse new sacraments?

ex opere operato, and that herein they differ from the sacraments of the old
law, for that the new sacraments do work justification, and not the old. the
first is apparent by Bellarmines discourse de sacrament. lib. 2. c. 3. and
sequent. the second by his dispute lib. 2. de sacrament. c. 12. and sequent.
neither will any papist deny this. let them then show, how men may be justified
by greasing and crossing in extreme unction, and confirmation: or else they
will appear to be strangers to Christ's church.

Can. apost. 10. and council. antioch. c. 2.
excommunicate such, as coming to church departed before they received the
communion. qui non perseuerauerint in oratione vsque dum missa peragitur say
the canons, necsanctam communionem percipiunt, velut inquietudines ecclesiae
mouentes conuenit co^munione priuari. the Romanistes themselves also C. peracta
did. 2. de consecrat. do confess that this was the ancient practice of the
church. peracta consecratione, says Anacletus, omnes communicent, qui
noluerint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. sic enim and apostoli statuerunt,
and sancta Romana tenet ecclesia. and the same is also confirmed by the
testimony of Iustine Martyr apolog. 2. of Dionysius de eccles. hierarch. and
other ancient fathers. but the church of Rome now does take them for good
cacolickes, that will come to mass, and look on. She does not certes
excommunicate any for not receiving the communion. does it not then appear,
that the Romish church is not the church of Christ?

Christ Matthew. 26. and Luc. 22. and 1. Cor. 11.
said, accipite, comedite, and bibite: that is, take, eat, drink, and so
forth. and the apostles and first christians did receive, and not keep the
sacrament in pixes. but the church of Rome does quite contrary.

Sermon. 4. de quadrages.
Leo says they were Manicheyes, that receiving the sacraments took the body
of Christ, but in no wise would drink the blood of our redemtion. and this act
he affirms to be sacrilegious. Gelasius also says, that it is plain
sacrilege to divide one and the same mystery, and receiving a portion of the
sacred body, to abstain from the cup of the sacred blood. but the church of
Rome does expressly forbid all communicants, beside the priest, to receive the
cup; and takes this to be good religion. The papists also are well content
to be deprived of the cup of the new testament, and think not the sacrament so
mangled, to be imperfect.

If a dog or hog, says P. 4 q 45.
Alexander Hales, should eat a consecrated host, I see no cause, but the Lords
body should go therewithal into that dogs, or hogs belly. some have said,
as it is in the third part of Thomas Aquinas his sum of divinity, that, as
soon as the sacrament is taken of a mouse or a dog, straightway the body and
blood of Christ cease to be there, etc. but that is derogatorie to the truth
of this sacrament. it is also the common opinion of all papisticall doctors,
that the body and blood of Christ so long continue in the sacrament, as the
forms of bread and wine continue vncorrupt, and that they go into all places
together. unless therefore Robert Parsons or some other do help here, and
show, that the true church of Christ did believe and teach, as before is
declared; both he, and his consorts must needs confess, that the Romish church
is not the true church.

Melchisedech. the priest after the order of Melchisedech was Christ Jesus. he
was also that sacrifice. the altar was his cross. tu es sacerdos in aeternum
says God by his Psalm. 109. and Hebr. 5.
prophet, secundum ordinem Melchisedech. he, because he remains for ever,
has an eternal priesthood, as the apostle says Hebr. 7. but the papists
erect altars of stone, whereupon, they say, they offer their sacrifices. they
believe also, that their priests offer up sacrifices, and that they are
according to the order of Melchisedech, as if they had neither father, nor
mother, nor certain genealogy, and were holy and impolluted. do they not then
declare, that they have erected a new congregation that is diverse from the
church of Christ? neither is it material, that the fathers do call the Lords
supper or eucharist, a sacrifice. for they do not so call it for other cause,
but for that it is a memorial of Christ's sacrifice on the cross. Christ,
says Dedemonstrat. Euangelic. lib. 1. c. 10.
Eusebius, offered a most excellent sacrifice for us all, and gave us a
memorial (or sacrament) thereof in stead of a sacrifice. Chrysostom writing
upon the epistle to the Hebrews, teaches us, that our sacrifice is but a
samplar, or memorial of Christ's sacrifice. and this Peter Lombard frankly
confesses. that which is offered and consecrated by the priest is called a
sacrifice and oblation, says Sentent. 4. did. 12.
he, because it is a memorial, and representation of the true sacrifice, and
holy oblation made on the altar of the cross.

aliud altar constitu^ says Epist. 25. pleb. vniuersae.
Cyprian, aut sacerdotium nouum fieri, praeter vnum altar, and vnum
sacerdotium non potest. likewise says Epist. ad Philadelph.
Ignatius, quod vnus sit panis pro omnibus confractus, and vnus calix totius
ecclesiae. but the papists have alters in every corner of their churches, and
there diverse priests sing or say diverse masses, and offer sacrifices. there
also they consecrate, and divide the sacrament, making a division, no less in
their congregations, then in their altars, chalices, and sacrifices.

deteriores sunt Judah, says Onus ecclesiae c. 23.
one speaking of Romish priests, alleging the authority of saint Brigit, qui
pro solis denariis me vendidit: illi autem pro omni mercimonio.

Christ's church believe, that the Lords supper was satisfactory for pains in
purgatory, or good against lightning and thunder, or such calamities. but the
Romish church does hold that their eucharistical sacrifice is propitiatory for
the dead, as well as the quick, and that the same is expiatory, and does work
diverse other woondrous effects. hoc sacrificium says De valor missae parad.
12.
Guernerus, est expiatiuum debitae poenae tam hic, quam in futuro exoluendae.
ibidem parad. 9.
he shows also, that the same works miraculous effects against thunder,
danger of enemies, and other calamities, and that he, that frequenteth the
mass, shall be directed in all things, which new doctrine, unless Robert
Parsons can prove that it has been taught in the ancient church of Christ,
will greatly endanger the state of the Romish church.

In canone missae.
supra quae, propitio acsereno vultu respicere digneris, and accepta habere,
sicut accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abel, and sacrificium
patriarchae nostri Abrahae. Upon which says he, vouchsafe to look with a
favorable and pleasant countenance, and to accept them, as thou vouchsafest to
accept the gifts of Abel, and the sacrifice of our patriarch Abraham. and
afterward: iube haec perferri per manus sancti angeli tui in sublime altar
tuum. Command these things, says the priest speaking of the body and blood of
Christ, to be brought by the hands of the holy angel unto thy high altar.
these things are blasphemous, and cannot be allowed of Christ his church.
neither can Parsons or Bellarmine answer, that these words are found in the
book of sacraments attributed to S. Ambrose lib. 4. c. 6. for there is great
difference betwixt the words of the canon of the mass, and the words of that
author. and the meaning of him is clean contrary. for never shall it be
proved, that the author of that treatise believed, that the body and blood of
Christ was under the forms of bread and wine in the sacrament, or that he
meant the body and blood of Christ, where he compares the sacrament to the
sacrifices of Abel and Abraham.

noui and aeterni testamenti, mysterium fidei. neither are these words found in
the old formularies of the liturgies of the church of Rome, as I have showed in
my treatise of the mass against Bellarmine. does not then this new trick of
the latter Romish church departing from the former, show a manifest difference
betwixt them?

pro redemptione animarum suarum, neither did the same use the commemoration
for the dead, as it is in the Romish missal, saying, memento domine famulorum,
famularumque, qui nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei and dormiunt in somno
pacis. nay, this form is not to be found in the old formulary, which the
Romans used about five or six hundred years agone. but now all In canone
missae.
Romanists do thus say and pray. if then Rob. Parsons could show this form, or
any such prayers or words in ancient authors, he might do a great pleasure to
the church of Rome, that otherwise is like to prove the synagogue of Antichrist.

In ordinar. missae.
per intercessione^ beati Michaelis archangeli stantis a dextris altaris
incensi and omnium electorum suorum, incensum istud dignetur dominus
benedicere, and in odorem suauitatis accipere. if Robert Parsons can prove the
contrary, let him do it, otherwise the Romish church will fall out, not to be
Christ's true church.

Missale Romans
Romish church has masses for all these causes and occasions.

exorcizo te creatura salis etc. and exorcizo te creatura aquae etc. vt fias
aqua exorcizata ad effugandam omnem potestatem inimici, and ipsum inimicum
eradicare and explantare valeas cum angelis suis apostaticis. it is not the
true church therefore that does practice these exorcismes.

Jews, nor eat the Paschall lamb. for as the 1. Cor. 5.
apostle says, Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus. but the In fine missalis
Romans
Romanists according to the rules of their missal do consecrate, and eat a
Paschal lamb, and pray thus: Deus, qui per famulum tuum Moysem in liberatione
populi tui de Aegypto agnum occidi iussisti in similitudinem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, and vtrosque posts domorum de sanguine huius agni perungi
praecepisti, ita benedicere, and sanctificare digneris hanc creaturam carnis,
quam nos famuli tui ad laudem tuam sumere desideramus.

the Father, or God the Holy ghost, or of Gods divine essence. neither did the
same ever set up images in churches to be worshipped with lights, incense,
kissing, crowching, prayers or other such like ceremonies. the second
commandment directly forbids the making of graven images to be worshipped,
and districtly commands us, that we should not bow down unto them. and that
this commandment was direct against the worwip of images, the first Christians
did well understand. Aduers. gentes.
Arnobius says, that they had no altars, nor temples, nor images, worshipped in
open show. ne simulachra quidem veneramur, says Contra Celsum. lib. 7.
Origin, quippe qui Dei, vt inuisibilis, ita and incorporei, formam nullam
effigiamus. Lib. 2. divine. instit. c. 19.
Lactantius doubts not to affirm, that there is no religion, where there is
an image, and when images and pictures began to creep into the churches as an
outward ornament, the council of Eliberis, to prevent all inconveniences,
forbad pictures in churches. Placuit, says the Council. Elib. c. 36.
council, picturas in ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur
in parietibus depingatur. such was then the religion of Spain. Arnobius
declares, that Christians were not wont to worship the cross. Cruces, says
Aduers. gentes. lib. 8.
he, nec colimus, nec optamus. nay, Lib. 9. epist. 9.
Gregory the first himself, albeit he would not have images broken down, yet
would he not have them adored or worshipped. and Jonas Aurelianensis, albeit a
defender of images, yet writes thus of them. Creaturam adorari, eique aliquid
diuinae seruitutis impendi, proh, nefas ducimus, huiusque sceleris patratorem
detestandum and anathematizandum libera voce proclamumus, says De cultu
imaginum lib. 4.
Jonas. but papists fall down before images, and give divine worship to the
cross and crucifixe. neither do they only make the images of the Father and
Holy ghost, but worship them. finally, they burn incense, kneel and pray to
stocks and stones.

Si orem lingua, says the 1. Cor. 14.
apostle, spiritus meus orat, men's autem mea fine fructu est. he says, it is
fruitless to pray in a tongue not understood. and reason teaches us, that
this is true. for if God respect not the moving of our lips, unless our heart
accord with our tongue, how can our heart accord, when we understand not what
our tongue utters? finally, the practice of the church teaches us, that a
known tongue is to be used in public prayers, and in the administration of
sacraments, as the answers of the people to the priest in all ancient
liturgies, and the testimony of Iustine Martyr apolog. 2. of Dionyfius
ecclesiast. hierarch. c. 3. of Origin. lib. 8. contra Celsum. of Hierome in
epitaph. Paulae ad Eustochium. and in his 17. epistle to Marcella. of Ambrose
de sacramentis, and Cyrill catech. 5. and others does declare. but the Romish
church will have no other tongue used in the common liturgy of the western
church, and public administration of the sacraments, but the latin, of which
the vulgar people scarce understand one word.

Lib. 4. contra Marci^n.
Tertullian says, id verius, quod prius; id prius, quod ab apostolis.
contrariwise, Aduershares. c. 26.
Vincentius Litinensis says, that is a trick of heretics, not to content
themselves with the ancient rule of faith, but to seek novelties from day to
day, and to desire to add, to change, to take away. but the church of Rome
first denies the canonical scriptures to be a perfect rule of faith. secondly
the same is departed from the doctrine of the apostles. thirdly the same is
bound to believe all determinations and decretales of popes concerning matters
of faith. finally, that church has added and changed the ancient faith.

Peter de Alliaco his treatise de reformatione ecclesiae, by Vllerstones
petitions proposed in the council of Constance, and diverse complaints both of
English, French and Dutch. finally, if they do not yield his judgment to be
infallible, then must they confess, that the church of Rome is built rather on
sand, than on a rock.

Christ never believed, that the bishop of Rome could depose princes, and take
their crowns from them, or that they could dispense with subjects for their
oaths of allegiance to their liege princes. nay the apostles teach obedience to
princes: and Peter did rather exhort to obedience, then rebellion. the canons,
that go under the names of the Can. 83.
apostles do severely punish such, as do speak reprochfully of princes and
magistrates. and certes most unlike it was, that ever king or prince would have
embraced christian religion, if the same had given power to bishops to depose
them from their regal throne, and to subjects to rebel against their liege
sovereigns. but papists do believe and Bellar. lib. 5. de pontif. Romans c. 6.
7. and 8.
teach, that the pope has power to depose kings, and to translate kingdoms
from one to another. they also do believe, that he has power to dispense with
the oaths of subjects, and to command them to rebel. Howsoever the rest
believe, pope In Bulla contra Elizabetham.
Pius the fifth most wickedly commanded her Majesty's subjects to take arms
against her, upon pain of excommunication, and the like insolency did In
declarat eiusdem bullae.
Sixtus quintus use against her, being the Lords anointed, and he being the
greased and marked slave of satan. both he, and Pius quintus do wickedly rail
against her, and the like course did that flagitious pope In bulla contr.
Henric. 8.
Paul the third take against her Majesty's noble father. and this is now the
popes, and their agents most common practice to raise sedition against
christian princes, and when they cannot otherwise do hurt, like helhounds to
bark against them, and to publish infamous libels tending to their dishonor
and disgrace.

to teach all nations. and in our creed we believe the catholic church. now
this catholic church, as saint In psalm. 56.
Augustine says, is spread throughout all the world, and contains not only
those, that are present, but those also, that are past, and are yet to come.
but the Romish church is not catholic, neither does it contain the Greeks
or Africanes, or men of Asia, that for many ages past have shaken off the yoke
of antichrist of Rome. further, it does not reach to the people of God before
Christ. finally Lib. de ecclesia milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine does define those only to be of the church, which live under the
obedience of the pope. this church therefore differs much from the catholic
church.

Peter, and all godly pastors his successors, to be fed. and these are the
members of his church, and not those cruel ones, that are more like to lions,
then sheep. they shall not hurt nor kill, says God by his holy Isai. 11.
prophet, in all my holy mountain. nay the force of Christ's religion is such,
that it makes savage and fierce people to become meek and gentle. the wolf
says the ibidem.
prophet, shall dwell with the lamb, and the pard shall lie with the kidde.
quis coegit barbaros, gentesque alias in suis sedibus, says Lib. de incarnat.
verb.
Athanasius, immanitatem deponere, pacifica meditari, nisi christi fides and
crucis signaculum? Optatus in his second book against Parmenian, speaking of
catholics to heretics, which of us says he, has persecuted any man? can
you show or prove, that any of you has been persecuted by us? But the Romish
church does consist of lions, tigers, wolves, and inquisitors, popes, and
friars more fierce and cruel then lions, tigers, and wolves. their Extr. de
haereticis per tot.
laws are most cruel, their executions notwithstanding pass both law, and
reason. In the time of Charles the emperor the fifth of that name, it is
recorded, Meteran de Belgit. tumult.
that above fifty thousand persons were condemned by sentences of inquisitors
and judges, and executed to death in the low countries for the profession of
their faith. In France, as the stories of that country declare, threescore
thousand christians without all order of law, and contrary to solemn oaths
given them by the king for their security, were most shamefully and
trecherously murdered and massacred for the profession of their relion, at the
kings sisters marriage. Circiter sexaginta hominum millia says Hist. Not. com.
lib. 23. p. 508.
Natalis Comes speaking of one only massacre, committed anno 1572. variis in
locis per illud tempus trucidata fuisse dicta sunt in Gallia. and so
extraordinary was the fury of the papists, that they spared neither age, sex,
nor quality. vel puberes, vel impuberes, says he, trucidati sunt, neque vllius
sexus, vel aetatis, vel dignitatis habita est ratio. neither may we think,
that they have showed less cruelty against christians in Spain, Italy, or
Germany. as for the realm of England it has sufficient experience of the
adversaries extreme rage and cruelty by the short and bloody reign of Queen
Mary.

And can any christian man notwithstanding endure, to nourish up young wolves,
and tigers within our bosoms? The Apocal. 17.
Romish harlot is drunk with the blood of the saints, and has her garments
made red with the slaughter of innocents. that therefore which Optatus lib. 2.
contr. Parmen. says of the Donatistes, may with good reason be applied to
papists. Iacerati sunt viri, tractatae sunt matronae, in fantes necati, abacti
partus: ecce vestra ecclesia, episcopis ducibus, cruentis morsibus pasta est.
for by the Romanistes many innocent christians have been tormented and
murdered, women have been abused, infantes have been cut in pieces, women have
been forced to loose their children: and they have fed themselves with
cruelty, and the popes of Rome and their agentes have been ringleaders in these
cruel executions. they are therefore professed enemies, rather then members of
Christ's church.

Jews and infidels, then to Christians, that misliked the pomp, tyranny, and
corrupt doctrine and manners of the popes or bishops of Rome. for with her
children the church deals like a kind mother most mildely. she corrects
them, if they offend, genly, and instructteth them carefully. contrariwise she
auoideth those, that will not hear her admonitions, and conuerseth not with
them. Christian emperors Hac valitura. C. de Iudaeis and Caell^olis.
excluded the Jews from all government, and authority in the common wealth.
ibidem.
they did also restrain their insolences with diverse sharp laws. the like
Cod. de paganis, sacrif. and templ.
course also they took with pagans and infidels, shutting up their impious
temples, and forbidding their sacrifices and idolatries. but the Romish
sinagogue does proceed by a contrary course. for she massacreth and murthreth
christians resembling that unnatural whore, that before Solomon would have the
child in controversy cut in pieces. but the Jews and wicked atheistes she
nourishes, so they meddle not with the popes scuruinesse. the popes by their
inquisitors and executioners torment christians, and receive tribute of Jews,
that dwell quietly in Rome. Onuphr. in Alexandr 6.
Alexander the sixth received Turks and Maranes into Rome, when the Spaniardes
could not endure them in Spain. and all popes show more favor to Turks, than
to such Christians, as come within the reach of the Spanish, or popish
inquisition.

Agatha, c. 27. and council of Eliberis in Spain, c. 73. and 74. but the
church of Rome perceiving, that she cannot prevail by plain truth and honest
dealing, goes now about by suppressing of truth, and forging of counterfeit
canons and false writings, and by all manner of untruths and slanders to abuse
the ignorant and simple multitude. the scriptures, as much as she can, she
suppresseth in unknown languages, and corrupts by making the old Latin
translation authentical. she deuiseth and spreads abroad false traditions,
and sets out falsehood under the names of false canons, and constitutions,
under the name of the apostles, false canons of councels, counterfeit treatises
set out under the name of Origin, Athanasius, Ambrose, Nazianzene, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Epiphanius, and other fathers, forged decretale
epistles under the names of Clement, Anacletus, Euaristus, and other ancient
bishops of Rome, that were never acquainted either with such matters, or such a
style. Of late time, most audaciously the Popes agents have taken unto them
power to put out, and to put in, and to change what they list in men's writings;
of which forgery, their expurgatorie indexes do plainly convince them.
Bellarmine, he with all his wit wresteth scriptures and fathers, to serve his
cause. Caesar Baronius out of Simeon Metaphrastes, Iacobus de Voragine, Surius,
and such like fabulous legends, has sent us from Rome whole cartlodes of lies.
To help him, Alanus Copus, or rather, Harpsfield, Alfonsus Ciacone, and diverse
popish companions, have set out diverse notorious and ridiculous fables.
finally, to disgrace the truth by slanderous accusations of such, as have
showed themselves forward in defense of it, the popish faction has hired
Sanders, Robert Parsons, Creswel, Cope, or rather Harpesfield, Genebrard,
Surius, Cochleus, Stapleton, Allen, Ribaldineira, Bolsecus, Laingius, and other
such like sycophants, to rail as well against princes, as inferior ministers.
can this company then be the true church, that delights in lying, slandering,
railing, cogging and plain forging?

qui sacrificat dijs eradicabitur, praeterquam domino soli, says Exodus 22.
God to Moses. S. De ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. c. 4.
Augustine says, that God only is to be served with sacrifices of praises, and
thanksgiving, and to have the worship of Latria, done to him. John, Apocalyp.
22. fell down, vt adoraret ante pedes angeli: that is, that he might worship
before the feet of the angel. but the angel forbad him, and said, vide ne
feceris. see thou do it not. and afterward, Deum adora. The papists also
confess, that the worship of sacrifices is due to God alone. Sacrificium,
says Lib. 1. de missa. c. 2.
Bellar. est externa oblatio facta soli Deo. he adds superfluously the word
externa. for if we may not offer external sacrifices to creatures, much less
may we offer our internal devotions and sacrifices unto them. But the Romish
church does offer the sacrifices of incense, of prayers and thanksgiving, not
only to God, but also to angels, to the virgin Mary, and to other saints. In
their Letanies they call upon the virgin Mary, upon the angels, upon saints,
they confess their sins to them, and yield them thanks for benefits
received. neither do they offer incense only to saints, but to their images
either planted on the altar, or near unto it. finally, they confess, that
they say masses in the honor of the virgin Mary, of angels, and saints, and
give latriam or sovereign worship, not to God only, but also to the images of
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy ghost; to the images also of
the holy Trinity, and of the cross. Of their Agnus Dei they Caerem. lib. 1.
c. 7.
say, Peccatum frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and angit. and when they consecrate
a cross, they pray, that as the world was delivered from the guilt of sin by
the cross of Christ, so those that offer to the new made cross, by the merit
of the same, may be acquitted from all sin.

Christ Jesus. the 1. Tim. 2.
apostle teaches us that there is but one mediator betwixt God and man, the
man Christ Jesus. but the Romish church has gotten to it self a pack of
mediators, and doubts not to entitle the blessed virgin the mediatrix betwixt
God and man. Hist. p. 3. Tit. 23. c. 3.
Antoninus writes, that on a certain time Christ sitting at the right hand of
his father, rose up in fury, purposing to destroy all sinners from the earth,
but that he was entreated by his mother to stay until such time, as she had
sent forth Dominicke and Francis to preach in the world. neither can that trite
and absurd distinction of some sophisters, excuse the papists, that they
accknowledge one only mediator of redemtion, and use to pray to saints, as
mediators of intercession. for first the scriptures and fathers allow no
mediators, but such as are mediators of redemption, and not only of
intercession, and therefore that title of mediator the scriptures give only to
our Savior, as appears by the words of the apostle 1. Tim. 2. and Hebr. 9.
and 12. where our savior is called the mediator of the new testamnet. and
Saint Lib. 2. contra parmen. c. 8.
Augustine where he dissallowed the title of mediator in Parmenian does not
deny, that the pastor may intercede and pray for his flock, but that he may be
called a mediator. and his Ibidem.
reason is, quia vnus, verusque mediator est: which excludes all men, whether
alive, or dead from this title of mediator. secondly the papists in their
blasphemous canon do make priests mediators not only of intercession, but
also of redemtion. where they say, qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium landis pro
se, suisque omnibus, pro redemptione animarum suarum. thirdly they so pray to
angels, and saints, as if we could not come to Christ, but by them but our
savior does immediately call men to himself, and teaches us to pray to the
father in his name. and Saint In Romans 1.
Ambrose says, that to obtain Gods favor we need no spokesman, but a devout
mind. Chrysostom likewise, homines, says De poenit. homil. 4.
he, vtuntur atriensibus: in deo nihil tale est; sine mediatore exorabilis est.
and in another place De profectu enang.
nihil tibi patronis opus est apud deum. neque enim tam facile deus audit, si
alij pro nobis orent, quam si ipsi pro nobis oremus, etsi pleni simus omnibus
malis. fourthly they so pray to angels and saints, as they give men to
understand, that they are present in all places. for to Saint Francis, Saint
Dominicke and other saints they pray in Italy, Spain, France and other
countries. they also signify, that they understand their hearts, and
devotions. but this is proper to God only, to be in all places, and to search
men's hearts; and the same belongs to no creature, unless we will ascribe
divinity unto them. fifthly they in their litanies to saints, and angels, have
such forms of prayers, as in the ancient church of Christ was no time used. in
the mass they pray to God, that by the merits and prayers of saints in all
things they may be protected by Gods help. at other times they pray to
saints, not only to pray for them; but to defend them, and help them.
finally they call upon such persons, as we have just cause to doubt, whether
they be saints: as for example, traitors executed for their offenses, and
friars and monks odious for their superstitions. in the first rank comes
Thomas Becket, and Campion and his fellows. in the second Francis, dominicke,
Clare, Rock, Catharine of Siena, and such like. unless therefore Robert
Parsons and his consortes can prove these forms of intercession to have been
used in the church of Christ, it is a great hazard, but he will prove himself
and his fellows not to be of the church.

Baal cut themselves, so that the blood followed, and that they cried mainly
upon Baal. we read also, that the priests of Cybele in honor of their goddess
were wont to cut themselves. they say also, that in the Indiaes there are
certain priests, that lash themselves before their idols. are not then the
papists that scourge themselves before their images, and in their chambers of
meditations liker to Baals priests and ethnikes, then to the children of God?

persons. in the Romish church they think it sufficient to scourge themselves,
and to do other offices of penance by deputies.



Ephesians. 4.
apostle says, our Savior Christ has given pastors and teachers for the
work of the mynistery, and for the aedification of his body, until we all
meet together in the unity of faith, and acknowledging of the son of God,
unto a perfect man. Lib. 4. epist. 9
Cyprian says, that the church is a people united to their bishop, and a
flock adhering to their pastor. est ecclesia, says he, plebs episcopo
adunata, and pastori suo grex adhaerens. so likewise says In dial. aduers.
Luciferianos.
Hierome, quod ecclesia non est, quae non habet sacerdotes. and this we are
taught by reason, that there ordinarily can be no church, where there is no
ministry to gather a church, nor a family of Gods children, where there are no
pastoral fathers to beget sons to God. But the Romish church has long wanted
true bishops and priests, and of late time have not any, that deserve to be
entitled either bishops or priests. where, least any fond cauiller should
mistake me, as a certain A detection of untruths and falsifications.
disciple of antichrist has done of late, I do give them to understand that
my meaning is not to deny them to be the church, that have ministers or bishops
faulty for life, or defective in the execution of their office, but only
those, that have bishops and priests without lawful ordination, and that do
not at all execute the office and function of a pastor or bishop. and because
the synagogue of Rome has only such priests and bishops, as want lawful
ordination, and utterly cease to execute pastoral functions, I say that the
same cannot be the true church of Christ.

I say then that Romish priests have no lawful ordination, because they are
ordained first by heretics, by excommunicate and simoniacall persons, which
the canons do prohibit to lay hands on any, and disallow such as are ordained
by them. that the popes of Rome, and bishops ordained by them are simonicall
persons, it appears by the practices of the conclaue in election of popes, by
the compacts made betwixt the pope, and such as he ordeineth, by the testimony
of the conscience of papal creatures, and public writings. Lib. de schism.
Theodorick a Niem testifies against Boniface the 9. and others, and says,
that Boniface sold the same benefice to diverse, and when he lay a dying bought
and sold, and said he should do well, if he had money. Vllerstone in his
petitions cries out of the simony of his time. that was a cause also of the
complaint of the Germans in their grieuances. venalia nobis says Mantuan
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, deusque.
that they are heretics, it shall be proved by the several heresies, old and
new which the church of Rome holds.

Secondly they are not ordained lawfully, because they are not ordained to
teach and administer the sacraments, but to offer sacrifices for the quick and
dead, as appears by their Machab. in lib. de missis episcop. pro ordinib.
formularies of ordring priests. Lib. de sacra. ord. c. 9.
Bellarmine likewise confesses, that this is the due form of ordring priests.
respondeo says he, sacerdotes ordinari, cum illis dicitur, accipe potestatem
sacrificium offerendi. this ordination I prove to be unlawful, first because
it contains no commission for the principal point of apostolical or
priestly function, and next because it gives them an office of sacrificing for
quick and dead, which is more then belongs to their charge, or was executed
by the apostles or ancient bishops of the church.

Thirdly they are ordained by bishops, that have themselves no due ordination
being sent abroad by antichrist, rather to suppress the truth, then to teach
the truth. now every man well understands, that no man can give orders, but
such as have received orders.

Finally they are most of them incapable of ministerial function, and can
neither teach, nor administer the sacraments duly, and if they were able, yet
do they not teach Gods people, but rather by their masses and confessions draw
them to superstition and disloialty.

That the Romish church has no true bishops, it is to be proved both by the
same and other reasons, first no heretics have power to ordeine others. but
the pope is an heretic, ergo, the first the adversaries will not deny. the
second we shall prove by diverse arguments in his proper place. secondly we
have declared, and the world knows that the popes of Rome are simoniacall
persons: of which it also follows, that they have no power to ordeine
pastors. thirdly, Antichrist has no power to ordeine pastors in Christ's
church. but that the pope is Antichrist, and the head of Antichrists kingdom,
I have declared in my fifth book De pontifice Romans fourthly, he that is no
bishop, can not ordeine bishops. but I have declared, that the pope is no
bishop. and it is evident, for that 1. Tim. 3.
episcopatus is opus. but the pope does not the office of a bishop, either in
teaching or administering the sacraments. further, bishops, as Cyprian diversely
declares, are the successors of the apostles. but the Pope succeeds Caesar
in the government of Rome, rather than Peter and Paul, in governing the church.
and other Romish bishops, they rather kill Christ's sheep, and massacre his
lambs, than feed them. finally, Romish bishops, albeit they are after a sort
sent to teach and administer sacraments, yet most of them are incapable of that
charge, and all leave the office of teaching, to a pack of loud mouthed monks
and babbling friars, thinking that too base an office for their great and high
estate.

But had Romish priests and bishops any mission or ordination, yet is the same
very defective, and diverse from the grave form practiced in the ancient
church. for neither is such regard had of the capacity and ability of the
persons chosen to this function, but that often times boys and infamous
persons are called to this charge; neither are the solemnities prescribed in
the canons observed, nor do either the priests or bishops teach true doctrine,
and sincerely administer the sacraments, nor do they finally attend that
office, and execute that work, whereto they are called. If therefore the Romish
priests and bishops have no due ordination or calling; then are not the papists
the true church. if their ordination be imperfect and faulty, then such is the
popish church, as their popish ordination of ministers is, that is faulty,
defective, and imperfect.

John 10.
says, they will not follow a stranger, but will fly from him. neither does
Antichrist seduce any, bur such as perish, as the apostle teaches us, 2 Thessalonians. 2. but the Romish church adhereth to the pope, which is declared
manifestly to be Antichrist, both by his doctrine, and by his manners, and by
the form and circumstances of his reign, and diverse arguments: which because
I would not draw out this discourse into length, I would desire the learned to
read in my fifth book De pontifice Romans and our adversaries to answer, if
they hold contrary. Robert Parsons should also do well to answer such
arguments, as I used in my answer to his Wardword, to prove the pope to be
Antichrist.

Babylon, Apocalypse. 18. and partly by the purple whore, Apocalyp. 17. that
rides on a beast with seven heads, and had a cup of gold in her hand full of
all abominations, and spiritual and carnal filthiness. If then the state of
Rome, and the Romish church, be represented by this purple harlot, and by
Babylon that wicked city; then does it necessarily fellow, that the church of
Rome now is not the city and church of God, but rather the malignant church
and synagogue of Satan adhering to Antichrist, and opposite to Christ and his
church. but that the state of new Rome and of the Romish sect, as it adhereth
to the pope, and is the fountain and metropolitan city, from whence all
idolatry, heresy, and superstition stoweth, is meant by the purple whore,
Apocalyp. 17. and by Babylon, Apocalyp. 18. diverse arguments may teach us.
first, the order of S. John's revelation does show it. for after that in the 12.
chapter, and in the beginning of the thirteenth he had described the state of
old Rome under the Roman emperors, and foreprophecied the ruin and decay of
that empire, and the rising of another state out of the ruins of it; there is
no likehood, that he should return back again, to describe the flourishing
state of that empire in the seventeenth chapter, or that the holy ghost would
relate things confusedly or disorderly. secondly, he represents unto us the
decay of old Rome, and the arising of Antichrist out of the ruins of it in the
end of the thirteenth chapter. and therefore, whatsoever follows after that
chapter, the same with good reason may be drawn to Rome after it came to be
under the pope, whose state is wholly built upon the fall of the empire, and
can by (...) means be applied unto Rome, as it was under the Roman emperors.
Thirdly after the destruction of the purple whore and of Babylon, the apostle
prophesies of the end of the world, and of the last judgment, as if the one
were to follow immediately, or at the least not long after the other. but we
see the Roman empire long since destroyed, and nothing remaining, but a vain
name or title of it: and yet the end of the world and last judgment is not
come. the ruin of old Rome therefore by the destruction of the whore, and of
Babylon, is not prefigured, but rather the destruction of antichrists seat and
kingdom. Fourthly the beast, which saint John saw, and upon which the purple
whore did sit, was not then, as she should be, as he says. non adhuc erat
Apocal. 17.
says he, and ex abysso ascensura erat. but the Roman empire did most
flourish in saint John's time. and therefore that beast must needs signify
another state and empire, which in Rome was to be erected after the Roman
empires decay. Fifthly those ten kings, which are signified by ten horns
Apocalypse. 17. did not arise during the time of the old empire of Rome, but
upon the decay of the empire, and rising of antichrist. for we do not read,
that kings did give their power to the Roman empire, nor had that strong
empire any need of their power. but we read, that diverse kings have given
their power to the papacy, and made themselves slaves, to make the popes great
lords. this therefore must needs be a figure of the papacy, and not of the old
Roman empire. Sixthly we do read, that the kings of the earth committed
fornication with the purple whore: and may well understand, that the purple
whore was a figure of one, from whom corruption of doctrine, and idolatrous
worship should be derived. for that is spiritual fornication. but from the
Roman emperore we cannot understand, that any kings received any form of
religion, or corrupt doctrine, or idolatrous worship. this therefore must needs
touch the pope, and his see, from whence manifold superstitions and idolatries
are derived into all places, and not the imperial state, which regarded but
little the state of religion. Seventhly the kings of the earth did rather
rejoice, then lament at the destruction of the Roman empire. for upon the
ruins thereof they built their own kingdoms, and states. but diverse kings,
that are linked with the Pope have lamented his losses. the king of Spain
wept, when he heard of the evil success of English rebels, which the pope
Vita de Pio 5.
Pius the fifth stirred up, hoping by them again yet once more to recover
footing in England. Eighthly the purple whore Apocalypse 17. is called the
mother of fornications, or idolatry, which is termed in scripture spiritual
fornication. this prophecy therefore does rather touch the popish idolatry and
corruption in religion, than the civil government. Ninthly after the empire of
Rome began to decay, the state of christian religion began to flourish in Rome.
and therefore that which is said of Rome, that it shall after the revelation of
the whore become the habitation of devils, and unclean spirits, cannot be
spoken of old Rome, after whose decay religion began to flourish, but of new
Rome, under the popes, which is now become a receptacle of all abominations and
filthiness. 10. This Rome that is described Apocalypse. 17. shall persecute the
saints near to the end of the world, as may be gathered out of saint John's
revelation. this therefore belongs to the pope, and his bloody inquisitors,
and not to the old Rome whose persecutions are long since ceased. 11. The
description of the purple whore, and of Babylon does best fit the state of
Rome under the subjection of the pope. the great whore is said to sit upon many
waters, and to inuegle the kings of the earth with her spiritual fornications,
she was clad with purple and sclarlet, and set out with gold and precious
stones. she had in her hand a golden cup full of abominations, and in her
forhead was written this word, mysterium, and great Babylon, the mother of
fornications and abominations of the earth. finally it is said she was drunk
with the blood of martyrs. Babylon also is called an habitation of devils, and
a receptacle of foul spirits, and unclean birds: and saint John says, the
nations of the earth did drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication,
and that kings did commit fornication with her, and merchants grew rich with
trading with her. so likewise the pope does rule many nations, and has won
the kings of the earth, to like his corrupt and idolatrous doctrine. he and his
religion also is decked with all precious furniture, and nothing seems more
gallant in external show. like a woman the pope prevailed by fraud, perjury,
and pretense of great mysteries, and from him all abominations and corruptions
proceeded. it is he and no other, that for this four or five hundred years
has persecuted the saints of God, and to him the kings of the earth yield
their forces, and are ready to execute his sentences and excommunications.
beside that, never was more uncleanness, nor filthiness practiced by any,
than by the Romish Sodomiticall and lecherous monks and priests: nor was there
ever in any place more buying and selling of all things, than in the Romish
church. lastly, Arethas and Ambrosius Ansbertus writing upon the Apocalypse,
say, that new Rome may be understood by Babylon, and Petrarch doubts not in
plain terms to call Rome under the popes, false and wicked Babylon. Gia Roma,
says he, hor' Babylonia fals'eria. his opinion is likewise confirmed by the
bishop of Salzburg Auentin. lib. 7. Michael Cesenas, Petrus Blesensis and
others. and so guilty are the Romanists in their own conscience, that either
they can not endure the interpretation of the Revelation of S. John, or else
they give out such vain constructions of it, as neither satisfy themselves
nor others.

Peter, nor the ancient bishops of Rome; nor did S. Peter suffer himself to be
worshipped, or carried on men's shoulders, or to have his pantofle kissed. but
the Romish church does worship the pope and call him a god on the earth, and
Christ's vicar, and the foundation, and spouse, and head of the church. the
bishop of Modrusa in the council of Lateran cried out to Leo the tenth, te
beatissime Leo saluatorem expectauimus. others bear him on their shoulders,
others cry out to the pope to have mercy on them, others lead his palfrey,
others kiss his feet.

Hildebrandus, says In vita Gragor. 7.
Beno, sacramentum corporis Domini responsa diuina contra imperatorem quaerens
iniecit igni, Pius Quintus cast one Agnus Dei into the water of Tybre, In vita
de Pio 5.
and another into the fire. Cresciuto il Teuere, says Hierome Catena, Pio vi
gitto vn' agnus Dei, and il fuoco appreso in vna casa piena di fieno, vi si
gitto un altero. All papists for the most part affirm, that if a dog, or
hog, or mouse eat a consecrate host, he eats the body of Christ really and
properly. the conspirators, that were suborned by Sixtus Quartus, to kill
Laurence and Julian de Medici, were commanded to do it in the church, and at
the instant of the elevation of the sacrament. Dato signo says Lib. Geograph.
5.
Volateran, cum eucharistia tolleretur. When the pope rides abroad, he sends
his corpus Domini before with the baggage, and with the basest servants of his
house, as Mouluc in a treatise directed to the Queen mother of France
declares. finally, albeit the papists teach, that the cross is to be
worshipped with latria, or divine worship; yet do the popes make crosses on
their slippers, to show what base reckoning they make of their religion.

vt aliquis aliquo modo dici possit pars verae ecclesiae, de qua scripturae
loquuntur, non putamus requiri vllam internam virtutem, says De eccles. milit.
c. 2.
Bellarmine. so by his account the church may consist of heretics, and most
wicked persons, so they make an external profession of Christianity, and
hold with the pope. but such can not be parts or members of Christ's church,
without true faith and charity.

Matthew. 18.
Whosoever hears not the church, is to be accounted as a heathen man or
publican. but he that hears not the church of Rome, that excommunicateth
Christian princes, and stirs up subjects to rebellion, and debaseth holy
scriptures, and sets up uncertain and false traditions, and mainteineth
false doctrine, idolatry and heresy, is neither to be accounted a publican,
nor a heathen man, but a true Christian, and follower of Christ Jesus. the
papists will deny perhaps the church of Rome to be guilty of this crime. but
the wicked excommunications of Paul the third, denounced against Henry the 8.
K. of England, of Pius 5. and Sixtus Quintus, against her Majesty, and of other
popes against other princes, and the stirs that have ensued of them do
prove them to be authors of rebellion. the rest we have already touched, and
shall more at large prove hereafter.

Lib. de notis ecclesiae.
Bellarmine confesses, and all papists agree with him, first that the true
church of Christ is the catholic church and maintains catholic doctrine.
2. that the same is most ancient. sine dubio says he, vera ecclesia antiquior
est quam falsa. 3. that the same shall always continue. ecclesia dicitur
catholica non solum, quia semper fuit, sed etiam quia semper erit, says
Bellarmine. 4. that it shall be enlarged to the ends of the earth. ecclesia
catholica says he, non solum debet amplecti omnia tempora, sed etiam omnia
loca, omnes nationes, omnia hominum genera. 5. that it has a succession of
bishops certain and continual. 6. that it consents with the apostolic
church in the doctrine of faith. sexta nota says Bellar. est conspiratio in
doctrina cum ecclesia antiqua. 7. that it be united to Christ Jesus, and have
the parts united among themselves. septima nota says he, est vnio me^brorum
inter se, and cum capite. 8. they confess also that the doctrine of the church
is holy. 9. that it is effectual. 10. that the authors of the docttrine of the
church are holy. ecclesia enim says Bellar. habet doctores sanctos. 11. that
the same is adorned with miracles and prophecy. 12. that the adversaries of
the church confess the doctrine thereof to be true. and finally that such as
have favored the church have prosperous success, and such as disfavor it,
evil success and unhappy ends. but the Romish church is neither called
catholic of all, nor is it catholic in respect of place, or doctrine. nor
is the same ancient, the doctrine of popery being not established, but since
the council of Lateran, under Innocent the third the first father of
transubstantiation, and enacted for the most part by the conuenticles of
Constance, Florence and Trent. nor has the Romish church any assurance, that
it shall always continue, seeing the same depends on the Pope, and his
determinations, in neither of which is there any certainty. for the pope may be
taken away as says De auserribilit. papae.
Gerson, and his decrees do oftentimes alter. Epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
Nicholas of Cusia says, that the scriptures are to be fitted to the time, and
that they are diversely to be understood, and that God does alter his judgment
according to the judgment of the church. we see also, that the popes are still
publishing decretales of faith, and that one destroieth that, which another
builds, and contrariwise. 4. it were plain impudency to affirm, that the
doctrine of the church of Rome concerning free will and works, sacraments, and
the popes authority, and such like points was always taught, and received of
all nations, and in all places. and that shall appear by diverse perticulars,
where we declare, that the papists are no catholics. 5. that church has no
certain, nor continual succession of bishops. for neither do the
adversaries, know, who succeeded Peter, nor what bishops from time to time
succeeded one another, nor have the popes been true bishops a long time wanting
due election, and ordination, and relinquishing utterly the office of bishops,
to rule the temporal state of Rome. nor can they deny, but that the succession
of that see has been often interrupted by long vacations, distraction by
schism, intrusion of Dame Ioane into the popedom. 6 we shall easily prove,
that the doctrine of that church agrees not with the apostles doctrine. for I
do not think, that Bellar. can show the decretales to consent with Paul's
epistles, or to have been written with the same spirit. 7. the papists have not
only overthrown Christ's prophetical office, in teaching new doctrine, but
also his regal and priestly function, appointing a new government never
established by him, and erecting a new priesthood and sacrifice contrary to
Christ's doctrine. furthermore that church, not only has been oftentimes
distracted by schism, but also is much distracted by contrary opinions of
schoolmen, monks, and friars in every point of doctrine, as, to go no further
appears both by Dionysus Carthusianus upon the master of sentences, and
Josephus Angles his Flores doctorum, and Bellarmines disputations, wherein he
alleges in every point diverse opinions. 8. their decretaline doctrine is
neither sound nor holy, standing more on temporal jurisdiction, then points
of faith, and establishing the blasphemies of the mass, the idolatrous worship
of saints departed, and of images, and the tyranny of the pope. 9. the same
doctrine is without effect being vpholden with lies, fables, fraud, fire and
sword, and not being otherwise able to stand. 10. Gregory the 9. was a most
wicked ambitious man. of Boniface the 8. it is said, that he sought rather to
rule by force, then religion. Clement the 5. was a notorious adulterer, as
Villani and Vrsperg.
stories write, John the 22. was an heretic, and an ambitious man. yet were
these the principal authors of Romish doctrine. for as for friars and monks,
they might prate their pleasure: but the chief authority to allow or disallow
was in the pope. 11. the reports of Romish miracles and prophecies are
nothing, but lies and fables, and stand only upon the report of their
legendes. 12. Bellarmine shall never prove, that any of us have confessed the
doctrine of popery to be true. finally it appears, that the popes of Rome,
and their agents, in most of their attempts have had no good success. Charles
the fifth and his son Philip, the greatest protectors of the popish cause died
discontent, to say no more. Henry the third, the principal agent in the
massacre of France, was killed by a friar. The duke of Guise and other
massacrers came to violent ends. contrariwise it has pleased God to maintain
true Christians against all the forces and ambuscadaes of their enemies, by
small means. if then Bellarmine say true, the Romish church will prove no
true church.

Rome is also convinced, not to be the true church by the confession of Relect.
doct. princip. contron. 1. q. 5.
Stapleton. for if the true church began at Jerusalem, and is universally
dispersed over the whole earth, and has continued in all ages, and has a
true, and certain succession continued from the apostles, and disagreeth not
about matters of faith, nor dissenteth from the head of the church, and has
planted christian religion, and preserved the same throughout the world, and
has kept the apostolic form of government, and prevailed against all
heresies and temptations, keeping the rule of faith sound and intiere, and also
shows the true way of salvation, and keeps the scriptures sound and pure
from corruption, and finally holds the decrees of general councels, as
blundring Princip. doctrinal. relectis.
Stapleton not only confesses, but after his rude and most odious, and
tedious fashion with multitude of words goes about to prove; then is not the
church of Rome, that now is, the true church of Christ Jesus. for to say, that
the church of Rome began at Jerusalem, is as absurd as to say that Rome is
Jerusalem, or to affirm that Rome now is like to old Rome. Robert Parsous
should do us a special favor, to show unto us, that the glory and fullness of
power, that the pope challenges, with his glorious cardinals, mass priests,
mitred prelates, idle monks, lying friars, and all the popes doctrine concerning
the law, faith, sacraments, ceremonies, and other matters, came from
Jerusalem. he may do well also to prove that the latter scholastical and
decretaline doctrine, which the church of Rome mainteineth was universally
received throughout the world, nay yt it was received in any part of the world
during the apostles times, or the times of the ancient fathers of the church.
as for the rock of succession of popes, upon which our adversaries build so
large conclusions, Lib. de pontif. Romans and de notis ecclesiae.
we have showed it, to be nothing but a bank of sand. for never shall the
popes agents be able to show the same to have been certain, or continued
without interruptio^. it is also apparent, that popish doctrine is not only
diverse from Christ's doctrine, but also contrary to the same. and that there
are infinite contradictions, and contrarieties in the opinions of the chief
patrons of popery, albeit all dissent from Christ the head of the church. the
church of Rome has also been torn in pieces by diverse schisms. further we
shall hereafter show, that the later popes have not planted, but rather rooted
out Christian religion out of diverse places, and in the rest have corrupted it
with diverse novelties and heresies. finally the church of Rome has not only
abrogated ancient canons, and changed the ancient form of church government,
but also corrupted the rule of faith by adding of unwritten traditions,
determinations of popes, and their fancies to the canonical scriptures. the
gates of hell therefore prevailing against the church and popes of Rome, it is
easily to be inferred, that the same is not the true church.

Bristow, a man, as the adversaries imagine, well seen in motives, and marks
of the church. He Bristowes motives.
commends that for the true church, that is catholic, and apostolic, and
which abhors all novelties, heresies, and idolatries, and whose doctrine is
confirmed by scriptures, most certain traditions, councels, fathers, and
practice of the ancient church, and which teaches the narrow way, and makes
subjects obedient, and is sure to continue. but neither is the church of Rome
catholic, nor apostolic, which embraces uncertain traditions, and
apocryphal scriptures, with equal affection to canonical scriptures, and
which receives all the popes decretales concerning matters of faith, albeit
they contain doctrine neither apostolical nor general. secondly it will be an
easy matter to show, that the Romish church abhors neither heresy, nor
idolatry, nor novelty. thirdly in diverse discourses against Bellarmine I
have showed, that popish doctrine has neither ground of scriptures, councels
nor fathers. thereby also it may appear, that popish traditions are most
vain, uncertain, and superstitious. fourthly, the way which that church
teaches, is broad and easy. for what is more easy than to hear masses, and
to eat fish, and to confess sins, and to observe diverse external
ceremonies? and yet by these small things, papists hope to be saved. fifthly, we
find, that all the rebellions of England, Ireland and France have wholly
proceeded from the church of Rome, and the doctrine of the seditious Iebusites,
and Cananites and mass priests. neither will ever rebellion be rooted out,
unless the tyrannical usurpation of popes be repressed, and their parasites
taught to submit themselves to their liege princes. sixthly, what certeinty in
judgment can the papists have, that depend upon the resolutions of blind,
unlearned and wicked popes? finally, we see Antichrist to be revealed, and the
city of Babylon to fall to confusion. who then does not expect and believe the
utter ruin and desolation of Antichrists state? Further, Bristow tells us,
that every church that is risen after the first planting of religion, and gone
out of the catholic church, and from apostolic doctrine, and is not the
communion of saints, nor ever visible, and which is not the teacher of all
divine truth, and the undoubted mother of Christ's children, is not the true
church. But the church of Rome, as it is now visible in the pope and cardinals,
in the officers of the popes chamber, in popish prelates, sacrificing priests,
monks, friars and nuns, and their officers and adherents, whose faith is
built on popish decretals, and mincing scholasticall distinctions, as fine
wouen, as any spider web, rose out of the earth long after the apostles
times, and first planting of religion, and that the Romish church crept out by
little and little out of the catholic and apostolic church: for apostolical
doctrine embracing apostaticall and light fancies and traditions, and for the
maintenance of men's bellies and the popes authority, is departed from Christ,
and has made war upon the saints. in the same also, whores are openly
maintained, and cutthrotes by rewards incited to kill and poison princes, and a
way to all periuries and vices by the popes indulgences opened. how then can
any call this a communion of saints? finally, he that expects truth at the
popes hands, shall be gulled with fables; and he that calls Rome a mother, can
be content for gain, to call the whore of Babylon, and mother of errors, his
mother.

Rome has diverse rules of the Romish faith, and thereby governs her
proceedings.

Christ clerks were not exempt from the subjection of princes. The apostle
says, Let every soul be subject to higher powers. But in the church of Rome,
all clerks are quited and exempted from the princes power, as Bellarmine in his
book of that argument, by the popes canons, and all his wit, endeavors to
prove.

Grauam. 51.
Germans in their grieuances declare, baptizeth belles, and compares the
entrance into monkish profession, with baptism.

Satan.

CHAP. II. That the doctrines and traditions of the Romish church, which the
church of England refuses, are mere novelties, and late devised fancies.
IF when the papists do recommend unto us their old religion, they meant
nothing else, but the religion of Christ Jesus, which the apostles first taught,
and which the apostolical and most ancient Christians received and delivered
to posterity; we should not much contend with thim. for that is the religion,
which we profess, not varying in any thing from the apostles creed, and other
creeds either set out by Athanasius, or the most ancient general councels of
the church, nor denying any thing that is expressed, or proved out of the holy
canonical scriptures.

But when they talk of old religion, they mean the religion of the church of
Rome, which was either established by later popes, or taken up by lewd custom
and uncertain tradition. the which though it seem to some ancient; yet in
very truth is new, and no way to be compared to the religion, that was first
delivered by Christ, and his apostles: neither does it deserve the name of old
religion. for as Ignatius said Epist. ad Philadelph.
sometime, antiquitas mea Christus est, so we may say, that Christ is the top
of our ancestry: and that the apostles doctrine is both ancient and most true.
id verius quod prius says Lib. 4. contra Marcion.
Tertullian, id prius quod ab initio, id ab initio quod ab apostolis. if the^
the papists, as they brag, could prove their religion to be derived from the
apostles; then would we indeed confess, it were ancient. if they cannot, then
we must say to them as Epist. 65. ad Pammach. and Ocean.
Hierome said to one in his time: cur profers in medium, says he, quod Petrus
and Paulus edere noluerunt? why do they produce articles of faith unknown to
the apostles? nay why do they teach us points of religion, which in times of
the ancient fathers of the church were unheard of? will they have that
accounted old, which the fathers of the church, which were long after the
apostles never knew, nor the ancient church ever received? they would so.
Contra. haeres. c. 35.
but Vincentius Lirinensis does call him a true catholic, that does only
believe and hold, whatsoever the ancient catholic church did universally
believe. quicquid says he, vniuersaliter antiquitus ecclesiam catholicam
tenuisse cognouerit, id solum sibi tenendum, credendumque decernit. if then the
papists will hold all the religion, which now they profess, their religion
will never prove ancient, nor catholic. not ancient, for that diverse
doctrines and traditions which they hold, are new, and unheard of in the
ancient catholic church.

First they teach us, that the holy canonical scriptures are no perfect canon
of our faith. for this doctrine is gathered out of the decree of the council
of Trent, that with equal affection embraces unwritten traditions, and
canonical scriptures. Lib. 4. de verbo Dei c. 12.
Bellarmine says, that scriptures are a part of the canon, or rule of faith,
and not a whole rule. dico secundo says he, scripturam, etsi non sit facta
praecipue, vt sit regula fidei, esse tamen regulam fidei non totalem, sed
partialem. De doctrine. princip. li. 7. c. 1.
Stapleton beside scriptures frames a new rule, which he calls the order of
tradition. but this doctrine is new, and contrary both to scriptures and
fathers. The 2. Tim. 3.
apostle he teaches us, that the scriptures are able to make the man of God
perfect, and furnished for every good work. he teaches us also, that they are
able, to make us wise to salvation. likewise the fathers testify, that the
scriptures are a perfect canon. sufficient sanctae, ac diuinitus inspitatae
scripturae says Lib. contr. idola.
Athanasius, ad veritatis indicationem. Basil in sermon. de fid. confess. says,
it is an argument of infidelity and pride, either to reject scriptures, or to
bring in matter not contained in scriptures: he means in questions of faith.
cum habeamus omnium exactissimam trutinam, gnomonem and regulam, diuinarum
legum assertionem, says, In 2. ad Corinth. homil. 13.
Chrysostom, oro vos omnes, vt relinquatis quid huic, vel illi videatur, and
de his a scripturis haec omnia inquirite. Tertullian writing against Hermogenes
says, that he adoreth the fullness of scriptures. And saint Lib. 2. de doctr.
Christian. c. 9.
Augustine teaches, that all things concerning faith and manners, are found in
scriptures clearly propounded. to conclude this point, most derogatory it were
to Gods divine wisdom, if any man should suppose the scripture to be an
imperfect canon, or half a rule, or maimed doctrine, as the papists lately
have begun to teach.

Tobia, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Machabeies, and such fragments of
books, as are in the old Latin interpreter, and not in Hebrew, equal to the
books of Moses and other prophets, and to the writings also of the apostles.
this is the determination of the council of Trent, and the common doctrine now
of the Iebusites and papists: but new, and no way approved by the ancient
church. for these books were never allowed by any prophets, or by the church
of God before Christ's time. nor did the ancient fathers allow them. Gregory in
his morals lib. 19. c. 16. directly affirms the books of Machabeis not to be
canonical. sicut ergo Judith and Tobiae, and Machabaeorum libros legit quidem
ecclesia says In Proverb. Solomon.
Hierome, sed eos inter canonicas scripturas non recipit. he says In praefat.
in lib. paralip.
also where controversy is concerning Apocryphal writings, we must have
recourse to the Hebrews. neither does Augustine so make them canonical, as he
reputeth them equal to other scriptures, as appears by his words lib. 18. de
ciuit. dei. c. 36. and conrra Gaudent. lib. 2. c. 23. nay Sixtus Senensis,
albeit he make all these books canonical; yet does he not give to all equal
authority. let us therefore see any ancient writer, that allows the decree
of the council of Trent, if the papists will not have all men see, that they
have innouated the very canon of the Christian faith.

Sixtus Quintus and Clement the 8. but also to antiquity, which, as appears
by the testimony of Hierome and Augustine always preferred the original
books in matter of difference before translations.

Trent Sess. 4.
determines that no man shall interpret them against that sense and meaning
which the holy mother church holds, to whom it belongs to judge of the
true meaning and interpretation of scriptures. end by the church they
understand the the pope and church of Rome. but this act is altogether new. for
we do not find, that ever the eastern, or African churches were forbidden to
interpret scriptures, as well as the church of Rome: or that the fathers of the
church were tied to expound scriptures after the opinions of the bishop of
Rome. nay we find, that no interpretations are more absurd then theirs, or
more contrary to the meaning of the holy ghost. as for example may appear in
these two points. In the law of Moses we are expressly forbidden to make graven
images to worship them. but the church of Rome interprets these words so
galantly, that men may both make graven images, and worship them. our savior
Christ says, bibite^ ex hoc omnes; but the Romanistes turn it contrary, and
will have no communicantes to drink of the Lords cup, but the priest only.

Did. 15. c. sancta Romana.
Christians were forbidden to read the legends of Quiricus and Iulitta, and
George, the 8. books of Clement, the acts of Tecla and Paul, the book of the
assumption of the virgin Mary and such like. The acts also of Siluestre bishop
of Rome, and writings concerning the invention of the holy cross, and of the
head of Saint John Baptist, were doubted of. but now these legends for the most
part are the grounds of Romish traditions, which the church of Rome places in
equal rank with holy canonical scriptures. is it not then apparent, that the
very grounds of Romish traditions are laid upon fables, and of late invention?

Christ Jesus being the corner stone. Lib. 3. aduers. haeres. c. 1.
Jeremy says, that the apostles first preached the gospel, and afterward by
the will of God delivered the same in scriptures, that they might be a
foundation, and pillar of our faith. but now Bellar. teachech us, that the pope
is the foundation of the church. and Stapleton doubts not to De doctr.
princip. in praefat.
say, that the pope is the chief subject of ecclesiastical authority. and
Cancanonicis. did. 19.
Gratian like a shameless fellow under the name of Saint Augustine doubts
not to reckon the popes decretale epistles among the canonical scriptures.

Stapleton lays 7. principles or grounds of Christian doctrine, Lib. 1.
doct^. princip. c. 1.
whereof the first concerns the church of Rome. the second concerns the
pope. the third the means that the pope uses in judgment. the fourth, the
popes infallible judgment. the fifth, his power in taxing the canon. the sixth,
his certain interpretation of scriptures. the seventh his power in delivering
doctrine not written. Which principles are not only new, but the most rascal
devises, that ever proceeded out of the mouth of a divine, or man of learning.
for among all these principles neither the scriptures, nor ancient rules of
faith are numbered. nay in plain terms he doubts not to affirm, that
Christian religion is built upon the popes authority. in hac docentis hominis
authoritate, says In praefat. ante relect. princip. doctrinal.
he, in qua deum loquentem audimus, religionis nostrae cognoscendae fundamentu^
necessario poni credimus. but if this be the foundation of popish religion:
then before Stapletons time that religion had no foundation. for no man ever
heard of either such principles, or such a foundation so laid.

Gregory the 9. Boniface the 8. Clement the 5. and John the 22. by whose
authority, as appears by the several prefaces of Gregory the 9. Boniface the
8. and John bishop of Rome, that published the Clementines. secondly it
appears, for that in all these books there is but very few constitutions of
ancient bishops of Rome. thirdly, for that by the laws of the Code and canons
of councels it appears, that the church for above a thousand years was
governed by the laws of Emperors, and general councels. fourthly, for that
Aeneas Syluius confesses, that before the council of Nice the church of Rome
was not respected. and finally, for that he, that makes the collection of the
Popes laws, and Bulls, that were authentical, In Bullari^.
begins with Gregory the 7. that was a thousand years after Christ: which
he would not have done, if he could have found any laws more ancient, than
his. Indeed I confess, that now and then our adversaries produce the
decretales of Clement, Anacletus, Euaristus and others. but the matters
contained in those epistles, and the style does so much differ from those
times, that every modest and learned papist is ashamed to say these epistles
were those, whose names they carry.

Gregory the 9. Boniface the 8. Clement the 5. and John the 22. but also by the
rapsody of decrees, which Surius collecteth in his first tome of councels. for
albeit he alleges the names of Anacletus, Zepherinus, Calixtus, Fabianus and
others; yet they speak only great words, and use general terms. for the
particulars of the popes authority he can not allege them, albeit such
counterfeit and rifferaffe stuff would advantage him nothing, if they were
truly alleged.

Christ being the chief corner stone. but the church of Romes foundation,
being laid on the pope and his decretales, is weak, and not durable. Videtur
nostra ecclesia, says Lib. 5. de provident. Dei.
Saluianus, ex vna scriptura foelicius-instituta. aliae habent illam aut
debilem, aut conuulneratam. habent veterem magistrorum traditionem corruptam,
and per hoc traditionem potius, quam scripturam habent. the foundation
therefore of papisticall religion, is both new and weak, being grounded upon
men both subject to errors, and other gross sins.

Index libr. prohib. reg. 4.
that every man may use them. Cum experimento manifestum sit, Ibidem.
say they, si sacra biblia vulgari lingua passim sine discrimine permittantur,
plus inde ob hominum temeritatem detrimenti, quam vtilitatis oriri. they punish
also both the bookesellers, and the readers, that have vulgar bibles without
license, albeit translated by themselves.

Joan. 5.
Christ speaking to the people, exhorted them to search the scriptures. and the
Beraeans were Act. 17.
commended for searching the scriptures. S. Paul writing to the Colossians,
Coloss. 3.
wished, that the word of God might dwell in them plentifully, in all wisdom.
the fathers also teach, that the reading of Scriptures belonged also to lay
men. S. Hierome writing upon the third chapter to the Colossians, Hic
ostenditur, says he, verbum Christi non sufficienter, sed abundanter etiam
laicos habere debere, and docere se inuicem, and monere. and Chrysostom,
homil. 9. in epist. ad Coloss. Attend, says he, as many of you as are secular
persons, and govern wife and children, how the apostle does command you also
to read the scriptures above all, and that not lightly and carelessly, but with
great diligence. In Isai. homil. 2.
Origin finally wishes, that all Christians performed that, which is written
of searching the scriptures. but the papists have a contrary spirit. speaking
of the vulgar bibles translated by their own side, they say thus, Qui absque
tali facultate ea legere, Index libr. prohib. reg. 4.
seu habere praesumpserit. they punish also the booksellers, Ibidem.
that have such books without license.

Bishop Longland, in king Henry the 8. his days. Index libr. prohib. reg. 4.
and now they punish both such as read bibles, and such as sell them.

Bordeaux, by Canisius Catechism translated into Spanish by Hierome Campos,
Bristowes 12. motive in the margent, the cardinal of Cusa epist. 5. ad
Bohemos. Cochlaeus hist. Hussit. lib. 11.

De eccles. milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine defines the church to be a company of men conioined in one
profession of faith, and communion of sacraments, under the government of
lawful pastors, and especially of the bishop of Rome. which definition is
neither to be showed in any authentical writer, nor proved by any good
argument. for neither is it sufficient to profess the faith outwardly, and to
communicate in sacraments, and to live in subjection under lawful pastors, to
make a man a true member of the catholic church; nor can it be showed, that
all christians have ever lived in subjection of Romish bishops. not that, for
that most wicked persons, and atheists, and heretics, may make an external
profession of their faith, and receive the sacraments as did Judas, and live in
outward subjection to their pastors; which notwithstanding the ancient fathers
do not acknowledge to be true members of the church. not this, for the
Eastern and Africane churches in time past were never governed by the popes
decretales. If Robert Parsons think otherwise, let him produce three or four
decretales of popes whereto these churches yielded obedience.

Non ideo putandi sunt mali, says S. Lib. 2. contr. lit. petil. c. vlt.
Augustine, esse in Christi corpore, quod est ecclesia, quia sacramentorum eius
corporaliter participes sunt. the second is proved, for that faith is the life
of Christans. Ecclesia est domus Dei says In Psalm. 51.
Hilary, and omnes euangelicae fidei sectatores. likewise Lib. 1. de sacrament.
Ambrose says, that the first thing that is required in a Christian, is faith.
and both these points I have at large proved against Lib. de eccles. part.
uat. and sedec. 6. and 7.
Bellarmine. but the papists, if any credit be to be given to Lib. de eccles.
mi^it. c. 2.
Bellarmine, do hold, that a man may be a part and true member of the true
church, albeit he have neither faith, nor charity, nor any inward virtue. so
that by his confession, the Romish church may consist of infidels, atheists,
sodomites, and abominable persons.

Ex 84. apostolicis canonibus, says Lib. 5. de sacror. hom. continent. c. 105.
Michael Medina, quos Clemens Romanus pontifex, and eorundem apostolorum
discipulus in vnum coegit, vix sex aut octo Latina ecclesia nunc obseruat.
likewise Martin Perez, de tradit. part. 3. c. de autorit. can. apost. says,
that many things are contained in the apostles canons, which through the
corruptions of times are not fully observed.

Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatae Mariae semper virgini, beato Michaeli
archangelo, beato Ioanni Baptistae, sanctis apostolis Petro and Paulo,
omnibusque sanctis, as the papists say in every mass, nay in ancient In missa
Jacobi, Marci, Basilij, Chrysostomi.
missals this form is not found.

Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, and dimissis omnibus peccatis tuis perducat te
ad vitam aeternam. for that is nothing else, but to give the keys to boys, and
prefer the scholar before the master.

Bulla Pij 4. super forma profess. fidei.
Pius the fourth, wherein all that take degrees in schools, or take charge of
souls, profess, that they believe, and admit ecclesiastical traditions, and
constitutions, and the scriptures according to the Romish sense, the seven
sacraments, and the doctrine of the council of Trent concerning original
sin, justice of works, the sacrifice of the mass, transubstantiation, and
other points there established; is new, and no where to be proved out of the
ancient fathers of the church.

Catechism. de Hieronymode campos.
books do leave the same quite out.

pronounced all accursed, Deuteronomy. 27. and Galat. 3.
that did not abide in all things, 1. John 5.
that are written in the book of the law, to do them. and Saint John says
expressly, that all unrighteousness is sin. and if it were not so, then were
the law of God a most imperfect, and uncertain rule. but the Consur. colon. f.
46.
papists of late time affirm, that all that is repugnant to the law is not
sin: and that concupiscence is not sin in the regenerate; and finally that
it is no sin, not to love God withal our heart, and all our soul.

thou shall not covet. the apostle also does call concupiscence in himself,
being now regenerate, sin. and necessarily it must be so, seeing we are by
the Deuteronomy. 6.
law of God bound to love God withal our heart, all our soul, all our
strength. Saint Hierome, In Amos 1.
says, that it is sin to think things that are evil, and Saint Lib. 2.
contr. Faust. Manich. c. 27.
Augustine teaches us, that whatsoever is desired, or coueted against the law,
is sin. but the late conuenticle of Trent decrees that concupiscence in the
regenerate is no sin.

James teaches, that we do all of us sin, and that in diverse things. and
Saint John says, that he that says, he has no sin, deceives himself, and
that there is no truth in him. the scriptures also teach us, that even just
men offend and fall: neither may we think, that these sins are trifling, and
venial, and without breach of charity, but sometimes heavy and against the law
of God. but the papists teach contrary, and Censur. Colon.
hold, that the regenerate do not sin.

Censur. Colon. f. 22.
papists of late teach, that we are justified by the works of the law, and that
charity is the formal cause of our justification.

no flesh says the Galat. 2.
apostle is justified by the works of the law. Saint Aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
Hierome, says, we are then just, when we confess our sins. Saint De
spirit. and litera.
Augustine likewise teaches us, that we shall then perform the law of God
withal our soul, and withal our heart, when we shall see God face to face. but
the papists of late do teach, that we are able to perform the whole law of God
perfectly, and not that only, but also that we are able to do works of
supererogation, and more then is commanded in the law.



Nauarrus throughout but he that should go about to prove that doctrine to be
received by the ancient fathers, should be much puzzeled.

Romans 5.
that through the offense of one all men were subject to condemnation. but the
papists Decret. Sixti 4. and sess. 5. council. Trid.
exempt the virgin Mary from this sin, and commonly teach that Hieremy, and
Saint John Baptist were sanctified from this sin in their mothers womb, and
by consequent not borne in original sin.

Lib. 1. de Orig. animae c. 9.
Augustine says, there is no middle place betwixt the kingdom of heaven and
damnation. Lib. de fide. c. 3.
Fulgentius likewise does plainly affirm, that children dying without
baptism, shall sustain endless punishments. Lib. 8. c. 16.
Gregory in his Morals also says, they shall endure perpetual torments of
hell. but the papists make places in the midde-way betwixt the place of joy, and
place of pain, and will not grant that such children shall endure sensible
pains.

Bellar. de purgat. lib. 1.
Papists hold, that Christians are able to satisfy, for the temporal penalty
of all sins: but contrary to the ancient faith of Christians, who depended
wholly upon Christ's satisfaction, and believed that the blood of Christ cleansed
them from all sins, and that his sacrifice only was propitiatory for the
sins of the whole world.

Thomas Aquinas and other papists say, that venial sins are done away with
holy water, but contrary to antiquity.

Benet of Nursia, Francis, Dominike, Ignatius Loyola and such like fellows,
rather than in the doctrine of the Gospel. but the papists say, that the life
of monks and friars is a state of perfection, and that their rules do teach
perfection; which praise they will not allow to the Gospel.

Christ Jesus, who taught us, John 3.
that he that believes in him should not perish: and of the Romans 5.
apostle, that says, that being justified by faith we have peace with God. but
the late papists speak basely of faith, making it a bare assent, and teaching,
that the devils and wicked men have true faith: which is not only new, but
also strange. for if they have faith, then are they justified. further they
should believe remission of sins and eternal life: which I do not think,
that our adversaries will grant.

Gregory the 7. his time, that any pope took on him to dispense with subjects
oaths of allgeance, or taught, that it was lawful so to do. for his Lib. 2.
regest. and Joseph. vestan. deoscul. pedum pontif.
determination it seems to be, quod papa a fidelitate subiectos possit
absoluere. but since that the popes have taught this doctrine, and Pius the
fifth that lousie companion not only discharged her Majesty's subjects from
their obedience, but Bulla Pij 5. contra Elizab.
threatened excommunication against such, as would still obey her.

Rome did never canonize saints* but now popes do not only canonize saints
very impudently, but also hire their proctors as impudently to defend it. Op.
Catechist. de 3. praecept. c. 11.
Canisius teaches, that under the commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath is
contained the observation of holidaies, and feasts of Saints. and no doubt but
he means all the feasts of saints, whom the pope has canonized.

Romish church, as they are called, are but new devises. for first if we seek
all antiquity, we shall not find where the church of Christ has commanded us
to keep this popes day, or that popes day, this saints day, or that saints
day, and that it is sin to work upon holy days dedicated to saint Dominike,
saint Francis, or other such like good fellows days. secondly, Christ's church
never enioined Christians to hear popish masses, and such like idolatrous
service. for how could the ancient church enioine men to hear that, which of
late only was coined? nay contrariwise the Can. apost. 9. and 10.
ancient church forbad Christians to depart from the church, before they had
received the communion: which quite overthrows private masses. thirdly it is
not to be proved, that the ancient church commanded Christians to fast lent by
absteining from flesh and white meats after the Romish fashion, or, to abstain
from meat the imber days, or vigiles of saints. for saint Epist. 86. ad
Casulanum.
Augustine directly affirms, that the apostles never made law concerning
fasting. and when Christians observed lent, they were not forced either to
abstain from flesh, or to fast every sunday in lent, nor were permitted to
drink wine, and eat all sweet meats and dainties on their fasting days.
fourthly we find not, that in the ancient church, men were commanded to come to
auricular confession once every year at the least. for that was first decreed
by Innocent the third, as appears by the chapter, omnis vtriusque. de poenit.
and remiss. finally the ancient church did not forbid Christians to solemnize
marriages, as of late time the Romish church has done in regard of holiness
of times, and for that married men cannot so well serve God, as those that
forswear them. such humane doctrines therefore our Savior Christ condemns,
and such voluntary worships the holy apostle misliketh. neither can such
additions of humane precepts binding men's conscience stand either with the
liberty of Christians, or perfection of gods law.

Augustine makes a question, whether any purgatory is after this life, and
Gregory the dialogist seems to grant, that small sins are purged after this
life. but that men do satisfy for temporal punishments in purgatory, neither
of them does once affirm. neither was any such thing known or taught before
the conuenticles of Florence and Trent, the first founders of this device in
the church.

Iubiley amongst Christians was first ordained by Boniface the 8. and afterward
altered by Clement the 5. and last of all brought to 25. years by Paul the
second, but not borrowed from Christians, but either from the heathen, that
every hundred years had solemn plays called Iudos seculares, to which these
plays and pageants of Romish indulgences may well be resembled, or from the
Jews, that every fifty years celebrated a Iubiley, and now agreeing neither
with Jews, Gentiles, nor ancient Christians. the popes also, when they please
grant extraordinary Iubileies, and as great pardons, as are granted the very
year of Iubiley.

Art. 18. aduers. assert. Luther.
Fisher sometime bishop of Rochester says, that before purgatory was feared,
no man sought for indulgences. he confesses also, that in the beginning of the
church there was no use of them. quamdiu says he, nulla fuerat de purgatorio
cura, nemo quaesiuit indulgentias. and again, in initio nascentis ecclesiae
nullus fuerat earum vsus. as for indulgences for not only hundreds but also
thousands of years, neither Bellarmine nor Parsons can allege either good
proof, or ancient precedent.

for murders, parricides, rapes, adulteries, incestes, sodomitry, yea apostasy
and Jewish and Turkish blasphemies, I do not think, that the most shameless
Iebusite in the whole order will auow to be ancient.

Peter Lombard, some eleven hundred and odd years after Christ. how then can
the Romish faith, that relieth wholly upon this divinity be accounted ancient?

Lib. 1. de verb. dei. c. 3.
Bellarmine says, that the new testament is nothing else, but the love of God
shed into our hearts by the holy Ghost. which argues, that the Gospel and new
Testament of papists, is a new Gospel differing much from that of Christ
Jesus. for Christ's Testament was established in his blood, and is a covenant
concerning remission of sins most especially. but charity is wrought by the
holy Ghost in those, that are already reconciled by the blood of the new
Testament. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and others, writing upon the second epistle
to the Corinthians, chap. 3. say, that the spirit quickening is the grace of
God, that remitteth our sins. and that charity is not the new testament, it
is most evident, for that then Christ had died in vain, and then we might have
had the new testament established by the law, that requires charity, and not
by the testament in Christ his blood, which is a declaration of Christ his
satisfaction and remission of sins.

Lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 12.
man teaches us, that it is a matter of faith to believe, that the pope has
succeeded Peter in the government of the universal church. but this is new,
and never heard of in the ancient church of Christ. is it not then a new
Christian faith, which these new vpstart Iebusites defend?

Armenians in the conuenticle of Florence, yet it seems to be first
established by the conspirators of Sess. 7.
Trent. for neither can Bellarmine, nor any of that faction show any
authentical law of greater antiquity for the joint, and just number of
sacraments, then the authority of the instruction of the Armenians, delivered
in the name of the council of Florence, and the conuenticle of Trent. is it
not then a new religion, that has so new sacraments?

Christians were justified by orders, confirmation, matrimony and extreme
unction. let Bellarmine or any papist, if he can, prove, that men are
justified by these sacraments. if he cannot, then can it not be denied, but as
the papists devise new means of justification, so they devise us a new
religion.

Trent council and instruction of the Armenians fathered on the council of
Florence. if any deny this, he must show, where these words, signo te signo
crucis, and confirmo te chrismate salutis: were received by any authority
before; and where the words and greasings of diverse parts of the body used in
extreme unction were established by the church. Wherein to avoid cauilles, I
would have Robert Parsons, and his seditious brood of rebels to mark, that I
deny not, but that idle schoolmen might prate of such matters before. but I
say, the same was not before those times confirmed by law, nor generally
received. would he please to try his strength in demonstrating the contrary, he
should soon be forced to confess, that I say true.



bardassaes, and Ganimedes to this new race of sodomites. that this doctrine is
new, it appears by Bellarmines weak dispute of monks, and in my treatise
against the stinking orders of friars and monks: which because Cardinal
Bellarmine is not now at laisure to answer, I would pray Robert Parsons,
because he takes on him to be learned, or some other of his scholars, to
undertake to refute.



In missal. Romans c. benedict. diuersae.
exorizo te creatura salis, etc. vt efficiaris sal exorcizatum in salutem
credentium, and sis omnibus sumentibus te sanitas animae and corporis. neither
did Christians in times past pray, that holy water might serve to cast out
devils, to drive away diseases, and to cleanse men's houses from unclean
spirits, could Robert Parsons be at leisure, and leave dreaming of Cardinals
hats, he might do a great pleasure to show us this coniuration of salt and
holy water out of some holy men's writings.

Ibidem.
says asperges me domine hyssopo, and mundabor. for the water sprinkle is not
made of hyssop, nor is the priest so honest a man as David, nor can drops of
water cleanse his faults.

Baal are proved sheep stealers, they to satisfy the owners losses consecrate
the flesh of lambs.

In ordinar. missae.
blessing also of incense by the intercession of Michael the archangel, as the
papists use it in their mass, sauoreth not only of superstition, but also of
nouelty.

Sarum, and partly in the Romish missal, is both superstitious and new.

Constance, though idelly talked of before.

Jesus: and to bring Christian religion into contempt,

Videte and palpate. but how can this be truly said, if as the papists teach,
he were in the sacrament invisible and impalble?

species does signify lightness, roundnesse, smoothness, hardness,
sweetness, relish and all other accidents of the sacramental signs, as the
papists believe and teach.

Transubstantiation was first established by C. firmiter. de sum. trenit. and
fide cath.
Innocent the third and his consorts, about the year of our Lord 1212. this
mystery therefore of transubstantiation is not so ancient.

Tridentine catechism do teach.



Constance.

1. Cor. 10.
sign of our mutual conjunction one with another. and the contrary custom is
refuted by all ancient liturgies. but now the priest eats and drinks all
alone by himself: and the rest depart fasting, or at the least without the
sacrament of the cup.

Augustine teaches, and I have showed at large in my treatise De missa against
Bellarmine. but now, as if Christ had not said, take, eat, drink, they offer
it for those, that can neither take, nor eat, nor drink.

Missal. Romans Paris. and Sarum.
Romanists have.



De missa, against Bellarmine, which I recommend to Robert Parsons for a
cordial, or a scarlet stomacher, to warm himself withal, requesting him to
shape us an answer.

Trent.

Sancta Maria ora pro nobis, and nunc and in hora mortis. nor thought it
lawful to say, Breuiar. Romans and offic. beatae Mariae.
Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae
tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe.


Sancte Michael, sancte Gabriel, sancte Raphael; nor sancta Maria Magdalena,
sancta Agnes, sancta Agatha; nor omnes sancti and sanctae intercedite pro nobis.

Vid. ordinem Romans
missals, the prayer, memento, for the dead, is not in the canon. the ancient
fathers did never use such a form.

1. Cor. 14.
teaches us, that it profits nothing.



auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam: which although it may be thought
sottish and senseless, yet will they not have it counted idolatrous.

battologies, or often repetitions in our prayers. but the papists neither
regarding his doctrine, nor the practice of the ancient church, in their
psalter of Jesus repeat the name of Jesus infinite times. they rehearse also
infinite Aue Mariaes and Pater Nosters.

Salsbury, the priest says to the sacrament Aue. he boweth also to it,
contrary to the ancient churches practice.

Aue Mariaes and 7. Pater Nosters, which are now much reckoned of in Spain and
Italy, as appears by the manual of Geronymo Campos are but new tricks of
late popes, and superstitious priests to catch money.



George of Cappadocia an Arrian heretic, Thomas Becket an impure fellow, and
a traitor to his country, La fulminante.
Ieames Clement the murderer of his liege sovereign, Campian and Sherwin, and
such as died in England for notorious treasons.

their lord and god, as appears by the words of Alane in his treatise de
sacrific. euchar c. 41. and Bristow in his 26. motive: which they cannot
justify by testimony of antiquity.

does adore it, as it is in the rubrike of the Missal. Romans
missal, and boweth his knee unto it. they hang the sacrament upon the altar
with light before it, and carry it about with lights, and bells, and great
solemnity. all which Robert Parsons will not prove to be practiced by the
ancient church of Christ. nay when he goes about it, he shall find that the
principal authors of this idolatry were Honorius the 3. Vrbane the 4. and
Clement the fifth men of late time and lewd stamp.

o crux aue spes vnica: and, venite adoremus, as is proved by the Romish
portesse sabbat. in hebd, 4. quadrages. and book of ceremonies and
pontifical, in die parasc. neither are they ashamed to confess, that latria,
or divine worship is due to the cross; albeit all antiquity abhorred such
gross idolatry.

latria, or divine worship, as may be gathered by their practice, by the decree
of the conuenticle of Trent, the 25. session, by the testimony of Suares in 3.
part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 54. sect. 4. and of vellosillus in aduertent. in. 5.
tom. Hieronym. ad 10. quae sit. which the ancient fathers never did. nay the
idolatrous second council of Nice, allowed not this supreme worship of Latria
to be due to any images.

Gregory the first in a certain epistle to Serenus, declares, that albeit
images are not to be broken down and utterly abolished out of churches; yet
they are not to be worshipped. Epiphanius utterly condemns the having of them
in churches. and to that effect the council of Eliberis in Spain made a
solemn Can. 36
act. Placuit say the fathers of that council, picturas in ecclesia esse non
debere, ne quod colitur, aut adoratur in parietibus depingatur. but now the
papists not only place them in churches, but also adore them and worship them.



John 4. but the religion of papists consists in eating of read herrings and
salt fish, in abstinence from flesh and white meats, in knocking, kneeling,
greasing shauing, washing, ducking, crouching, crossing and such like outward
ceremonies.

Christ is the head of the church, and Savior of his body: and 1. Cor. 3.
that no man can lay other foundation, then that which is laid, which is Christ
Jesus. and that the church is built upon the apostles and prophets, Christ
Jesus being the corner stone: but upon apostles and prophets because they
preach unto us Christ Jesus. but the papists now teach, that the pope is both
the foundation and the head of the church. for that does Bellarmine teach in
his preface before his books de Pontifice Romans and in the second book chap.
31. of that treatise. neither do I think that any papists will deny it.

adiunxi vos vni viro says the apostle, 2. Corinthians. 10. ad exhibendam virginem
castam Christo. but the papists C. vbi periculum. de elect. in sexto.
do not stick to call the pope the spouse of the church. and Bellarmine of
his liberality does give the pope that title, lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans c. 31.
and the pope like a good fellow takes the same to himself. c. quoniam de
immunitat. in 6. nos iustitiam nostram, says he, and ecclesiae sponsae nostrae
nolentes negligere.

universal bishop. for Lib. 4. ep. 32.
Gregory the first does much mislike that title, and calls it sacrilegious,
and profane. and a certain council of Africa cited by Gratiam, did. 99. c.
primaesedis. imports, that the bishop of Rome should not be called
universal. but now every lousie friar made pope will be called universal
bishop, and the papists dare not deny him this title.

supremum numen in terris. but the canonistes do not stick to call him, and
honor him as God, as appears by the chapter satis. did. 96. and by Augustine
Steuchus in lib. de donat. Constantini. and Stapleton in his epistle dedicatory
before his book entitled doctrinalia principia, calls him supremum numen in
terris, that is the sovereign god of the world.

Justinians Code. it appears also, that in the time of Charles the great, and
his sons, the church was governed for external matters by laws of princes.
but now the popes exclude both emperors, kings and princes, and take on them
the sole government of the universal church.

Constance it was holden, that the council was above the pope. the same also
appears, for that diverse popes have answered, and some have been deposed by
councels. but now the papists hold contrary, and say, that the pope is above
the council. neither do they allow any councels, to be authentical, but such
as are called and confirmed by the pope.

S. Paul taught all bishops and priests to be subject to higher powers. but now
they hold, that the pope is above all princes and kings whatsoever. Papa est
dominus dominantium says In c. ecclesia. vt lite pendente.
Baldus, and ius regis regum habet in suos subditos. and De pontific. Romans lib.
5.
Bellarmine holds, that the pope has power to depose kings, and to take
their crowns from them.

Henry the 8. king of England, and his daughter Elizabeth now reigning. against
Henry the 3. of France, and against diverse emperors.

C. 83.
canons of the apostles the censure of deposition is inflicted upon such of the
clergy, as utter words of reproach against princes. but now the popes rail
against princes, as is evident by their wicked bulls, and when railing will
not serve, by assassins, and murdrers hired and aposted they seek to cut their
throats. as appears by the fact of James Clement, that murdered Henry the 3.
Chastell that assaulted Henry the 4. of France, and diverse assassins hired to
kill our noble Queen.

Gregory the firsts time, the popes made no bishops either in England or
France, or Germany, or Afrike, or Asia, but al nations and provinces were free
from his usurpations. neither did any bishops swear fealty to the pope. but
now all this is quite changed. and the pope claims a general power to
ordeine bishops over the world, and makes them C. ego N. de iurtiurando.
swear fealty unto him, as to their sovereign.

Cyprians and Augustines time, the bishops of Afrike would suffer no appeals
to be made to Rome. now Bellar. disputes, that it is a point of the popes
right to hear appeals out of all the world.



C. vnam. extr. de mayor. and obed.
challenges both swords. but our Savior Christ taught, that his kingdom was
not of this world: and the apostle Paul said, that the weapons of his warfare
were not carnal. The ancient bishops of Rome certes never used swords, nor
soldiers, but sincerely taught the Gospel.

Boniface the ninth his time, the city of Rome was either under the emperors,
or under her own magistrates, as Lib. 2. de schism.
Theodoric a Niem testifies. is it not then strange, that the emperor will
suffer his imperial state, and empire to be holden from him, which is so
lately usurped, and by fraud intercepted by the pope?

Robert Parsons show, that this was done before Gregory the seventh, and
Celestine the third.

annates, and took money of archbishops for their palles.

provisions, reseruations, translations, and other extraordinary dispensations
were unheard of in the ancient church.



CHAP. III. That the papists are no true catholics, nor hold the catholic
faith, if they believe the popes decretals, and his school divinity.
IF false teachers, as they secretly broch erroneous doctrine, so would openly
manifest their malicious and wicked natures; we should not need so watchfully
to look to their proceedings, nor so earnestly to exhort all Christians to
beware of their deceits and entisements, but seeing like wolves in sheeps
clothing they come abroad with the names of catholics, and catholic religion,
and abuse simple people; I think it very necessary to take this mask from
their false visages, and to show, that they are woluish papists, and not
Christ's sheep, or true catholics. the which, that we may with all plainness
and sincerity perform; we will first declare what is meant by the catholic
church, which we profess in our Creed; and next, what is the catholic faith,
which every Christian is to embrace, and with all constancy to maintain.

The catholic church therefore, is the universal society of Gods saints. and
it comprehends all the faithful from the beginning, unto the end of the
world. This catholic church, says S. In Psalm. 56.
Augustine, is spread thorowout the world, and contains not only those, that
now live, but those also, that are past, and are yet to come.

The catholic faith is the faith of Christ Jesus, which the apostles first
taught, and which all true Christians both have holden, and do hold, and shall
hold to the worlds end. In this catholic church, says De haeres. c. 3.
Vincentius Lirinensis, we are to hold that, which always has been believed
of all Christians. for that is truly and properly catholic. he De haeres. c.
34.
teaches us also, that the property of catholics is, to keep the doctrine
committed to them, and left with them by the ancient fathers, and to avoid
profane novelties. finally, he determines, that those only are truly and
rightly called catholics, which only believe and hold that, which the
catholic church in old time did universally hold. Saint De vera relig. c. 5.
Augustine does take catholics to be nothing else, but Christians and true
believers, which maintain the sincere faith, and follow that which is right.
Apud eos solos, says he, quaerenda est religio, qui Christiani, catholici, vel
orthodoxi nominantur. he does also oppose catholics against heretics. Epist.
81. ad monach. palaest. and epist. 95.
Leo says also, that there is one true, only, perfect, and inviolable faith,
whereto nothing can be added, and from which nothing can be taken.

If then the papists be heretics, and no true believers, then are they no
catholics. if they hold a faith grounded upon private opinions of men, and
not always nor universally holden, then do they not hold the catholic
faith. but that they hold diverse heresies and false opinions, shall be showed
in the chapter following. that they hold many new points altogether unknown in
ancient time, and when the Gospel began first to be preached, we have already
proved and demonstrated in the last discourse.

That papists hold points of doctrine not catholic.
It rests then now, that I here declare, that the papists maintain diverse
points of doctrine never generally holden of all Christians, nor universally
taught in the church of Christ. and that may appear first by the doctrine of
the church of Rome concerning the foundations of Christian religion. next, by
the doctrine of that church, that concerns both the law and the Gospel.
thirdly, by the faith of the Romish church, concerning the sacraments.
fourthly, by their faith concerning prayer and the whole service of God.
fifthly, by their doctrine concerning repentance, ordination of ministers,
marriage, alms and fasting. and finally, by their doctrine concerning the
church, and the government of it.

first, that scriptures are an Bellar. lib. 4. de ver^. Dei. c. 12.
imperfect rule of faith, as has been declared in the chapter going before.
and Bish. of Eureux.
some of them have not feared to write books, of the insufficiency of
scriptures. but the 2. Tim. 3.
apostle says, they are able to make the man of God perfect and wise to
salvation. and true catholics always held the canonical scriptures to be a
perfect rule both for faith and manners. Saint Lib. 2. de doct. Chr. c. 9.
Augustine says, that all things necessarily belonging to faith or manners, are
contained in plain places of scriptures.

Bellar. de verb. Dei.
teach, that we have one word of God written, and another unwritten. and Sess.
4. council. Trid.
determine, that we are with equal affection to embrace unwritten traditions,
and the holy scriptures. but the catholic church never taught, that after the
writings of the prophets and apostles once perfected and published, we had a
word of God unwritten, which is to be placed in equal rank with the holy
scriptures. Aduers. gent.
Athanasius says, that the holy and divine scriptures are sufficient to
instruct us in all truth. S. In Mich. 1.
Hierome calls the scriptures, the limits or bounds of the catholic church.
Non est egressa de finibus suis, says he, id est, de scripturis sanctis. What,
says Regul. 80.
Basil, is the property of a faithful man? forsooth to believe with certine
fullness of mind, whatsoever is contained in scriptures, and neither to reject
any part thereof, nor to add any new thing unto them. Saint Lib. de paradis.
c. 13.
Ambrose says, we may no more add to Gods commandments, than take from them.
and S. In Joan. tractat.
Augustine, electa sunt quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere
videbantur. that is, those things are chosen out, and thought fit to be
written, which seemed to be sufficient for the salvation of the faithful. and
albeit the fathers mention traditions, which were sometime unwritten; yet if
they were necessary, they signify that now they are written. Si aut in
euangelio praecipitur, says In epist. ad Pompeium.
Cyprian, aut in apostolorum epistolis, aut actibus continetur, obseruetur
diuina haec, and sancta traditio. he signifies, that no tradition is to be
admitted, unless it be contained in scriptures.

est Petri seeds says In praefat. ante lib. de pontif. Romans
Bellarmine, lapis probatus, angularis, preciosus, in fundamento fundatus.
these words also he applies to the pope, whom he calls Christ's vicar. in
another Lib. 2. depont. Romans c. 31.
place he calls the Pope, the foundation of the church. and Sanders in his
Rock of the church, disputes that the pope is that rock. is not then the
Romish church a weak building, that in every vacation is without foundation,
and relieth wholly upon one man? true Catholics certes, never applied the
words of Isay chapter 8 and 28. to the pope, nor thought him to be an approved
stone, or corner stone, or a precious stone laid in the foundation of the
church. the 1. Cor. 3.
apostle teaches us, that no man can lay any other foundation, then that which
is laid, that is Christ Jesus. and in another place he Ephesians. 2.
says, that the church and citizens of saints are built upon the foundation of
the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. with him
also consents all the company of true catholics.

Stapleton in plain terms denies the scriptures to be the foundation of his
religion. aliud hodie says he, In praefat. ante relect. princip. doctrine.
Christianae religionis fundamentum habemus. and afterward, ab ipsis literis
euangelicis and apostolicis aliud. the same In analysi ante relect. princip.
doctrine.
man entreating of the sure grounds and principles of Christian religion, does
leave the scriptures quite out of the reckoning. but Athanasius in Synopsi,
does call the canonical Scriptures the anchor, and stay of our faith. Lib. 3.
aduers. haeres. c. 1.
Irenaeus says, that the apostles first preached, and afterward delivered the
Gospel in Scriptures, that they might be a foundation and pillar of our faith.
the church says Homil. 6. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, is Jerusalem, whose foundations are placed upon the mountains
of the scriptures. and with them do consent all true catholics, condemning
the error of the papists falsely called catholics.

a killing letter, as appears by the Remish annotations upon the 3. chap. of
the 2. epistle to the Corinthians. as if God had delivered his will in writing,
to the intent to kill them, that read them. they Annot. Rhemens. in Joan. c. 5.
slander them also as if they were dark, and hard to be understood. finally,
they disgrace them Ibidem in c. 4. Matthew.
saying, that the devil and heretics allege scriptures. others call them a
nose of wax, Inken divinity, and matter of strife and contention, and
condemn the reading of scriptures, as pernicious and hurtful. but true
catholics had always a reverent regard of holy scriptures, as the grounds of
faith, and directions of holy life. Lib. 3. aduers. hares. c 2.
Irenaeus says, that it is the property of heretics, when they are convinced
by scriptures, to fall into dislike of them, and to accuse them. the papists
therefore in this point are rather heretics, then catholics.

inter canonicas scripturas decretales epistolae connumerantur, says the
rubrike did. 19. c. in canonicis. and this Gratian goes about to prove by a
place of saint Augustine, which he there falsifieth. this also seems by
Gregory the 13. to be approved in his edition of the canon law. neither do I
think, that any papist will deny, that the popes decretales in matters of
faith are to be received of all men. but ancient catholics never had the
decretals in this estimation, nor thought them to be canonical scriptures, or
grounds of faith, or infallible, as the papists call them. nay Thomas Aquinas,
albeit no catholic 2. 2. q. 1. art. 1.
confesses, that the ground of Christian faith, is the first truth, or God
himself. and not only Cyprian took exceptions against Cornelius, Ireney
against Victor, the council of Carthage against Sozimus, but also diverse
catholics against the decretales of diverse popes.

Sess. 4.
Trent unto the canon of scriptures of the old testament, has added not only
the books of Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and of the Machabeies, but
also such additions, as are found in the old latin translation, albeit they
be not found in the original text. and these they place in equal rank, and
degree with the books of the prophets, and apostles: which is contrary to the
faith of the catholic church, as appears by the testimony of Hierome in his
preface to the proverbs of Solomon, in his epistle to Paulinus, and in his
general prologue before the bible, which he calls prologum galeatum, of
Athanasius in synopsi, of Epiphanius in his book of waightes and measures, of
Melito, of the council of Laodicea, can 59. of the canons of the apostles.
can. 84. and diverse others. neither is it material, that Augustine lib. 2. de
doctr. christ. c. 8. and a certain council of Carthage do reckon the books
of Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabeies among the
canonical scriptures. for by canonical scriptures they understand such books,
as by order of the church were read publickely, and commonly joined together in
one book, and were rather for some part a canon and rule of manners, then of
faith. for that may be gathered out of the words of Saint Augustine, and the
council, that speak rather of the books, as they were read, then as they were
authentical. Ruffine speaking of these books says, legi voluerunt in
ecclesiis; non tamen proferri ad authoritatem fidei ex his confirmandam.
Augustine also lib. de ciuit. dei. 18. c. 36. speaking properly of canonical
scriptures excludes the books of the Machabeies, though some churches receive
them for canonical. Athanasius in Synopsi accounts the 3. and 4. of Esdras
as canonical as these books. and Sixtus senensis does not accounpt them equal
to the rest of canonical scriptures. finally no one catholic writer can be
produced, that allows the fragments and additions, that in the old latin
interpreter are added to the original text, to be canonical scripture. are
the papists then catholics that have no catholic grounds of their faith?

Rome holds, contra eum sensum, Council. Trid. sess. 4.
quem tenuit, and tenet sancta matter ecclesia. but true catholics never
allowed such senses and interpretations, as the church of Rome does make. as
for example the church of Rome believes, that Christ, when he said to Peter,
pasce oues meas: gave power to the pope to depose princes. Again, where God
says to Hieremy, chap. 1. ecce constitui te hodie super gentes and regna:
Boniface the 8. concludes, that the pope has power to judge all earthly
princes. and these words, ecce duo gladij hic: he C. vnam sanctam. de mayor.
and obed.
expounds so, as if the pope had two swords given to him. the words, deus
fecit duo magna luminaria, the pope interprets so, as if the pope were meant
by thy son and the emperor by the moon, and as if the pope did so far
excel the emperor, as the son is greater then the moon. bibite ex hoc
omnes, they expound thus, drink not all of this. and these words, scrutamini
scripturas, they interpret, as if lay men might not search the scriptures
without license of the inquisitors. infinite such like interpretations the
church of Rome has devised: but all contrary to the expositions of the fathers
and the catholic church.

Trent does adiudge the old vulgar latin translation of the bible to be
authentical, and prefers it before the original text. but catholics have
always preferred the original text before the latin translation. Saint In
Epist. ad Suniam and Fretel. and ad Damasum.
Hierome says, that in the old testament in matters of doubt concerning the
translation, we must have recourse to the Hebrew, as to the fountain; and in
the new to the Greek. ad exemplaria Hebrea and Graeca a latinis recurratur,
says Lib. 2. de doctr. Chr. c. 10.
Augustine. Hilary also writing upon the 118. psalm confesses, that the latin
translation cannot satisfy the reader.

C. ad abolendam. de haeret.
adiudge all to be heretics, which teach and hold otherwise of the sacraments,
then the church of Rome determines, and holds. and commonly they condemn
all, that receive not the popes determinations concerning faith. but catholics
make the doctrine of Christ to be the squire of our faith. Our Matthew. 28.
Savior Christ gave his apostles in charge, to teach what he had commanded
them. the apostle likewise pronounces him accursed, that should teach
otherwise, than the Galatians had receives. So it appears, that not those
that taught other doctrine, than the bishops of Rome, but such as taught
contrary to the apostles doctrine, yea albeit they were bishops of Rome, were
condemned and accursed.

Romanists do as well build their faith upon Conc^l. Trid. sess. 4.
unwritten traditions, as the written word of God. so the papists must as well
receive the traditions of the legends as the holy scriptures, and as well must
they believe the wounds of S. Francis, as Christ his passion; and the miracles
of S. Dominike, and other brave Romish saints, as the miracles of Christ and
his apostles. for these as they hold, are traditions: and the wounds of S.
Francis are confirmed by diverse decretales of popes. To this effect writes C.
sancta. did. 15.
Gelasius, and says, Gesta sanctorum martyrum recipimus. but true catholics
have more certain grounds of their faith, and would be much ashamed to believe
such fables. nay, some of the papists have much misliked these fabulous
legends, as may appear by the testimony of Dante an Italian poet, Cant. 29.
and Laurence Valla in his treatise contra Donationem Constantini.

S. George, S. Christopher, S. Catherine, Abgarus, of the invention of the
cross, of S. John Baptists head, and diverse such like, as containing old
traditions. but true catholics will not allow any such fables to be read in
the church. nay, Gratian himself under the name of C. Sancta. did. 15.
Gelasius, does condemn the legend of George, of Cyricus and Iulitta, Abgarus,
of the invention of the cross, and such like.

Alij nunc a Christo, says In praefat. in relect. princip. doctrine.
Stapleton, eorumue doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti apud me
locum habebunt. that is, others beside Christ, together with their doctrine,
preaching and determination, shall be accounted of me, as a foundation. The
rest also believing, that the popes can not err in their determinations
concerning faith, must needs rest upon them, as the foundation of their faith.
but true catholics build their says only upon Christ, and his doctrine
delivered by the apostles and prophets.

Galat. 1.
apostle pronounces him accursed, that teaches any other Gospel, than that
which he had taught. Catholicorum hoc fere proprium, says Aduers. hares. c. 34.
Vincentius, deposita sanctorum patrum and commissa seruare, damnare prophanas
nouitates, and sicut dixit, and iterum dixit apostolus, si quis annunciauerit
praeterquam quod acceptum est, anathematizare. If then the church of Rome and
papists have altered the apostolic and ancient fathers faith, and have added
diverse points of new doctrine unto it, as I have verified in the chapter going
before; he does greatly wrong the catholic faith, which calls them
catholics.

Faith, says the Romans 10.
apostle, is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. De divine. non. inib.
c. 7.
Dionyse says, that faith has for his object, the most pure, and ever being
truth. and every catholic rehearsing his belief, says, he believes in God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. but the papists after a sort
believe in the virgin Mary, in angels, and saints, and pray and confess their
sins unto them. for if they believe not in them, how do they call upon them,
seeing the Romans 10.
apostle says, how shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? and
why do they confess their sins unto them, if they believe not, that they do
understand the secrets of their hearts, and know that their confession is
sincere and true? if they do not believe in saints, yet I hope they will not
deny, that they believe the determinations of the pope, and of the Romish
church. In o^usc. contra errores Gracorum.
Thomas Aquinas says, it is a matter of faith to believe the determination of
the pope. ad fidem pertinct, says he, inhaerere determinationi pontificis
fummi in his, quae sunt fidei, imo and in his, quae specta^t ad bonos mores.
with him also concurreth Summa Siluest. in verb. fides.
Siluester Prierius. He says also further, that we are to believe whatsoever
is taught by the church of Rome. Ad fidem pertinent omnia, says he, quae sunt
in doctrina ecclesiae.

Christ Jesus, as he was true God, so was he also true man, and had a body like
to ours in height, breadth, and thickenesse, and that he filled the place, where
his body was, as do our bodies. We must believe, says S. De essentia
diuinitatis.
Augustine, that the Son of God according to his Deity is invisible,
incorporeall, and incircumscriptible, but according to his humane nature, that
he is visible, corporeal and local. Contr. Eutychem lib. 4. c. 4.
Vigilius says, that Christ is contained in a place according to his humane
nature, and that this is the catholic faith. Illud corpus, says Dialog. 2.
Theodoret, habet priorem formam, and figuram and circumscriptionem, and vt
semel dicam, corporis substantiam. so likewise says Ad Thrasymund. lib. 2. c.
5.
Fulgentius, Si verum est corpus Christi, loco potest vtique contineri. If then
the papists do assign to Christ such a body, as is neither visible, nor
palpable, nor circumscriptible in the sacrament, nor has the dimensions of
height, breadth, and depth, such as a man's body by nature has; nor is continued
to it self, as all bodies are, but wants all the properties of a true body;
then are the papists neither catholics nor Christians. for how can they be
either, that err in things so material?

Christ's true body is ascended into heaven, and that he there remains, and
shall remain, until his coming again. he John 16.
told his disciples before his passion, that he must leave the world, and go
to the father. he says also in another John 12.
place, that they should not always have him with them. In the first of the
Acts we read, that his body was taken up into heaven. the apostle Peter also
Act. 3. declares, that the heavens must contain him, until the time, that
all things be restored. and this the ancient fathers, which the adversaries
will not deny to have been good catholics do clearly express. according
to his divine nature says Tractat. 33. in Matthew.
Origin, he is not absent from us, but he is absent according to the
dispensation of his body, which he took. Saint Lib. 10. in Luc. 24.
Ambrose says, that we are not to seek Christ either on the earth, or in the
earth, or after the flesh, if we mean to find him. Saint Tractat. 50. in Joan.
Augustine says, he has carried his body into heaven, although he has not
withdrawn his majesty from the world. Homil. 21. in euangel.
Gregory the first also does plainly affirm, that Christ is not here on
earth according to the presence of his flesh. the flesh of Christ says Lib. 4.
contr. Eutych.
Vigilius writing against Eutyches, when it was on earth, surely was not in
heaven, and now because it is in heaven, certainly it is not on earth. neither
did ever any catholic father teach otherwise. are the papists then catholics,
trow you, that contrary to the catholic fathers, and catholic faith, teach,
that Christ's true body is both in heaven, and in earth, and upon every altar
at one time? and do you call them catholics, that affime that Christ's true
body properly may not only be touched, and received into men's mouths, but
also devoured of dogs, and mise, and other beasts, that eat consecrated
hosts?

I believe the remission of sins, and life everlasting. for as the apostle
says, Heb. 6. God has promised and sworn, that we should have firm comfort.
and saint 1 John 5.
John says: these things I write unto you, that believe, in the name of God,
that you may know, that you have eternal life. and whosoever believes not
this, as Ibidem.
he testified, makes God a liar. The apostle Romans 5.
Paul says, that he that is justified by faith, has peace with God. but what
peace can we have, unless we believe that our sins are forgiven, and that
assuredly we shall obtain eternal life? the sacraments also, that are
delivered to every Christian are seals of remission of sins, and of the
promise of eternal life. for by Baptism we put on Christ, that is, we are
made members of his body, and partakers of his merits. and in the Lords supper,
our Savior teaches us, that the cup is the new Testament in his blood, and
that Christ's body was broken for every one, that is a worthy receiver. this
doctrine is also confirmed by the examples of Abraham and the apostle Paul. of
Abraham we Romans 4.
read, that he doubted not of the promise of God: and that the same was
imputed to him for righteousness. the apostle Romans 8.
says, that he was persuaded, that nothing should separate him from the love
of God. and this assurance of remission of sins and eternal life the
catholic fathers teach us. Si iustus es, and fide viuis, says Sermon. 4. de
mortalit.
Cyprian, si vere in Christum credis; cur non cum Christo futurus, and de
domini pollicitatione securus, amplecteris? Ibidem.
again he says, that we are not to waver, or doubt, for that God has
promised us immortality. Saint Sermon. 2^. de verb. dom.
Augustine writing upon these words, thy sins are forgiven thee: says, it is
faith, and not pride, to acknowledge what we have received. Sermon. 2. de anno^.
Bernard says, that we have no promise, but by Gods favor, and that the
spirit of God works this in us, that we believe remission of sins. and this
do all true catholics believe. how then can the papists be catholics, that
will have men only to hope for remission of sins, and eternal life, and
that not without doubting? or what are we to hope of the Sess. 6.
doctors of Trent, that prouounce them accursed, that shall say, that a man
must certainly believe, that his sins are forgiven him? finally how shall we
believe, that those are true believers, that teach Christians not to believe
remission of sins, or eternal life, but to doubt of both.

these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous shall presently
possess the kingdom of heaven prepared for them, as may appear by the
sentence of our savior Matthew. 25. the Romans 8.
apostle does also plainly testify, that there is no condemnation to those,
that are in Christ Jesus. the spirit of God does likewise Apocal. 14.
pronounce them blessed, that die in the Lord. and the reason is added, for
that they rest from their labors. and this likewise is the faith of the
catholic fathers. Ecclesiast. hierarch. c. 7.
Dionyse says, that the godly when they come to the end of their lives, shall
rest in Abraham's bosom: and signifies, that there shall be no grief nor
sadness nor sighing. Quaest. 75.
Iustine Martyr holds, that the souls of good men shall presently be carried
into paradise. both Lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 2.
Irenaeus and Sermon. de mortalit.
Cyprian likewise make only two sorts of souls departed, whereof the first
are in bliss, the second in pains and endless misery. and that is also
confirmed by the confession of our adversaries in the canon of the mass, where
they pray for those, that sleep in a sleep of peace. but the papists teach,
that all that have not satisfied here for temporal punishments must be plonged
in the unspeakable pains of purgatory, and so after a time pass to heaven.

Christ has reconciled us to his father, and that he has satisfied for our
sins fully and perfectly. the Isay. 53.
prophet says, that we are healed by his stripes. ipse volneratus est says
he, propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter scelera nostra,
disciplina pacis nostrae super eum. we may therefore well accounpt them no
catholics, that Bellar. lib. 1. de purgat.
teach, that Christians are to satisfy for the temporal punnishment of their
own sins either here or in purgatory: the which is no where delivered by the
fathers of the church.

or the holy ghost. nor did ever the godly fathers how down to graven images
or worship them. the Exodus 20.
commandment of God is direct against such images. thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image, etc. thou shall not bow down unto it, nor worship it.
Lib. 2. institut. c. 19.
Lactantius says, that there is no religion, where graven images are. religio
nulla est, vbicunque simulachrum est. The papists therefore, that make the
images of God, and worship them, are no catholics, nor have any good religion.
neither can it avail them, that they say, they worship not the matter of the
image. for so did the gentiles answer in excuse of their idolatry, as
testifies Institut. lib. 2. c. 2.
Lactantius.

1. John 5.
all unrighteousness is sin, and thirdly that Deuteronomy. 27. and Galat. 3.
he is accursed, that abides not in all things, that are written in the book
of the law to do them. if then the papists teach, that all is not sin, that
is repugnant to Gods law, as the Iebusits do in the censure of Coleine fol.
26. and as others do, that it is not sin in this world, not to love God
withal our heart, and all our soul, which is commanded by the law of God;
then are they no catholics.

that we have but one lawgiuer and judge, that is able to destroy and to save.
vnus est legislator, and index says Saint Jacob. 4.
James, qui potest perdere and liberare. that the transgression of the popes
laws, is sufficient to condemn us, and the observance of them to justify us,
as papists hold, was never generally taught or holden.

Nauarrus, and other books of cases of conscience.

Exodus 20.
says directly, Thou shall not covet. and catholics do expound this law so,
that it binds the regenerat, as well as ye unregenerate; as appears by the
words of the apostle, Romans 7. I should not have known sin, says he, but by
the law. for I knew not concupiscence, but because the law said, Thou shall not
covet. and this sin he confesses to be mortal, Who, says he, shall deliver
me from the body of this death? S. Lib. 2. contr. Faustum Manich. c. 27.
Augustine also teaches, that whatsoever is desired or coueted against the
law, is sin. and very absurd it is, to surmise that baptism should sanctify
concupiscence, and of sin in the unregenerate to make no sin. The
conuenticle of Trent therefore, that Sess. 5.
determines, that concupiscence in the regenerate is not sin, and all
adherents unto it, are no catholics.

that even the just man falls seven times a day, and as the apostle saint
James says, that we offend all in many things. our Savior Christ taught his
apostles to pray for remission of sins, and to confess, when they had done
all they could, that they were notwithstanding unprofitable servants. so
likewise teach catholic fathers. Saint Lib. 1. aduers. Pelag.
Hierome says, that then we are just, when we confess our sins. and saint
De spirit. and lit.
Augustine signifies, that in the frailty of this life we can not perfectly
perform Gods law. we shall then says he, perform the law of God, with all
our soul, and all our heart, and love our neighbor as our self, when we shall
see God face to face. the papists therefore that teach, first that the
regenerate are able to perform the law of God perfectly, and secondly, that
they are also able to perform more then is commanded, and to do works of
supererogation, are no catholics: nor shall they ever be able to prove, that
this doctrine of theirs was generally holden by the fathers, and by all
Christians, or by any man of note.

that the law is the minister of death, and Lib. 3. aduers. haeres. c. 20.
Irenaeus affirms, that the law being spiritual does only manifest sin,
and not kill it. the papists therefore that hold, that all our life and
salvation does consist in the law, as appears by the censure of Coleyn, are
no catholics.

Sess. 6. c. 10.
Trent condemns those that say, they are justified formally by Christ's
justice: and their meaning is, that we are formally justified by charity, and
by the works of the law. but the catholic church teaches us far otherwise.
no flesh faith the Galat. 2.
apostle, is justified by the works of the law. he denies also, that Romans 4.
Abraham was justified by the works of the law. and saint Lib. 1. aduers. Pelag.
Hierome says, that our justice does not consist in our merits, but in the
mercy of God. this also is proved by an invincible reason, for that none are
justified by the law, but such as perform the law, and are not to be accused
of sin by the law. but if our adversaries will say, that all that shall be
saved are such, they will bring the number of them, into a small compass. for
as De inter pellat. David.
Ambrose says, David does acknowledge his sin, and Paul does acknowledge
himself guilty. who is then innocent?

Romans 5.
teaches us, that through the offense of one all men were subject to
condemnation. and that is the doctrine of all catholics. but the Bellar. lib.
4. de amissi. great. c. 15.
papists exempt the holy virgin Mary from original sin, as appears by the
determination of Sixtus 4. and conuenticles of Trent doctrine, sess. 5. some of
them also hold, that the prophet Heremy, and saint John Baptist were sanctified
from this sin, and so borne without original sin, at the least.

Adam, and excluding them out of the kingdom of heaven, and which could not be
purged, but by Christ's passion. but the papists hold, that it is the least of
all sins, as having the least force of our freewill, and that it deserves
not sensible pains in hell. which in effect is as much, as if they should
deny, that all men sinned originally in Adam, or needed to be saved from
sensible pains by Christ.

Th. Aquin. and dd. in 2. sent. did. 33. and Bellar. de amiss. great. lib. 6. c.
4.
papists also teach, that children departing without baptism, and with
original sin only, shall not be punished with hell fire, nor with sensible
pains. as if at the last judgment all that stand on the left hand, as it is
written in the 25. chap. of saint Matthew. shall not by the sentence of the
judge, be adjudged to everlasting fire or as if that sin, that brought
condemnation upon all, should not be punished with sensible pains: or as if
there might be a place in hell without sensible pains; or finally, as if there
were a middle state betwixt, heaven and hell fire. Saint Lib. 1. de orig.
animae c. 9.
Augustine certes says, there is no middle place between the kingdom of
heaven, and the place of the damned. Lib. de fide. c. 3.
Fulgentius likewise does plainly affirm, that children dying without
baptism shall sustain endless punishments. and Lib. 8. moral. c. 16.
Gregory the first holds, that such shall endure the perpetual torments of
hell.

Martin ab Aspilcueta in his Enchiridion, writing upon the first precept of the
law, chap. 11. says, that it is mortal sin for a lay man to dispute of
matters of faith. but catholics do not acknowledge any such matter to be
mortal sin.

ex opere operato, and that they are justified ex opere operato by the
sacraments of the new law; whereupon it follows, that by the sign of the
cross in confirmation, by orders, matrimony, and extreme unction men receive
charity (for that is the grace they speak of) and are justified exopere
operato. for this does Bellarmine dispute, lib. 2. de effectu sacrament. cap.
3. and 14. and other chapters following. which doctrine if they do prove;
then ex opere operato, let him take the grace of the popedom. if he do not
prove, he must needs confess, that the doctrine of papists is not catholic.

that the regenerat after baptism have no sin, and it follows necessarily
of their doctrine of justification by the works of the law. for by them a man
can not be both unjust and just at one time. but the cathotike faith is
otherwise. S. John says, that they deceive themselves, that say they have no
sin. and other scriptures signify, Proverb. 20.
that no man can say, his heart is clean. neither is this to be understood of
venial sins, which the papists say, may be done away without repentance. for
S. Lib. 2. aduers. Pelagian.
Hierome says, that the most just man, in some things stands in need of Gods
mercy. and it is apparent, for that every man transgressing the law of God,
which is the case of all men, makes himself subject to the curse of the law,
and to the wrath of God.

that some sins are done away with holy water, and without repentance; and
deserve not death. but no catholic ever taught, or thought so. for the apostle
teaches us, that by Christ's blood we are purged, and that we are made
partakers of remission of sins by faith. In the sixth to the Romans he
declares, that the wages of sin is death. and Galat. 3. that such as
transgress Gods law, are accursed by the sentence of the law.

Censur. Colon. f. 204.
teach also, that this is the proper doctrine of the Gospel, if thou will enter
into life, keep the commandments. but catholics know, that those that so
teach, confound law and gospel, and overthrow the doctrine of the apostles. for
he Romans 1.
teaches, that the gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes. their doctrine does take from us all hope of salvation. for how can
we hope to be saved by the gospel, if that promise life to none, but such as
perfectly fulfill Gods commandments?

Benet of Nursia, Francis, Dominike, Ignatius Loyola, and diverse other founders
of monkish and frierlike orders, do show us the way to perfection; and hold
not, that the gospel of Christ Jesus is sufficient of it self to do it. true
catholics certes never maintained any such fantasies, nor allowed any such
order. which may also appear by this, that all these orders of monks and
friars have their approbation and allowance from the popes of Rome.

that faith is only a bare assent, and requires neither firm hope, nor
holiness of life, to make it truly Christian. secondly, that not only wicked
men, but also the devils of hell may have true faith. thirdly, that faith is
not only grounded upon holy canonical scriptures, but also upon traditions and
determinations of the pope. which if they firmly hold and vary not, then must
they confess, that we are no less to give credit to lousie legends, and lying
and erroneous decretals of popes, than to the eternal word of God. But true
catholics have always believed otherwise. The apostle Romans 1.
says, that the just shall live by faith. and the church believes, that John
3.
whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.
and Romans 5.
that being justified by faith, we have peace with God. further, the apostle
Romans 10.
teaches, that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. but
there is great difference betwixt the word of God, and traditions of men;
betwixt the infallible truth of Gods word, and the deceiuable doctrine of
popes decretals.

that charity is the form of faith. but catholics have always taken this
doctrine to be erroneous. for how can one virtue be the form of another?
again, seeing matter and form be parts in natural bodies, is it not absurd to
apply these words to qualities, that rather resemble form than matter:
thirdly, if justifying faith were always formed with charity, then could not
faith work of it self. for it is the form, from whence actions proceed, and
not matter. but the apostle Romans 1.
says, that the just live by faith. and Ephesians. 2. that we are saved by grace
through faith. hereupon Lib. 2. epist. 3.
Cyprian says, that whosoever does believe in God, and live by faith, he is
found to be just.

Bellar. lib. 1. de fid. c. 13.
attribute our first justice to faith, and other preparations, as for example,
fear, hope, love, repentance, a purpose of new life, and such like: but the
principal form and beauty of our justice, they place in charity, and works
of the law. and that they call our second justice. but true catholics do
otherwise think and speak of justice. The 1. Cor. 1.
apostle says, that our Savior Christ is made justification unto us, and Romans
3. and Gal. 2. and 3.
that we are not justified by the works of the law. the prophet also does
show, that our righteousness is like a defiled cloth of an unclean woman.
neither can this distinction of first and second justice, or that wicked
doctrine, that follows of it, be found in all the fathers.

Apolog. ad Antonin.
Justin Martyr where he has occasion to describe the sacraments, and rites of
the first church, does only mention two sacraments. this number also may be
proved by the testimony of Ireney, Dionysius, Tertullian lib. 1. and 4. contr.
Marcionem, Ambroses books of sacraments, Cyrilles catechisticall instructions,
and all the fathers, that in no place mention 7. sacraments, nor compare any
rite or sacrament to baptism and the Lords supper. Pauca pro multis says Lib.
3. de doctr. Christ. c. 9.
Augustine, eademque factu facillima, and intellectu augustissima, and
conseruatione castissima ipse dominus, and apostolica tradidit disciplina,
sicut est baptismi sacramentum, and celebratio corporis and sanguinis domini.
and this may be proved also by the weak dispute of Bellarmine, for his 7.
sacraments, who is not able to bring either good argument, or testimony for his
opinion.

Sess. 6. c. 1.
Trent does anathematize all that hold, that the 7. sacraments of the Romish
church were not all instituted by Christ Jesus, or that there are either more
or less, then just 7 which doctrine, if Robert Parsons can prove to be
catholic, let him take a cardinals hat, which he has so long desired, for
his labor. his friends do much doubt of his good success in this matter. for
they find, that matrimony was instituted in paradise, and that repentance has
always been in the church. priesthood was either established by the law of
Moses, or else then by laws and rites adorned. confirmation, and extreme
unction were neither instituted by Christ, nor deemed necessary or ordinany
rites by the church: as the silence of fathers, that speak of the sacraments
of the church may teach us.

C. Benedict. fontis.
missales they pray, that the font may be sanctified, and made fruitful with
the oil of salvation, to those that shall be regenerate by it to life. then
the priest powers in oil and chrisme in form of the cross. they also
sprincle all the assistants with holy water out of the font, and none of all
these ceremonies, they Sess. 7. c. 13. council. Trid.
say, may be omitted without sin. if then Robert Parsons cannot prove these
ceremonies to have been either ancient, or generally used; he cannot deny, but
the papists are no catholics.

that shall not hold baptism to be necessary to salvation: which curse and
doctrine cannot be sound in ancient catholic fathers. nay we read in ancient
writers, that not the want, but the contempt of baptism condemns. and the
Bellar. lib. 1. de baptis. c. 6.
papists to mollify this hard sentence, have found diverse means to supply
baptism.

Matthew. 19.
what man can separate them, whom God has joined together? again what reason
have married couples keeping asunder for exercise of devotion, not to come
together again, seeing the apostle commands such to return and cohabite
together, least Satan should tempt them? Iterum 1. Cor. 7.
says he, reuertimini in idipsum, ne tentet vos Satanas.

Leuit. 18.
appoints limits and degrees, within which it is not lawful to marry, there
is no signification, that spiritual gossips are forbidden to entermarry. and
the apostle signifies, that marriage is honorable among all sorts of men, and
the bed of married folks undefiled. happy were popish priests and votaries, if
they were able to say, that their beds, and bodies were undefiled.



Sess. 14. council. Trid.
pronounce him anathema, that believes not, that penance is properly a
sacrament of the new law; or that denies auricular confession in the priests
ears, to have been instituted by Christ in the new testament. and yet are
they not able to show, that any catholic father says, that our Savior Christ
in the new testament did institute the act of repentance; nor can they deny,
that the people of God under the law used to repent themselves of their sins;
nor can they show any place, where Christians were commanded to confess their
sins to the priest, and were otherwise excluded from all hope of pardon. nay
they cannot show, that any was tied to confession in the Romish church before
Innocents decretale beginning, omnis vtriusque sexus. de poenit. and remiss.
and in the Greek church there was never any such course established. as for
the power, which monks and friars claim in hearing of confessions, that
depends wholly upon the popes grant, benevolence, and authority.

Council. Trid. sess. 13. c. 1.
teach, that our Savior Christ's body, that was borne of the virgin Mary, and
crucified on the cross, is properly and substantially present under the
accidents of bread, and likewise that his blood is contained really and
properly under the accidents of wine, as may be seen in the acts of the
conuenticle of Trent. but true catholics believe, that his body is M^. vlt.
and act. 1.
taken up into heaven, and that concerning his bodily presence he has left the
earth, and that his blood is in the veins of his body, and not properly shed
forth in the chalice further they know, that when we are commanded to eat
Christ's flesh, and to drink his blood, we are to understand, it and to do it
spiritually, and not carnally, as do the Canibales; and that Christ, when he
said, this is my body, and this is my blood, gave a sacrament of his body and
blood, and not that body, that sat at the table, nor the blood, that was in the
veins of his body. Lib. 4. contr. Marcion.
Tertullian says, that Christ made the bread, which was delivered to his
disciples his body, by saying this is my body, that is, the figure of my body.
and likewise saint Contra Adimantum c. 12.
Augustine affirms, that Christ doubted not to say, this is my body, when he
gave a sign of his body. and that this is the catholic faith concerning this
sacrament, I have at large declared in a treatise of the real presence, of
late published against Bellarmine: which Robert Parsons may do well to take
notice of.

Council. Trid. sess. 13.
and that shall dare to deny transubstantiation. which curse lights not on us
only, but upon the apostle saint Paul, who after the words of consecration
speaking of the sacrament, says, let a man examine himself, and so eat of
this bread, and drink of this cup. it falls also upon all true catholics,
that according to our Saviors words, shall call the cup being consecrate,
genimen vitis. Aduers. Iudaeos.
Tertullian says, that Christ called bread his body. Saint Hierome in a
certain epistle to Hedibia says, that the bread, which the Lord brake, and
gave to his disciples, is the Lords body. this is also saint Augustines
judgment. c. qui manducant. de consectat. did. 2. and Theodorets in his first
dialogue, and diverse others, that affirm, that the pronoune, Hoc, in these
words hoc est corpus meum, does demonstrate the bread, finally unless the
papists grant, that the bread remains in the sacrament after consecration,
they must needs grant, that Christ has a body impalpable, invisible, and that
may be in all altars at once, and yet fills no place, and such a body, as
never man had before, nor ever shall have hereafter.

Sess. 13. council. Trid. c. 5.
They anathematise those, that shall affirm, that the principal fruit of the
eucharist is remission of sins. which falls upon all catholics, that shall
believe these words of Matthew. 26.
Christ: this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for
remission of sins.

shall say, that Christ's body in the sacrament is not to be worshipped, Council.
Trid. sess. 13. c. 6.
with divine honor, or that shall condemn the feast of corpus Christi, or the
popish fashion in carrying about the sacrament. and yet never true catholic did
so worship, or carry about the sacrament, as papists do. our Savior said, take
eat; and not, fall down, and worship, or carry about this sacrament, or put it
in a pixe. the disciples they did also, as our Savior Christ commanded. and
the ancient church, as appears by all the ancient liturgies, did communicate,
and not worship the sacrament, as their Lord and God, according to the style of
the Romanists.

Ibid. c. 8.
They do anathematize all them, that hold, that Christ is received in the
sacrament spiritually, and not otherwise. which touches saint Augustine and
all catholics. he Tract. 25. in Joan.
says, vt quid paras dentem? the rest say, that Christ's flesh is meat of the
soul, and not of the body; cibus mentis, and non ventris.

Sess. 22.
anathematise such, as deny the body and blood of Christ to be really and
properly offered up in the mass, for an external and propitiatory sacrifice
for quick and dead, and say, that the eucharist is a memorial of Christ's
sacrifice on the cross. but the apostle Heb. 7. and 10. teaches us, that
Christ his sacrifice was to be offered up but once, and that he left no
successors behind him to offer this sacrifice. De demonstr. euangel. lib. 1.
Eusebius also says, that our sacrifice is the memorial of Christ his
sacrifice. and this also Chrysostom upon the epistle to the Hebrews clearly
demonstrateth.

Robert Parsons be ever able to show, to have been practiced by catholics.
nay, of such devices there is not any sign, or suspicion in ancient liturgies;
but of the contrary rather.

Can. apost. 9. and 10.
departed not before they received the communion. but now the priest eats and
drinks all, and sends away Gods people empty.

that beside the priest that does minister, all the rest shall content
themselves with one kind.



Hebr. 5. and 7.
apostle tells us, that Christ only is a priest according to the order of
Melchisedech: and this all catholics believe. but papists believe, that every
greasy and polshorne priest is a priest after the order of Melchisedech; yea,
although, as they suppose, he offers neither bread nor wine, as did
Melchisedech.

Christ in the name of our Lady, and of saints, as if we were not to approach to
our Mediator without the mediation of others. to the virgin Mary they pray
thus, In breuiar.
Aue maris stella, Dei matter alma, atque semper virgo, foelix coeli porta,
solue vincla reis, profer lumen caecis. in the Romish breuiary they call her,
dulcem amicam Dei. in the missal of Sarum: per te matter, say they, aboleri
filiorum flagitamus crimina, nosque omnes introduci in sempiterna paradisi
gaudia. as if the holy virgin had power to remit sins, and were the gate, by
which we enter into heaven.

Hierem. 2.
idolatrous Jews, say to a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou
have begotten me? which set light before those that can not see, and cry
before those that can not hear, and say In offic. beat. Mariae.
to a wooden cross, increase in the godly, righteousness, and pardon
sinners: and also, crux Christi protege me, crux Christi defend me ab omni
malo? and which before the printed face, which they call Volto santo, pray
thus, Salve sancta facies impresta panniculo, nos ab omni macula purga
vitiorum, atque nos consortio iunge beatorum?

to look favorably upon the body and blood of Christ. Supra quae, says he,
propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris. and in the missal of Sarum on
Batildis day, they pray, that God would accept their sacrifice, viz. of
Christ's body and blood, through the merits of S. Batildis. vt haec munera
tibi, Domine, accepta sint, say they, sanctae Batildis obtineant merita, quae
seipsam tibi hostiam viuam, sanctam, and been placentem exhibuit.

Damascen and other authors of Romish legends tell us, that Gregory the first
delivered Traians soul out of hell; and every pety pope thinks he is abused,
if any tell him, that he can not let out of purgatory as many as he pleases.
Commonly all papists pray for the dead, that they may have a place of rest
given them, and that their sins may be pardoned them; as if sins might be
forgiven after this life.

Hierome in an epistle to Ripatius denies, that any creature is to be
worshipped, or adored. Lib. 22. deciuit. Dei. c. 10.
Augustine shows, that Christians did not worship martyrs, nor erect temples
in honor of them, and says that they gave thanks and praise unto God only at
their monuments. ecclesia catholica matter Christianorum verissima says De
morib. eccles. lib. 1. c. 30.
he, solum ipsum deum, cuius adeptio vita est beatissima purissime, atque
castisime colendum praedicat, nullam nobis adorandam creaturam inducens, cui
seruire iubeamur. whereby plainly he excludes the worship of Doulia. De obitu
Theodosij.
Ambrose declares, that Helene finding the cross, worshipped not the cross,
but Christ. but the papists worship not only the saints, but dumb images.
they say masses in honor of S. Francis, and S. Dominicke, and diverse other
saints. they kneel to images, and burn incense unto them. finally they give
Latriam, that is due by their own confession to God only, to the cross, to
the crucifix, and to the images of the Trinity.



Auemariaes, and after every fifty Auemariaes one Creed, and after every ten
Auemaries, one Pater Noster. nay our savior expressly forbad his desciples to
use battologies, and odious repetitions in their prayers. But papists put great
religion in our Ladies psalter, and in their rosaries, and often repetitions of
the name of Jesus, and of their Auemariaes.



John 4.
catholics worship God in spirit and truth. but the papists place most of
Gods worship in external ceremonies, and use in their worship a tongue not
understood. so that their prayers cannot proceed from the spirit, nor be true
nor catholic.

Coloss. 2.
the apostle Paul does expressly condemn the worship of them, as Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Oecumenius writing upon the 2. and 3. chap. of the epistle to the
Colossians do testify. the council of Laodicea does also prohibit the worship
of Angels, and Saint De hares. c. 39.
Augustine numbreth the worshippers of Angels among heretics. Neither may we
think, that they were therefore condemned, because they atrtibuted the
creation of the world to angels, but because they worshipped angels, and as
Chrysostom homil. 7. in coloss. 2. affirms thought we were to come to God by
the mediation of angels. and yet papists Horae ad vsum sacrum.
pray to angels, that they would protect them, and drive diuils from them, and
open their sight. they say also masses in their honor, set up lights to them,
make confession of their sins to them: and all this contrary to the practice
of the ancient catholic church.

Matthew. 15.
savior Christ teaches, that those worship God in uaine, which worship him
according to the doctrines and commandments of men. and therefore all true
catholics have had principal respect herein to the commandments and laws of
God. but the Romish church does wholly depend upon the decretales of popes, and
vain fancies of men. their missals, breuiaries, offices and whole service
proceeds from no other fountain.

Psalm. 32.
prophet declares, that they are blessed whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered. and the apostle says, that being instified by faith
we have peace with god. and this is the hope of all catholics, that Christ
has reconciled us to his father, and washed away our sins, and paid a
ransom for them on the cross. but this comfort papists do take from us, that
teach and hold, that after our sins forgiven, we are to satisfy for
temporal pains due for our sins either here, or in purgatory; and that such
are there to sustain great torments, in which pains and place none but mad
men can place felicity.

Christ's satisfaction. the papists believe, that the pope can apply them by his
bulls, both in purgatory, and in this life, according to his laws.

Bellar. lib. 1. de indulgent.
papists believe, that a man's sufferings may be so great, as they may serve for
his own and other men's sins, and are laid up in a treasury, whereof the pope
has the dispensation.

Sess. 23. council. Trid.
and accurse them that shall say contrary.

Christ ordained seven orders in the church, or that exorcistes, doore-keepers
and subdeacons were instituted by him, or that they are a holy sacrament. the
papists notwithstanding do hold contrary, or at the least, the contrary may be
gathered out of their doctrine.



Bellarmines disputes, hold contrary.

Asian churches dissented from Victor, and the African churches from Sozimus,
but long since all have left the popes, that would not be oppressed by them.
Saint Lib. de sacrament.
Ambrose shows, that he was not bound to follow the church of Romes direction
in all ceremonies. but papists are tied to Peter's chair, as they seem to
confess, and by Pius 4. his constitution, are bound to believe all things
contained in the Creed, which the church of Rome uses. seruilly also they
submit themselves for the most part, to the decrees of the counsel of Trent.

Catholics do not condemn all for heretics, that either teach, or think
otherwise of the sacrament of the altar, or of confession of sins, or other
Romish sacraments, then the church of Rome. for concerning the Lords supper, I
have Lib. de missa papist. cont. Bellar.
showed, that al antiquity is against the Romanistes. and the rest shall be
proved as occasion serves. but papists condemn all, that dissent from the
church of Rome in the points above mentioned.

Catholic church, as agrees with the Romanists. for so the Iebusites of
Bordeaux in their confession do signify. and the same is proved by Bristowes
12. motive, the 5. epistle of cardinal Cusanus to the Bohemians, and Sanders
in his fifth book of his visible monarchy. Lib. 2 de eccles. milit.
Bellarmine also admits none to be of the church, but such as are subject to
the pope. and that is Boniface the eight, his determination, c. vnam sanctam.
extr. de mayor. and obedientia.

Christ, and therefore kill none, especially none of Christ's sheep. but
papists like woolues murder all, that like not of the popes government and
doctrine.

Augustine shows, lib. de ver. relig. c. 6. and 7. but to be a true member of
the popish church neither faith, nor holiness, nor inward virtue is required,
as says Bellarmine lib. de eccles. milit. c. 2. but only an outward
profession and obedience.

De pontif. Romans lib. 2. c. 31.
Bellarmine, albeit he searches all corners, yet cannot find, that any
catholic writer had any such conceit. is it not then apparent, that the pope
is a plain intruder into ecclesiastical government, and that the papists
holding with him have forsaken the catholic doctrine of the church?

sancta Romana ecclesia, and, sicut sancti. did. 15. but now papists will have
them to be above councels.

Justinian, and diverse other emperors before him, which are to be seen in the
code under the titles, de summa trinit. and fid. cath. de episc. audient. and
authent. de ordinat. episcop. but now contrary to the old form of government
of the church papists exclude the emperor, and give all authority to the pope.
Sic omne: did. 19.
Agatho determines, that all the decrees of the apostolic see are to be
received, as if they had been established by the voice of Peter.

Cyprian teaches, that the apostles had all equal power. and that is proved,
for that they had like calling, and Luke 9. and Matthew. 28. and John 20.
like commission, and for that the church was equally founded upon them all.
but papists believe, that Peter was head, and monarke of the church, Summa de
ecclesia.
and that the rest of the apostles were to him, as the cardinals are to the
pope. for so Turrecremata a cardinal seems to hold.

Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus the 1. Chalcedon and diverse others. and that the
cardinal of Cusa, and Anastasius the popes principal agent in his library
confess. ex superioribus habetur says De Concord. Cath. li. 3. c. 13.
Cusanus, imperatores sanctos congregationes synodales vniuersalium conciliorum
semper fecisse. ita ego perlustrans, gesta omnium vniuersalium conciliorum
vsque ad octauum inclusiue Basilij tempore celebratum, verum esse reperi. Ibid.
Anastasius also affirms, vniversals synodos de omni terra imperatores
colligere solitos fuisse. but to the papists this catholic form of assembling
councels, is much displeasing.

Ephesians. 4.
ascending up on hie, gave some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some
pastors and teachers, and these he thought to be sufficient for the government
and building up of the church, and gathering together the saints, and work of
the ministry, and he is no catholic that thinks contrary. the hierarchy
therefore of the church of Rome, where we see a triple crowned pope, a
multitude of carnal cardinals, a heard of fat abbots and generals of orders of
friars, and whole swarms of monks and friars, is not catholic. these friars
a certain popish Onus eccles. c. 22.
bishop does compare to locustes issuing out of the bottomless pit of hell,
for that they corrupt religion, as the other devoured every green thing. illi
mendicantes peruersi says he, designantur per locustas de puteo abyssi
exeuntes, quia ipsi sunt scurriles leaves, volatiles, rodentes sacras literas
virides, paganicae philosophiae sequaces, quasi equi currentes, sic illi in
vanam disputationem.

C. vnam de mayor. and ebed.
Boniface the 8. upon pretense of these words, ecce duo gladij hic, imagines,
that the pope is to use both the temporal, and spiritual sword, and the
Iebusites stoutly defend his authority, and with their two handed swords, and
gentle receipts of their sophisticated drugs, kill more honest men, than honest
men can easily convert from superstition and impiety to Christ Jesus.

Gregory the seuenths Joseph Vestan. de oscul. ped. pontif.
dictates, the 12. is, that the pope has power to depose the emperor. the 8.
that he may lawfully use the ensigns of the emperor. the 27. that he has
power to absolve subjects from their allegiance. but S. Peter, that was a far
better catholic, than this Gregory called otherwise Hildebrand, or rather
Helfirebrand, teaches contrary doctrine, and 1. Petr. 2.
wills Christians to honor the king. so likewise S. Paul exhorts all sorts
of men to be subject to the higher powers. finally, the law of God binds so
fast, Romans 13.
that no device of man can untwist the bond of an oath taken to his prince, as
true catholics ever believed.

Council. Nicen. c. 5.
Catholics in time past did not permit one bishop to absolve him, that was
excommunicate by another. but the pope of Rome absolueth now all at his
pleasure, by whomsoever they be excommunicated.

Can. 22.
Mileuis in Afrike, excommunicated all priests, that appealed to Rome. Ad
transmarina qui putauerit appellandum, say the fathers of that council, a nullo
intra Africam in communionem suscipiatur. but the pope and his adherents
adiudge him worthy to be excommunicate, that shall deny, that it is lawful to
appeal to Rome. let it then be judged, whether therein they deal as
catholics.

Gregory the first doubted not to censure him as the forerunner of Antichrist,
that should call himself universal bishop. and this title he accounts
profane and sacrilegious. yet does not the pope refuse this title, neither
does Lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 31.
Bellarmine mislike it.

a charge, as appears by the acts of the council of Chalcedon. but now the
popes without charge ordeine infinite monks and friars, which are the moths
that fret and consume Christian religion.

Miserere nostri. are then the papists catholics, trow you, or flanes, and
base fellows, that kiss the slipper of Antichrist, and fall down before him,
crying out, Miserere, to a most miserable mortal man?

provisions, reseruations, expectatiue favors, indulgencies, iubileyes, and
such like tricks and hooks to overthrow order, and enrich the pope; neither
would they have liked any such Babylonish traffike, if they had known it.
shameless therefore are they, which take to themselves the titles of
catholics, and yet either commit, or allow these abuses.

that the pope could pardon incests, murders, sacrilege, Sodomy, blasphemy, and
such horrible crimes. those therefore that allow this sinful traffike of
popes, and their courts, they are neither good catholics, nor civil honest
men.

Lib. 5. de pontif. Romans
showed, that the pope is Antichrist, and that popery is nothing else, but
Antichristianisme, and that by such arguments, as for any thing yet answered,
seem invincible. if then papists adhere to the pope, they must leave the name
of catholics, which without all reason they have usurped, and taken to
themselves.

De vera relig. c. 6. and 7.
Augustine teaches us, catholics are true Christians, and embrace the right
faith. but the papists have embraced, and yet hold many both old and new
heresies, and thereof popery seems to consist: the which to be very true, it
shall appear by the particulars discoursed in the chapter following.

CHAP. IIII. That papists do maintain many both old and new heresies, and
erroneous points of doctrine contrary to the catholic faith.
LIttle reason have the papists to charge others with heresy, if they would
narrowly look into their own opinions, and heresies which are so many, and so
ugly. we may therefore well say unto them, Pull out the beams out of your own
eyes, you hypocrites, and then you shall more clearly see the motes that are in
other men's eyes. so gross are your errors, and so foul, that beams in men's
eyes seem not more deformed.

Romans 2. and 3.
Jews, and especially the scribes and Pharisees rested in the law, and gloried
in their works, Luc. 18.
and as the apostle declares Romans 2. and Galat. 3. sought to be instified by
their works, and by the law; so the papists rest, and rely much upon the law,
not doubting but by observance thereof to enter into life; and thereto they
apply these words, hoc fac, and viues. they glory also in their works, and if
they said true, that by the works of the law they were justified, they had
reason so to do. for to him that works, the reward is imputed, not according
to grace, but according to debt, as the Romans 4.
apostle says. finally they seek to be justified formally by their works, and
by the law, which they say is fulfilled by charity. for that is the end of
Bellarmines dispute of justice of works, and habitual justice. and so much do
they rely upon their own justice, that they Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 10.
and 11.
exclude the justice of Christ out of our justification.

that they made void the law of God by there own traditions. reprobastis
mandatum dei per seniorum vestrorum traditionem, says our Marc. 7.
savior speaking to the pharisees. they were likewise reproved for their
diligence in making proselytes, and drawing nouices, to like of their sect.
circuitis mare and aridam says our Matthew. 23.
savior, vt faciatis vnum proselytum, and cum factus fuerit, facitis illum
filium gehennae duplo plus, quam vos estis. the pharisees also stood much upon
external ceremonies, but setretly they devoured widows houses. Furthermore
they are noted, for that they loved pre-eminence in meetings, and destred to be
called Rabbi, affecting a strange kind of singularity. Dicebantur pharisaei,
says Haeres. 16. ante Christum.
Epiphanius, eo quod separati essent ab alijs propter spontaneam superfluam
religionem apud ipsos receptam. Ibidem.
finally they are taxed for their vows of continency, for their sleeping on
thorns and boords, for their superstitious fashions in praying, and for their
allowing of fatum or destiny. In all which points the papists seem much to
resemble this pharisaicall sect. for first by their traditions they frustrate
the law of God. God, he forbids us to make graven images, to worship them.
but they say the making of images, and the worshipping of them is a tradition
descended from the apostles; and is very profitable. Saint Paul he teaches us
obedience to princes: but papists say, this holds no longer, then during the
popes pleasure, or at the least until such times, as he shall excomunicate
them. for then they say, it is lawful to cut their throtes. and so de facto
they do it, if they can, as appears by many precedents.

Our savior Christ in the institution of the Lords supper, commanded his
desciples to take and eat, and delivering the cup said, drink ye all of
this, yet by their traditions the papists have frustrated Christ his
institution. for in lieu of taking and eating, they content themselves with
gaping and fasting, and in the end they put up the sacrament into a box, and
worship it. and where Christ said, drink yet all of this; their tradition is,
drink not all of this, nor look for the cup. secondly the Iebusites friars
and priests travel land and sea to reconcile men to the pope, and to make of
good subjects obstinate recusants, and proselyts to the sinagogue of Rome. and
when they have inuegled simple people, they make them as unnatural and
disloyal traitors as themselves. thirdly no sect ever stood more upon
external ceremonies, then the papists, whose whole religion stands in
ceremonies. fourthly the Iebusits have devoured many widows houses, and have
empouerished many orphans, intercepting by singular fraud that, which was due
unto them. as Arnold in his pleading, and the secular priests in their
discourses do particularly charge them. fifthly the priests and friars look
for great pre-eminence, and desire to be saluted by the name of fathers,
begetting children to the pope and bastards to their hosts, as the Jesuits
catechism says. sixthly these friars pretend, that they are in the state of
perfection, and condemn other christians, as carnal and secular. They do
also wear hairecloth sometimes, and lash themselves with whips, and in the
manner of their superfluous religion they are very singular. finally both they
and the Th. Aqu. 1. p q. 116. art. 2 3. and 4.
schoolmen do in some sort allow fatum, and subject all second causes unto
it. and is not this trow you, pharisaisme?

for that they brought in a superfluous, and sophistical exposition of the
law. Haeres. 15. ante Christum.
Ephphanius does call it supersophisticam expositionem. they were likewise
condemned, for their often washings and purifyings, and for that they accounted
themselves more holy then others. why then should not the popish schoolmen and
the frapling friars be likewise accounted scribes, sectaries and heretics,
seeing never any devised more vain and sophistical expositions upon the word
of God, nor more contrary to the meaning of the holy ghost then they? Further
do not the Sea the rubicks of the mass.
priests often wash themselves at mass? and do not all papists continually
wash themselves and others with holy water, thinking thereby to cleanse
themselves from venial sins, and to Missale To. in fine.
drive the devil from them? do they not also purify and hallow altars,
churches, vestements, and other vtensiles of their profane priesthood? finally
who can account themselves more holy, then those, that will needs be entitled
holy fathers, and profess themselves to live in a holy and perfect state of
life?

Epiphan. in haeres. 17. ante Christum.
Hemerobaptistes for their continual washings, and for that they imagined,
that they were thereby cleansed from their sins, are numbered among Jewish
heretics, let it therefore be imagined, whether the papists do not resemble
them both in their washings and opinions, when they sprinkle themselves
continually with holy water, and imagine, that thereby they are cleansed from
venial sins. yet as Ibidem.
Epiphanius says, neither can drops, nor rivers, nor the whole ocean wash away
sins.

Epiphan. haeres. 13. ante Christum.
Dositheans were a sect of heretics among the Jews, and so reputed for their
affect at virginity, and abstinence from the use of marriage, although they were
married. they were also noted for their voluntary fastings, and for that
diversely, and voluntarily they afflicted their bodies. what then are we to
think of papists, that allow these voluntary whippings, and lashings of their
bodies? and what may be thought of the Iebusites chambers of meditations?
papists also allow extraordinary fastings, and think thereby to satisfy for
sin, and to merit heaven. some of them also account it great holiness for
married couples to live a sunder, and to creep into monasteries, and such
dens of superstition and idolatry. for which cause they deserve to creep, if
not to run into the catalogue of heretics. for the apostle does condemn
those, which upon a superstitious conceit Colos. 2.
spared not their bodies.

Simon Magus and his followers are commonly reputed the ringleaders. of him we
read, Act. 8.
that he thought it no sin, to buie the gifts of the holy Ghost. and
thereupon those, that buie and sell orders, benefices, churches, and masses,
and barter for spiritual things, and account such chaffaire sailable, are
accounted Simonians, and this simonie, as Petitiones R. Vllerston.
Vllerston, who wrote about the time of of the council of Constance,
affirms, is haeresis practica. but if men imagine it to be lawful, it is
truly an heresy according to rules of speculation. the papists in both these
points are guilty. for nothing can be more infamous, then the church of Rome,
for buying and selling of palles, miters, churches, and such like chaffaire.
Venalia nobis, says Lib. Calam. 3.
Mantuan,
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, detisque.
Benedict the 9. sold his popedom for a great sum of money. and all the world
knows, that without simoniacall compacts no man can enter into that seat.
they sell men's sins, and for money they offer to sell heaven. the priests
sell masses, as dear as they can, albeit such merchandise be now decried and
of little worth. for which cause Brigit inueigheth bitterly against them, and
says they are worse then Judas. deteriores sunt Judah, says Brigit. 132. onus
ecclesae. 23.
Christ in Brigits revelations, qui pro solis denariis me vendidit, illi autem
pro omni mercimonio. so it seems, that these are the merchants, of which
mention is made Apocalypse. 18. which sell men's souls. beside that, the
canonists dispute, that it is lawful for the pope to buy and sell benefices,
palles, and mitres. and Bellarmine with all his skill mainteineth the sale of
Iubileies, and other indulgences. of Simon Magus also De haeres. c. 1.
Augustine affirms, quod docebat detestandam turpitudinem indifferenter
vtendi foeminis: and quod imagines, and suam, and Helenes praebebat discipulis
suis adorandas. that is, he taught it was no sin, to use women without making
difference betwixt wife, concubine, and whore (for that is the signification
of the word indifferenter) and gave his own image and the image of his leman
Selena, to be worshipped of his disciples. finally, he carried a concubine
about with him called Selena. let it therefore be judged with indifferency,
whether the papists have not some touch of these heretical tricks, who in Rome
and all great cities almost maintain common bordels, and They put adultery and
fornication in the rank of lesser crimes. c. at siclerici. de iudicijs.
account lechery a small sin, and whose priests commonly keep concubines,
and finally which worship the images of diverse lecherous priests, and their
whoores canonised by the pope for saints. as Dunstane and Alfgina, Bernac and
his leman, and many others. and albeit we are not able to say much for the
honesty of Francis and Clare, yet it is apparent, that the papists worship
their images. so it appears that the first foundation of the worship of
images was laid, either by Simon Magus, or by Carpocrates and Marcellina and
other heretics of Simon Magus also it may be, they borrow their exorcisations.
for they are rather magical, than Christian like, as appears by them as they
are set down in Hierome Menghus, a disciple as it seems of Simon Magus.

Basilidians were reputed heretics, for that they worshipped images, and used
enchantments, and superstitious adiurations. for that is proved by the
testimony of Lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 23.
Irenaeus. how then can the papists wipe away the blot of heresy, that not
only privately worship images, but also fill every corner of their churches
full of them, and like the statues of Mercury set them up in high ways? they
do also conjure and enchant water, saying, exorcizo te creatura aquae: and
salt, saying, exorcizo te creatura salis; as if the creatures were possessed,
or corrupted by devils. likewise they conjure and enchant candles, herbs, and
make exorcistes and coniurers a holy order, and that order a sacrament of the
church.

Iren^y lib. 1. c. 24.
Carpocrates used to worship images; and Marcellina one of his followers adored
the images of Jesus and Paul, and burnt incense unto them. Colebat says De
bares. c. 7.
Augustine, imagines Jesus and Pauli, and Homeri and Pythagorae, adorando,
incensumque ponendo if then this were heresy in them, why should it not be
heresy in papists to worship the image of Jesus with divine worship and to
burn incense not only before the images of Jesus and Paul, but also before
other petie saints, and percase no saints? if the image of Christ Jesus and
Paul might not be adored, how come the images of Christopher and saint
Catherine, that never were in the world, of George that was an heretic, and
Thomas Becket and Campian, that were traitors, to be adored and honored with
light and incense?

Carpocratians and Basilidians did conceal and hide the mysteries of their
religion, least holy things should be cast to dogs, as may appear partly by
the testimony of Irenaeus aduersus haeres lib. 1. c. 23. and Epiphanius
entreating of the 24. and 27. heresy. and what do the papists? do not they
rehearse the words of the canon so, that no man can hear? and do they not
keep the mysteries of their religion secret, when they Nauarri enthirid and
Alagona.
teach, that it is mortal sin for lay men to dispute of matters of faith,
and read scriptures and the public liturgy in tongues not understood of the
hearers? finally, have not diverse of them alleged, that the reason why
scriptures are not translated into vulgar tongues, nor in that tongue read
publikly is, because holy things are not to be cast to dogs?

Marcosians did baptize in an unknown language, and anoint those, whom they
baptized with chrisme or opobalsamum, that is testified by Epiphanius haeres.
34. this by Irenaeus aduers. haeres lib. 1. c. 18. they did also anoint their
dead, and give them extreme unction. Marcus their founder went about to make
his followers believe, that he did transubstantiate wine into blood in the
sacrament. In that which he calls the eucharist, says Haeres. 34.
Epiphanius, they say that the redness (viz. of the wine) is changed
straightwaies into blood. The followers of Marcus accounted themselves perfect
but, as Lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 15.
Irenaeus says, perfectus nemo, nisi qui maxima mendacia apud eos
fructificauerit. Finally, they allege a multitude of apocryphal writings,
forged by themselves, as Ireney testifies of them, lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c.
18. all which points of heresy, the papists seem to have translated into
their religion. for first, they baptize in a language not understood of the
multitude. next, they use greasing and anointing in baptism and confirmation.
thirdly, they grease their disciples, when they lie on dying. fourthly, they
believe, that wine in the Lords cup by certain words of consecration is
transubstantiate into blood. fitly, their orders of religion do account
themselves to be in state of perfection. but the most perfect of them, which
are employed by the pope in defense of the popish faction and religion, do
fructify plenteously in telling of greatest lies, as we shall in his place
exemplify by Bellarmine a cardinal, and Robert Parsons in hope and desire a
cardinal, and a most famous forger of lies. his putatiue father, father
Coobucke, they say, could not with more art forge a horseshoo, than he can
forge a lie. Finally, for proof of their traditions and doctrine, they have
forged diverse decretale epistles, and counterfeit canons, and have written
diverse lying legends. Parsons to trouble the state, under the name of Dolman
has forged a book of forged titles to the crown, and Baronius for a
cardinals hat has been hired with apocryphal trash raked out of every blind
corner, and often times most impudently forged, to corrupt the history of the
church.

Nazarites were condemned for heretics, first, for that they mingled Jewish
ceremonies with Christian religion, and next, for that they boasted much of
their revelations and miracles, as is testified by Augustine de haeres. c. 9.
and partly, by Epiphanius in haeres. 29. The like sentence therefore is to be
pronounced against the papists, which Missal. Romans
consecrate every year a Paschal lamb after a Jewish fashion, and observe a
certain form of Iubiley, and have translated the priests apparel, and diverse
ceremonies from the Jews, as appears by Durand, and those that write of
their ceremonies. Innocentius the third by a solemn decretale determines,
that what is contained in Deuteronomy, is now to be observed in the new
testament. cum Deuteronomium, says C. per venerabilem. qui filij sint legitimi.
he, secunda lex interpretetur, ex vi vocabuli comprobatur, vt quod ibi
decernitur, in nouo testamento debeat obseruari. but Deuteronomy contains an
epitome of Moses his law. finally, they brag much of their revelations, and
miracles, and Bellar. de notis eccles.
make them a mark of the church.

Heracleonites did anoint their followers departing out of this life, and gave
them a kind of extreme unction. Feruntur, says S. De haeresib. c. 16. and
Epiph. haeres. 36.
Augustine, suos morientes nouo modo, quasi redimere, id est per oleum,
balsamum, and aquam, and inuocationes, quas Hebraicis verbis dicunt super
capita eorum. and these their anointings and prayers, they thought to be
grounded upon the place out of the fifth of S. James commonly alleged to this
purpose, all which notwithstanding, they are numbered among heretics. it
seems therefore, that the papists have borrowed their extreme unction, their
dirges and masses for the dead from heretics. and I am the rather confirmed in
this opinion, for that the prayer for the dead, that is now in the canon, is
not found in the old ordinall of the church of Rome. neither did ancient
Christians anoint those parts and senses, that the papists do. finally, they
did anoint the sick while the gifts of healing continued in the church, and to
the intent, that the parties grieved might recover their health: which
circumstances do now fail in our adversaries cause.

Helzai, and heretics called Osseni, as Haeres. 19. ante Christ.
Epiphanius reports, did use to swear by salt and bread, and other creatures.
they worshipped also the spittle and relics of two of their saints. Ibidem.
thirdly, Helzai taught his disciples to pray in a tongue not understood by
them. nemo quaerat interpretationem, says he, sed solum haec dicat. then he
added a prayer in a strange tongue. Do we then think, that it is catholic
religion in papists, to swear by bread and salt, and by creatures? and are
they good Christians, that worship the relics of saints, and reserve their
ashes and relics in their altars, and pray in a tongue not understood of them
which pray, and say, it is not material although a man understand not the
interpretation of the words?

Damascen. de haeresib.
Marcion gave women power to baptize, and albeit he had corrupted and abused a
maiden, yet was he not ashamed to extol virginity. a Marcione, says
Epiphanius, Haeres. 42.
virginitas praedicatur. Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 30. says, that he
and Saturninus began to teach abstinence from living creatures. he did also
Epiphan. haeres. 42.
teach, that by Christ's descending into hell diverse men's souls were thence
delivered, and separated marriages under pretense of religion, of which
heresies, Tertull. aduers. Marcion.
the papists savor very strongly. for first they authorize women to C.
adijcimus. 16. q. 1. etc. mulier. de consecrat. did. 4.
baptize, as did the Marcionistes. secondly they extol virginity and fasting
highly, and make both a means of great merit, and yet observe neither
virginity nor fasting. for their priests keep commonly harlots, if no worse.
the nuns albeit mured up, yet prove oftentimes very fruitful. thirdly they
imagine, that flesh is not so holy meat as fish, and believe that he that
fills himself with fish and other dainties does fast, where he that eats
a bit of flesh fasteth not. fourthly they separate marriages upon pretense of
monkish religion, and hold that parties so separated may not again cohabite
together without sin; and that contrary to the apostles commandment, 1. Cor.
7. lastly, they teach, that the patriarks before Christ's time were delivered by
Christ's descension into hell out of that place, which they call limbum patrum,
or receptacle of the fathers souls.

Messalians believed, that baptism was only available to cut away former
sins so likewise the papists believe, that baptism does only purge and
respect sins past, and that sins committed after baptism are to be done
away by penance. against them both Theodoret De divine. decret. c. de baptism.
teaches, that baptism is the earnest of future graces, and the communication
of Christ his passion. again he says, non vt dicunt amentes Messaliani,
baptismus nouaculam imitatur, quae praecesserunt peccata auferens. hoc enim ex
superabundanti largitur. likewise the Messalians did mumble over their prayers
with their lips, having their heart otherwhere, and believed they were heard
for their much babbling. which custom blind papists do so well like, that
they rehearse infinite auemariaes, pater nostres, and creedes, liking that
babbling religion, which mumbleth up her prayers on a string of beads: Mantuan
Alph. lib. 4.
Quae filo insertis numerat sua murmura baccis.
and pattreth prayers, like an ape clattring with his chappes. the pope also
gives great indulgences to those, that say the ladies Rosary, and pray upon
their beads, albeit the poor souls understand nothing of that they pray or
rather pratle.

Caians were reputed heretics for worshipping angels, and praying to them.
vnusquisque eorum, says Here Is. 38.
Epiphanius, vniuscuiusque angeli nomen inuocat. for the same cause also the
Epiphan. de angelicis. and Augustine. de haeres. c. 39. and Isid. lib. 8. orig.
Angelickes were condemned both by the writings of fathers, and acts of
councels. non oportet Christianos say the C. 35.
fathers assembled in the council of Laodicea, derelicta ecclesia abire, and
ad angelos idololatriae abominandae congregationes facere. what then are we to
think of papists, that pray to angels, and say masses in honor of them, and
serve them devoutly as their protectors? to avoid this blemish Carranza and
others in the canon of Laodicea before recited, for angelos, write angulos, and
so hope to hide their filthiness in corners. But Theodoret does plainly
convince them both of heresy, and falsehood also. Synodus says he, In epist.
ad Coloss. c. 3.
quae conuenit laodiceae lege prohibuit, ne precarentur angelos. that this
worship of angels is superstitious, Chrysostom commenting upon the epistle to
the Colossians declares, and especially in his ninth homily upon that epistle.

Seuerians were noted as heretics for their miracles either vainly forged, or
by the devils help effected. their prophetess Augustine. de hares. c. 24.
Philumena through a narrow mouthed glass, would put in a pretty big lofe,
and draw it out again without breaking the glass. the Mirabiliaries were
likewise condemned, for that by miracles and prophecies they sought to confirm
their opinions. and what do the papists? do not they likewise confirm all
their superstition, false religion and idolatry with counterfect miracles? do
they not tell us tales of Laurent. Vall. contra donat. Constanim.
images speaking, of men headless walking, of dead men reviving? they will not
deny it. nay Bellarmine makes these miracles a mark of his church. but if
they prove false, their church must needs prove a false church by a very good
consequent.

Tatians and other heretics absteined from marriage, as a state of life impure
and imperfect. The Romish priests therefore, together with monks, friars and
nuns have abiured marriage, as not compatible with their pretended monkish
perfection. C. proposuisti. did. 82.
Syricius, or at least Gratian, or some other falsary under his name, calls
marriage fleshly pollutions. In Capgranes legends, the Romish saints no
otherwise talk of marriage, then as if it were uncleanness, sin, and
abomination. diverse of our adversaries have written, that it is less sin for
priests to commit fornication, than to marry.

Manicheyes in diverse points savoring of heresy. for as the Mancheyes
condemned marriage in their priests, which for their excellency they called
electos, so likewise do the papists in their monks and greater orders of their
clergy. secondly as the Manicheyes abstained from the cup in the Lords
supper, and received one kind only, as appears by the testimony of Leo
Sermon. 4. de quadrages. and of the chap. relatum, and c. comperimus. did. 2. de
consecrat. so likewise do the papists dividing, if Gelasius say true, one and
the self same sacrament most sacrilegiously. thirdly both Manicheyes and
papists destroy Christ's humanity, the Manicheyes giving him no true flesh, nor
solid body, and the papists giving him a body neither visible, nor palpable,
nor endued with the right dimensions and true properties of a body. both of
them also say the body of Christ may be in many places at once. lastly the
Manicheyes in their fasts, albeit they abstained from flesh, yet used diverse
other exquisite and dainty meats. and this is also the rigorous fast of most
papists, which the rest will not deny to be a good fast after the popes law,
and a good feast as Christians say.

Montanus did first Apollonius apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 17.
establish laws of fasting, as is recorded in the history of Eusebius, and
appears also by the practice of the church, that had no law concerning that
matter in his time. the same also may be proved by the testimony of Augustine,
who denies, that any law concerning fasting was made by Christ or his
apostles. quibus diebus Epist. 86. ad Casulan.
says he, non oporteat ieiunare, and quibus oporteat, praecepto domini, vel
apostolorum non inuenio definitum. Montanus also began first to Epiphan. in
haeres. 48.
dispute, that the scriptures were not perfect, and that they were to he
supplied by his new paracletus, that as he said was to teach all things
necessary. his Augustine. de haeres. c. 26.
followers had the prophecies of Prisca, and Maximilla in great reverence. both
he and his disciples did believe Limbum Patrum, to be in hell Lib. de anima. in
fi^t.
Tertullian having learned of Montanus, taught, that small sins after this
life were to be purged, and that his paracletus did often recommend that
doctrine. further by the testimony of unwritten traditions, and his paracletus,
he Lib. de coron. milit.
proves, that the suffering days of martyrs were to be kept holy, and that
sacrifices should be offered for souls departed. the doctrine therefore of the
church of Rome concerning set fasts, the imperfection of scriptures, unwritten
traditions, legendary prophecies of Brigit, and other Romish saints, and
concerning Limbus Patrum in hell, and remission of sins after this life, and
the oblations for souls departed, seems rather to proceed from Montanus,
then from Christ or his apostles. finally the Montanistes did not more'vant of
their Prisca and Maximilla, then the papists of their Brigit, Hildegardis and
Mechtildis. nor did Montanus offer for the souls departed otherwise, then the
papists.

Pepuzians did honor their town Pepuza, and call it Jerusalem, or the
metropolis of their religion; so do the papists honor Rome. and both papists
and Pepuzians suffer women to minister the sacrament or baptism. should not
then the papists have great wrong, if they were not made equal in rank with
Pepuzians? herein they also surpass them. for we do not read, that any woman
among the Pepuzians was made pope of Pepuza. but Martin Polonus, Marianus
Scotus, Chronicon Chronicorum, Platina, and diverse authors of great credit
report, that a woman was made pope of Rome, and her picture is to be seen in
the dome of Siena among other popes, if it be not latele defaced. finally the
Iebusites contending to show the contrary, show nothing but their own
impudency, and the hardness of their faces.

Catharistes boast much of their merits, purity and perfection. Mundiores se
ceteris praedicant, says Lib. 8. orig. ^. de haeres.
Isidore. they do also deny absolution in somes cases to the repentant, and
rebaptize those that are already baptized. and is not this also the case of
papists? they cannot well deny it. for they say that all monks and friars are
in state of perfection, and deny that any just man does commit a mortal sin.
they deny also to heretics relapsed as they call them all favor, and absolve
none in cases reserved to the pope. finally the histories of France and
Flanders do show, that the popish priests have there rebaptized many. and in
England albeit they do not rebaptize, yet they change the names and use a
number of greasy ceremonies frequented in the Romish church to supply our
baptism as they say.

Iacobites and Armenians were condemned for heretics, for that they made the
images of God the father, and God the holy ghost. Imagines says Lib hist. 18.
c. 52.
Nicephorus patris and spiritus sancti effigiant, quod est perquam absurdum.
yet this absurdity is a high point of popish religion.

Chazinzarij and Staurolatrae, were for that point esteemed heretics.
Nicephorus he woondreth at them, as strange fellows. Crucem, says he, adorare
and colere dicuntur. Lib. hist. 18. c. 54.
Is not then this a plain conviction of the papists, which worship the cross,
and say, aue sancta crux: and desire to be protected by it, and give to it
latriam, which I suppose the Staurolatrians were not so simple and stupid, as
to give to their crosses.

Collyridian heretics were condemned for worshipping the virgin Mary, and that
worthily. for as Haeres. 78.
Epiphanius says, she was a virgin, and honorable, but not to be adored. and
again, non dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem, and
adoremus ea, quae ab ipso facta sunt. all which notwithstanding the papists
adore her, and worship her, and say many a mass in her honor, and pray unto
her; which I doubt whether the Collyridians did so grossly or no. Bonauenture to
make her equal with God, as David made Psalms in the praise of God, so
applied, or rather distorted Psalms to the virgin Mary, turning God into the
blessed virgin.

Hist. miscel. Paul. Diat. lib. 21.
council of Constantinople, whose acts are recorded, and inserted in the sixth
action of the second Nicene council, were noten as idolaters, and condemned by
the fathers as heretics, or worse. the synod of Francford did condemn the
second Nicene council, that allowed the worship of images. non nos imagines in
basilicis positas, In lib. Carol. Magni contr. Synod, in partib. Graeciae pro
imaginibus adorandis.
say they, idola nuncupamus, sed ne idola nuncupentur, adorare and colere eas
recusamus. which is nothing, but the judgment of Gregory the first also, that
would not have images worshipped. Epiphanius haeres. 79. says, that by
worshipping of images, the mind is turned from one only God, to commit
fornication with images. all which notwithstanding, the papists kiss them, bow
to them, worship them, light candles, and burn incense unto them, or at the
least before them.

barefooted brethren were condemned for their heretical singularity in going
barefoot. Est alia haeresis, says Saint De hares. c. 68.
Augustine, nudis pedibus semper ambulantium. yet this is accounted by the
papists a part of their frierlike perfection, who have orders of men and women
that go barefoot, and believe it is meritorious to go barefoot in pilgrimages
and processions.

Apostolici, qui se isto nomine arrogantissime vocauerunt, says Saint De
hares. 40.
Augustine, eo quod non receperunt in suam communionem vtentes coniugibus, and
res proprias possidentes, quales habet ecclesia catholica, and monachos and
clericos plurimos. where note, I pray you, how that Augustine says, that monks
and clergy men had wives and goods in property: and how near the papists come
to this heresy condemning all monks and friars, that possess any goods in
property, and both monks and priests, that match themselves in marriage, though
very honorable in the judgment of the apostle.

Heraclites, as says Isidore, were heretics, that received only monks, and
refused married folks to be of their company. Monachos tantum recipient, says
Orig. lib. 8. c. de hares.
he, coniugia respuunt. further, they believe not, that children dying young
shall possess the kingdom of heaven. and do not monks and friars, and other
sects among the papists believe the like? do they not also exclude all infants
dying before baptism out of the kingdom of heaven, albeit the parents did by
all means endeavor to have them baptized? and do they not place such in limbo
puerorum, which is either in hell, or else the papists know not where it is?

Priscillianistes disioine married folks for religion sake. Coniuges, says S.
Haeres. 70.
Augustine, speaking of Priscillian, quibus hoc malum potuerit persuadere,
disiungens: and viros a nolentibus foeminis, and foeminas a nolentibus viris.
likewise, for hiding their wickedness and filthiness, they made no account to
forswear themselves. Ibidem.
propter occultandas contaminatioens and turpitudines suas habent in suis
dogmatibus and haec verba: iura periura, secretum prodere noli. they do also
refuse to eat flesh, as unclean meat, as S. Augustine testifies. And what do
papists? do not they likewise separate married folks, that vow monastical
religion? and do they not hold, that man or wife before marriage consummate,
may enter into a monastery, albeit the other party be most unwilling? Of oaths
also they make no account. If thou be put to an oath, say the In annot. in act.
23.
Rhemists, to accuse catholics for serving God (so they please to speak of
papists worshipping idols, and hearing the idolatrous mass) or to utter any
man to Gods enemies (thus they call her Majesty and the Judges) thou ought
first to refuse such unlawful oaths. but if thou have not constancy and
courage so to do: yet know thou, that such oaths bind not in conscience and
law of God: but may and must be broken under pain of damnation. where note,
that they advise men to forswear themselves under pain of damnation: and that
they call catholics and Gods servants such as are combined with the Pope and
Spaniard, and come with an intention to murder their dread Sovereign, and to
raise rebellion, or at least embrace the idolatrous religion of the pope. this
is also the resolution of the two traitors, Allen and Parsons, in their wicked
resolutions of cases of conscience for the English nation, through which they
have brought diverse young men to the destruction both of body and soul.
Finally, if papists did not account flesh unclean, why do the Carthusians
forswear flesh? and why do papists account it more holy to eat fish, than
flesh on fasting days?

Helcesaits make Christ in heaven to differ from Christ on earth. Christum,
says Haeret. fab. lib. 2. c. de Helcesaeis.
Theodoret speaking of them, non vnum dicunt, sed hunc quidem inferne, illum
vero superne: and eum olim in multis habitasse. so likewise the papists believe
and teach, that Christ in heaven is visible and palpable, and has the
fullness, thickness and just proportion of a body. but their Christ on the
altar they believe to be neither visible nor palpable, neither that he fills
a place, or is contained in one place. nay, they say he is substantially in
every one, that receives the sacrament, and not that only, but also in every
pixe, and consecrated host.

Eutychianists deny, that Christ after the union of the two natures, had a true
body, but as De ieiun. 7. men's. ser. 6.
Leo signifies, a body without shape, dimensions, or circumscription. they
said also, that Christ was whole both in heaven, and earth: against whom
Vigilius disputing, Lib 4. contr. Eutych. c. 4.
says, that the flesh of Christ when it was in in earth, was not in heaven,
and now being in heaven, is not in earth. and their chief ground was, that
Christ's humane nature was abolished, even as the mystical signs are changed
into another nature after the consecration of the sacrament. for this is
plainly apparent in Theodorets second Dialogue. Who then understands not,
that the papists by their transubstantiation do bring in Eutychianisme, holding
that Christ's body in the sacrament is without all shape, and dimensions, that
may be perceived, and that his body is both in heaven and earth at one time,
and also in as many altars and places, as the sacrament is? who does not
likewise perceive that Christ's humanity is abolished, if the substance of
bread and wine be abolished in the sacrament, especially if the union of the
two natures in Christ's person be fitly resembled by the fathers to the
sacrament? This, certes, is a matter very evident, that both Theodoret dialog.
1. and Gelasius writing against Eutyches, does confute his heresy by this
reason, for that the substance of the bread remains in the sacrament. which
being denied by papists, is it not very plain, that they reduce and bring
back into the world the old decayed heresy of Eutyches?

Pelagians. Augustine. de haeres. c. 88.
Pelagius says, that without grace a man may do all Gods commandments.
Voluit credi, says Augustine, etiam si difficilius, tamen posse homines sine
gratia diuina facere iussa. and De great. and lib. arb. lib. 5. c. 5. etc. 9.
Bellar. says, Solis naturae viribus posse aliquem ad breuissimum tempus omnia
seruare. scilicit, diuina mandata. he shifteth off the matter, with saying,
quoad substantiam operis. but that, no question, but the Pelagians would also
admit. Pelagius said also, that grace is infused according to merit. The
papists also teach, that men doing quantum in se est: God is present with his
grace. and this they call meritum congrui, or preparations to justification.
they do not deny also, but after a man has grace, he may merit a greater
measure of grace. thirdly, both Pelagians and papists agree in the definition
of sin. Proprie vocatur peccatum, says Vid. August. contra Julian. and de
great.
Pelagius, quod libera voluntate, and a sciente committitur. so also say the
papists, as appears by the censure of Coleine. Again, the Pelagians teach,
that a just man in this life may be without sin. Hoc Pelagiani audent dicere,
says, S. De bono perseuerant. lib. 2. c. 5.
Augustine, hominem iustum in hac vita omnino nullum habere peccatum. and in
his book of heresies. c. 88. he shows it is Pelagianisme to hold, that the
life of just men in this life has no sin. Lib. 4. de iustif. c. 11.
Bellar. also holds, that a man is able to perform the law perfectly. of
which it follows, that a man may be without all sin. for how can a man
fulfill the law, but he must be without all sin? All papists generally hold,
that all just men are without mortal sins.

The Pelagians do Augustine. contra Julian. lib. 6. c. 6.
teach, that concupiscence by baptism is sanctified, and being before evil,
does afterward begin not to be evil: which doctrine S. Augustine calls very
absurd. yet from this doctrine can not the papists clear themselves, when they
teach that concupiscence after baptism, and in the regenerat, is no sin.

The Pelagians would not grant, that the Gentiles sinned in all their actions,
nor that their actions were sin, as done without faith, as S. Contra Julian.
lib. 4. c. 3.
Augustine shows. no more will the papists grant it, as appears by
Bellarmines disputes lib. 5. de great. and lib. arb. c. 5. and 9. nay, they
stick not to hold, that they may do all good works according to the substance
of the work.

The Contr. dua^ epist. Pelag. c. 19.
Pelagians were wont to say, in omni bono opere hominem semper adiuuari a
gratia; and Ibid. lib. 4. c. 6.
again, gratiam adiuuare bonum cuiusque propositum. and Bellar. likewise lib.
2. de great. and lib. arb. c. 5. disputes, that God according to time and place
gives grace sufficient to all men.

The August. lib. 1. de great. c. 28.
Pelagians say, nos forte and firmum habere ad non peccandum liberum arbitrium.
and S. Lib. 2. de baptismo.
Augustine teaches us, that this doctrine is Pelagianisme* yet do the papists
hold, that sin is subject to our will, as the censurers of Coleyn do speak.
Bellarmine also lib. 5. de great. and lib. arb. in diverse places allows this
power to free will, to be able to do good, and to abstain from sin.

The Pelagians deny orignall sin, as saint Augustine lib. de haeres. c. 88.
teaches. and most papists now hold, that the virgin Mary was conceived
without original sin, as appears by the testimony of Bellarmine, lib. 4. de
amissione great. c. 15. now to deny original sin to be in any, is
Pelagianisme, as Bellarmine lib. de notis ecclesiae c. 9. disputes.

Saint Augustinne Contra. epist. Pelag. lib. 4. c. 6. and 8. de great. lib, 1.
c. 14.
teaches us, that it is Pelagianisme to hold, that God is ready with his
grace, if he see a man's soul ready and prepared to receive it: and, that a
natural man may desire his own conversion. and yet the papists will not deny
these propositions, nor seem to dislike them.

S. In Hierem. 13.
Hierome says, that the Pelagians did interpret these sentences: our justice
is like a cloth of a menstruous woman. and, no man is good, no not one: in this
sort, as if the holy Ghost, had meant, that man in comparison of God is not
just, or good. which is also the slight and cunning interpretation of papists.

Both Pelagians and Papists use the same reasons to prove the strength of
freewill: as first, that we are commanded to choose, and next, that God would
not command us things impossible. magnum aliquid se scire putant Pelagiani.
says saint Degrat. and lib. arb. c. 16.
Augustine, quando dicunt non iuberet deus quod sciret ab homine non posse
fieri. so likewise the papists say, if we had not freewill; that then God would
not command us to do things. but he confuteth both their reasons in the words
following. quis hoc nesciat? says he. sed ideo iubet aliqua quae non possumus,
vt nouerimus, quid ab illo petere debeamus. he says not, that we have free
will, to do good works, because God commands us to do them; but rather
shows that God commands us to do things, which we are not able of our
selves to do, that we may learn what to crave and beg at Gods hands. we may
therefore well conclude, that the papists are far declined toward
Pelagianisme. and that long before us, did Lib. 1. de great. aduers. Pelag.
Thomas Brandwardine, perceive and declare, and therefore doubts not to call
the popish schoolmen Pelagians. totus mundus says he, post pelagium in
errorem abiit. exurge deus and iudica causam tuam. this man wrote about 300.
years agone. but now our adversaries are grown worse and worse.

Donatists, as saint De haeres. c. 69.
Augustine writes, believed, that the church was only contained in Afrike,
and consisted in the obedience or part of Donatus; quod ecclesia Christi says
he, in Africa, and Donati part remanserit. they did also rebaptize catholic
Christians. if this then be heresy, the papists may not escape scot free, that
believe the catholic Roman church only, and take none for Christians but
such, Geronym^ Campos, catetechism. and Brist. motiut 12.
as take the popes part, and live under his obedience. they do also presume
sometimes to rebaptize, such as have been baptized in our churches.

Circumcellions shought it a matter meritorious to kill those, that were
contrary to their sect, immania facinora perpetrando, as S. De haeres. c. 69.
Augustine says. nay that holy man himself did hardly escape their
ambuscadoes laid for him. like to them also do papists teach, that it is
lawful and meritorious to kill princes excommunicate by the pope. both pope
Pius the fifth, and Sixtus the fifth, upon pain of excommunication, commanded
her Majesty's subjects to take arms against her. Sixtus quintus that
shameless friar, did La fulminante.
highly commend James Clement the Dominican friar, that murdered his liege
prince Henry the third king of France. John Ghineard a Iebusite did maintain
this doctrine of murdring princes, and was therefore by arrest of the
parliament of Paris condemned and executed. by these desperate Assassines and
hired murderers the papists killed the prince of Orange and James the regent of
Scotland, and poisoned diverse others. Alphonsus Diazius did most wickedly
murder his own brother, and yet was protected by the pope. finally by diverse
means they have sought to murder the Queens Majesty, king Henry the 4. of
France, Grave Maurice, and all that stand in their way: far passing not only
the heretical circumcellions, but also the Turkish assassins.

Audaeans or Anthropomorphites did imagine God to have an humane shape, and
parts like a mortal man. Cogitatione carnali, says De haeres. c. 50.
Augustine, Deum fingebant in similitu dinem hominis corruptibilis. The papists
likewise cannot imagine, but that God is like man, when they express God the
father in likeness of an old man, or at the least imagine such images to be
like God. they do also make the image of the incomprehensible trinity. let the
people be taught say the men of S^ss. 25.
Trent, that the Godhead is not therefore figured, as if it could be seen with
corporeal eyes, or expressed wirh colors or figures. it appears therefore
they meant it should be represented, though it could not be well expressed by
figures.

Origin believed, that sins might be purged and done away after this life.
and therefore Augustine de haeres. c. 43.
imagined, that even the damned after some long time might be saved. he
delighted also to draw scriptures to serve allegorical senses. if then it be
heresy to say, that great sins are to be remitted after this life, why is it
not heresy to hold, that small sins may be then remitted: seeing we have
but one means to obtain remission of sins? again why should allegorical
interpretations be more allowable in papists, then in Origin? finally why
should not other damned souls be as well saved as Traians soul and the soul
of Falconilla an idolatresse, at the intercession of Gregory, as Damascen and
the papists believe?

Eunomius taught, that so a man were of his religion, it skilled not greatly
what sins he committed. asseuerabat says De haeres. ^. 54.
Augustine, quod nihil cuiquam obesset quorumlibet perpetratio, ac
perseuerantia peccatorum, si huius, quae ab ipso docebatur, fidei particeps
esset. unto which heresy the papists come very nere. for the pope to all his
followers promises heaven, if they believe as he does, and will come to
confession. his canonists teach that the pope, albeit he draw innumerable
souls to hell, and continue in all wickedness, yet he is Christ's true vicar,
and the head of the church. Lib. de eccles. milit. c. 2.
Bellarmine requires no inward virtue in the true members of the church, which
he defines, so they profess outwardly and communicate with the pope. let the
world then judge, what church the papists build, when they admit Piers Lacy,
Tirone, the white knight, and such wicked rebels to be true parts and members
of their society.

1. Tim. 4.
apostle condemned them as heretics, that forbad men to marry, and to abstain
from certain meats. whereupon says In 1. Tim. 4.
Theodoret: recte posuit, prohibentium contrahere matrimonium. neque eum
Caelibatum, aut continentiam vituperat, sed eos accusat, qui lege lata ea sequi
compellunt. if then the papists by sharp laws forbid priests and monks to
marry, and to eat certain meats, are they not within the compass of these
false teachers?

Anomi, were condemned as heretics, for that they either contemned, or
corrupted the law of God. is it not then some blemish to papists, that they
make the law of God to be imperfect, and Sess. 4. council. Trid.
make their own traditions equal to Gods law? and is it not heresy, to make
a new lawgiuer, as the papists do, c. translato. de constitutionibus: and to
cut off the second commandment concerning the making of graven images? finally
do they imagine that it is no error to Council. Trid. sess. 5.
say, that concupisence is no sin, which is direct contrary to the apostles
doctrine Romans 7. and to the law of God?

Ireneus and Tertullian does range them among heretics, which fly from
scriptures, and when they are convinced by them, fall to accuse them, affirming
that the apostles did not commit all things necessary to salvation to writing.
cum ex scripturis arguuntur, says Aduers. hares. lib. 3. c. 2.
Ireney, in accusationem conuertuntur scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant,
neque sint ex authoritate, and quia vary sunt dictae, and quia non possit ex
his inueniri veritas ab his, qui nesciant traditionem. norrenim per literas
traditam illam, sed per vinam vocem, ob quam causam and Paulum dixisse,
sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos. Tertullian says, it is a trick of
heretics either to falsify, or by false interpretations to pervert
scriptures. alius manu scripturas, says De praescript. aduers. haeres.
he, alius sensu expositiones interuertit. he says again, that heretics
cannot stand, if they be brought to try their cause by scriptures. aufer
haereticis says De resurr. caernis.
he, quae cumque ethnici sapiunt, vt de scripturis solis quaestiones suas
sistant, and stare non possunt. in these points therefore these two fathers
have stricken the papists, albeit generally they speak of heretics. for first
Bellar. de verb. Dei non scripto.
they deny, that the scriptures contain doctrine sufficient to salvation, or
that we can learn all truth necessary out of them without their traditions.
secondly they speak evil of scriptures, as before has been showed. thirdly
they say that scriptures receive authority from the church. fourthly they
accuse them of uncertainty. Turrian aduers. Sadeelem lib. 1. does call them
Delphicum gladium: and others call them a nose of wax. fifthly they allow no
sense, but such as the synagogue of Rome authorizeth. sixthly either Sixtus
Quintus or Clement the 8. has corrupted the scriptures. for both pretending to
set our the old latin translation the one is in diverse places contrary to the
other. finally they will not have the scriptures to decide controversies about
matters of faith.

Lib. 8. Orig. c de haeres.
Isidore does declare them to be heretics, that do otherwise vnde^stand the
scriptures, then the meaning of the holy Ghost requires. quicunque says he,
aliter scripturam sacram intelligit, quam sensus spiritus sancti flagitat, a
quo conscripta est, licet de ecclesia non recesserit, tamen haereticus potest
appellari. if then we list to read the popes decretales, or the writings of
the popish faction; we need not doubt, but they are tresgrand heretics, having
so notoriously perverted the Scriptures, and turned them to senses never
intended by the holy Ghost. as for example, these words of the Isai 1.
prophet, a planta pedis vsque ad verticem non est in eo sanitas, which he
spoke of the people of Israel being then most sinful, Clement the sixth in the
chap. vnigenitus extr. de poenit. and remiss. does turn to our Savior
Christ, as if our Savior had been unsound from the foot to the head: or that
the prophet had meant, that our Savior had shed all his blood, that the pope
might make sale of the fruit of it at his pleasure.

God by his prophet Hierem. 1.
says, I have appointed thee over nations and kingdoms. ergo says C. vnam
sanctam. ext. de mayor. and obed.
Boniface the 8. if earthly princes go out of the way, they must be judged by
the pope. Again, out of these words of the apostle: the spiritual man judges
all things: he Ibidem.
Ibid.
collecteth, that the pope has no superior judge. thirdly because Christ says
to Peter, put up thy sword into the sheath, he concludes, that both Peter, and
his successors ought to have a temporal sword. fourthly of these words, ecce
duo gladij hic: Ibid.
he infers, that the pope is to command and exercise both the swords. The
Isai. 8 and 28.
prophets and Romans 9. and 1. Pet. 2.
apostles by the corner stone placed in the foundation of the church do
understand Christ Jesus. but Bellarmine in his preface prefixed before his
books de potifice Romans draws these words to the pope, and forces them to
serve to make him to be a corner stone, and a foundation also of the church. he
will also have these words, super hanc Petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam: to be
meant of the pope. these words of our Savior, drink ye all of this: the
papists expound in such sort, as if Christ had said, drink not all of this.
the words of our Savior to Peter, when he said, pasce oues meas: they
appropriate to the pope, that feeds not, as if none were to feed, but the
pope.

The apostle says, marriage is honorable among all men: yet will they not
allow, that marriage is honorable among nuns, and monks, and friars, and
mass priests, and the rest of the Romish clergy. where our Savior Christ
says, scrutamini scripturas; they say contrary, search not the scriptures. the
apostle says, they are profitable: they Index libror. prohibit. regul. 4
say, they are pernicious. our savior says, that those do in vain worship
him, that teach doctrines of men: these do teach humane traditions, and yet
doubt not, but that God is well pleased with them. The spirit of God
commands, that prayers be made for princes: and wills every Christian man,
to submit himself to the magistrate, and to higher powers. but the papists do
so expound these words, as if it were lawful for the pope to curse Gods
anointed, to excommunicate kings and emperors, to massacre them, if they can,
and to raise rebellion against them. It were infinite to rehearse all the false
interpretations of Scriptures, devised by papists. beside that, in this place
it is not necessary, seeing by these few which we have alleged already, it
may in part appear, that never any heretics alleged Scriptures more
peruersly, nor more direct contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost, then
they.

Damascene. de haeres.
Herodians gave the name and honor of Christ to Herod; so the papists do
give the names and honor of Christ to the pope, allowing these words of
Bernard to Eugenius, unction Christus es. they call him the foundation and
rock of the church, the head and spouse of the church, the monarke of the
church, and Christ's vicar general. In epist. dedic. ante princip. doctrine.
Stapleton does call him supremum numen in terris. some teach, that he and
Christ have but one consistory between them. Lib. Caerem.
others say, that all power is given to the pope in heaven and earth: which
words our Savior Matthew. 28. speaks of himself. if then the Herodians
deserve for honoring Herod with Christ's titles, to be reputed heretics, who
can clear the papists from the note of heresy, that far more impudently and
wickedly give Christ's honor to the pope?

De haeres. c. beicetae.
Damascene numbreth those monks and nuns among heretics, that meeting
together, used to skip and dance also together, as they thought, to the praise
of God. yet do not the popish sort leave their piping and dancing processions,
nor do priests, monks, and nuns cease to celebrate their comedicall dancing
masses skipping and hopping about the alter like apes, that are taught to
skippe, and to leap for their masters best advantage.

Gnosimachi were certain heretics, that held an opinion, that vulgar
Christians were not to study the scriptures. omni Christianorum congnitioni ac
scientiae ita aduersantur, Ibidem c. gnosimachi.
says Damascene, vt vanum, and minus necessarium laborem esse dicant eorum,
qui in diuinis scripturis aliquam exquirunt scientiam. neque enim deum aliud a
Christiano postulare, quam bonas, praeclarasque actiones. Itaque aliquem
simplici, rudique animo institutum suum persequi melius est, vt aiunt, quam
multam curam in cognoscendis decretis and sententijs ponere. and like to these
heretics are the papists, for they hold it to be mortal sin for lay men to
dispute upon matters of faith, as Nauarrns in his enchiridion declares. they
suppose also, that the coliars faith is sufficient, albeit he knows nothing,
but being demanded a reason of his faith answers, that he believes as the
church believes. De legit. iudicibus lib. 1.
Hosius writing against Brentius does greatly commend ignorance, and does
greatly allow this saying, thy faith has saved thee, and not the exercise of
scriptures. Lib. 3. de authorit. scripturae.
he says also, that nothing is more pernicious, then with scriptures to enter
into a combat with Satan. generally they allow an implicit faith in the rude
sort, and dehort them from knowledge of scriptures: which is the flat heresy
of the Gnosimachians.

Damascene de haeres. 6.
Ethnophronians were by the church condemned for observing diverse heathenish
customs, and holidaies. which notwithstanding, pope Boniface the 8. instituted
the Iubiley every hundred years in imitation of certain plays, or games
called Ludi seculares. the papists also have their expiations and lustrations
with holy water, like to the gentles, they keep their carneual, as the Romans
kept their lupercalia, running disguised up and down the streets. they
canonize saints, as the heathen did canonize their benefactors for gods. and
like as they burned incense to their idols, so papists burn incense to their
idols. neither do they regard, that such as offered incense to dumb idols in
the primitive church, were condemned as idolaters, as appears by diverse
censures of Cyprian, and others contra thurificantes: that is against those
that burned incense before idols. they do likewise offer sacrifices, or
inferias, for the souls of the departed, as did the Gentiles. finally they use
lots, and coniurations, and lash themselves before their images, and have
diverse other tricks of gentilisme,

Montanists, so likewise do papists mislike second marriages denying to bless
them, and not accounting those marriages so holy a sacrament, as the first. nay
they seem to go yet farther, and to enioine penance for 2. marriages 31. q.
1. de his qui. and council. Neocaesar.
they decree, presbyteru^ conuiuio secundarum nuptiarum interesse non debere,
maxim, cum praecipiatur secundis nuptijs poenitentiam tribuere. quis ergo erit
presbiter qui propter conuiuium illis consentiat nuptijs? it appears
therefore, that they would not have priests to allow second marriages, or to
bless them, or to be present at them.

De haeres. c. Christiano-categori.
Damascene also accounts them heretics, that worshipped the images of our
savior, of the blessed virgin, and the saints, as the gentiles did their
gods: which is just the case of papists. for both of them bow unto them, pray
before them, burn incense to them, offer sacrifice in honor of them: and yet
both of them deny, that they worship stocks or stones, and say that they
worship only the things represented by them, as Lib. 2. divine. instit. c. 2.
Lactantius testifies of the Gentiles, and is very often repeated by papists.

Romans 16.
apostle when he had warned the Romans to beware of those, that caused
divisions and scandals, he adds also, against that doctrine, which they had
received. In the first epistle to Timothy chap. 6. he shows, that heretics
had a fashion, to teach other doctrine, and not to rest in the wholesome words
of our Lord Jesus Christ. The apostle 2. Pet. 2.
Peter says, that there shall rise up false teachers, which shall privily
bring in heresies, and damnable sects. De praescript. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian does oppose heretics to the apostles, and their doctrine to
apostolical doctrine. vnde extranei, and inimici apostolis haeretici, says
he, nisi ex diuersitate doctrinae, quam vnusquisque de suo arbitrio aduersus
apostolos, aut protulit aut recepit? If then the schoolmen and doctors of the
popish synagogue have caused a great division from the apostolic and ancient
church, and have taught doctrine diverse from that of Jesus Christ; and if they
rest not in the wholesome words of Christ Jesus, but make humane traditions
equal to the word of God; if they have troubled, and corrupted the deepest,
and highest mysteries of Christian religion by their late inventions, and have
digressed from the doctrine of the apostles, and refuse to be tried by the
writings of the prophets and apostles; then are they clearly proved to be
false teachers and heretics. that they are departed from the doctrine of the
apostles, and have brought in diverse heresies, and sects, and new doctrines,
which by no means are to be reputed catholic, it may be proved by this whole
discourse. It is made evident also by the grounds of popish religion, by the
popes decretales, by the school divinity, by the lying and fabulous legends
of the Romish church, by the doctrine of the conuenticle of Trent, by the
manifold corruptions of the mass, by the idolatrous worship, not only of
saints, but also of stocks, stones, rotten bones, and rags, by their
rebellion against princes, and by the tyranny of the pope, and finally, by the
Iebusites new doctrine concerning these points. nay, if they teach doctrine
contrary to scriptures, and to the apostles; by their own confession they will
be proved heretics. Haeresis, says Lib. 2. part. 1.
Occham, est dogma falsum fidei contrarium orthodoxae. Apud Matt. Paris in
Henric. 3.
Robert Grosthed says, that heresy is an opinion chosen of humane
understanding contrary to scripture, and either openly taught, or defended.
Apud Dionys. Carthus. in 3. sent. did. 31.
Durand signifies, that heresy is only an opinion contrary to canonical
scripture. Opinio ista, says he, non est haeretica, quia non est contra
canonicam scripturam. finally, the council of Aen. Sylu. de gist. council.
Basil. lib. 1.
Basil does determine him to be an heretic, thatdoth reject the catholic
faith deduced out of canonical scriptures, and proved by fathers.

that our savior Christ did pass out of his mothers womb, as the rays of
the sun do pierce through the substance of the glass. quomodo solis radij
concretam vitri substantiam penetrant. for these are the words of the Roman
Part. 1. in exposit. 3. art. fid.
catechism. but this shows, that they give no true flesh to our Savior, and
that they overthrow the article of Christ's nativity, and a principal mystery
of Christian religion.

Lib. 1. sent. did. 14.
Lombard teaches, that there is a two fold proceeding of the holy Ghost, the
one temporal, the other eternal. but this point his own scholars do mislike, as
erroneous. non debet concedi, says Occham, writing upon this place, quod
spiritus sancti sit duplex processio, ne duae spiritus sancti processiones
videantur (vt sunt duae filij generationes) vna aeterna ex patre, altera
temporalis ex filio. they also dislike his doctrine, sentent. lib. 1. did.
18.. 4. where he does teach, that the Holy Ghost is as properly said, to be a
gift, as to proceed. his words are, aeque donum esse, ac procedere.

Lib. 3. p. 290.
Andradius says, that philosophers by natural knowledge, and by the works of
the creation, did after a sort know Christ crucified, which I hope Robert
Parsons will not deny to be erroneous.

Sess. 6. c. 9.
Trent teaches us, always in this life to doubt of Gods favor toward us,
and of our own salvation. which is nothing else, but a plain demonstration,
that the same teaches not true faith, but rather a superstitious distrust, and
oppugneth these two articles of our Creed, I believe remission of sins, and
aeternall life.

Robert Parsons, or any man of note among the papists, leaving off his vain
bangling about quotations, dare undertake particularly to answer my challenge,
or will adventure hand to hand to encounter me.

CHAP. V. That all papists, if they maintain the doctrine of the pope and
Romish church, are plain idolaters.
HOw odious and heinous a sin idolatry is, the scriptures do in many places
declare. Almighty God having published his law against idolatry, adds a very
severe threatening against those, that should transgress it. I am the Lord thy
God, says Exodus 20.
he, strong and jelous, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of those that hate me. and when the
children of Israel departed from their God, to worship a molten image: Suffer
me, says Exodus 32.
he to Moses, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them. Idolatry in scriptures is called spiritual fornication. but nothing can
more displease a man, than that his spouse shall forsake him, and breaking the
covenant of marriage, run after strangers. In this case therefore, Deuter. 13.
God forbids a brother to spare his brother, or a father his son, or a
husband his wife, if any of them arise and say, come and let us serve other
gods. Sit primum manus tua super eum, says Moses. neither are idolaters only
punished in this life, but also in the life to come. Without, says Apocal. 22.
John, shall be dogs, coniurers, unclean persons, murderers, and such as
serve idols. and in the 21. chapter of the Revelation he says, that idolaters
shall have their part in the lake, that burns with fire and brimstone. If
then popish religion do plainly maintain most gross idolatry, as not only by
their practice is proved, but also by diverse godly men's writings verified; not
only the magistrates are diligently and seriously to repress the priests of
Baal, and the mainteiners of idolatry, but also all Christians are carefully to
take heed of their damnable doctrine. if not, let them assure themselves, that
they shall neither avoid Gods judgments in this life, nor the lake of fire and
brimstone prepared for idolaters in the life to come. And lest any papist
should complain, that I do greatly wrong the Romanists, and their religion,
charging them with idolatry; I do now, God willing, purpose to make my charge
good in this chapter. What papists are not, I declared in the three first
chapters, and, I hope, I have made it plain, that they are neither true
Christians, nor catholics. it followed, that I should show what they are. and
that in part is performed. for I have declared them to be heretics. it rests
therefore now for a fuller description of their nature, that I declare them to
be idolaters. in the last part we shall, God willing, examine the loialtie of
Rob. Parsons and all the popes agents and adherents.

That the papists therefore are idolaters, it shall be proved by arguments
first drawn out of scriptures. secondly, out of fathers. thirdly, out of the
confession of some learned papists, and lastly, out of their own common
doctrine and practice.

That papists are idolaters arg. 1.
The first law of the decalogue does expressly forbid the having of other Gods.
non habebis deos alienos says God, coram me. that is, thou shall have no
strange Gods before me, or else thou shall have no other Gods, but me. out of
these words I frame this argument. whosoever does worship or serve any other
God, beside the Lord God, that created heaven and earth, is an idolater. but
the papists do worship, and serve other Gods beside the God of heaven and
earth. ergo. the proposition is proved first by the intention of the law, that
seems principally to be made against idolatry; and not only against worship
of idols subject to our senses, but also against idols, which men frame to
themselves in their own imaginations and fancies. secondly by the textes of
Scriptures, that account them idolaters, not only that worship idols of
color, or metal, or other matter, but also that honor with religious honor
such things, as themselves fancy to have divine power. so covetousness is
called worshipping of idols, Ephesians. 5. and those are idolaters, that serve
Matthew. 6.
Mammon, or call a wedge of gold their god, or that put trust or confidence in
any creature, visible, or invisible, or that serve or worship any thing for
God, but only the everliving and true God. finally whatsoever a man does out
of his own fancy set up for God, that may by good construction well be termed
an idol, or a false God.

The assumption is proved by diverse particulars. for first it is plain, that
the papists make the sacrament of the Lords body and blood their Lord and God,
both in that they call it so, and in that they Rubric. can. Missae.
fall down and worship it. secondly they call upon angels, saints, and
specially upon the virgin Marie. thirdly they put their trust in them fourthly
they make vows unto them. fifthly they confess their sins unto them. finally
they bow down their bodies before them, and publicly worship them, as is
proved by their common practice. the Rubrickes also of their missals, and
breuiaries, and ladies offices, together with their blasphemous prayers made to
angels, saints, and other creatures do show the same to be most true. but the
scriptures do Hierem. 17.
testify first, that we are to put our trust in God only: secondly, that we
are to call on him Psalm. 50. Joel. 2. Romans 10.
faithfully: thirdly, that we are to make our Isai. 19.
vows to him only: fourthly, that we are religiously to serve him only: and
finally, that we are to confess our sins to God only, Matthew. 4.
and to give religious worship to none, but to him alone. And this the practice
of the ancient church most evidently confirms, which never allowed, received,
nor used to yield any such profane worship to angels, saints, or other
creatures, as the papists give unto them; as in the first chapter of this
discourse has at large been proved. superstitiosi sunt, qui multos ac falsos
deos colunt, says Lib. 4. instit. c. 28.
Lactantius, nos religiosi, qui vni and vero deo supplicamus. those are
superstitious, which worship many and false gods, we are religious which call
upon one true God. the papists percase will answer, that they worship not
either false gods, or many gods. but seeing they give the worship of God to
many; and call upon creatures and make vows unto them, and build churches, and
altars, in their honor, and do ascribe to them that, which is proper to God;
they cannot by any means avoid the charge of plurality of gods. for even the
Macrob. Sa^tnal.
Gentiles can answer, that they draw all to one God. yet because they
attributed divine power to creatures and inferior persons, therefore no man
will deny, but that they worshipped many gods. therefore Libr. 3. de cultu
sanct. c. 9.
Bellarmine says plainly, quod votum non conuenit sanctis, nisi quatenus sunt
dij per participationem. that is, that vows are not to be made to saints, but
as they are gods by participation. may it not then be truly said, that papists
worship strange gods? yes certes. and if they deny it, they are strange fellows.

Argu. 2.
Almighty God does also forbid his people to make any graven image, or
likeness of anything, either in heaven above or in the earth below, or in the
water under the earth, Exodus 20.
to the intent to bow down to it, and to worship it. non facies tibi
sculptile, neque omnem similitudinem, quae est in coelo desuper, and quae in
terra deorsum, nec eorum, quae sunt in aquis sub terra; non adorabis ea, neque
coals. if then it be not lawful to make sculptile, or a graven image, to the
end to worship it; and if those, that do worship such graven images be
idolaters, no question is to be made, but that papists are gross idolaters.
for they make the images of God in heaven, of men that sometime lived on the
earth, and of some that percase now may be in hell. they make also graven and
molten images of angels and other creatures, and fall down and worship them.
to the cross they pray, and Breuiar. Romans ^
say, auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam. that is, increase
righteousness in the godly, and grant pardon to sinners. the schoolmen hold,
that what worship is due to the original, is due also to the picture, or
image. so says Alexander Hales part. 3. q. 30. art. vlt. Thomas Aquinas 3. p.
q. 25. art. 3. and Caietan in his commentaries upon him. so then by these men's
doctrines the Crucifixe is to be worshipped with like worship, as we do
worship Christ Jesus: and the image of God is to be worshipped with the worship
due to God himself. and this is so plain idolatry, that Lib. 2. de imaginib.
c. 22.
Bellarmine is constrained to deny, that Latria or divine worship is due to
images properly. so albeit he would excuse himself, yet in effect he makes
himself to be an idolater improperly, and all the ancient schoolmen, and
synagogue of Rome for this 2. or 3. hundred years properly. for Hierome
condemns them for idolaters, that worshipped the statues, or images of
Emperors, albeit the same may seem a civil ceremony. iudices and principes
seculi says In cap. 3 Daniel
he, qui imperatorum statuas adorant and imagines, hoc se facere intelliga^t,
quod tres pueri facere nolentes placuerunt deo. how then can they escape his
censure, that fall down before the statues and images of saints, and there
pray before them, and offer incense to them?

Argu. 3.
We are also forbidden expressly to make any similitude, or likeness of God.
and a reason is Deuteronomy. 4.
added. for that God speaking to his people out of the fire in Mount Horeb, yet
they saw no likeness of any thing. and this God did, least his people being
deceived should make an image of male or female, or other thing, and so adore
and worship it. if then it be against the commandment of God, to represent him
in any shape, and to adore any creature whether male or female, spiritual or
corporal; then are papists gross idolaters, that make images of God, and
worship both male and female saints, as appears both by the canon of the
mass, and also by their doctrine and practice. nay they do not only bow
their bodies to them, but also set up lights, and offer up spiritual
sacrifices of prayers unto them.

Argu. 4.
most plain terms also Leuit. 26.
God prohibiteth the making of idols, or graven images, and the erecting of
monuments, or titles, or stones for signals to be worshipped. non facietis
vobis idolum and sculptile, says the Lord, nec titulos erigetis, nec insignem
lapidem ponetis in terra vestra, vt adoretis eum. neither was there any thing
intended in this law, then that the people of Israel should be restrained from
idolatry. is it not then plain, that such as make idols, and graven images,
and erect crosses, and stocks and stones to be worshipped, are idolaters? it
cannot well be denied. but percase our adversaries will say. they neither
erect, nor make any idols. as if every image worshipped with religious worship
were not an idol, as it is said in the book of Charles the great set forth
against the second council of Nice, and the worship of images.

Beside that, to prevent this simple shift of idolaters, that distinguish
images, yea though worshipped with divine worship, from idols, the scripture
says, non facietis vobis idolum and sculptile, taking all graven images
worshipped with religious worship for idols. but our adversaries do proceed
further. for as the gentiles did fall down before their idols, and pray before
them, and burn incense to them; so do they to their images. they do also
rely much in their idol of the altar, and put no small trust in the cross,
and their images. to the cross they ^rcu^ar. Romans
o crux aue spes vnica. that is, o cross all hail, our only hope. are not
then these wooden fellows, that thus say to a wooden cross? in the Romish
breuiary, they pray to our lady, as to their anchor hold, and say; Sumens illud
aue Gabrielis ore, funda nos in pace. that is, receiving, an aue, from Gabriels
mouth establish and found us in peace. which howsoever they obtain, they found
our opinion most firmly, that say, they are idolaters.

Argu. 5.
In the 81. psalm God by his prophet forbids his people to worship new
gods, or strange gods* non erit in te, says he, Deus recens, neque adorabis
deum alienum. and no question, but that such, as do either invent new gods, or
strange gods, are idolaters. let us then see, whether the papists do not
worship both new gods and strange gods, and such as the apostles and prophets
never knew. first they will not deny, that the eucharist is their lord and god.
for that I have showed before. next they confess, that the images of the
trinity are to be worshipped with the worship that is dew to God. further they
do daily canonize new saints. and make new masses and prayers in their honor.
but these are new gods never known in ancient time, and gods by participation,
as Bellarmine calls them, and very strange gods. nay every day they
conscerate new hosts, and make new images, and new crosses and new saints.
finally the newest saints and gods with them have best credit. do they not
then worship new gods? and do they not frame us a new religion.

Argu. 6.
The Israelits Exodus 32. were condemned for their idolatry, although they
pretended to worship the true God in a golden calfe. and this is apparent by
the words of Aaron, and the text following. to morrow said Aaron, is a solemn
feast of the Lord. and when that day came, it is said, that the people offered
burnt sacrifices, and peace offerings. which if they had been offered to the
calfe, what reason had Aaron to talk of the feast day of the Lord? or why
should the people say, that those were the gods, that brought Israel out of
Egypt, but that they imagined, that they did worship ye invisible God, that
brought them out of Egypt in that visible calfe? The mother also of Micha
Judges 17. affirms, that she had sanctified certain silver (whereof a molten
image was made) to the lord, to make a graven image of it. It is apparent also,
that 3. Reg. 12.
Jeroboam did consecrate his two idols, which he erected in Bethel and Dan to
the Lord, yet were all those that worshipped either the calfe, or Michas or
Ieroboams idols, gross idolaters. neither was it any excuse for them, that
they did not worship the matter, or any thing corporeal; or that, as they
thought, they did worship the true god in these images. if then the papists
worship either God, or saints in images; it is first contrary to Gods
commandment, and next it is plain idolatry, albeit they pretend, that they
neither worship silver, nor gold, nor the images themselves materially, or
grossly. but much more is it so to be esteemed, if any of them, as the fashion
is, worship and kiss stocks and stones, and offer light, and other commodities
unto the very statues and images them selves.

Argu. 7.
It is also a property of idolaters, to rejoice in the works of their own
hands, as may be proved by the words of Stephen act. 7. laetabantur, says he,
in operibus manuum suarum. further it is their wont, to worship those very
images, which themselves made. Act. 7.
figuras quas fecistis says the scripture, adorare eas. and this is also
apparent by the practice of the papists. for they celebrate solemn feasts on
the day of the dedication of their images, and vant much of the miracles of the
lady of Walsingham, of Monserrat, of Loreto. Horatius Tursellinus a Iebusite,
and a panegyricall declamer has in a vanting vain set out the story of the
acts, miracles, offerings, and festiuities of the lady of Loreto. they likewise
were wont to talk much of Thomas of Canterbury, and yet talk of the images of
Saint Sebastian, and Saint Rock, and of the Cocle shells of Saint Michael,
which in liew of the substance of religion, they give to their followers.
finally they fall down, and adore the images, which themselves have made; and
which the heathen scarce did, they creep to them on their knees, touch them
with their fingers, set up light before them, pray to them, and say, sancte
Christophore, sancte Hermingilde, sancti coronati quatuor, audite nos,
intercedite pro nobis. They do offer also, which the priests like best of all,
rich presents to them, as is evident by the rich shrine of Thomas Becket in
time past, and now by the great treasure of the idol of Loreto, set out by
Histor. Lauret.
Tursellinus.

that serve the host of heaven, as is testified by the prophet Amos, chap. 5.
and saint Stephen, Act. 7. where it is said, that God gave over his people to
serve the host of heaven: seruite militiae coeli. are not then those simple
papists given over to a strange dullness, and as it were to a reprobate sense,
that worship angels, and archangels, he saints, and she saints, In missal. Romans
and breuiar. and Hortulo animae.
and all the host and court of heaven? and is it not strange to hear them
pray in their litanies, Sancta virgo vriginum, sancte Michael, sancte Gabriel,
sancte Raphael, omnes angeli and archangeli, omnes sancti beatorum spirituum
ordines orate pro nobis: omnes sancti, and sanctae dei intercedite pro nobis.

Argu. 9.
Amos does account them idolaters, that erected tabernacles to their gods, and
carried about with them, the images or pourtraits of their false gods. portastis
tabernaculum Moloch vestro, Amos 5.
says he, imaginem idolorum vestrorum, sidus dei vestri, quae fecistis vobis.
you have carried about the tabernacle erected to Moloch, the image of your idol
gods, the star of your god, which you made to your selves. what then may we
think of papists, if we scanne their false worship of God according to this
rule? do not they also place their corpus domini, which they call their lord
and god in a pixe or tabernacle? do they not carry him also about in
procession, and with him for company other idols of wood and metal? do they
not also worship the holy virgin Marie, and salute her, and call her a star,
and say, aue Maris stella: hail thou star of the sea, alluding, percase, to
Venus, whom poets feign to have her beginning of the sea? and do not the
Spaniards call on her at sea, as if God had made her a commander there?

the Simulachra.
images of the Gentiles says Psalm. 114.
he, are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. they have mouths and speak
not, they have eyes and see not, they have ears and hear not, they have noses
and smell not, hands they have, and handle not, feet have they, and walk not,
neither does any voice pass through their throat. apply then this to the
great image of great saint Christopher, as you enter our ladies church at
Paris. for albeit the same be great and large; yet he neither sees, nor
feels, nor smells, nor speaks, nor walks. only the priests are sorry,
that he is not of silver and gold, that they might cut him in pieces and make
money of him. our lady of Loret also, albeit women be more talkatiue then men,
speaks not a word. diverse images also they have of silver and gold, and other
metals; but all without sense and motion, unless by engines the false mass
priests be able to make them move. the Chap. 15.
author of the book of Wisdom shows, that the sight of such images and
pictures well shadowed out in colors does delight senseless and brutish
folk; which do also love the shape of dead images without soul, but that the
godly are not abused with such idolatrous inventions and pictures, or labor
without fruit. non in errorem induxit nos says he in the person of godly men,
hominum malae artis exogitati, nec vmbra picturae, labor sine fructu, effigies
sculpta per varios colores, cuius aspectus insensato dat concupiscentiam, and
diligit mortuae imaginis effigiem sine anima. are not then the papists more
blockish, then the old idolaters, that take such delight in their painted
tables, and in their images without soul, yea oftentimes without good or
decent shape? and are not our mass priests mad, that run to the pope, and
for love of his idolatrous religion, are content to break their necks in
England, practicing for his service?

Argu. 11.
The offerings of the Gentiles, are immolated and offered to devils, and not to
God, as the 1. Cor. 10.
apostle teaches us, quae immolant Gentes says he, daemoniis immolant, and
non deo. it cannot therefore serve the papists turn, that they say, they
worship God, in his image, improperly. secundum rei veritatem says De imagine.
lib. 2. c. 22.
Bellarmine, non potest dici adorari latria imaginem, nisi per accidens vel
improprie; per se autem, and proprie, nullo modo. this, I say, albeit contrary
to all the best schoolemens doctrine, can not excuse the papists from idolatry.
for albeit the Gentiles did not per se, and properly immolate sacrifices to
idols and devils; yet because they sacrificed before idols, and in other
sort, than God had commanded, the apostle calls this the devils sacrifice. I
would therefore exhort all simple papists to beware, how they come at the
idolatrous mass. for albeit their priests tell them, that they offer up the
body and blood of the son of God; yet in truth they offer the devils
sacrifice, and say mass in honor of their idols, and before images; and can
no better excuse themselves, than heathen idolaters, that might as well as they,
say, they worshipped not their images with latria per se, and properly, but in
a certain sort, and improperly. the apostle does plainly declare, that both
heathen men, and they sacrificing in this sort, offer to devils, and not to god.

Arg. 12.
God signifies them to be idolaters, that built high places, which he never
commanded them, nor thought of any such matter. Quae non praecepi, nec cogitaui
in cord meo, says Hierem. 7.
he. and this because they thought, that God was to be served according to
their own inventions, and humors. he does also directly charge them with
idolatry, that made vows to the Queen of heaven, that sacrificed unto her,
and served her, saying, faciamus vota nostra quae vouimus, vt sacrificemus
reginae coeli. And do not papists build their altars in high places, and ascend
unto them by steps? do they not also worship God in images, and forms which
God never commanded, nor thought upon? do they not further, call the holy
virgin reginam coeli, and poli reginam, that is the Queen of heaven? do they
not finally, say masses in honor of her, and offer consecrated hosts for her
sweet service every Saturday?

Arg. 13.
The papists also give the honor due to God unto graven images, teaching, that
the same worship is due unto the image, and to the original; and that, as
Thomas and the old schoolewen hold, absolutely and without distinction, and
as Bellarmine believes, improperly, and as he terms it, by an accident. but
this is contrary to scriptures, and can not be deemed less, than plain
idolatry. I am the Lord, says Isai. 42.
God by his prophet, and my glory I will not give to another, nor my praise to
graven images. Ego Dominus, says he, gloriam meam alteri non dabo, and laudem
meam sculptilibus. gladly I would therefore have Rob. Parsons to show, how
graven images may be worshipped with divine honor, and yet without repugnance
to scripture, or derogation to Gods honor, or touch of idolatry.

Arg. 14.
Like to the Babylonians the papists deal with their images. the images also
of papists are not much unlike to the idols of the Babylonians. the
Babylonians carried their golden, silver, wooden and stone gods on their
shoulders. Videbitis, says Baruch. 6.
Baruch, in Babylonia deos aureos, and argenteos, and lapideos, and ligneos in
humeris portari. The papists likewise, they have images, which they worship as
God, some of gold, some of silver, some parcel gilt, some of wood, some of
stone, and in processions they carry them about triumphantly on men's shoulders.
Inaurata, and inargentata falsa sunt, and non possunt loqui, says Baruch of
the idols of the Babylonians. so likewise, there is no truth in the gilt
images of the papists; neither can they speak, or move, whatsoever you do to
them. The Babylonians put golden crowns on the heads of their images, and the
priests stole from them their gold and silver, and bestowed it on themselves,
and sometime on baggages and whores. Coronas aureas habent, says Baruch, super
capita sua dij illorum, vnde subtrahunt ab eis aurum and argentum, and erogant
illud in semetipsos. dant autem ex ipso prostitutis, and meretrices ornant. and
do not popish priests likewise set coronets on the heads of their images, and
steal away the offerings which blind and superstitious people give to images,
and bestow part on themselves, and part on their whores and baggages? The
Babylonians clad their idols with purple; and yet could not the idols keep
their faces clean from dust. Opertis illis vest purpurea extergunt faciem
ipsoru^ propter puluerem, says Baruch. and what does experience teach us? do
we not see, how the mass priests set out their images with purple and scarlet,
and wipe their faces with fox tails to keep them from the dust? and yet the
simple idiot papists see not, that these impostors and charlatains pay them for
all their devotions with the flap of a fox tail. neither the idols of the
Babylonians, nor the images of papists can keep themselves from rust,
corruption and thieves. who then can otherwise think, but that the papists are
idolaters as the Babylonians were, and that they have learned this abomination
from the whore of Babylon, that has a cup in her hand full of spiritual
fornications, and abominations?

Arg. 15.
As the idolatrous Hierem. 2.
Jews said to a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have begotten
me: so the idolatrous papists before stocks and stones say Pater noster, and
the babbling friars in their chaires say to a crucifixe of wood or metal
standing by them, thou have redeemed us, thou have reconciled us to thy father.
concionatores says Lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 23.
Bellar. alloquuntur imaginem crucifixi, eique dicunt, tu nos redemisti, tu nos
patri reconciliasti: men more blockish and senseless, then stocks and stones.
and yet Christians suffer themselves still to be abused by them, and are not
ashamed of it, when they are told of it, as the Jews were being reproved by
the prophet.

Arg. 17.
As the Hierem. 2.
Jews according to the number of their cities, had the number of their gods;
so the deceived papists according to the number of nations, and cities have
their saints, and idols. some call on Saint Ieames, others on Saint Patricke,
others on Saint Denis, and every town, nay every parish has their several
patrons. private persons also serve diverse saints according to their several
humors. and therefore we may say to the blind papists, secundum numerum
ciuitatum vestrarum, and dij vestri, o miseri and Caeci idololatrae. nay we may
say thus further, according to your families, and diverse occasions, you have
diverse saints and diverse gods, upon whom you call for healp and remedy. to
Saint Antony they fly for their piggs, to Saint Loy or Jews for their horses,
to Saint Sebastian in time of sickness and plague, to saint Apollonia for
their teeth. they fly also to other saints and implore their help, as gods for
other several matters, and upon several occasions.

Arg. 18.
The apostle forbids the humble service, and seducement of religious worship
of angels. nemo vos seducat volens, says Coloss. 2.
he, in humilitate and religione angelorum. neither were these noted for other
respect as idolaters and heretics, but because under pretense of a certain
counterfect humility, and baseness, they used the mediation of angels, as may
be proved by the commentaries of Theodoret, and Chrysostomes homilies upon the
2. and 3. chap. of Saint Paul's epistle to the Colossians. if then the papists
will needs worship angels, and use their mediation, they must not marvel, if
they be noted as idolaters. which is also proved more plainly by the record of
John apocalypse 22. who when he fell down before the feet of the angel, and
would have adored and worshipped him, received his check, see thou do it not,
I am thy fellow servant. postquam audissem and vidissem says he, cecidi vt
adorarem ante pedes angeli, qui mihi haec ostendebat, and dixit mihi: vide ne
feceris. conseruus enim tuus sum, and fratrum tuorum prophetarum etc. if then
papists shame not to adore angels, and to implore their help; these words of
Saint John shall always convince them to be idolaters.

Arg. 19.
Saint John does expressly forbid the worship of statues and images, where John
5.
he says, custodite vos a simulachris, that is, keep your selves from images,
or idols. for in effect both words signify one thing; albeit the abuse of
images, has given the title of idols only to images abused. if then papists
do recalcitrate, and repugne against the prohibition of the apostle, that
directs his speech agianst idolatry; their conscience must needs accuse them,
that they are guilty of idolatry, which he forbids, as often as they worship
them.

Arg. 20.
To serve creatures, and to call upon them publickely, and with an opinion of
their divine power to honor them, is plain idolatry, as appears by the words
of the confession of the people of Israel who returning from their idolatry,
Judges 10.
said, dereliquimus dominum deum nostrum, and seruiuimus Baalim. that is, we
have forsaken the Lord and served Baalim. and by Gods answer to them:
coluistis deos alienos. etc. ite, and invoke deos, quos elegistis. that is,
you have worshipped strange gods, go therefore and call upon the gods, which
you have chosen. but the papists confess, that they worship angels, and saints
with Dulia or service, and it was wont to be a common doctrine among papists,
that the image and original were to be worshipped with one kind of worship.
they do also set up strange gods, and call upon the angels and saints in their
public litanies, and in diverse collects. who then cannot collect out of these
litanies, and collects, that papists are plain idolaters? if they will not
believe our collection; yet I hope they will not deny our savior Christ's
doctrine, that teaches, that God alone is to be adored, and served. dominum
deum tuum adorabis says Matthew. 4.
he, and illi soli seruies.

Arg. 21.
It is also plain idolatry, to offer incense unto creatures, to erect altars
unto them, and with a public form of liturgy to worship them, as appears
in part by the example of 2 Paralip. 30.
Hezechias and his people, that overthrew the altars, wherein incense was burnt
unto strange gods. destruxerunt altaria says the text, quae erant in
Jerusalem, atque vniuersa, in quibus idolis adolebatur incensum subuertentes
proiecerunt in torrentem cedron. would not then such mass priests, as burn
incense to their idols, and cense their idolatrous altars, be repressed, and
their altars overthrown, and their strange fire be thrown out of the church?

Arg. 22.
The apostle act. 17. does plainly declare, that God neither dwells in
temples made with hands, nor is worshipped with men's hands. non habitat in
templis manufactis, nec manibus humanis colitur. those therefore, that worship
God in images, and images with their own devises, as the papists do, do
decline to gentilisme, and idolatry.

Arg. 23.
Finally the scriptures do signify, that it is idolatry to express God by
any similitude, or figure, and to worship the same. for that is expressly
forbidden in the commandment against idolatry, and the holy scriptures to
recall Gods people from this idolatrous humor, does diversely declare, that he
cannot be expressed or figured by any likeness. cui similem fecistis deum?
says the Isai. 40.
prophet, aut quam imaginem ponetis ei? numquid sculptile conflauit faber, aut
aurifex auro figurauit illud, and laminis argenteis argentarius? he does
plainly express, that no image can be made like to God, and that neither the
grauer, nor smith can resemble him with their graven images. and again, non
debemus existimate says Act. 17.
Saint Paul, auro aut argento, aut lapidi sculpturae artis and cogitationis
hominis diuinum numen esse simile. we ought not to imagine, that God is like to
gold, or silver, or stone graven by art or devise of man. those therefore that
by grauing and painting resemble God the father to an old man, or the holy
ghost to a dove, and make shapes of the holy Trinity repugne manifestly against
scripture, and worshipping those images show themselves to be gross idolaters.
neither is it any excuse, that they say, they do not go about to express the
divine nature. for if they do not that, then do they express nothing but a
fancy, and worship a fancy, and so prove themselves to worship idols, that is
as Bellarmine confesses false images or resemblances. idolum says he, est
falsa similiiudo, id est representat id, Lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 5.
quod reuera non est. but God is not like to these resemblances. therefore they
must needs be false, and they that worship them true idolaters by the
confession of Bellarmine.

Arg. 24.
The fathers also minister us good arguments, not only to reprove the papists
false worship, but also to prove them idolaters. Quis tam amens erit, says
Praeparat. euangel. lib. 3.
Eusebius, vt dei formam and imaginem statua viro simili referri perhibeat?
that is, who will be so mad as to auow, that God may be expressed and resembled
by an image like to a man? Athanasius in orat. contra Sabellij gregales,
calls them fools and mad men, that made God like to things, that have bodies.
quam imaginem ponetis ei, says Hierome in Isaiae c. 40. qui spiritus est, and
in omnibus est? what image will you erect for him, which is a spirit, and is in
all things?

Stromat. lib. 1. and 5.
Clement of Alexandria says, that Moses taught us, that neither in the shape
of man, nor any other thing God is to be represented. and Origin likewise in
his 7. book against Celsus, denies that Christians are to make any
resemblance, or likeness of God.

Tale simulachrum says saint De file and symbolo.
Augustine, speaking of God made in shape like a man, deo nefas est Christiano
in templo collocare. It is a wicked thing says he, to make the image of God
and to place it in the church.

In deuter. q 1.
Theodoret teaches us, that the law of Moses forbids us so much as once to
attempt to frame an image, or similitude of God: Ne tentemus vnquam says he,
diuinam imaginem effingere.

Damascene lib. 4. de fide c 17. says, it is a point of great folly and
impiety, by figures and similitudes to represent God.

The Audeans were condemned, for that they taught, that God had a shape like to
man. Haeres. 70.
Epiphanius disputing against them: quomodopossibile est says he, visibile
simile esse inuisibili, quomodo corporale incorporali? Lib. hist. 18. c. 53.
Nicephorus reckons those among heretics, that made the images of God the
Father and God the holy Ghost. imagines patris and spiritus sancti effigiant,
says he, quod perquam absurdum est.

Finally it appears by the testimony of Agrippa in a certain epistle to
Caligula, of which In legate. ad Caium.
Philo makes mention, that it was accounted a thing impious amongst the Jews
either in picture, or graven or embossed work to represent God, that is
invisible. inuisibilem deum pingere aut fingere, says he, nefas duxerunt
maiores nostri.

If then the papists make the images of God the father, and the holy Ghost, and
of the holy Trinity, and worship them with divine worship, according to the
school doctrine; then do they by the judgment of the fathers not only
transgress Gods law, and offend most foolishly and wickedly, but also commit
most gross idolatry. but it cannot be denied, either that they make such
pictures, and images, or that they worship them. that they make them, the
common practice of the Romish church, and the front of Sixtus quintus his
bible, and diverse popish monuments do teach us, that they do worship them,
the decree of the Sess. 25.
council of Trent concerning images, the common school doctrine, and practice
of papists does teach us. Suares in 3. p. Thomae Aquin. tom. 1. disput. 54.
sect. 4. and 5. does affirm it: and Bellarmine in his disputes does not deny
it. how then are they able to excuse themselves from palpable and gross
idolatry? Lib. 2. de cult^ imag. c. 8.
Bellarmine where he disputes, that it is lawful to make the images of God,
and namely, the image of the holy Ghost, says, that the images of God may be
made or painted, if not to express the perfect likeness of God, yet to
express histories, and to express the nature of God by a certain analogy,
and by metaphorical and mystical significations. afterward he says, Ibid.
c. 25.
that images are to be worshipped with the same worship, that is due to the
original imperfectly, and analogically. but the first is sufficent to show, and
that most perfectly, that he speaks impudently against the law of God, and
all the fathers, that utterly denied all use of pictures of God, either in
stories, or in mystical significations. the second declares him and his
consorts to be idolaters, and that perfectly, albeit be surmise it to be
imperfectly and analogically.

Ambrose teaches us, that to worship the cross or crucifix is plain
idolatry, and paganism. Inuenit Helena crucem domini says De qbitu Theodosi ^.
he, regem adorauit, non lignum vtique, quia hic Gentilis est error, sed
adorauit illum, qui pependit in cruce. he says, that Helene finding the
cross, did adore her king (that is Christ Jesus) and not the wood, because
this is the error of the heathen (idolaters) he adds also, that she
worshipped him, that hung on the cross.

In epist. ad Joan. Hierosolym. apud Hieron.
Epiphanius also shows, that the image of Christ is not to be worshipped, nor
hung up in churches, for that he tore a veil, wherein such an image was
figured, and that contrary to scriptures, as he says. inueni velum pendens in
foribus eiusdem ecclesiae tinctum atque depictum, and habens imaginem, quasi
Christi, says Epiphanius. and afterward, cum hoc vidissem in ecclesia Christi
contra authoritatem scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud. the
papists therefore by the judgment of Epiphanius place Christ his image in the
church, contrary to scriptures, and like to the heathen idolaters worship the
cross, giving to it latria, as to Christ Jesus himself.

In litanijc.
saying, sancte Michael, sancte Gabriel, sancte, Raphael, omnes angeli and
archangeli, orate pro nobis. they In itinerario ad finem Breuiarij.
pray likewise to unknown angels. they confess their sins to them saying,
confite or beato Michaeli archangelo. they set them out in imagery, and bow to
them, and burn incense to them, and kiss them. finally they erect churches
and altars, and say masses in honor of angels. all which to be idolatrous, not
only the scriptures, but also the fathers teach us. non oportet Christianos
say the fathers of the Can. 35.
council of Laodicea, derelicta ecclesia abire, and adangelos idolatriae
abominandae congregationes facere. Christians say they, ought not to leave the
church of God, and to assemble themselves idolatrously, to worship angels they
do also excommunicate such, as worship angels, as idolaters. In summa council.
Laod. c. 35. ^
Carranza to wipe away this blot from the papists, turns angelos, into
angulos. but Chrysostom and Theodoret in their commentaries and homilies upon
the epistle to the Colloss. c. 2. and 3. do plainly show, that the council
condemned the worship of angels, which they also condemn. synodus quae
conuenit Laodiceae, says Theodoret in epist. ad Coloss. c. 3. lege prohibuit,
ne precarentur angelos.

Nos non dico martyrum reliquias says In epist. ad Riparium.
Hierome, sed ne solemn quidem and Iunam, non angelos non archangelos, non
cherubim, non seraphim, and omne nomen, quod nominatur, and in praesenti seculo
and in futuro colimus and adoramus, ne seruiamus creaturae potius quam
creatori, qui est benedictus in secula. he says, Haeres. 79.
that Christians do not worship, or adore angels; and signifies, that such
worship is idolatrous, as savoring of service of creatures, honoramus eos
charitate says saint Augustine lib. de ver. relig. c. 55. speaking of angels,
non seruitute: nec eis templa construimus. angelos adorari non vult, that is,
God will not have us, says l Epiphanius, to adore angels. and again, angeli
non capiunt talem glorificationem. Augustine does therefore condemn the
Angelikes, as heretics, for that they worshipped angels. Angelici says he de
haeres. c. 39. in angelorum cultu inclinati.

Romish misial, after the words of consecration, the priest is enioined, to
worship the sacrament. hostiam consecratam genu flexo adorat. likewise, calicem
genu flexo adorat. the people also knock their breasts, and adore it. neither
do the papists deny, but that the sacrament is to be adored latriae cultu,
that is, with such worship as is due to God. but the sacrament is a creature.
therefore they are plain idolaters, that worship it. and this is proved by
the testimony of Epiphanius. stultum est says Haeres. 69.
Epiphanius, creaturam deificare. reprobat autem primum praeceptum, quod dicit,
dominum deum tuum adorabis, and ipsi soli cultum praestabis. he says it is a
foolish thing to worship a creature as God. and therefore proves, that Christ
is God and no creature, because he is worshipped, and for that the church does
not worship a creature. unless therefore Christ be hypostatically and
personally united to the sacrament; those that worship the sacrament, are
idolaters. as for those that worship unconsecrated hosts, the papists
themselves deny not to be idolaters.

Mary, of angels, and saints departed this life. the council of Eliberis to
avoid this idolatry Can. 36.
decreed, picturas in ecclesijs esse non debere, ne quod colitur, aut adoratur
in parietibus depingatur. that is, that pictures should not be in the church,
least any thing, that is worshipped, or adored, should be painted on walls.

Non est dubium says Lib. 2. instit. divine. c. 18.
Lactantius, quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrum est. nam si religio
ex diuinis rebus est, diuini autem nihil est, nisi in caelestibus rebus: carent
ergo religione simulachra, quia nihil potest esse coeleste in ea re, quae fit
ex terra. he teaches us, that there is no religion, where images are
worshipped, as being earth, and not savoring of any heavenly, or divine
quality, or substance.

Inueni velum pendens in foribus eiusdem ecclesiae tinctum, atque depictum,
says Ad Joan. Hierosolym. apud Hieronymous.
Epiphanius, and habens imaginem quasi Christi, vel sancti. non enim satis
memini, cuius imago fuerit. cum ergo hoc vidissem in ecclesia Christi contra
authoritatem scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud. and afterward,
Precor, vt iubeas presbyteros eiusdem loci suscipere velum a latore, quod a
nobis missum est, and deinceps praecipere, in ecclesia Christi istiusmodi vela,
quae contra religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi. he does plainly show, that
to place pictures and images in churches, is contrary to scriptures and
religion. neither does he only condemn heathen idols, but images in churches
also. Unto this place our adversaries answer, that these words were not written
by Epiphanius, but soisted in by some other. but in his book against heresies
he shows himself to be of the same opinion, and does strongly confirm that,
which is here said. Writing against the Collyridians, haeres. 79. he shows,
that the invention of images, and their worship came of the devil. Vnde non
est, says he, simulacrificum hoc studium, and diabolicus conatus? praetextu
enim iustitiae semper subiens hominum mentem diabolus mortalem naturam in
hominum oculis deificans, statuas humanas imagines prae se ferentes per artium
varietatem expressit. and mortui quidem sunt, qui adorantur, ipsorum vero
imagines, quae nunquam vixerunt adorandas introducunt adulterante mente ab vno
and solo Deo, velut commune scortum ad multam multiplicis coitus absurditatem
irritatum, and quod temperantiam legitimi coniugij vnius viri detriuit. he does
clearly show, that the diabolical invention of images has adulterated the
service of God, and brought in absurd spiritual fornications. S. De haeres. in
cap. 6.
Augustine shows, that one Marcellina was noted as an heretic and a follower
of Carpocrates, because she worshipped the images of Jesus and Paul. Colebat,
says he, imagines Jesus, and Pauli, and Homeri, and Pythagorae, adorando and
incensum ponendo. and yet in burning of incense, and adoring the images of Jesus
and Paul our adversaries the papists nothing dissent from her. He does also
condemn those, that worship sepulchers, and pictures, as those which do that,
which belongs not to the religion of Christians. Noui, says De morib.
eccles. c. 34.
he, multos esse sepulchrorum, and picturarum adoratores.

Likewise S. Hierome in Danielis c. 3. does condemn the worship of images.
Sieve statuam, vt Symachus, sieve imaginem auream vt alij transtulerunt,
voluerimus legere, cultores Dei came adorare non debent.

Gregory also the first, albeit he would not have images broken down, yet did
he teach, that they ought not to be worshipped, as may be gathered by his
words, lib. 7. epist. 109. and lib. 9. epist. 9.

Finally, the worship of images is condemned, as idolatrous by a certain
council of Constantinople, whose acts are inserted in the reports of things
passed in the second council of Nice; in the council of Francfort under
Charles the great, and a certain council of Paris about the year of our Lord
824. in the time of Jews Charles the great his son. Non nos imagines in
Basilicis positas, says the In lib. Caroli Magni c^ntr. imagine.
council of Francfort, idola nuncupamus, sed ne idola nuncupentur, adorare and
colere eas recusamus. the council signifies, that images being worshipped in
churches are idols. neither does any thing more confirm the Christian faith
touching the false worship of images, and statues, than Bellarmine his wretched
and wicked answers to these objections in his treatise concerning the worship
of images. as shall shortly God willing appear by our answer, and has
sufficiently been declared by M. D. Rainolds already in his learned book De
Romanae ecclesiae idolatria against Bellarmine.

Arg. 29.
The papists also show themselves idolaters in calling upon saints departed, in
devising masses in their honor, in setting up light before their dead bones,
and praying before their images, as the holy fathers teach us, that have showed
themselves always ready and forward to suppress such abuses.

S. In epistol. ad Ripar.
Hierome says, that the relics of martyrs are not to be adored. his words I
have before related. answering in defense of such women, as light candles at
noone day, Contra Vigilant.
he confesses plainly, that they had zeal, but not according to knowledge.
Zelum habent, says he, sed non secundum scientiam.

Sed neque Helias adorandus est, says Haeres. 79.
Epiphanius, etiamsi in viuis sit, neque Ioannes adorandus, quamuis per preces
suas proprias dormitionem suam admirandam effecerit, imo potius ex Deo gratiam
acceperit. sed neque Tecla, neque quisquam sanctus adoratur. non enim
dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem, and adoremus ea,
quae ab ipso facta sunt. he says, that neither Helias, nor John, nor Tecla,
nor any saint is to be adored, forasmuch as this sauoreth of the old idolatry
of the Gentiles, and in so doing we should abandon the living God, and adore
creatures made by him. and again, Sit in honor Maria, says he, pater, and
filius, and spiritus sanctus adoretur. Mariam nemo adoret, non dico mulierum,
sed neque virum. that is, let the virgin Mary be had in reverence, but the
Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost is only to be adored. but as for the virgin
Mary, let neither man, nor woman adore her. Likewise S. Augustine shows, that
the worship of Christian religion consisted not in the service or worship of
dead men, or their relics. Non sit nobis religio, says De vera religione. c.
55.
he, cultus hominum mortuorum, quia si pie vixerunt non sic habentur, vt tales
quaerant honores, sed illum a nobis coli volunt, quo illuminante laetantur
meriti sui nos esse consortes. honorandi sunt ergo propter imitationem, non
autem adorandi propter religionem. He says, that saints are to be reverenced
in regard, they are examples to be followed, and not to be adored for religion
sake. In his book also De moribus ecclesiae cathol. c. 34. he reprooueth
those, that worship the tombs of men departed. Bellarm. lib. 2. De cultu
imaginum. lib. 11. alleges the 36. chapter of this book, where there are not
so many in the whole* in his 44. epistle ad Maximum, he shows, that in his
time dead men were not yet worshipped. Scias a Christianis catholicis, says
he, quorum in vestro oppido etiam ecclesia constituta est, nullum coli
mortuorum, nihil denique vt numen adorari, quod sit factum, and conditum a Deo.
he signifies, that religious worship is not due to any creature.

Arg. 30.
Neither do the fathers only testify against the idolatry of papists, but
diverse also of themselves do confess to the shame of the rest, that diverse
points of popish doctrine savor of idolatry, The second Nicene council does
not allow any image to be made of the Godhead, nor that Christians should give
the worship of Latria to images. Christiani adorationem in spiritu and veritate
says that Act. 6.
council, imaginibus non exhibuerunt, nec etiam diuinae crucis effigiei, nec
etiam vnquam inuisibilis and incomprehensibilis naturae imaginem appararunt.

Diverse are of opinion, that not the image is to be worshipped, but that which
is represented by the image, as Durand. lib. 3. sent. did. 9. q. 2. and
Alphonsus a Castro in verb. imago. and that is also signified by these two
verses Sabellici lib. 8. Aenead. 8. Nam deus est, quod Imago docet, sed non
deus ipsa.
Hanc videas, sed mente colas, quod cernis in ipsa.


The meaning of these verses is, that not the image it self, but that which is
represented by it, is to be worshipped: which argues the Romanists, that
worship images, as well as things represented by images to be idolaters.

Durandus writing upon the 3. book of Lombardes sentences condemns the
images made in resemblance of God. with him consents also Abulensis in chap.
4. Deuteronomij, Martin Perez de tradit. part. 3. c. de imaginibus.

Lib. 4. hist. belli Gallici.
Diverse doctors of Sorbona, as Salignac, Boutelier, Claude Espence, Picherel,
together with Monluc bishop of valence do wish the images of the Trinity taken
out of all places. with them also does Hessels agree in explicat. 1. praecept.
c. 65. and Ambrose Catharine in his commentary on the 10. commandments, and
diverse others. Bellarmine himself finally, ashamed percase of their
ouerlashing, that taught, that the image was to be worshipped with the same
honor, that is due to the thing represented, will not yield, that images are to
be worshipped with Latria properly. non est dicendum says he, imagines vllas
adorari debere Latria, sed e contrario non debere sic adorari. and he proves
his assertion by diverse reasons lib. 2. de imaginibus. c. 22. of which it
follows, that Thomas Aquinas, and all his followers, and infinite papists,
that teach contrary and do worship images with Latria, are idolaters, and that
by the confession of a Cardinal idolater.

They are also convinced to be idolaters by diverse reasons drawn from the
nature of idolatry, from the excellency of Gods divine nature, and terms of
his law. and Arg. 31.
first for that they give to creatures the worship, that is due unto God.
neither will the papists deny this argument to follow. but they percase will
deny, that they give divine worship to creatures. Let us therefore see whether
they give divine honor to creatures, and examine also what their doctrine is in
that point. first then it is apparent, that they call upon the cross and say,
auge pijs iustitiam. and to the virgin Mary, funda nos in pace, solue vincla
reis. but to increase justice in us, and to pacify our consciences, terrified
with the horror of our sins, and to forgive sins, belongs to God only.
Bonauenture in his blasphemous psalter applies that to the virgin Mary, which
the spirit of God means of God only. Secondly the friars in their sermons
say to the crucifixe, tu nos redemisti, tu nos patri tuo reconciliasti: that
is, thou have redeemed us, thou have reconciled us to thy father. and this
Bellarmine Lib. 2. de imaginibus. c. 23.
confesses. but this is the office of Christ Jesus. thirdly they make vows to
saints, and angels, and confess their sins to them, and put their trust in
them. but vows are to be made to none, but to God only: and he it is, and none
else that knows the inward of our heart. on him also we are to call in all our
distresses, and to trust in him. fourthly they honor the sacrament, as their
lord and god. finally they burn incense and offer their prayers to saints.
they say masses also and build churches in honor of creatures. Their doctrine
is also consonant to this their practice. for first they teach, that the same
honor, that is due to the original is to be given also to images, and by good
consequent, that we are to worship the images of God the Father, the Son and
the Holy Ghost, yea and wooden crosses also with Latria and like worship, as we
give to God himself. and this is proved by the testimony of Alexander Ales 3.
p. q. 3. art. vlt. by Thomas Aquinas 3. part. q. 25. art 3. Caietan writing
upon that question and article, Bonauenture, Marsilius, Almayn, and others
writing upon the third book of sentences did. 9. and this Bellarmine himself
lib. 2. de imaginibus c. 20. confesses to be so. they do also in their
rubricks of the mass teach their priests to adore the consecrate host and
chalice, and to burn incense before their images. but it cannot be denied, but
that images are creatures. for they are made by the hands of smiths, carpenters
and other workmen the sacrament also is a creature. for they say in their
missal, qui haec omnia semper bona creas, speaking of the sacrament. Neither
do I think, that Robert Parsons will deny, that a cross is a creature,
seeing his putatiue father the black smith was able to make crosses, as many
as he would. are they not then idolaters, which worship creatures with divine
worships.

Arg. 32.
Secondly those are idolaters, that worship graven images contrary to Gods
commandment. and that appears by the saying of better catholics then the
papists. let them be confounded, that worship graven images, said Ruffin. hist.
lib. 1. c. 35.
Christians in times past. but papists worship graven images, and it cannot be
denied, that they do it contrary to Gods commandment, bowing down to them,
and giving latriam to diverse images, as before is showed, and putting
confidence in angels and saints, and serving them with religious honor: matters
plainly idolatrous and impious.

Argu. 33.
Thirdly whosoever worshippeth false images is a worshipper of idols. for as
Homil. 8. in Exodus
Origin says, idolum est quod repraesentat speciem, quam oculus no^ vidit, sed
ipse sibi animus fingit, that is, that represents things, which the eye has
not seen, but which our own imagination has devised. Quaest. 38. in Exodus
Theodoret likewise says, that an idol represents nothing, that subsisteth.
and Bellarmine confesses, quod idolum est falsa similitudo, id est, quod
repraesentat id, quod reuera non est. that is, Lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 5.
that an idol is a false resemblance, and that, which represents a thing,
that indeed is not. how truly, we will not here dispute but if it be true;
then must the papists necessarily confess themselves to be idolaters. for they
worship the image of the Trinity, which, seeing the Godhead cannot be
represented, must needs be a false resemblance. they worship also the image of
the cross, in different forms, so that all of them cannot resemble the true
cross. they worship angels in bodily shapes with wings, such as no papists
ever saw with their eye. they worship saint Catharine, and saint Christopher in
the form of a giant. but they are not able to prove, that ever there was such
a man, or such a woman. finally the shapes of their saints are one unlike to
another, some being of one color, some of another, some being of one
proportion, some of another. and Christ Jesus they worship in the form sometime
of a man, sometime of a child, sometime of a lamb: which figure is nothing
like to Christ.

Arg. 34.
It is also idolatry, to worship a man's own conceits and fancies, and not to
yield to truth, albeit never so manifestly showed. sculptile and conflatile
reor says In Abacus. 2.
Hierome, dogmata esse peruersa, quae ab his, quibus facta sunt adorantur. but
never did any sect more stiffly defend their errors, then papists. for they
hold the popes sentence to be infallible. neither will they abandone any of
his errors, though never so plainly demonstrated.

Arg. 35.
Neither can they excuse themselves, that C. satis did. 96.
call the pope their god, and worship him, with more strange worship, then that
which Peter refused Act. 10. the canonists wonder at his excellency, In
proaem. Clement.
saying, papa stupor mundi, non deus, non homo, sed vtrunque. that is, the pope
is the wonderment of the world, not god, not man, but both. for so says
Mosconius in his book de maiestate ecclesiae lib. 1. part. 1. c. 1. in the
council of Lateran one called Leo the tenth his savior. But Hierome in his
Commentaries upon the third of Daniel esteems them to be idolaters, that give
such worship to earthly princes.

Arg. 36.
Furthermore God is a spirit; and therefore he will be worshipped, not in
external images, but in spirit. he is a jealous God: and therefore admits
no copartners in his worship. he is so one God, that he will admit no other
creature to have any part of his worship given to him, according to the law of
God: thou shall have no other gods but me. and all this is signified to teach
us, how much God detesteth idolatry. but the papists worship God, as they say,
in his image. they give divine worship to stocks, stones, and to the
sacrament. they make vows to saints, and angels, and call upon them. they put
their trust as much in saints, as ever the Gentiles did in Hercules,
Aesculapius, Apollo, and other idols. they have transformed the Psalms
uttered in praise of God, to the praise of our lady. how then can they excuse
themselves from idolatry?

Arg. 37.
Finally, the law of God condemns all images, and similitudes of things both
in heaven above, and in the earth beneath, and in the waters under the earth,
that are worshipped. the same also Romans 1.
reprooueth those, that change the glory of the incorruptible God, into the
likeness of an image of a corruptible man: and that offer incense, or
spiritual sacrifices unto any but God. and all this tends to the abolishing
of idolatry. but the papists worship the likenesses, and images of God, and
change his glory into the shape of a corruptible man. they offer also to
creatures their prayers, and vows. manifest therefore it is, that in diverse
points they are guilty of gross idolatry.

Neither can they by any means excuse themselves. if they say they do not
worship the image Per se and proprie.
for it self, and properly with that worship, that is due to the original, as
Lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 24.
Bellarmine teaches; the heathen could allege so much for themselves. for
they did not worship the image, as they worshipped their gods themselves, nor
did they sacrifice to the wood and stone, but to the things represented.

If they allege, that they do not worship images, as gods, as Ibid. c. 5. and
de eccles. triumph. lib. 2. c. 24.
Bellarmine and Gregory de Valentia do oftentimes, thinking by that means to
shift off the blot of idolatry from themselves, and the church of Rome; yet
will not that serve. for the very heathen could say, that they took not their
idols for gods. non ipsa inquiunt, timemus, says Instit. divine. lib. 2. c. 2.
Lactantius, speaking of the excuse of idolaters, sed eos, ad quorum imaginem
ficta, and quorum nominibus consecrata sunt. that is, we do not fear or
worship images, say the heathen idolaters, but those after whose likeness they
were made, and to whose names they were consecrated. likewise saint Augustine
in Psalm. 113. shows, that the heathen were wont to say, that they did not
worship that, which was visible, but only the invisible divinity, that was
represented and manifested in the image. non hoc visibile colo, sed numen, quod
illic inuisibiliter habitat. and again, they said, nec simulachrum, nec
daemonium colo, sed per effigiem corporalem eius rei signum intueor, quam
colere debeo. do you not then plainly see, that the idolaters spoke like the
papists? for they say also, we worship not images with latria properly, nor do
we worship devils, but by bodily shapes we are brought to see, and remember the
things, which we ought to worship.

If they deny that they worship creatures, and change the truth of God into a
lie, saint Augustine will tell them, In Psalm. 113. conc. 2.
that while they call their images by the names of the things represented (as
for example, when they say to the crucifixe, thou have redeemed me, and call
the images or pictures our lady, or S. Peter, or Paul) they change the truth
of God into a lie. effigies a fabro factas, says saint Augustine, appellando
nominibus earum rerum, quas fabricauit deus, transmutant veritatem dei in
mendacium.

If Lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 10.
Bellarmine allege, that images are not only profitable, as reporting matter
of story, but also effectual to inflame us to the love of God, and imitation
of holy men, and diverse other uses; he must be told, that Augustine teaches us
far otherwise. ducit and affectu quodam infirmo rapit infirma corda mortalium
formae similitudo says In Psalm. 113. conc. 2.
Augustine, and membrorum imitata compago: he says again, that the outward
form of things does bring forth, sordidissimum erroris affectum, a most
filthy affection to error. he says also, that images do effectually pervert
unhappy souls. plus valent simulachra says he, ad curuandam infaelicem
animam, quod os habent, etc.

If they say, that their images are no idols, because they are representations
of true things, and not false representations, as does Bellarmine, lib. 2. de
imaginib. c. 5. saying, quod idolum est falsa similitudo; it may be answered,
that the Gentiles might answer so likewise: and yet say nothing to purpose. for
the image of Romulus, of the son, of Hercules, and Aesculapius were true
representations; and yet idols, for that they were worshipped by idolaters.
why then should we not judge the like of the images, of Peter, and of our lady?

If they say, that idolaters are condemned, because they put their trust in
their idols and images, as the conuenticle of Trent Sess. 25.
says, and hops thereby to put away the infamy of idolatry from the Romish
church, it may be replied, that the Gentiles did never trust more in their god
Jupiter, and Juno, and Fortuna, or in their idols, then the papists do in our
lady, in saint Denis, saint James, and in the images of our lady of Loreto, of
the cross, and such like.

If they say, that the image of Christ is to be worshipped with the honor due
to Christ improperly, as Bellarmine teaches, lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 23. It
may be replied, that the Gentiles were never so stupid, as to say, that
properly as much honor is due to the image, as to the original. Finally, if
you meet with any of Bellarmines opinion, lib. de imaginibus, c. 6. that
thought Xenaias to be the first, that found fault with the worship of images;
you may boldly reprove him by the testimony of Lactantius, Hierome,
Epiphanius, Augustine and other fathers before cited.

Unless therefore Robert Parsons and his consorts can well answer our
arguments, and fortify their own simple excuses, shifts and distinctions; it
will appear both by testimony of scriptures and fathers, and also by diverse
good arguments, that the papists are idolaters. nay it will appear they can no
better answer for themselves, then the heathen idolaters in ancient time. is
it not then marvel, that such gross idolatry should creep in among
Christians? it is so certes. but much more is it to be marvelled that so gross
an abuse being detected, should either be defended, or tolerated.

CHAP. VI. That such papists, as within the compass of her majesty's reign,
have been executed to death, have died for treason, and other capital crimes,
and not for religion. and therefore are to be detested as malefactors, and not
honored as martyrs.
HItherto we have discoursed of matters of religion. and I hope so, as it may
appear to every man, not altogether either irreligious, or possessed with
prejudice, that the papists are neither true catholics, nor good Christians. I
have therein also discovered not only the vanity of Parsons his pleading in his
Ward-word, that takes that as granted, which is the principal question, but
also the simplicity of this wooden Oulyglasses dealing, that not daring to
answer our arguments, does notwithstanding still in his exceptions usurp the
name of Catholics and Catholic religion, as due to himself and his
consorts, being nothing less, then either catholic, or Christian. now
therefore, to fill up this discourse, it follows, that we consider a little
the ou^ward civil carriage of this faction, and what we are to think either of
those, that heretofore have broken their necks in the Popes service, or else
yet continue well affected toward his cause. and generally, what all true
subjects are to look for either at their hands, or the hands of their
partakers, and adherents, and this, for that Robert Parsons in the first
chapter, or encounter of his Ward-word doubts not most impudently to affirm,
that many honorable and worshipful gentlemen have endured continual, and
intolerable affliction for perseuering in their fathers faith, and that above a
hundred priests have been tortured, hanged, and quartered for the same cause.
the same man also in the conclusion of his encounters does insinuat, that
albeit they were charged with treason, yet they died as martyrs. Allen likewise
that perfidious traitor to his prince and country in his Ad p^rsequutores
Anglos.
treatise against the execution of justice, done upon diverse priests and
friars, and their adherents, taken in notorious treasons, does exclaim against
the state, and charge our governors with persecution, injustice, tyranny and
extreme cruelty. as for his clients, he bears us in hand, that they were
clear of treason, and without all just cause died for matter of religion and
conscience only, and not for treason or practices against the state: and
concludes, that therefore they are to be esteemed as holy martyrs, and not as
lewd traitors. the detector also in his disiointed exceptions is talking of
crosses and persecutions, where he and most of his consorts live at ease, and
in all security in good houses, and have laisure to write, and opportunity to
print such pamphlets and idle toies, as that, which he has of late published.

first it is treason to stir up foreign enemies against the prince, or state.
the statute of 25. Edward the 3. c. 2. does so account it, condemning all of
treason, that shall go about to leuy war against the kings and queens of
this land. Likewise it was adjudged by the Roman laws. Maiestatis crimine
tenetur, says Vlpian ad legem Iuliam may. l. 1. cujus opera, consilio, dolo
malo consilium initum fuerit etc. quo quis contra remp. arma ferat. The same
course is now taken in Spain with such as attempt to levy war against the
king, either within or without the realm, as is apparent by the book called
El fuero real. Tit. de la guarda del rey. those also that counsel, or abet
such as attempt any such matter, are by that law condemned as traitors. Neither
is the practice of France diverse from other nations in this point. Finally, no
Roman may so much as once attempt to raise war against the pope, albeit he
hold nothing, but by usurpation, but the popes sergeants and officers seize
upon him, as a traitor. neither will any pretense or allegation of conscience
serve to excuse his treason, or to exempt him from punishment. But such agents
of the pope as have been executed hitherto in England for his cause, either
have themselves been persuaders of the pope, and Spanish king, and others, to
make war upon her Majesty, and their country, or else have joined with
Englefield, Allen, Parsons, Holt, Owen, Morgan and other principal moouers and
stirrers for an invasion, and were directed by them, and sent into England and
other places for that purpose. and this may be proved first by the Bull of Pius
Quintus procured at the instance of diverse English fugitives, and by them sent
abroad into England, and sent into the king of Spaines country, as a motive
for him to invade England, and as it were a trumpet, that sounded fire and
sword against us. secondly, all the practices and exercises of the seditious
seminaries in the Low Countries, Spain, and Rome, have tended to the stirring
up of foreign nations against us, as is confessed by diverse priests, and
testified by scholars, and may be proved by some notes of their exercises,
which we have to show. Thirdly, Sixtus Quintus, anno 1588. in his sentence
declaratory, or rather declamatory, against the Queen, does say, that at the
earnest solicitation of certain principal English men, which he calls
catholics, he had proceeded against her Majesty, and had enjoined the Spanish
king to execute his Bull of excommunication and deposition against her, and to
come with great forces against England. fourthly, Allen in his traitorous
letters to the nobility and people of England and Ireland, does confess, that
the pope and Spaniard were solicited by himself and diverse other English men,
to invade this land. and this is also known by the negotiation of Englefield,
Parsons, and other English, both with the Spanish king, and also with other
princes to this purpose. fifthly, Parsons to draw on the king of Spain to
enterprise this war, told him, that his name being Philip Norway, he could
not choose but have good success. his reason was, for that our country had a
prophecy, that betwixt Bostons Bay, and the pile of Foudray should be seen
the black navy of Norway. which, as he persuaded the king, should return
victorious. The same man also in a letter to a certain noble man of Scotland
declares, that he had been with most princes in Europe, to move invasions and
wars against us. sixthly, the emperor that now is, upon their informations
has professed himself our enemy; and set out diverse prolamations against our
nation, by means whereof our merchants in his dominions have sustained great
losses. seventhly, Allen and diverse fugitive English, were busy anno Domini
1586. and 1587. with the duke of Guise, and other Frenchmen, to induce them to
concur with the Pope and Spaniards in the war against England. The English
papists at that time in a certain treatise called, Un aduertissement des
catholics Anglois aux catholics Francois; do endeavor to stir them up
against us, charging them with this slacknesse, and imputing their evil
success thereunto. Le crime d'endurer Iesabel ta voisine, say they;
Plonger an sang Chrestien, te destruit peu a peu.


They confess also, that themselves are scorned of all nations for suffering
an heretical Queen (as these heretical traitors call her) to reign. An
eight argument to prove this point, may be drawn from the infamous libels,
set out against our nation, partly by Parsons, and Creswell, and partly by
Worthington, Gifford, and other fugitives, tending to no other end, than to
stir the whole world to take arms up against us. finally, the practice of D.
Story with the duke of Alua, the oration of Allen made to Gregory the 13.
Sanders his negotiation with the same pope, Parsons his running up and down
these twenty years and upward, from nation to nation, the agencies of Holt
and other Jesuits and priests with the duke of Parma, the plots taken about
Crighton a Jesuit concerning the invasion of England, and the clamours of
English fugitives from time to time in the ears of all Christian princes, and
now lately the attempt of D. Juan d' Aquila in Ireland, only set forward by
English and Irish priests and fugitives against her Majesty, do all plainly
declare, that these fugitives from time to time have been the firebrands, to
set their own native country on a flame, if any would have hearkened to their
promises. and this point, albeit the same touch not all that have been
executed, or are yet alive in England of the popes faction, principally; yet it
touches either all, or most of them, as being a betters, counselors,
scholars, slaves, or companions of these principal stirrers, all of them
coming from Allen and Parsons, and other principal agents in this business.
and so clear it is that English fugitives were the principal motives of the
invasion anno 1588. and of D. Juan d' Aquila his attempt, that the Spaniards
impute most of their evil success to their lies, and false informations of
our weakness; and it is said, that diverse of them begin to be hateful to most
Spaniards for this cause.

Secondly, it is treason to stir up sedition or rebellion against the prince
or state, or to concur with those, that go about to move rebellion, or stir
up sedition. The words of the Roman laws are clear. Maiestatis crimine, L.
1. ff. ad l. Julian maiestatis.
says Vlpian, tenetur is, cuius consilio doloue malo, factum est, vt armati
homines cum telis, lapidibusue in vrbe sint, conueniantue, aduersus remp.
locaque occupantur vel templa, quoue coetus, conuentusue fiant, hominesque; ad
seditionem connocentur. He is guilty of treason, says Vlpian, by whose
counsel, or cunning procurement, armed men with weapons come together against
the state, and sease places of advantage, or that causes metings and and
assemblies to raise up sedition. By this law those are also condemned, qui
milites solicitauerint, concitauerintue, quo seditio tumultusue aduersus
rempub. fiat. that is, which shall solicit, or cause soldiers to mutine or
revolt, or stir against the state; as for example the traitor Allen did with
Sir W. Stanley and the soldiers of Deuenter. Likewise, by the statute of the
25. Edward the 3. c. 2. those are adiuged traitors, that shall take arms
against their prince or country, either within the realm or without. in which
case also are all rebels and seditions persons, that shall rebel against their
governors, or that shall be aiding or consenting thereunto. And in the Spanish
laws del fuero real, tit. de la guarda del rey, it is enacted, that none be so
hardy by word, deed, or advice, to oppose himself against the king, or his
state, or to make an insurrection or practice of rebellion against him, or his
kingdom, either within the realm or without. Que ninguno no sea osado por
fecho, ni per dicho, ni por conseio de yr contra el rey, ni contra su sennorio,
ni hazer alleuamiento, ni bollicio contra el, ni contra seu reyno en su tierra,
ni fuera su tierra. This is also law both in France, Germany, and all
countries. neither will the pope suffer any of his dominions, notwithstanding
that he holds them by usurpation, and without lawful title, to consult
against him, or mutinously to stir up such, as live under him to rebellion,
but he presently chastises them as traitors. Innocent the seventh who
succeeded Boniface the ninth, that not yet three hundred years agone first
usurped the temporal government of Rome, as In lib. de schism.
Theodoricke a Niem and other Paulus Langius in Chronic. Citizensi.
stories testify, caused diverse citizens most cruelly to be murdered, albeit
they did but again redemand the authority, that was committed to the popes in
trust. Platina he makes mention of this murder writing of Innocent the
seventh, though concealing the true cause, he says, they were executed for
sedition. Vndecim ciues, says Platina, reip. suae labenti in negligentia
pontificis consulturi, statim necantur, e fenestrisque deijciuntur, quod
diceret eo modo tolli seditiones. If then a pretense of sedition be cause
sufficient for the Pope to proceed against his subjects, with what face can he,
or his adherents blame her Majesty, if she do chastise her mutinous,
seditions and rebellious subjects? shall it not be lawful for her, and for
this state to do that which all princes and states do practice, and take to
be most lawful? Theodorick. Niem lib. 2. de schismae. 36.
Vrbane the sixth upon pretense of a conspiracy against himself, put diverse of
his cardinals to death, and proceeded with all rigor against such, as were but
a little suspected of practicing against him. neither did his adversary
Clement use a milder course against such, as were taken practicing against his
faction. Iouio in vita de Leon. 10.
Leo the tenth spared not Cardinal Petrucci, but put him to death most cruelly
for uttering some words tending to the alteration of the state of Siena,
although that city was no part of his dominions, but only recommended unto
him. finally Clement the fifth by the aid of the French king abolished the
whole order of the Templars. and of late the whole order of the Humiliati was
suppressed and dissolved, and diverse of them executed to death for a practice
against the state of the Romish church. and shall the Romish church and her
agents be suffered without punnishment to practice against this state? or can
any reasonable or indifferent man justly find fault with the execution of such
persons, as have been taken practicing? the very adversaries, I think, albeit
very bold, yet will not be so impudent to affirm it. for hitherto their
pleading has been, that the massepriests and other Romanists are clear from
such practices. Let us see therefore, whether they speak truly, or no. and
albeit we should greatly wrong the state, if we should dispute this point, as a
matter doubtful; yet let us, I say briefly touch it for satisfaction of the
ignorant, especially such as are strangers, and unacquainted with the trial of
such priests, friars and other the popes agents, as have been executed in
England, as offending in cases of treason.

I say then, that no one priest, Jesuit, or other papist in England has been
executed for treason, but he has been found guilty of practicing against her
Majesty and the state, or at the least aiding, and assisting, and intertaining
of such practisers, and seditious persons: and that diverse of them have either
stood armed against the state in open rebellion, or else joined with the
rebels, and assisted them to their uttermost power, and means. and this
appears first by faculties granted to Thomas Harding about the year 1567.
for the reconciliation of the people to the pope, and for the disturning of
them from their obedience to the Prince. for whatsoever the pretense was, the
end was sedition and rebellion, he being appointed for nothing else, but to be
a forerunner of that filthy friars Impius Quintus his excommunication against
the Queen. secondly it is proved by the rebellion in the north anno 1569.
which was stirred up by one Nicholas Morton, and other seditious priests.
thirdly by the rebellion and treason of the duke of Norfolk stirred up by the
pope as appears by the report of Hierome Catena, in the life of Pius Quintus.
fourthly by the erection of two seminaries of treason, the one erected at Doway
anno 1569. and another at Rome anno 1579. or thereabout which were receptacles
of such scattered and lost priests, as had been in rebellion, and open schools
to teach treason to malcontent papists. fifthly by the rebellion of the earl of
Desmond in Ireland raised by the solicitation of Sanders the popes legate, and
set forward by diverse seditious priests, and friars, and other malcontents.
sixthly by the faculties of Parsons and Campian and their companions, which
came to make a way for the execution of the Popes bull. seventhly by the
judgment of Sanders and Bristow, who commend these rebels, and put them into
the catalogue of martyrs. Sanders in his 7. book of his visible monarchy
says, that the purpose of the earls of Westmerland and Northumberland and
their followers in the northren rebellion was to be praised, albeit they had
no succcesse. nobilium illorum laudanda erant consilia. he does also call the
rebellion pium institutum, and fidei confessionem, that is, a godly and devout
resolution, and a plain confession of the Romish faith. neither does he
esteem of them, that were executed for that rebellion otherwise, then of holy
martyrs. Bristow likewise in his fifteenth motive, puts the earl of
Northumberland, the two Nortons, and two massing priests called Woodhouse and
Plomptree, and others, that were executed, as principal actors in that
rebellion, in the catalogue of martyrs. for now the pope does account
rebellion for his cause good religion, and celebrateth the memory of traitors
for martyrs. an eight argument is ministered unto us by the most scandalous and
traitorous libell set out by Allen, and printed not without the help of
Parsons, they say, and other English traitors; wherein they by all the means,
they can devise, do exhort her Majesty's subjects in England and Ireland to
take arms against her, to seize upon her person, and to deliver her into the
hands of her enemies. they endeavor also to persuade them to forsake their
allegiance, and to join with foreign enemies. The 9. argument may be drawn
from the practice of Charles Paget with the earl of Northumberland, anno
domini 1583. that by all means solicited him to revolt, and to join with the
French against the State. The 10. is ministered unto us by the treacherous plot
of Parsons and Hesket, to draw in Ferdinand the late earl of Darby, into
action. The 11. is grounded upon the insurrection of Tyrone, and the rest of
that rascal rout stirred up by Monford a priest yet lurking in England, and
diverse other seditious agents of the pope. The last is that dangerous attempt
of the late earl of Essexe, which makes my heart to bleed in respect of some
private causes, as often as I remember it, and moves many to wonder, that he
should be made an instrument by these firebrands of sedition, to set up that
religion, which I think he never loved. and my arguments are proved good, for
that no one of those, that have been executed for the popes cause, can be
named, but either he was an agent in some of these practices, or allowed them,
or were privy unto them. nay, I do believe, that if the question were asked of
any Jesuit, or Iesuited priest, or any of their adherents, he would not
disallow the popes act, or the acts of his agents in stirring up rebellion in
England, and Ireland, especially for matter of religion. what others would do
I know not. but hitherto we find, that they speak honorably of Card. Allen,
as of their foster father. yet was he the most notorious and seditious traitor,
that ever this land bred, Robert Parsons only excepted. that Parsons and
Campian knew of a rebellion, or change intended, it is apparent by their
petition to the pope, wherein they do only provide for their consorts, rebus
sic stantibus, that is, so long as the state of things did continue in terms,
as then it stood. a certain Quod lib. 9. art. 10.
secular priest affirms, that no papist, (which he falsely calls catholic)
ought to send his children into seminaries abroad. and his reason is good. for
that their heads be filled with trecheries, and aequiuocations, dissimulation,
hypocrisy, and all falsehood. sufficient witnesses and confessions of diverse,
that have forsaken those nestes of treason, declare, that the youths there are
maintained for no other end, then to move sedition in England; and we may well
think, that neither the pope, nor Spaniard would be at the cost they are for
their maintenance, unless they hoped by their agencie to be recompensed again
ten fold. whatsoever their intent was; certain it is, that in the seminaries
nothing is more commonly talked of, then how to set up a party against the
state, how to trouble her Majesty, or some such like matter. and albeit the
governors do not acquaint the scholars with particulars; yet when any
mischief is intended against us, then the scholars are willed to say Pater
noster, or aue Maria, for furthering of some good intention, as they call it,
of the Rector of the college, finally whatsoever the priests say, or swear
concerning practices of rebellion; yet unless they will forswear the pope,
they must needs be rebels, and stir up rebellion, as often as he lists. for
the Pius the fifth his Bull.
pope does excommunicate al those, that will not rise up in arms against her
Majesty. and who knows not, that they will rather venture to break their
necks, then loose their souls, that they suppose to depend on the popes
curses. this argument therefore follows necessarily. if a true papist, then is
he a false hearted subject. for otherwise the pope by his bull has
excommunicated him, as well as all other subjects: and the same shall
undoubtedly be in force ere it belong, if these good fellows be not tied
shorter, or if the calves of such bulls be not surely kept up.

Thirdly it is treason to attempt against the life and person of the prince,
and ever has been so accounted by laws of all nations. among the Romans it
was so heinous, that the offender being dead, yet the offense was enquired of,
and punished by confiscation of his goods. meminisse oportebit, says Cod. ad
legem. Iulia^ maiestatis. l. meminisse.
Paulus the lawier, si quid contra imperatoris maiestatem commissum dicatur,
etiam post rei mortem id crimen instaurari solere. by the ancient laws of
England it has always been adjudged high treason, to compass, or imagine
the death of the kings or Queens of this realm, as appears by the old
statute of the 25. of Edward the third, c. 2. it is likewise so judged by the
laws of Spain, reported in a book called Fuero real. tit. de la guarda del
rey. in France it is deemed the highest and chiefest point of high treason, to
attempt against the life of the prince. Bodin in his second book de la
republique c. 5. reports, how a certain gentleman in his confession to a
priest declaring, that once he had an intention to kill the king, albeit he
never did attempt to do it, and was then most sorry, that ever he did think
upon such a matter, was notwithstanding executed to death for his very
imagination. Peter Barriere was likewise executed at Melun, for that being
persuaded by one Varade a Jesuit and others, that it was an act meritorious to
kill the king that now reigns, he did conceive in his mind a resolution to
do it. neither did any papist think, that he had any wrong in it. Ghineard
likewise a Jesuit was hanged in Paris for declaring by writing that it was
lawful to kill kings excommunicate by the pope, and for oppugning their title.
for the same cause also, and for that they sauored of this treacherous doctrine,
and were not unacquainted with the assassinate of Chastell, that meant to have
murdered k. Henry the fourth, that now reigns in France, all the Jesuits were
expulsed by an arrest of parliament out of France, albeit the same is not so
thoroughly executed, as were to be wished. Vrbane the 6. with exquisite torments
killed all, that were any way to be suspected for conspiring against him. John
the 22. caused the bishop of Cahors to be skinned alive, and to be slain with
great torments upon suspicion of a conspiracy made against him. omnibus
cruciatibus, says In John 23.
Platina, coegit vitam cum morte commutare, quod in Pontificem coniurasset. In
Alexandro 6.
Alexander the sixth used to put men to death most cruelly for every word
spoken against him, as Onuphrius testifies. and this is the resolution of all
lawiers. they commit treason says Socinus the yoonger, lib. 3. consil. 105.
which make a practice against the person of their lord and prince. and with him
agrees Alciat consil. 456. they are also guilty of the same crime, which do
consult or practice against the state of the prince or commonwealth, as says
Baldus consil. 58. and seq. lib. 1. and Alexander consil. 13. lib. 6. and Jason
consil. 86. lib. 3.

Let us then see whether those Jesuits and priests, that either have been
executed for treason; or else are yet alive, and to be executed, if they repent
not, and fly to the Queens mercy, be not guilty of this point of treason also
and whether their adherents and supporters may not justly be touched for
supporting them. first it is apparent, that Pius the fifth in his execrable bull
against her Majesty, does excommunicate all such, as will not take arms for
the execution of his sentence, and the actual deposing of the Queen. but
neither can any such thing be executed without violence offered to her person,
nor may we imagine, that the mass priests and their consorts were sent for any
other purpose into England, then for the execution of the bull. Lib. de schism.
Theodorike a Niem speaking of a like sentence of a pope denounced against a
king of his time does signify, that such sentences are not executed without
many calamities, and great troubles* secondly the earls of Westmerland and
Northumberland and their adherents the rebels anno 1569. did not entend other
matter, than the destruction of her Majesty's person. as many therefore as
either were actors in that rebellion, or else approved the same, as did Sanders
in his book of his pretended visible monarchy, and all Jesuits and Iesuited
papists do very boldly, are guilty in this point of treason. Bristow in his
Motives does no otherwise account of those, that were executed for this
rebellion, then of holy martyrs. neither can any priest or papist
notwithstanding all their pretenses mislike that rebellion, unless in opinion
they contradict Bellarmine and other Romish doctors, and absolutely condemn
the popes sentence, that has so oftentimes been published: which I doubt
whether any will do or no. In Ireland certes we do not find any priest, that
is not consorted with the rebels, and that publickely does not defend their
cause. how is it then possible, that either they should draw their swords
against her Majesty, or allow them that do it, and not be guilty of attempting
against her person? Thirdly Holt the Jesuit, Worthington, and other priests
persuaded first a certain Irish man called Patricke Collen, and afterward one
York and Williams to murder her Majesty. and this the secular priests in Holt
and his consorts in a certain treatise entitled important considerations, Page
33.
do confess to be true. they do also Ibidem.
confess, that Edmund Squire was drawn by the persuasion of Walpoole a
Jesuit to a like vilanous attempt against her Majesty's own person. Parsons
in his Wardword likewise confesses, that he was acquainted with the resolution
of a certain gentelman, as he calls him, that came over to kill the Queen.
neither need we to make any question, but that diverse priests, and Jesuits, and
others either One Bifley a priest confessed, that it was lawful to kill the
Queen, being excommunicate by the pope, and denied not, that he himself would
do the act, if he could. his confession is extant to be seen.
allowed or were acquainted with the most execrable treasons of Parry, Savage,
Lopez, Squire, Babington, and such like unnatural monsters, that attempted and
intended most cruelly to murder, empoison, and destroy their liege Sovereign.
the rest they are scholars and agents of the pope, and his wicked consistory,
and of Parsons and other Jesuits and traitorous priests, and combined with
them, and therefore guilty as far, as the others in this point of treason.

Allen in his wicked letters, to the nobility and people of England and
Ireland, declares, that there were diverse English priests in the Spanish army,
ready to serve every man's spiritual necessity by confession, counsel, and
all consolation in Christ Jesus, and the same is confessed also in diverse
treatises set out by secular priests. but how could they be in the army of
public enemies, and not attempt against her Majesty's person, if occasion
served? or how can any allow or like of such fellows or such attempts, that
wish not the destruction of her Majesty? fourthly, cardinal Allen in his most
slandrous libel directed to the nobility and people of England and Ireland,
does by all his best retoricke endeavor to persuade all papists, to take arms
against her Majesty, to lay hands on her, and to deliver her into the hands of
her enemies. but what priest or papist in England did not much depend on him
while he lived? nay, most of them were his scholars, and the rest conuersed
with him, and received diverse letters and instructions from him. fifthly, it is
confessed, that diverse priests now in England were either in the Spanish army,
or in their ships, or appointed to follow the army anno 1588. and that diverse
others were put aboard the Adelantadoes ships, that came for Falmouth anno
1597. and 1598. If then they came with foreign enemies, and were in their
troops, it is no question, but they meant to attempt against her Majesty's
person. it is also apparent, that all their receiters and abetters, and such
also, as allow their act, and this opinion, are likewise guilty of this point
of treason. Finally, in a certain house, where David Engleby a traitourous
priest was taken, these They are to be seen in the memorials of the council
of York.
resolutions were also found, that it is lawful for papists to take arms
against the Queen. and further, that they might do with her person,
whatsoever pleased them. they also resolve in flat terms, that it is lawful
to kill the Queen. but say the priests, as matters now stand, it is best not
so much, as once to speak of that matter. so then all, that are not blind,
may see the malice of this generation. and no question, but their followers in
their superstitious opinions would not be far behind them in their lewd and
treacherous actions, if occasion were offered. neither can they otherwise do,
when the pope, upon whom they build their faith, does Bulla Pij 5. aduersus
Elizabetham.
excommunicate all, that will not fight against the Queen.

or maintain his right. Li^ij lib. 1. decad. 1.
Metius Suffetius standing aloof, when Romulus encountered the enemy, was
seized upon as a traitor, and drawn in pieces with horses. By the laws of
fees, he that forsakes his lord in the battle, Lib 2. de feudis. de caufis
benefic. amittendi.
as a traitor, is deprived of his lands. qui dominum suum, says the law, cum
quo ad praelium iuerit, in acie periclitantem dimiserit, beneficio se indignum
indicauit. Likewise, it is adjudged treason, not to declare any harm intended
against our lord. By the common laws of England also, and laws of nations, it
has been always accounted treason, not only to oppugn the right of the
king, but also being required, not to acknowledge it. Suppose then all priests
and papists were not actors either in op^n rebellions, or in attempts made by
foreign enemies; yet all of them denying the Queens authority, being
excommunicat by the pope, and that refuse to acknowledge her lawful title, or
to take her part against the pope, who is now become an enemy, and an inuader
consorted with the Spaniard, are notorious traitors. But this is the case of
the best of those, that have died for the popes cause. Campian and his consorts
being demanded, whether they took the Queen to be lawful Queen,
notwithstanding the popes sentence of excommunication: and likewise, whether
Sanders and Bristow, that maintained the popes authority, and the Queens
deposition to be lawful, was sound or not, refused to answer directly, and
neither would they acknowledge her Majesty to be their lawful Queen, nor
promise to take her part if occasion served, nor would they condemn the popes
fact, nor disallow the traitorous doctrine of Sanders and Bristow. and I do
believe, if our recusants in England were put to the question, they would
either accord with the priests, or make very doubtful answers. for, the
Queens authority in ecclesiastical causes, they utterly condemn, and from
the pope, that is our enemy, and has displaied his banner i^ open field
against her Majesty, they will not be drawn. Sherwin, and some others did so
answer, as every man might judge, that they mean to the uttermost of their
power, to defend the popes cause, and to oppugn her Majesty's authority. In
Ireland we find, that papists are the men, that uphold the rebellion, and that
serve her Majesty very coldly, though sometime enterteined in her service. Were
it then nothing else but this, that the mass priests and their adherents refuse
to acknowledge her Majesty's title, and to serve her against foreign enemies;
yet is that sufficient, to show them to be traitors, and most unworthy to
possess land and office, that will not serve her Majesty, by whose favor and
clemency, they enjoy their lands and offices, against the Spaniard, or other
foreign enemy, that seeks to deprive both us, and them percase of lands,
living and life. It may be, that some papists will not believe this to be true
of the mass priests, and their adherents. but if they list to read and see,
what the secular priests confess in their treatise of important
considerations, they will change their opinions.

to adhere to foreign enemies. In the statute of 25. of Edward the third, chap.
2. those that adhere to the kings enemies, are adjudged traitors. By the El
fuero real. tit. de la guarda del rey.
laws of Spain likewise it is made treason, to join with the enemy, and to
yield him succor, or help by any means. and the like we may gather out of
the Roman laws ad legem Iuliam maiestatis. l. 1. Finally, reason may teach us,
that they can not be our friends, that adhere to our enemies, and join with
them. but the mass priests, and all, that have dealt hitherto in the popes,
and Spaniards cause, have adhered to foreign foes, and to the public and
professed enemies of her Majesty and this state. for first it is apparent, that
the Pope and Spaniard are public enemies of the prince and state. Hosts ij
sunt, says ff. de verborum signific. l. hosts.
Pomponius, qui nobis, aut quibus nos public bellum decreuimus. that is, they
are public enemies, either which make wars on us, or upon whom we make
wars. The Greeks, of the word (...), that signifies war, do call enemies
(...). which shows them to be enemies properly, that make wars upon us. But
the Pope and Spaniard, from the year 1569. have not ceased to make wars
against the English nation. Pope Pius the fifth having a determination to
recover his authority in England, and that rather by the sword, than as Peter
did gain men, by the word, stirred up Philip king of Spain to join with him
against our nation. both of them sent money to aid the Northren rebels, anno
1569. and were determined to have sent an army into England, under the conduct
of the duke of Alua, had not the practice of the rebels been discovered, and
had not the rebellion been suppressed before the succors came to them.
Manolessa.
The Pope also afterward set up the duke of Norfolk, and sent him money, and
encouraged him with great promises to execute his sentence. and both these
points are proved, not only by the testimony of the letters of Pius Quintus,
as they are recorded by him, that set out the report of his life, but also by
the testimony of the secular priests in their treatise called important
considerations. About the year 1578. Stukelcy was by the Pope furnished with
money and soldiers to make some enterprise in Ireland, and had done somewhat,
if Gods judgments had not turned him into Barbary, where he made his end
correspondent to his life. That string being broken, Sanders was sent, as agent
for the Pope to raise a rebellion in Ireland. and not long after, the Pope sent
certain forces into the same country, that openly Let Parsons show that ever
S. Peter did the like.
displaied his banners against her Majesty, and the English nation. Anno 1588.
both the Spaniards and Popes fleet came with fire and sword against England.
The duke of Parma likewise provided great land forces against us in the
Low Countries. An. 1597. and 1598. the Adelantado of Spain set forth twice or
thrice from Corona, with an intention to descend in the port of Falmouth, and
to take that country. And lately Don Juan d'Aquila was sent with diverse
regiments for the conquest of Ireland. Likewise we for our defense have since
made some attempts against the Spaniard in Spain, in the Indiaes, and in the
Low Countries. And most of these matters are publicly known, and can not be
denied by the aduersarses themselves. The secular priests confess most of
these things in their treatise of important considerations. It can not
therefore be denied, but that both the Pope, and the Spaniard are public
enemies of her Majesty and the state. The like may be said of Henry the 2. the
French king, during the wars in Scotland, in the beginning of her Majesty's
reign, and of the duke of Guise, the duke of Alua, the prince of Parma, and
others, that at several times have done hostile acts against her Majesty, and
the English nation.

Likewise it is a thing very manifest, that all our mass priests, and their
partakers and consorts have adhered to the king of Spain, to the pope, and to
other foreign enemies. Upon the first coming of the Queen to the crown,
diverse fled to the French king, who pretending a right to the crown of England
for his daughter in law the Queen of Scots, proclaimed her in Paris Queen of
England, and Ireland, not without the consent of some traitorous English, as it
seems. Mortua Maria, says De schi^. li. 3.
Sanders, Henricus Galliarum rex etc. nurum suam Scotorum reginam Henrici
octaui proneptim parisijs pro concione Angliae and Hiberniae reginam
declarandam curauit. he sent also forces into Scotland to second his claim.
which no man may surmise he would have done, but that he was promised a party
in England. that the seminaries of Doway and Rome, adhere to the pope and
Spaniard, it cannot be denied. for of them they have their maintenance, and
when the priests of the seminaries are deeply rooted in the grounds of
unnatural disloialty and treason abroad, they come with commission and means
from them two, home into England. thirdly, Sanders was sent by the pope as his
legate into Ireland, and both he and his consorts, that were sent upon that
business, were furnished with means from the pope, and did wholly depend upon
him, and on the king of Spain. fourthly it appears, that the priests held
the pope for the chief lord, and did not so much as vouchsafe to call
Elizabeth the Queen of England their Queen. petatur a summo domino nostro,
say Parsons and Campian in their faculties, explicatio bullae declaratoriae
contra Elizabetham, and ei adhaerentes. let us beseech say they, our most high
lord the pope, to make an exposition of the bull against Elizaberh, and all
that adhere unto her. so it appears, that they declare themselves opposite to
the Queen, and all her true subjects, and that they adhere to the pope. it may
out of that faculty also be gathered, that all papists adhere to the pope, for
that these two provide for them only, and exclude all the Queens subjects.
for the papists, whom those two traitors call catholics, desire, that the
popes bull may bind the Queen and her subjects always, but not the papists,
while matters stand in terms as now they do, but then only when the bull may
be put in execution. so it appears by the faculty granted to Parsons and
Campian, that papists are a faction adhering to the pope, and resolving to
execute his bull as soon, as they shall be able. fifthly it cannot be denied, but
that such priests as came with the Spanish forces by sea or land, either ann.
1588. or ann. 1597. or at any other time, or that came with the popes or
spanish forces into Ireland, do adhere to foreign enemies. but of this sort
there are diverse, as may be proved by the secular priests confessions, in
several treatises, and by the libell of cardinal Allen, that Italienated
traitor, and alienated fugitive, that signifies so much. Parsons also is
charged to have thrust diverse English priests aboard the Adelantadoes ships,
being more then half forced to come against their country. neither do the
rest of the priests and their adherents cease to converse with these secret
traitors, and to interteine them, and to hide them. sixthly Deschism. l. 3.
Sanders does testify, that the scholars of the seminary at Doway are
protected and maintained by king Philip. the same king also caused other
seminaries of English scholars to be erected in Spain: which no man doubts,
but they adhere to the Spanish king. so likewise the Romish seminaries and
their scholars adhere to the pope. for they take an oath and swear to the
pope, and those of Spain to the Spaniard, as is testified by Nauarrus consil.
lib. 3. de regular. consil. 1. and Ribadineira de schism. part. 3. c. 21.
seventhly those that swear to maintain the Infantaes title to the crown of
England set down by Robart Parsons a notorious traitor to the crown of
England, must needs adhere to the Spaniard. but that is the case of all the
English priests, that are now under the Jesuits government, as appears by the
testimony of diverse treatises set out by the secular priests against the
Jesuits, and by Charles Pagets book against Parsons. the matter also is very
evident and notorious to all that know the orders of the English seminaries of
traitors fostered in Spain. 8. the Jesuits and their scholars are linked to
the pope and spaniard; to the pope swearing to go, whether he will send them;
to the Spaniard for his liberality toward them, and for that he is ready
always to execute their treacherous devises. 9. diverse fugitive English are the
Spaniards, and popes pentioners and sworn servants. 10. the archpriest and his
adherents, as they are enemies of the state, and therefore hide their heads: so
are they dependents on the pope and Spaniard, and profess themselves their
clients. finally you shall hardly find either mass priest, or sound papist,
that will renounce the pope, and take an oath to serve the Queen either against
the pope or Spaniard. and if any do so, they perform their service very
slackly. which if any do endeavor to excuse, because they take the pope to be
Peter's successor, and the Spaniard to seek nothing but to establish popish
religion in England; they show themselves to be ignorant both of religion, and
matters of state. for Peter's successors (of which number the pope is none) have
a commission only to feed Christ's sheep, and not to cut their throtes.
Important considerations. p. 25.
and the Spanish general anno 1588. said openly, that if he once came into
England both catholics and heretics should be one to him; so he might make
way for his master. and his reason was, for that his sword could not discern
between them. wherefore as the pope and Spaniard are professed enemies to her
Majesty and this state, so all that adhere unto them, or favor them, and
depend upon them, are traitors to their prince and country.

Maiestatis crimine tenetur says L. 1. ff. ad l. Iuliam maicstatis.
Vlpian, qui hostibus populi Romans nuntium literasue miserit, signumue dederit,
feceritue dolo malo, quo hosts populi Romans consilio inuentur aduersus remp.
the same is also adjudged treason both by Spanish, French, and the Popes laws,
as English traitors, if they should be taken writing, or aduising the enemies
to the Pope, or Spaniard, or french king, should well know. but the archpriest
and his adherents both send letters, and give advise to the Pope and Spaniard,
the best they can. they do also write to Irish and English rebels. neither is
there any almost of the Iesuited faction, but he writes to Parsons a notorious
traitor; and Allen, while he lived, was made acquainted by these fellows, of
whatsoever passed in England either publickely or privately.

Blackewell and his assistants, and whole faction, that continually receive
letters, directions, briefs and other instructions from foreign enemies? and if
these fellows be so far engaged in treason; then are they not clear, that
shall hide them, and conceal them, and maintain them.

Robert Parsons, and the priests, that come out of the seminaries of Rome and
Spain, who either by oath, or promise stand engaged to promote, I know not,
whether I should call it, a title or a dream of Parsons concerning a title by
him cast upon the Infanta of Spain to the crown of England? The Proved by
the treatises of secular priests.
same man also not long since offered the crown to the duke of Parma, and
others. neither wants he a number to consort with him; especially of those,
that favor the spaniard.

Paulus the lawyer does account of such no otherwise, then as of enemies. Qui
malo consilio says L. post liminium.. transfugae. ff. de Captiu. and postli^.
he, and proditoris animo patriam dereliquit, hostium numero habendus est.
neither do I suppose, that either the Pope, or Spaniard, or any prince in the
world does otherwise account of their rinegued fugitives, the^ of traitors:
which may in part also appear by the severity of the punnishment by law
inflicted upon such persons. transfugae ad hosts, says the L. si quis..
transfugae. ff. de paenis.
law, aut viui exurantur, aut furca suspendantur. by this law it appears,
that our rinegued english Jesuits, and priests have great favor, that hitherto
have escaped the penalty of the law, that adiudgeth men in their cases worthy
of such grievous punnishment. and certes, seeing our adversaries think it
lawful to burn men for transgressing the vain traditions of men, as for
example for reading of an english testament, for eating flesh in lent and such
like; they cannot say, but such as seek the destruction of their country, and
run to foreign enemies deserve with all severity to be punnished. that our
mass priests have forsaken their country to fly to the enemies, it cannot be
denied. nay in the cases of conscience resolved by Allen and Parsons cap. 1.
cas. 1. and cap. 3. they are taught by pretty equivocations, to deny their
country.

which fraudulently enforces a man to to take an oath, to do an act against
the state. L. cuiusque ff. ad l. Iuliam may.
cuius dolo malo says Sceuola, iureiurando quis adactus est, quo aduersus
remp. faciat. likewise L. quisquis. c. ad legem Iuliam maiestatis.
Arcadius and Honorius pronounce him a traitor, qui scelestam cum militibus vel
priuatis, vel barbaris inierit factionem, aut factionis eius sacramentum
susceperit, vel dederit. that is, which shall enter into a wicked faction with
soldiers, with private men, or barbarous nations or shall either give or take
an oath to maintain that faction. the Romans did therefore call conspirators,
Coniuratos, because those, that intended treason against the state, did bind
themselves one to another by an oath not only to keep matters secret, but also
to prosecute the intended treason with effect. If then the Iebusits, and
seminary men take an oath to their superior of blind obedience, as they call
it; to the Pope, that they shall go whether he will send them; to the Spaniard
to serve him faithfully, to Robert Parsons to maintain the title of the
Infanta of Spain; how can they excuse themselves from treason in this point?
if they deny, that they take such oath, not only their own conscience, but
also the testimony of Nauarrus consil. lib. 3. de regularib. cons. 1. and
Ribadineira lib. 3. de schism. c. 21. and the confession of diverse seculer
priests, in diverse treatises published against the Jesuits, and their faction,
will plainly convince them.

agnus dei, their grains, their consecrated beads, and such other trash, and
are shorn and greased for the popes sheep, and Spanish servants, are
undoubtedly by all reason to be taken for traitors. And if any reply, that it
is a ridiculous and strange law, that men should be reputed traitors for
bringing in, or having the popes bulls, and an agnus dei, and blessed grains,
medalles, and such toies; it may be answered, that not to have these things
simply is treason, but to have them as marks of faction, and signs to
discern the heard of anthichrist from others. and that do the papists well
know. Allen also and Parsons in their hellish resolutions of cases of
conscience, affirm, that such medalles, and grains bind men in devotion to
the popes see, which they call apostolic. haec grana and metalla benedicta say
Resolut. c. 1. cas. 2.
they, multum confer possunt, ad afficiendos populos erga apostolicam sedem.
again to be shorn a priest, and greased after the popish manner in it self is
not so much treason, as superstition and false religion. but when it is known,
that such greased goats are signed for the popes and Spaniards agents in
England, to set forward the Spanish invasion, or the Popes cause; he is very
simple, that does not understand him to be a traitor, whose pole is shorn by
the pope and his faction; and who carries with him the marks of the Spanish
faction.

Roman laws. L. quisquis, Cod. ad l. Iuliam maiestatis.
Arcadius and Honorius pronounce them guilty of treason, which shall by faction
attempt to murder their principal counselors or officers, and the reason is,
for that they in doing justice are but the princes lieutenants, and do nothing
but his commandment. in this point therefore the Jesuits and priests are no
less guilty then in the rest. the pope he excommunicateth not only the
Queen, but all that do adhere unto her, and do her service. being therefore
to execute the popes bull, as calves begotten by the bull of Bashan the pope,
the priests and Jesuits must needs seek first the destruction of these
principal men, and then of the rest. furthermore we are given to understand,
that one principal point of Parsons and other Jesuits consultations is, how
to procure certain principal men to be either made away or disgraced. in the
mean while being not able to do worse, Parsons and Creswell under the title
of Andreas Philopater, and others have set out most vilanous libels against her
Majesty's principal counselors, officers, and agents.

Stanley and York and their followers showed themselves to be notable traitors
to deliver up Deuenter, and their soldiers into the Queens enemies hands.
Allen also, and all his scholars and followers, that allowed that fact, showed
themselves to be traitors, in applauding to their disloialty and wickedness.

Extr. feud. c. qui sunt rebaelles.
emperors do declare them to be rebels, and disloiall traitors, which either
openly, or conuertly do the works of rebels, or practice against the
prosperity of the state. in this case therefore are they, that either oppugn,
or deny the princes right, and title; or else advance the right of foreign
potentates, to dispose of the crown: or else which practice against the person
of their sovereign lord, as says Socinus the younger, lib. 3. consil. 105. and
Alciat consil. 456. or that shall conspire against the state of the prince, or
commonwealth, as may be proved by the testimony of Baldus consil. 58. and
sequent. and Alexander consil. 13. lib. 6. and Jason consil. 86. lib. 3. or
that shall make peace, or contract friendship with the princes enemies, as
says Decius consil. 604. and 605. or finally that shall do any act
prejudicial to the prince or state. especially if they be subjects, and bound
by their natural allegiance to the prince and state. all which points do
nearely touch Robert Parsons, Creswel, Walpoole, and other rectors and scholars
of the english seminaries a broad, the archpriest Blackewell, his adherents and
al massepriests, and pensioners of the Pope and Spaniard both abroad and at
home, all that intertaine intelligence with traitors, and any way releive them,
and finally all factious malcontents, that are offended with the present state,
or present governors, and practice or endeavor to work innovation in the
government. and as for Parsons, Creswel, Garnet, and other Iebusits, and
cananites that are archplotters of treasons against the prince and state, there
is no question to be made, but they are traitors. the In the epistle before the
treatise of important considerations.
secular priests charge Parsons, Creswel, Garnet and Blackwell to be wicked
members, and show, that they have sought to bring in foreign enemies into
England, to the overthrow not only of many noble families, but also of the
whole state. The author of the Quodlibets, quodlib. 8. art. 10. confesses,
that the English seminaries beyond the seas are greatly degenerated from their
primitive foundation, and that now the heads of the scholars are filled with
treacheries, aequiuocations, dissimulation, hypocrisy and all kind of
falsehood. and that now priests in their missions are bound to take an oath for
the setting forth the Spanish Infantaes title. but if he had said nothing
thereof, yet we understand, that the seminaries beyond the sea are nothing else,
but dens, wherein young traitors are fostered up for the restoring of the
popes tyranny, and the furthering of the Spanish invasion. therein also for
many years no other consultations have been more rife, than how to bring her
Majesty to destruction, or to raise a rebellion, or to work some hurt to the
state, or to some principal governors thereof. As for the archpriest and his
faction, wherein I comprehend the provincial Garnet and other viperous
Jesuits, it is mere simplicity, not to understand, that they are still
working against the prince and state, and have wholly devoted themselves body
and soul to serve the Pope and Spaniard. To the pope they complain, and from
him they receive not only authority and direction, but commissions also and
faculties, and grants to sell licenses for eating white meat, dispensations in
diverse cases, and to traffike for beads, grains, and other such like
merchandise of Babylon. O simple papists, that suffer your selves to be abused
with these montebanks, charlatanes, impostors, and cousening merchants! O
unwise people, that prefer these toies and this most vain trash, and other
tricks of popish superstition, before true religion, before your allegiance to
your prince, and your love to your country, and, as if you were bewitched, run
your selves headlong into danger for love of those vain toies to join with
enemies, that hate your country, and care not a straw for you, if they may
obtain their own wicked purposes. All those likewise, that enterteine
intelligence with Parsons and such like traitors, or with rebels, or join in
any practice to further foreign enemies, or to hurt the state, which are many
abroad and at home, both priests and others, can not clear themselves of
treason. Finally, whosoever is a true papist, and according to Bellarmines Lib.
de ecclesia militant. c. 2.
definition lives in subjection to the pope, must needs be a false traitor to
her Majesty, and this country, as the case now stands. for if every papist
be bound to obey the popes sentence, and to hold them excommunicate, and
deposed, whom the pope shall excommunicate, and depose; as most papists teach,
and none dare deny, that believes the popes power and authority: then if the
Pope have excommunicated and deposed her Majesty, they are bound to hold her
excommunicate, and deposed, and to concur with him and his wicked agents, as
often as he will command and charge them to make ready for the execution of his
sentence. Again, if, as Allen a notorious traitor in the justification of
Stanley teaches, every papist in all wars, which may happen for religion, is
bound in conscience to employ his person and forces by the popes direction,
viz. how far, when, and where, either at home, or abroad he shall be directed:
then is every papist bound to be a rebel, and traitor as often as the pope
pleases and commands. and this sequel the secular priests also confess in
their Page 24.
treatise of important considerations, to be good, and acknowledge, that this
is Allens doctrine. contrariwise, if so be a man do not regard the popes
sentence, excommunication, and direction; then he is no papist, neither may he
ever look for the popes blessing.

Finally, it is treason, not only to practice against the prince and state,
but also to abet, to maintain, to aid, to relieve, or conceal such
practisers and traitors. By the common laws of England, all that are
accessaries in cases of treason, are punished as principals. likewise, the
Roman laws punished not only the principal actors in treason, and rebellion,
but also their abetters, counselors, and aiders, as lawyers teach in their
commentaries in l. proximum. l. cuiusque. and l. maiestatis. ad l. Iuliam
maiestatis. the same also may be gathered out of the text of the law. Finally,
this is usual in all crimes, as both the L. 16. qui epem ff. de furto. and
ibid. dd.
civil, and 11. q 3. c. qui consentit. and extr. de homicidio. c. ficut dignum.
canon laws do teach us. but few papists of any note can be found in England,
but they have either consulted with traitorous priests and Jesuits, or
relieved them, or receited them, or had intelligence with them. let them
therefore thank God for the favor, which this state bestows on them without
all desert of theirs, and beware hereafter, that they send no relief to
seminaries abroad, nor receipt such traitors at home, nor have any dealing with
such, as are known to depend upon foreign enemies. The state has had exceeding
patience in their behalf hitherto. but even most patient persons by continual
prouocations may be urged to change their course. Cicero de legibus lib. 3.
Salus populi suprema lex est. the safety of the state is a matter above all
others to be regarded. L. lex. ff. de legibus.
the law also without punishment of offenders is dead. Lex, says Papinian, est
delictorum quae sponte, vel ignorantia contrahuntur, coercitio. Ibidem. l.
legis virtus.
Modestinus teaches us, that the life, and efficacy of the law consists in
commanding, forbidding, permitting, and punishing. take away execution and
punishment; and you not only overthrow the law, but the state also.

Now if any offense deserve punishment; then sure, traitors may not think to
escape, that seek to dissolve both laws, and state. Treason, says Rerum
Graec. lib. 2.
Xenophon, is so much more dangerous, by how much it is more difficult, to take
heed of traitors, than of enemies. with our enemies we may be reconciled. but
traitors are never to be trusted. the offense being so great, many
extraordinary courses are taken in the repressing of treasons. In hoc
atrocissimo delicto, says a certain Clarus sententiar. lib. 5.. laesae may.
lawyer, lex nonnulla specialia introduxit. and commonly such persons are most
hateful. I have learned, says In prometheo.
Aeschylus, to hate traitors, neither is any villainy more hateful than
treason. Traitors are common enemies to all men, that love the state, or their
liege Sovereign. Omnium communis est hostis, says Lib. 1. accusat. in Verrem.
Tully, qui hostis est suorum. Who then would not hate them, that wickedly
consort themselves with the Pope and Spaniard against the state?

The prince has principal reason to repress this faction. for she carries
not the sword for nothing. and if she should neglect the danger in regard of
her own particular, yet will she not neglect their safety, whose estate
depends so much upon the saftie of her person. further, she has little cause
given her to extend her clemency to this viperous generation and their
adherents, that show extreme malice in seeking the destruction of her kingdom
by bringing in foreign enemies. they have also slandered her Majesty's noble
father, herself, her friends, her servants and the whole state, as appears
by Sanders his book of schism, by Andreas Philopater, Didimus Veridicus, and
diverse other infamous libels set out by Parsons, and other wicked Jesuits.
Finally, no prince can endure such to have the benefit of subjects, that will
neither acknowledge his souereignty, nor submit themselves to laws.

The ecclesiastical state may not endure either Baals priests to set up
idolatry, or false teachers to broch false doctrine, and privily to bring in
superstition and heresy.

Her Majesty's council assuredly will not wink at any practice or complot
against their prince and country; but with all severity will proceed against
the authors of them, and all their factious partakers.

The chief officers and nobility of the relme have no reason to bear with
them, which by alteration of state, seek to deprive them of their honors, and
to dispose of their lands and goods at their pleasure. neither is it the part
of a generous and noble english mind, to suffer themselves to be disgraced and
ouerruled, if not tirannized by Parsons his council of reformation, by
Italians and Spaniards, and the very scumme of all villainy.

The reverend judges will never suffer such to escape unpunished, as seek the
subversion of justice. neither may lawiers endure those, that go about to
overthrow their country laws, and to bring in strange laws, and to rule all
by force and violence, as may appear by Parsons treacherous plots, and his most
infamous council of reformation.

All true subjects, I suppose, will rather die, then suffer the tyranny of
strangers. and therefore I need not animate either her Majesty, or the
ecclesiastical state, or her council, or her chief agents, or her nobility
or judges, or the lawiers, or the rest of her subjects, to encounter and to
resist the plots of these Iebusits and traitorous massepriests, that seek for
the establishment of their massing ceremonies, and most wicked religion, to
bring in strangers, to cut their own countrymens throtes, to abuse their
wives, and daughters, and finally to destroy this flourishing kingdom, and
their own most dear country. the safety of the commonwealth as all politics
know, and Arist. polit. lib. 3. c. 3.
teach, is the common work of all true citizens, and well minded subjects: and
I doubt not, but as all men detest such, as oppugn the state, so they will all
join together and have a vigilant eye to look to their execrable plots
intended against the state.

Finally, reason and experience may teach the papists, that howsoever some of
them hope to win by shuffling of matters of state; yet that most of them shall
rather loose then win. they may also see, that many have lost their lives and
livings, that have been practisers in rebellion and treason. and foreign aides
do commonly first oppress those, that use them: and finally forsake them.
examples hereof they may see in the rebellion of the north and of Ireland, if
they be not blind: and consider them they may, if they will be led with reason.

Wherefore I doubt not, but as all men may see the treasons of priests, and
Jesuits, and their adherents to be made manifest; so they shall shortly see the
execution of laws against them. that such as have been executed for practicing
in the popes cause, are no martyrs, as papists give out, it may easily be
proved. for even the adversaries themselves will confess, that traitors
against the prince and state are no martyrs. unless therefore Parsons can
clear his consorts of those points of treason, which I have declared and
objected, and show, that they adhered not to foreign enemies, nor had
intelligence with traitors, that sought the destructoon of the prince and
state, nor offended in any other points of treason, before rehearsed; he must
needs confess himself, and his consorts to be rather in state of treason,
then martyrdom.

Christ Jesus. but such papists as have been executed in England of late
years, have died for the maintenance of antichrists tyranny, and packing with
foreign enemies, and matter of treason against the prince and state, and for
other offenses deserving death. and this is manifestly proved by the
enditements framed against them, by the depositions of witnesses, confessions
of the parties, and the whole form of their trial judgment and execution.
neither is it material, that some were accused for bringing in, or having of
medalles, or grains, others for being made priests by the popes faction,
others for reconciling men to the pope; which are points, as the papists say,
of their popish religion. for albeit medalles and grains are not simply of
themselves notes of treason; yet seeing the pope does use them, as marks of
his faction; it were simplicity not to understand, that such as use them are of
his adherents. Again, to be a priest simply in it self is no treason. but if
priests, that are ordered by the popes faction take an oath of obedience to him,
that is our enemy, and are bound to set forth his cause for the regaining of
England to his obedience; then to be made priest by the popes agents, is
argument sufficient to prove a man to be a traitor. likewise it is no treason
simply to be addicted to the superstitions of the Romish church, no more then
it is to be Sarracen or Turk; yet to be reconciled to the Pope, and to
receive absolution from his agents, is treason, he being a professed enemy of
the state, and using this reconciliation and color of religion for a means to
overthrow her Majesty, and this kingdom, and to reestablish yet once again
his tyranny in England. finally to obey good bishops cannot be evil
interpreted but to submit a man's self to the pope, that pretends to have
right to depose princes, and to translate kingdoms from one to another at
pleasure (a matter repugnant to scriptures, to the practice of the apostles,
and primitive church, and as Sigebertus Gemblacensis testifies speaking of
Gregory the seventh his time, a notarious and plain condemned heresy) cannot
but prejudice the right of a prince in enmity with the pope, and prove flat
treason.

that is thankeswoorthy says saint 1. Pet. 2.
Peter, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.
such were the martyrs of times past, who suffered death, because they would not
deny the Lord Christ Jesus, nor sacrifice to idols. but the popes martyrs
suffer for practicing with foreign enemies, and die for the Popes pleasure, and
desire nothing more then to set up idolatry. for conscience they cannot say,
they suffer, unless the make treason against their prince and country a
matter of conscience, and rule their conscience by the Popes will, and make no
conscience of idolatry or blasphemy. neither can they say, they are punished
wrongfully, being punished for their treasons, rebellions and packings against
the state with foreign enemies. whosoever therefore shall entitle and call these
fellows martyrs, he shall greatly wrong religion, and the state of martyrs,
and much resemble the Donatistes, and other old heretics. Saint Epist. 68.
Augustine says of the Donatists, viuebant vt latrones, honorabantur, vt
martyrs. Alexander also an heretic, of whom Lib. 5. eccles. Just. c. 17.
Eusebius makes mention, lived as a thief, and died for his deserts, and yet
by those of his sect was honored as a martyr. such martyrs also are those of
the popish sect. for whatsoever reckoning their consorts make of them, they
were punished justly for their offenses, and died for treason, rebellion,
practicing and packing with foreign enemies.

Fourthly true martyrs are charitable, and die in charity. for without
charity, furious and Jesuitical zeal to promote the Popes cause avails
nothing. if I give my body to be burned says the 1. Cor. 13.
apostle, and have not love, it profits me nothing. now what charity, think
you, had they, that were employed by public enemies to the hurt and
destruction of their liege Lady, and most dear country? Charity says the
Ibid.
apostle, is patient, gentle, humble. but these by force of arms sought to
return into their country, and like fierce lions endeavor by conquest to
subdue men to their opinions. anno 1588 their common talk was of sharing of
lands and livings. In Wisbich also all the stirs among the papists grew about
superiority, the Jesuits seeking to rule, the rest refusing to be ruled by
them. Parsons they say has an old prophecy how England must be ruled by
certain men in long black gowns, and square caps, that is by Jesuits. and
long he has been dreaming of a cardinals hat. yet none falls to his share.
in all the English colleges and seminaries the Jesuits by great stirs have
sought the government. A discovery of Campian and his consorts.
Cottam an English Jesuit being condemned to die, praid God, that he would
send down fire from heaven to consume all the people, that stood round about
him to gaze on him. and this is the gentleness and charity of Jesuitical
martyrs. when Sixtus quintus told the Jesuits, that he wondered, that none of
their order were canonized for saints; some of them answered, that they sought
honors in the church triumphant, and not in the church militant. such
triumphant martyrs are these of the popes and Jesuits calender.

Fifthly, true martyrs are men of a peaceable disposition, and no way desirous
of tumults and troubles. Lib. 3. contr. parmen.
si supra memoratos says Optatus, videri martyrs vultis, probate illos amasse
pacem, in qua prima sunt fundamenta martyrij; aut dilexisse deo placitam
vnitatem; aut habuisse cum fratribus vnitatem, sine qua nullum vel nomine
potest, vel re esse martyrium. his words in effect amount to this, that none
can be martyrs, unless they they be studious of peace, and unity. if then the
papists neither agree with us, nor with themselves, and are given much to
contention, and continually have stirred up wars, and hurliburlies, in diverse
countries, and have like firebrands set most parts of Christendom on a flame,
as appears by their actions in England, Scotland, France, Germany, Flanders,
Suethland, and other places; why should such men dying rather be accounted
martyrs, then the contentious Donatists?

Sixthly the true martyrs of Christ Jesus died in time past for the true faith
of Christ delivered unto us in the apostles writings. but the popish mastifs
died for the popes excommunications, and for defense of his most unjust and
tirannicall usurpations, according to such doctrine, as they had received out
of the popes decretales, and their masters dictates. who then does not marvel,
that any should be so bold, as to call such obstinat fellows, that died out of
the church, and for no point of faith were so much as once called in question,
martyrs? cum deo manner non possunt says Cyprian, qui esse in ecclesia dei
vnanimes nolueru^t. ardeant licet flammis, and ignibus traditi, and obiecti
bestiis animas suas ponant, no^ erit illa fidei corona, sed poena perfidiae:
occidi talis potest, coronari non potest. if then these good fellows have
forsaken the church, and linked themselves with enemies and traitors, die they
may for their treasons, but crowned they shall not be as martyrs. neither is it
death, but ye cause, that makes christians dying to be esteemed martyrs.

Seuently, no true martyr ever seemed more desirous of the applause and praise
of men, then of the glory of God, and good of Christ's people. fi ita martyrium
fecerimus says In epist. ad Galat. lib. 3. c. 5.
Hierome, vt nostras velimus ab hominibus reliquias venerari, si opinionem
vulgi sectantes intrepidi sanguinem fuderimus, and substantiam nostram vsque ad
mendicitatem propriam dederimus; huic operi non tam praemium, quam paena
debetur, and perfidiae magis tormenta sunt, quam corona victoriae. his meaning
is, that they cannot be martyrs that seek the applause of the multitude, and
for vainglory die obstinate in their opinions. if then the popes agents in
England sought nothing more, then their own glory and praise, and the applause
of the pope, and cardinals, and the simple people adhering unto them, it were
but a simple imagination, to suppose them to be martyrs. Christian martyrs
certes sought not their own glory, nor the applause of men. nor did they
solicit the invasion of their country, and domestical tumults, that they
might reign like young lords.

Eighthly, it was not the fashion of martyrs, in ancient time, to renounce their
kings and sovereign princes, and to refuse to acknowledge their authority. for
well they knew, that the apostle had taught them obedience, and not rebellion,
nor contumacious resisting against the princes power. omnis anima says Romans 13.
he, potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit. neither did the holy martyrs of
Christ's church set out most slanderous libels against men in authority, or
allow any such course. finally we do not read, that ever any godly martyr, did
bear arms against lawful princes, or go about to depose them, or murder them
upon bishops, or other men's commandment whatsoever. Hieremy he had more
authority then has the pope. constitui te hodie super gentes, says Hierem. 1.
God unto him, that is, I have appointed thee over nations, and he had power to
pull up and to destroy. yet we read not, that he commanded any prince to be
deposed or murdered. but Campian and his consorts, whom the papists
notwithstanding celebrate and repute martyrs, did disclaim her Majesty's
authority, and adhered to the popes declaration, as appears by their answers
yet to be seen. all priests also, that come from Rome in their cases of
conscience, which they will not deny, are taught to deny her Majesty to be
their lawful Queen. Robert Parsons Campians fellow has since his execution
proved a notorious libeller. both the pretended martyrs themselves have set
out slanderous libels against their prince, and the state, and have well liked
of the slandrous and lying writings of Sanders, Harpsfield, Ribadineira,
Rishton, Parsons, Bristow, Creswell, and others. When the army of the Pope and
Spaniard was ready to come for England anno 1588. then was Parsons, they say,
very busy in printing pope Sixtus his scandalous declaration against her
Majesty, and Allens railing and scurrilous letters to the nobility and people
of England and Ireland. A In an answer to a libell set out by Parsons.
friend of his also does charge him, that his finger was both in the making,
and dispersing that infamous libell. and yet the pretended popish martyrs would
neither mislike the authors, nor these wicked libels, nor any thing else, that
might work disgrace either to her majesty or the state. Finally, the earl of
Northumberland, and the two Nortons, and diverse priests, whom Bristow in his
Motives, and Sanders in his books De visibili Monarchia, and diverse others do
celebrate for martyrs, are in the Crown office and public records registered
for men of a far diverse quality. Among these certes the earl of
Northumberland and the Nortons were principal actors in the rebellion anno
1569. and diverse of the rest were spotted with other treasons. But percase, it
is a matter not unusual for the pope to put those in the Calender of martyrs,
whom public executioners register in their books for rebels and traitors. in
which rank, it may be, that James Clement, that murdered king Henry the third
of France, and Ghineard the Jesuit, that allowed that murder, and was
therefore executed, and Chastell, that assaulted Henry the fourth of France now
reigning, shall sometime or other be entered, and be reputed as good saints, as
the best.

Christ Jesus did ever suppose it a thing lawful, to break their others of
allegeame to their princes upon any excommunication, or other warrant of popes
or bishops. In Chronic. and Auentin. annal. 7.
Sigebertus Gemblacensis says, it is a pernicious heresy to believe, that the
pope can discharge subjects from the bond of an oath, and from their allegiance.
but the popes martyrs, or rather unnatural, and churlish mas^ifs, did not only
take themselves to be discharged from their allegiance, and joined with foreign
enemies, but also persuaded as many as they could, to take arms against their
prince and country.

that any martyr of Christ Jesus did ever deny his name, quality, kindred,
and prince, all together; nor that they used equivocations, and dissembled
their faith; nor finally, that they went apparelled like spadassins, and
ruffians. but these pretended popish martyrs do not only all this, but also
are resolved by Allen and Parsons, that it is lawful so to do. The Resolut.
quorundam casuum nationis Anglicanae. c. 1.
case being put, vtrum sacerdos possit habitum mutare, comam nutrire, nomen,
and patriam, and parents negare; they answer thus: potest. nec videtur in ea
re dubium. potest enim quis veritatem tacere, vel dissimulare. The same good
fellows determine also, quod dissimulatio est licita. that is, that
dissimulation is lawful. and afterward they say, it is pious to use
dissimulation, for that it is lawful to lay ambuscadoes for enemies. so it
appears they take all their countrymen, that favor the state, for enemies,
and would take them in ambuscadoes, if they could. and this, if we look not to
it, they have fully purposed, and resolved, as may appear by their resolved
cases. Concerning the Queen, they say, she is not lawful. the more they to
blame, that hold them for lawful subjects. Regina haeretica, say Ibidem.
they, non est legitime regina. and again, non gerit se vt reginam, sed
exercet tyrannidem. Finally, the disciples of these traitors are taught to
renounce their country, and to give no respect to their parents, if they be
not of the Romish religion.

machiauelian tricks; nor to equivocate in places of judgment; nor to forswere
themselves, being examined, and interrogated by their superiors. but the
schoolemasters of our popish priests, and the popes calves, and designed popish
mastifs do inform them, that they may do both without any scruple of
conscience. sciant say Ibidem. c. 3. cas. 3.
they, se vti posse aequiuocationibus, and iurare sine peccato. Now by
aequiuocations, they mean promises and oaths made, not according to common and
literal meaning, nor according to the understanding of the judge, but
according to a certain hidden meaning of the party. and by swearing they
understand false forswearing, according to our common understanding. they
Ibidem.
teach also, that a priest is no more to regard an oath to the Queens officers,
then if he should swear to pirates and robbers. are not these gallant fellows
then, trow you that suppose the Queens justices to be like pirates and
robbers, and that pirates and robbers may as well spoil men by the high way,
as they deal with priests according to her Majesty's laws?

Donatists died desperately; and so likewise did the heretics called
Euphemitae, which for the multitude of their supposed martyrs, would needs be
called Epiphan. haeres. 80.
Martyriani. yet did the church of god no otherwise account of them, then as of
lewd heretics, and not as of martyrs, as appears by the testimony of
Eusebius, Epiphanius, Augustine, and other fathers. We read also in histories,
that Turks, Tartares, and Mores oftentimes die most resolutely or rather
desperately for the blasphemous opinions of Mahomet, and that the Matthew. Paris.
Assassins, that were a sect of desperate cutthrotes like to the Iebusits, that
desperately would adventure to dispatch whomsoever their general commanded
them to murder, suffered death most willingly and constantly. and this they
accounted a special point of their bloody religion. yet it were mere madness
to repute such fellows martyrs. why then should the papists that have broken
their necks and died for the popes cause, and whom we have clearly proved, to
be heretics, be accounted martyrs? nay why should rebels, traitors, and
Assassins, such as Parrye, who by the Cardinal of Comoes letters, and the
popes promises, was enduced to lay violent hands on her Majesty, and such like
wicked men be named martyrs? if because they are put in the popes calender, it
may be easily replied, that as at Rome they are put in the popes calender, so
at Newgate, and such places, they are put in the hangmans calender. further it
is Christ's truth, and not the popes faction, that makes martyrs.

Those therefore, that died in the popes quarrel, are traitors, and not
martyrs. and that will be the case also of all their consorts, if they pass
that way, which I would have not only all Jesuits and massepriests to
consider, but also all those, that like their humors, and opinions. neither is
it material, that grace has been offered to some, that have been executed for
treason, if they would have renounced the pope, and his treacherous doctrine and
faction. for that shows not, that the parties, to whom this grace was
offered, were no traitors, but rather her Majesty's great clemency, that was
willing to pardon all, of whom any hope might be conceived, that they would
become good subjects. so likewise if a man should offer pardon to an Assassin,
it does not prove that such as murder men upon a lewd conceit of wrong religion
died as martyrs.

If then the papists be not the true church; I trust all true Christians will
avoid them. if their doctrine be neither ancient, nor catholic, I hope true
catholics will no longer suffer themselves to be abused by them. if they be
heretics; they will, I trust, for very shame forbear to impute heresies to
true Christians. if massepriests be idolaters; I hope religious Christians will
take order with them, as godly kings did with Baals priests. finally if
massepriests and the popes agents have so far engaged themselves in treason;
I hope all true subjects will learn to detest popery, not only in regard,
that it is a false religion, but also, because it is a pack of lewd opinions
borne out with all fraud, vileny and treason. which because it flows from the
forge of Antichrists authority and invention; let us beseech God, to reveal
daily more and more the man of sin, that such as now are abused by him, may
forsake him, and serve God in spirit and truth according to his holy word. And
thus much may serve for the declaration and justification of my challenge. it
rests now, that I answer my adversaries exceptions and cauils.

An answer first unto such exceptions, as by a certain namelesse, and
worthless fellow are taken to the Challenge precedent: and next unto the same
parties most idle observations. Thereto also is added a brief of certain
notorious falsifications and untruths of the Papists.
Chap. 1. An answer to Owlyglasses exceptions concerning thirteen untruths,
supposed to be contained in M. Sutcliffes Cha^lenge.
Sect. 1.
The first supposed untruth cleared.
IN 19. pages of my challenge, and all direct contrary to the doctrine of
Papists, Owliglasse cannot find so much, as any occasion of cavil. In the 20.
pag^rapi^ numb. 10. in my former, and in the latter, cap. 4 numb. 43. be
takes hold of this, that I say, That the Papists use exorcismes, blowings,
salt, spittle, hallowed water, annoyntings, light, and diverse ceremonies,
neither used by the Apostles, nor practiced by the ancient Church. And this,
says he, is an untruth so manifest, that Calvin does confess it. Owlyglasse
talking of untruths in others, himself utters two gross untruths in the
first charge.
But what if it be true? and what if Master Calvin do not confess that, which
I say, to be untruth? Is not Owlyglasse, where he goes about to detect me of
one untruth, manifestly taken in a tray, and detected to have uttered two
untruths in one breath? he cannot, though he would, deny it. Well then, let
us see first, whether my words contain untruth, and next, whether Calvin
confesses so much, or no.

Of my proposition there are two parts. First, I deny, that the Apostles used
these ceremonies now in question: and secondly, I deny, that they were
practiced by the ancient Church of Christ Jesus. Now against the first part of
my words, Owliglasse can object nothing, neither does he so much as touch it.
But went he about to allege any thing, yet the History of the Acts of the
Apostles, and Christ his institution would refute his allegations. For in
neither of the two, are any such ceremonies to be found.

Against the second part, he alleges Caluins words, Instit. lib. 4. ca. 15.
art. 19, for exufflations, halowing of water, annoynting, and light: and for
exorcismes in baptism, he produces Nazianzen. For salt he quoteth the words
of Origin. For spittle he cites the words of Ambrose, and the name of Petrus
Chrysologus. But neither does Calvin, nor any of these fathers mention either
the use of the Apostles, or practice of the ancient Church, nor does any father
speak of all these ceremonies together, nor can the practice of the Romish
Church in the signs, and forms of these ceremonies be justified by fathers,
either to have been in the whole Church, or in any one singular Church, nor to
come nearer to our adversaries, can any one concludent argument be drawn out
of any of the Fathers against that which I teach. Calvin says, He knows how
ancient the ceremonies of exufflation, Lib. 4. instit. ca. 15 number. 19
halowing of water, of annoynting, and lights is. Which if I should confess,
yet could not Owlyglasse conclude, that such ceremonies were used in the time
of the fathers of the Church, nor that they were used in the form, the
Romanists use them. Let him conclude if he list, and then he shall see his
error. Further if he be obstinate, let him prove, that the fathers prayed in
consecrating light, In Missali in Sabbato sa^cto
that devilish fraud might be expulsed by it: and while they hallowed water,
that it might be effectual to purge men's minds: and that they coniured water,
and salt, as the Romanists do, praying over hallowed water, Vt fiat aqua
exorcizata ad effugandam omnem potestatem inimici: All which, I trust, he does
not believe that Calvin said, or thought to be ancient.

Nazianzen says only, ne contemnas, De sancto baptism.
or as our adversaries translation has: ne despuas exorcismi curationem: that
is, Despise not the help of exorcisme. But that is nothing to other
ceremonies, about which we contend: neither out of these words can it be
proved, that exorcismes were used in the act of baptism, but rather otherwise,
when by extraordinary grace devils were driven out of the possessed.

Rehearsing the words of Origin, he does curtall them. He reports them thus.
Qui renascitur, debet sale saliri. Origens words stand thus: Oportet eum ergo,
qui renascitur vtique in Christo renascentem rationabile, and sinceru^ lac
desiderare, and prius quam rationabile. and sine dolo lac desideret, debet sale
saliri, and pannorum inuolucris colligari, ne dicatur ad eum, sale non es
salitus, and pannis non es inuolutus, Where I would pray the Archpriest
Blackwell to put on his spectacles, and see whether Owlyglasse has not with
his glass eyes corrupted the place. Against me this place of Orige^ makes
nothing, for neither does he mention all the ceremonies which are in question,
nor does he speak one word of the popish forms of exorcismes, nor does he
speak, as it seems literally, of salting, but allegorically understanding
true believing: Si credidero spiritui, qui in Apostolo loquutus est, says he,
Sale condior. And if our adversary will needs urge the litterall sense, then
must he needs confess, that men being baptized are to be lapped in clouts,
and to dr^ke milk. For Origin speaks of all these things alike. Finally, it
is a very ridiculous point to think, that every ceremony spoken of by
Origin, was vse^ throughout the universal Church.

De sacrament. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Saint Ambrose shows, that the priest used to touch the ears, and nostrils
of those that were baptized. At the least, he says so, under whose name the
books of sacraments, that are among S. Ambroses works, do pass. But that is
nothing to the purpose, unless Owlyglasse will confess, that whosoever does
touch his nose, does spit in his face also: which were a wonderful and
archpresbyterall interpretation.

He sends us also to Petrus Chrysologus. But if the man had said any thing
to the purpose, I doubt not, but he would have taken pains out of this golden
fellow, to fetch gold him self: whereas now he delivers to his reader
nothing but dross.

Lib. 1. de Baptism. ca. 25
Neither is Bellarmine able to afford Owliglasse any help in this case. For
albeit he raketh into all authors good and bad: yet can he allege no
sufficient testimony out of antiquity for the forms and ceremonies used by
the Popish Priests. Furthermore he cannot justify, that the rites of baptism,
that any one father speaks of, were generally received in all the Churches.
Finally, the forms of celebrating baptism described by Clement, Dionysius,
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, Basil, and other fathers do declare that no
such forms were in ancient ^me used, as the rituall books now in practice in
the Romish Church do prescribe. I have therefore sufficiently discharged my
self of the accusation he would fasten upon me.

Secondly, Calvin does not affirm any thing contrary to my words. For albeit
he knew how ancient some of the ceremonies are, which I deny to be used in the
first Churches: yet does he not express how ancient they are, nor speak any
thing of their several forms, nor confess any other thing contrary to my
assertion. To conclude this point, the conuenticle of Trent affirms, Sess. 7,
cap 13.
that none of these Ceremonies which we speak of, can be omitted without
sin. Which doctrine I hope Owlyglasse will not confirm either out of the
fathers, or out of Calvin. It is he therefore, and not I, that has committed
this fault of lying, unless he have somewhat else to allege for himself.

Cap. 1. Sect. 2. That it is not untruth to say, that the doctrine of the
Council of Trent, that denounces men accursed, that shall not hold baptism
to be necessary to salvation, is not Catholic.
MY adversary does also challenge me, Cap 2. page 12
because I affirm that the doctrine of the Council of Trent, that denounces
men accursed, that shall not hold baptism to be necessary to salvation, is
not Catholic. And to justify his challenge, he alleges for himself, first
S. Augustine, lib. 3. de Orig. animae. c. 9. Secondly the words of our book
of Common prayer. And thirdly mine own testimony, where I speak of the
pains of original sin. And in the end he concludes, that if the want of
baptism sends infants into hell fire, that it is necessary to salvation. But
all this tedious discourse is far from the purpose. For neither does any
father affirm, that such are accursed, that hold not baptism to be necessary
to salvation, which is the doctrine that I condemn, as not Catholic, nor can
any such thing be gathered out of the words of the Common prayer book, or of
any thing delivered by me. How then durst this vain fellow charge me with
untruth, being not able to allege one argument to convince me, or any
Catholic Father to speak against me, had he not steeled his face, and
dulled his understanding, so that he neither shameth at any thing, nor well
understands what he writes? Further this is contrary to promise made in the
beginning* for there he promised, that he would put the Reader to no more
labor, then to open the books and view the places that should be alleged.
And here he argues to his uttermost skill, and yet proves nothing.

But suppose I had indeed said, that all that die without baptism are not
damned, and had said that only, and not a^ded any thing concerning the curse of
the conuenticle of Trent, as I did: yet I hope this will not be proved to be
any untruth. For if Circumcision did resemble baptism, why should all infants,
especially borne of godly parents, rather be damned dying before Baptism, then
such as dyed before Circumcision? Secondly I hope our adversary will not say,
that the thief which confessed Christ on the cross, was damned, albeit he
died without Baptism. Nor is he able to show, that he was baptized, for that
troubled Saint Augustine, Lib. 3. de Orig. animae. cap. 9.
a man far more learned then himself, and yet that could not resolve
himself in this point. Thirdly Ambrose doubted not* but Valentinian was saved,
albeit he dyed without Baptism. De obitu Theodos^.
Fourthly our adversaries say, that there are three sorts of Baptismes, viz.
Of water, of the holy Ghost, and of blood: and Bellarmine confesses that
without Baptism men may be saved, Lib. 1. de baptismo, cap. 6.
marty^dome and the conversion of the heart to God supplying the defect of
Baptism: and it is a common saying, that not the want, but the contempt of
Baptism does damn those that depart this life without Baptism. Finally the
ground of that opinion, that condemns al dying without baptism, is laid upon
these words: Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua, and spiritu sancto, John. 3.
non potest int^oire in regnum Dei. And yet our Savior does speak these
words of Baptism, no otherwise then he utters these words in the sixth of
John: Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and d^inke his blood, ye
shall have no life in you. If then no interpreter, that expounds these words
of the Lords Supper, will thereupon conclude, that no man can be saved
unless he receive the Lords Supper, then do not the other words infer
necessity of Baptism. Unto S. Augustines words, lib. 3. de anima, cap. 9. I
answer, that he speaks of such as die in original sin, and seem to
contemn Baptism. But diverse may die without baptism, and yet not contemn
it. We say also in the administration of Baptism, that none is saved, that is
not regenerate. But it is impious to tie Gods grace unto Sacraments We do also
speak of the ordinary external means, by which salvation is obtained. But
we exclude not extraordinary courses. I do also confess, that infants dying
in original sin are damned to hell fire. But I hope no man will say, that
all that die before Baptism, albeit they much desired it, and believed in
Christ Jesus, dyed in original sin. But says Owlyglasse, You say that
children by Baptism are received into the Arc of Christ's Church. psalm. 1^.
But he was simple to conclude thereof, that none is received into the Arc
without Baptism. He says also, that Lay men and women by the book are
permitted to Baptize: but he should remember that it is shame for him to speak
untruth, who takes on him to control others in that behalf. He concludes
finally. Seeing the want of Baptism does send Infants to hell, that Baptism
is necessary to salvation. But his consequent is weak, and of no value. For
many die for want of knowledge, and for want of small matters, and not only of
Baptism. And yet God is not necessarily tied to save none, but such as are
baptized. Sick men also die for want of Physic: and yet is not physic
absolutely necessary. In this place therefore the detector wandreth out of the
way, and yet effects nothing.

Sect. 3. That Catholics use not after the Popish manner to separate man and
wife upon occasion of monastical vows.
HIs third accusation is grounded upon these words: They hold, that by mutual
consent the married couple may depart asunder, and that it shall not be lawful
afterward to company together. A matter not only strange in the catholic
church, during the Apostles and their successors times, for many hundred
years, but also contrary to Christ's doctrine. For what man can separate them,
whom God has conioined? but seeking to fasten an untruth upon me, he
commits a gross falsification himself. for he cutteth off my words in the
beginning, See the challenge, page 20.
and midst of the sentence, ^umbling the rest together very ill fauoredly, and
marring the grace of my sentence with his lewd handling. To help out the
matter, he alleges other words of mine, out of the 35. page, where I say,
that this proceeds from the new forge of popish invention. But as before, so
in this place he makes me speak of one thing in the singular number, where I
speak of prohibition and dissoluing of marriages for spiritual kindred, and
dissoluing of marriages contracted, and other matters in the plural. And
having framed my words after his own lewd fashion, and curtalled them at his
pleasure, he charge me with a notable untruth (as he calls it) For (says
he) there be testimonies and examples in the Primitive Church of married
folks, page 15.
that with mutual consent vowed perpetual, chastity. And to that purpose he
alleges Epiphanius, Hierom, ye 2. council of Arles, and S. Augustine. But
first he minceth the matter, and dare not say any thing directly contrary to
that, which I have written. For I say that married folks might not be so
separated, but that they might come together again. And he talks of
separation for a time. Now that which I say is most true, and is proved first
by our saviors words, Mat. 19. for as our savior says, that which God has
joined, let not man separate. Therefore marriage being instituted by God is not
to be broken by the tradition of man. Secondly, the words of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 7. are direct for me. To those that are co^ioyned in matrimony says he,
not I command, but the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband. And if
man and wife for a time depart, he wills the^ to come together again, least
the devil tempt them. Thirdly, the practice of the church proves, that I have
said true, Scelus est, says Chrysostom homil. 63. in Math. 19. in duo
diuidere vnam carne^, sic et muliere^ a suo viro diripere iniquissimum est. So
likewise says Theophylact. Si^ut impiu^ est sua^ carnem diuidere, ita et
coniuges diuellere. He says, It is a wicked thing to separate married folks.
Fourthly, reason shows, that if marriage be a knot indivisible, that married
folks cannot be upon pleasure sundered, and that it is a presu^ption
intolerable for the Pope to dissolve marriage, whose institution is from God.
Finally, it appears by Bellarmines dispute, de Monachis c. 37. who handling
this point with more cunning then this poor swad, yet is not able to prove
that married couples were separated for religion in ancient time, or that this
practice was conformable to Christ's, or his Apostles doctrine, as I have
verified against Bellarmine in my treatise de Monachis. As for the examples and
testimonies alleged by Owliglasse, they either are from the purpose, or make
against him Neither Epiphanius nor Hierome says, that married folks used not to
be admitted unto holy orders, except they did promise perpetual continency from
their wives, as Owliglasse with his glassy conscience affirms, (for neither
of them has one word of promise or vow) but the contrary rather. Haeres. 59.
Ad huc viuente^ et liberos gignentem vnius vxoris viru^ says Epiphanius, non
suscipit (ecclesia), sed eum, qui se ab vna continuit. He has not one word of
any promise, nor does he deny, that priests may return back again to company
with their wives. Nay, he says in the same place, that priests and deacons
have wives, and keep children, albeit against the outward rule of the church.
So it appears, that this abstinence from wives, was but an humane ordinance,
and not observed in all places: which is that which I say.

Hierome likewise says, that in certain churches they chose clerks of
bachilars, widows, Contra vigilant. in princip.
or such as desisted to be husbands. But the question is, whether the church
universally had any such order. And secondly whether married priests did promise
or vow continency, and thirdly, whether they might not return to their wives:
in all which points Hierome fails Owliglasse. Nay Hierome says, that
certain bishops ordained none, but married priests, seeing the lubricity of
others. Indeed I confess he disliked it, but the question betwixt Owlyglasse
and me is concerning the practice of the Church.

The 2. Council of Arles, is said to be celebrated in Siluester and
Constantines time. But the acts of that supposed Council describe a form of
the Church far disagreeing from those times. Besides that the copies of it
differing much one from another, as Surius testifies, do show the acts not to
be authentical. But suppose they were, yet nothing is contained in the 2. Canon
of that Council quoted by Owlyglasse, but that no married man shall be made
priest, nisi fuerit promissa conuersio. Which if our adversary do translate,
unless he promise continency from his wife, as he does, then must he condemn
marriage to be sinful. Which if he do, then does Owlyglasse teach doctrine of
Devils. If conversion signify turning from wicked life, the Canon makes
nothing against me. That the 199. Epistle to Ecdicia in the works of Saint
Augustine was written by him, we, are not bound to believe, seeing many
Epistles daily foysted in among his, that are clearly known to be
misbegotten. But were it his, and did he write, that Ecdicia, and her husband
promising continency, were to persevere in that purpose: yet that proves not,
that if they were not able to perform their vow, that therefore they might not
come together. For they lived in one house together, and took no solemn vow.
Ei obsequi says the author of that Epistle, in domestica conuersatione
debuisti. Beside that, they had house and goods, and the woman was reprehended,
for that she gave them away: which is contrary to the course of Monkery in our
times. Finally albeit this were the opinion of one man, is it not ridiculous,
to think, that all the Church in external matters was led, and governed by
one man's opinion?

To that place which I alleged out of the 19. of Math. he answers, that the
band of matrimony does continue still after the vow of continency. But if he
speak of the vow of continency after marriage solemnized, and not consummate,
he does show himself to be ignorant what his own side does hold. For the
Council of Trent, Ses. 24. cap. 6. does decree, that such marriages by vows of
monastical religion are quite dissolved. The same also does Bellar. lib. de
Monach. 2. cap. 38. by arguments endeavor to prove. If he deny that marriage
consummate is dissolved by vows, yet Cassian collat. 21. c. 10. and the last
law Cod. de episc. and Cleric. is against him. Likewise seems Peter Lomb. to
hold lib. 4 sent. did. 31.. 2. Angelus in authent. de episc. and cleric. and
Baldus in authen^, sed hodie. C. de adulter. The same also albeit by the
Canonists denied C. ex publico. and C. ex part tua. de conuersione coniugat.
Yet in effect by the Popish practice is granted. For seeing the married couples
may no more company together, nor live together, nor yield mutual offices of
marriage love one to another: who does not acknowledge that in effect the Pope
does break the hands of marriage, and repugneth against his opinion, that
writes to Ec dicia? for he would have her to serve her husband in all things.
Inter August. Epist. 199.


Sect. 4. That Masses and prayers for souls departed, and special offices for
the dead were never frequented by true Catholics.
WHere I affirm, that the Papists say Masses and prayers for souls departed,
and for the dead have appointed special offices, and that my adversary shall
never be able to prove, that such Masses, prayers, and offices have bin
frequented by true Catholics, there Owlyglas stormeth and shows great
impacience. Belike he perceives that I touch his freehold, and wound him
mortally. For in the Mass the very soul of popery consists. And rather would
the priests loose all the rest of their trinkets, then Masses and Dirges, which
to Mass priests is prora and puppis, and the foundation of all their hope.
Therefore he says, that this which I say, is an untruth in grain. But if he
were not a dizard in grain, he would not so rashly have adventured upon this
point. For the first part of my proposition he cannot deny, unless he will
forswear the Mass, as he has forsworn his liege sovereign. The second also
cannot be denied, unless Rob. Parsons, or he can prove the contrary. Let us
therefore see, if he can prove, that Masses, and Dirges, and set offices for
souls departed, have been frequented of true Catholics.

Homil. 69. ad populum.
First he alleges the testimony of Chrysostom, yt says, that not without
cause it was ordained by the Apostles, that in the dreadful mysteries
co^memoration should be made of the dead, knowing thereby, that much gain and
profit does come unto them. Secondly he alleges Epiph. and August. that seem
to say, that Aerius was condemned for denying, that sacrifices and oblations
were to be offered for the dead, or that prayers were to be made for them.
Thirdly he alleges, Caluins confession, that says, it was a received custom
1300. years agone to pray for the dead, and reproves S. August. and Monica for
it. Finally he calls out my brother Willet for a witness against me, in that
he says, that diverse ancient writers inclined to maintain and commend prayer
for the dead. And yet all this comes short of yt, which he would prove. For
first in all these proofs there is no mention of special offices for the
dead. Secondly there cannot any Mass be showed like unto the Masses of
Requiem aeterna^. Thirdly the Masses set out under Chrysostoms, Basils, and
other fathers names, are of one sort only. Neither shall you find, that beside
the ordinary form, they had speciales Missas votiuas, or Masses proper for the
dead. Fourthly the commemoration made of the dead in times past was at the
first a recital of the names of the dead without any prayer added for
remission of sins. Fifthly in the Canon of the Mass in the old ordinall of
Rome, the prayer for the dead is left out. Sixthly Chrysostom. never believed
Purgatory. For in the 3. Hom. upon the Epistle to the Philip he says, that
just men whether living or dead are with Christ. He would also have prayers
made for sinners, and for those, that die entangled in love of riches, and per
consequent great sinners. Likewise in the 69 Homily, Ad populum Antioch. he
says, that just men dying see God face to face, and would have Christians he
mourn for those that are dead in sins. Excogite^ eis ^uid solatii, says
he, modicum quidem, ^lamemus tamen. These he would have also to be remembered
in the celebratio^ of the holy mysteries, and would have alms distributed for
them. And this is that oblation, that the fathers speak of. Finally, never
shall Owlyg^asse prove, that Chrysostom, or Augustine, or any father believed,
that Christ's body and blood was offered for the dead, as the Papists use to
offer it, or that we are to pray, as they prayed in the memento for the dead,
in the Canon.

To the place of Chrysostom I do therefore answer, that he meant only, that
the dead should be remembered in the celebration of the mysteries and was
uncertain what good it did to them, saying sometimes it did them much good,
some time but little. Unto the places of Epiphanius, haere. 75. And Augustine de
haeres. ca. 53. that Aerius was condemned for disallowing the order of the
Church in this commemoration of the dead, and giving thanks for their blessed
and. And this is that prayer, which Calvin and we confess to have been in the
Church along time. But this makes nothing for Owlyglasses purpose. For first
the fathers neither knew, nor allowed Masses without Communion. Quisquis
mysterioru^ consors non est, says Chrysostom, impudens, and improbus astat.
He condemns him as a wicked fellow, that was present at the celebration of
the Eucharist, and did not communicate. The which I have confirmed by diverse
testimonies in my Latin book, de Missa, against Bellarmine. There also I have
showed, that the fathers did never teach, that the body and blood of Christ
were offered in the sacrament for quick and dead. Lastly, in ancient time
they made a commemoration of the Patriarks, of the blessed virgin, of the
Apostles, Mar^yrs, and others. Now they pray to them, and not for them, as in
time past. Wherefore to prove Masses, and prayers, and special offices for the
dead, such as the Romish Church uses, to be Catholic, Owl^glasse must bring
us other testimonies, and other fathers. In the mean while he has proved
himself a liar and not me, and has utterly overthrown the Masses of Requiem
and Dirges for the dead, and not proved them in any sort to be Catholic or
ancient. So that if he can say no more for Masses, he may go sing a Requiem for
the soul of the Mass.

Sect. 5. Of the Idolatrous worship of Papists, which they give to Images, to
Saints, to the Cross.
page 20.
HIs fifth accusation falls upon my words in the 1. chapter of my challenge,
number. 16. where I say, that the Papists have devised Masses in the honor of the
cross, of the virgin Mary, Saint Francis, Dominicke, and other saints: and
that unto the Images of these Saints they burn incense, and offer their
prayers and devotions. But he to make his objection the stronger, does leave
out the first part of my sentence, knowing himself to be guilty of the crime,
wherewith his consorts are charged. And in the latter part he leaves out that
which I say, of the Cross and Incense, upon which the ground of the work is
laid. Wherefore if he knew what he wrote, he could not but well understand,
that he had falsified my words. And yet fearing he had not hold enough, he
goes to the 64. page, and where I say, that Damascene accounts them
Heretics, De haeresib. C. Christiano-categori.
that worship the Images of our Savior, of the blessed Virgin, and the
Saints, as the Gentiles did their Gods: and that this is just the cast of the
Papists: he leaves out that, which I say of the Images of our Savior, and of
the blessed Virgin, whereupon depends the substance of my charge, which
aryseth of this principally, that the Papists do give the worship of Latria to
the Crucifixe, and to the Image of our Savior, and Hyperdouliam, to the Image
of our Lady. And finally he reports my words thus, as if I had said, that
the Papists worship the Images of Saints, as the Gentiles did their Gods, and
pray unto them: where that which I say of prayer follows after, and stands
otherwise then he reports. Of which manner of dealing, if he could have
convinced me: he would have gone beside himself with bragging, as now he
passes all his companions, not only in foolerie, but also in falsifying, and
cogging.

Having thus mangled my words, and left out in the first place, the Cross, in
the second, the Image of our Savior, and turned both to his pleasure: he had
no reason to charge me, with a shameless untruth desperately avouched. For
that which I say is true, neither did I think that Owliglasse, or any of his
consorts would have denied a matter so plain. Which because it proceeds from
his ignorance, I will direct him to his masters, that will teach him, that the
same honor is due to the Image, that is due to the original, and that
therefore, the Image of Christ is to be worshipped, as we worship Christ, and
the Image of our Lady with Hyperdulia, and the Images of Saints with the
worship of Doulia: as appears by the testimony of Alexander Hales, 3. p.
quaest. 3. art. vlt. Thomas Aquinas, 3. part. quaest. 25, art, 3. and Caietans
Commentary upon him. Bonauenture and Capreolus in 3. did. 9. Bellarmine also
confesses so much in his Treatise de Imaginibus, cap. 20. And that this is as
gross Idolatry, as ever the Gentiles practiced, it may appear, for that I
do not read, that ever the Gentiles gave the same honor to Jupiters or
Apolloes Images, that they gave to Jupiter and Apollo themselves.

I say also, that as the Gentiles did worship their Images, so likewise the
Papists do worship the Images of the Crucifixe, the Cross, the Images also of
our Lady, and the Saints. For first as the Gentiles called on their Idols, so
the Papists say to the Cross, O Crux aue spes vnica, auge piis iustitiam: and
to the picture called Veronica, salve sancta facies. Secondly, as the Genttles
to their Images gave the tytles of Jupiter, Apollo, Mercury: so do Papists
call their Images, Saint Peter, Saint Dominicke, Saint Frideswide. Thirdly, as
the Gentiles did burn incense to their Images, so do the Papists before
theirs. Finally, as the Gentiles did bow down to their Images and kiss them,
and pray before them, so do the Papists fall down before stocks and stones,
kiss their Images, and pray before them, as both the practice of Popery, and
the doctrine of the Schoolmen does show. The Images of our Lady of Loreto, of
Monferrat, and in England the Image of our Lady of Walsingham, and diverse
Saints shrines, do show my words to be most true. But says Owlyglasse, the
Council of Trent decrees, that due honor is to be given to Images, but not
so, as that we are to put trust in them, as the Gentiles did sometimes. But
what if the Papists regard not the decree of this absurd conuenticle? And what
if the Papists do more trust in the Image of the Lady of Loreto, then the
Gentiles did in the Images of Aesculapius or Mercury? Wist not Owliglasse then
confess, that his consortes do put some trust in these Images? But that is
apparent, for they believe she is able to do more, then ever the Gentiles
believed, that Aesculapsus or Mercury was able to do. Furthermore, the
Gentiles did excuse themselves, that they did not worship their Images
mate^ially, but rather the persons represented by their Images, as appears by
Lactantius, li. 2. ca. 2. and Augustine in Psalm. 11^. and does not this self
same excuse serve the Papists likewise? It is apparent by all their writings,
and Bellarmine, and Gregory de Valentia have no better defense for this their
Idolatry in their treatises of the worship of Images.

That the Papists do pray unto Saints, and offer their prayers before their
Images, it cannot be denied* Bellarmine calls Saints Deos per
participationem. Lib. 3. de cult. sanct. c. 9.
Votum (says he) non conuenit sanctis, nisi quatenus sunt dij per
participationem. That is, vows are not conveniently made to Saints, but as
they are gods by participation.

I trust therefore hereafter Owlyglasse will not charge me with desperate
untruth in this point, nor urge me to exhibit proofs* for the more I bring,
the more shame will fall upon his face. In the mean while, I would have the
Papists to observe for their learning, that Owlyglasses metaphores are drawn
either from gamesters, as here, Page, 20. and 21.
where he talks of playing at barestake, and laying down sufficient pawnes;
or from women, Page, 6.
as where he talks of more towe to our Rocks. Which shows, that he is a
better gamester, then a disputer; and is as much conversant in women's closets,
as in his study. Wherefore, if Recusants be wise, they will take better heed
hereafter, how such compagnions come near their houses, that are so well
acquainted with their wives rocks and frockes, to say no more.

Sect. VI. That the Popes decretales before Gregory the 7. his time, had no
force of law.
THe sixth exception which Owlyglasse takes against me p. 22. is, for that I
say, that before Hildebrands time, which otherwise is called Gregory the
seventh, the Popes decretales had no force of law. This says Owlyglasse, is
untruth. And he proves it by a certain decree of Pope Hilarie, that lived
long before Gregory the seventh, who threatened all with danger of their state,
that should violate either divine laws, or the decrees of the Apostolic see:
and by a constitution of Gelasius c. sancta Romana. did. 15. where he
determines, that the Popes decretales are with reverence to be received. But
his proofs are too weak to convince me of untruth. For first, neither of
these authorities are authentical, seeing it is not likely, that Hilarie would
match the Popes decretales with Gods laws, nor the Church of Rome neglect
Gelasius his decree concerning apocryphal writings, if his authority were so
great, as is pretended. Secondly, albeit Hilarie threaten, yet it appears
not, that his threats were regarded. Thirdly, it is one thing to accept men's
letters with reverence, and another thing to accept them as laws. Fourthly, it
is a ridiculous thing to require men to believe the Popes in their own cause.
Fifthly, laws are not enacted by letters, nor recorded in scrowes; but solemnly
established by public seals and monuments, that give them credit: which
Owlyglasse cannot show to have been practiced in Hilaries, or Gelasius his
decretales. Finally, the state of the Church was not such then, as that the
Popes could command, or bind all Churches by their letters. That therefore
which he says, is nothing. But I do allege the testimony of the Records of
the church of Rome, which contain no ancienter decretales then those of
Gregory the seventh, as appears by the book of Bulls called Bullarium,
Secondly Bellarmine, that is a man of greater knowledge, then Owlyglasse, does
fail, where he goes about to prove, that the Popes had power always to
make laws. For his records lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 19. are weak, and all
of them refuted in my answer to him. Cod de sum. Trin. and fid. Cath. and de
episc. audient. and acta council.
Finally it is evident, that for diverse hundred years Emperors and councels
made laws, and not the Popes; and that this course continued until such time,
as Popes by suppressing the authority of both prevailed; and until the power
of Antichrist began to show it self in Gregory the seventh. In this point
therefore Owlyglasse shows himself ignorant of the story of the Church; and
not only vagrant from his purpose.

Sect. VII. That the fasts of the synagogue of Rome, and their usual forms
were not established by the ancient Church.
IN the seventh article of his supposed untruths, because Owlyglasse could not
otherwise fasten the lie upon me conveniently, he does curtall my words with
an etc. and mangleth my sentence, applying that to one particular, which I
direct to diverse matters. I say, that if we seek all antiquity, we shall not
find where the church of Christ has commanded us to keep this Popes day, and
that Popes day, and to abstain from work on S. Francis, and S. Dominicks, and
other canonized Friars days, or where the same has enjoined Christians to
hear mass, or to fast lent, and embre days, and vigils of Saints, and other
tides according to the fashion of the Church of Rome. But our adversary does
unhandsomely place my words thus, as if I had said, that if we seek all
antiquity, we shall not find, where the church of Christ has enjoined
Christians to fast lent, and embre days, and vigils of Saints, etc. But if he
had done me right, he should have added these words, and other tides according
to the fashion of the Church of Rome. Which if he had done, my words would
have given him no occasion of cavil. For then neither out of the 50. canon of
the council of Laodicea, nor out of the 63. canon of the fourth council of
Carthage, nor Hieroms epistle to Marcella, nor S. Augustines sermon de tempore,
nor Leo, nor Epiphanius his words, nor any other authority by him alleged,
could he have brought any thing to contradict my assertion* neither does master
Willets confession any whit relieve him. The Council of Laodicea does not
establish the fast of lent, nor says any thing of choice of meats, or the
manner of fasting, but would, that men should fast upon thursday before Easter.
Which argues, that before that time, that day was not necessarily fasted.
Besides that, the Council has nothing concerning embre days, or fasts on
vigils of Saints, and therefore short of my adversaries purpose. Finally, the
Synagogue of Rome does not observe the canon of this council, that would have
men to eat dry meat: for massepriests eat delicate fish, and licour the
same well with wine. Therefore Carranza falsifieth this canon of the council, In
summa council. Laodic.
and for dry meats, puts convenient meats, fearing, as it should seem,
least he should lose his good fish, and good Spanish secke.

The Council of Carthage can. 63. speaks nothing of fasts established by
law, but rather signifies, that fasts were then upon especial occasion
proclaimed. Qui tempore indicti ieiunij, says that council. Beside that, in
this canon there is no mention of any set form of fast, nor does the council
speak of other then clerks, which notwithstanding are not the only men, that
should fast in Lent. Finally, this makes nothing for forms of fastes on embre
days and vigils of Saints.

Saint Hieroms order of fasting, which he speaks of in his Epistle to
Marcella against Montanus, the Romanists regard not* for they fast between
Easter and Whitsontide, which he did not like. Besides that, he speaks of no
form of fasting, nor allows the fasting, or rather Lenten feasting of the
Romanists. Thirdly, that which he speake^h of Apostolical tradition is
contrary to S. Augustines words in his Epistle 86. ad Casulanum, where he
shows, that the Apostles set down no days, nor forms of fasting.

The sermons de tempore set out under Saint Augustines name, are found to
belong to diverse others. In the 62. sermon it is said, to be sin, not to fast
Lent. But the Romanists observe not the order of fasting by that author
prescribed. for he fasted without dining, and observed not Sundaies, and
abstained from wine. The Romanists do all otherwise. Sermon. 62.
In isto legitimo, ac sacratissimo tempore, says he, exceptis dominicis diebus
nullus prandere praesumat. And again, Sermon. 64. de tempore.
speaking of Lenten fasting, quid prodest, says he, vinum non bibere, and
iracundiae veneno inebriari? If then the Papists will not abstain from wine,
why do they urge us to observe, or believe his forms of fasts^ That these
Sermons of fasting are not S. Augustines, it is apparent; for that they
contradict his Epistle ad Casulanum.

Leo ser. 2. de pentecoste c. 9. talks of certain fasts; but that they were
the Romish embre fasts, Owlyglasse will not prove. Neither must he think, that
we are bound to believe all Leoes epistles and sermons to be either written by
him, or authentical. If Owlyglasse understand not so much, I will teach him,
and show him reasons of my saying in my next.

Master Willet says Calixtus instituted the four embre fasts. But he
speaks according to the opinion of the Romanists, and well knew, that the
Epistles that go under his name, were counterfeit.

Aerius was condemned of heresy by Epiphanius haeres. 75. and S. Augustine
haeres. 53. for that he held, that fails appointed by the Church were not to be
observed. His error was, that he held, quod i^iunium non esset ordinatum, as
Epiphanius says. But this touches us nothing. for we know, that the Romish
synagogue is not the true Church, and that the ancient Church never approved
either the Romish doctrine, or the Romish order concerning fasting.

Seeing then Owlyglasse was neither able to prove the Romish orders of Lenten
fastes, or of embre days, nor brought any one author to justify the fasts
upon vigils of Saints, what an impudent fellow was he to affirm, Page, 26.
that in ancient times the Church of Christ enjoined Christians to fast Lent,
embre days, and vigils of Saints, shuffling in vigils of Saints into his
conclusion, of which he had not brought any proof in his premises? Secondly,
if he would contradict me, why did he not speak of the manner of the Romish
fasts? Lastly, what reason has he to charge me, as having dealt without
conscience, where I denied their manner of fastes to be Catholic and
christian; when he shows neither conscience, wit, learning, nor modesty in
holding the contrary?

That I have delivered my opinion with good conscience, and that he with a
cauterized conscience pinned to the Popes sleeue has contradicted my
assertion, it may also further appear by the form of Romish fasts. For first,
the Romanistes place their fasts in abstinence from flesh, and not in
abstayning from meat, or eating dry meats, or abstinence from wine, as the
Eastern Churches did. Secondly they eat large dinners, and refrain not from
them, as the author of the 62. ser. de tempore, among S. Augustines works
thinks they should. Thirdly, they believe that by eating flesh, and redd
herring, and such like meat, they are able to satisfy for their sins, and
to inherit the kingdom of heaven: which is not only erroneous but also most
ridiculous Fourthly, they teach that fasting in Lent was instituted by Christ,
and that the other fasts are apostolical traditions. Finally, they burn true
christians for eating of a piece of flesh upon a fasting day. The which
doctrine and practice is not only contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and his
Apostles, and the fathers of the Church, but also to the practice of the
ancient apostolic Churches, whose fashions we are far to prefer before the
practice of the late apostatical synagogue of Room. Our Savior he teaches
us, that we are not defiled by any meat, that enters into a man's body. Quod
intrat in os says he, Matthew. 15.
non coinquinat hominem. We may also thereout gather, that it is not meat,
that does satisfy us. Secondly, the Apostle does signify, that this
difference of meats proceeds from the ceremonial law, and therefore ought
now to cease. If ye be dead with Christ, Coloss. 2.
says the Apostle, from the Elements of this world, why do you yet decree,
saying, touch not, taste not, handle not, which all go into destruction in use,
according to the precepts and doctrine of man. Thirdly, the Apostle does also
prophecy, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
forbidding to marry, and enioyning abstinence from meats, which God has
created. Neither can this be understood of ancient heretics, that thought
flesh unclean* for he speaks of the latter times and says in nouissimis
temporibus. The Papists also would not so severely forbid eating of flesh,
unless they thought it a more holy matter to eat fish. Fourthly, Tertullian
shows that Christians fasted upon occasion of their own accord, and not by
constrainte of laws. Indifferenter ex arbitrio, non ex imperio nouae
disciplinae, says he, Aduers. Psychicos.
pro temporibus et causis vniuscuiusque ieiunabant. And this he speaks of
Christians, he being then teinted with the heresy of Montanus. Augustine in
his 86. Epistle to Casulanus testifies, that he finds no set fasts enjoined
by Christ, or his Apostles. Quibus diebus no^ oporteat ieiunare, and quibus
oporteat, says he, praecepto domini, vel apostoloru^ non video definitum.
Sixthly, lent was diversely observed in times past, as may be gathered by ye
testimony of Irenaeus, as Eusebius writes Ecc. hist. lib. 5. c. 26. the same
may be proved also out of Socrates l. 2. hist. 43. and Sozomenus lib. 3. c. 13.
Spiridion did not think it unlawful to eat flesh in Lent, as Sozomenus
testifies lib. 1. c. 11. of eating dry meats, and abstinence from wine, and
dinners I have spoken before. Finally, if Owlyglasse had Lynceus his eyes, yet
in all ancient stories he shall not find, where any was condemned by the Church
to death for eating flesh upon friday. And why? forsooth because this is the
practice of the synagogue of Antichrist, and the whore of Babylon. Let it then
be judged, whether I, or the ecstatical Owlyglasse have used better conscience
in discussing this controversy concerning Romish fasts, and who has lied, he
or I.

Sect. VIII. That the ancient Church of Christ has not forbidden Christians
to solemnize marriage upon days forbidden by the Church of Rome.
THe 8. article of Owlyglasses exceptions is drawn out of ^he 32. page of my
challenge. for where I say, that if we seek all antiquity, we shall not find,
where the Church of Christ has commanded christians to keep this popes day,
or that Popes days. etc. Or where the same has enjoined christians to hear
Mass, or to fast lent and imbre days, and Vigiles of Saints, and other tides
according to the fashion of the Church of Rome, or to confess our sins to
Romish Friars and Priests, or not to solemnize marriage on days forbidden: he
is somewhat offended at my words. but to make his objection the stronger, he
places them thus. If we seek all antiquity, we shall not find where the
Church of Christ has enjoined christians, not to solemnize marriage on days
forbidden: cutting out a multitude of my words out of the midst of my
sentence; and making me to speak of one point, where I speak of diverse, and
disioyning that which I coupled together, so that I may say, that if a man rake
all the college of Iebusites. he shall not lightly find a more impudent, or
witless falsary, then this. But to let that pass (albeit I marvel he was not
ashamed speaking against falsifications to falsify every place almost which he
touches) I say it is no untruth to affirm, that the ancient Church of Christ
did not prohibit Christians to solemnize marriage on days forbidden by the
Church of Rome. And my reasons are* First, for that I find not any such
prohibition to have been used in the histories or monuments of the Church.
Secondly, for that I do not see, that the aunciente fathers do mention in
their writings any such matter. Thirdly, for that the first decretale
concerning these prohibitons, that has force of law, ^s in the chapter
capellanum. ^xtr. de ferijs. Gratian does insert a certa ne counterfect canon.
33. q. 4. Non oportet. But every canonist can tell O^lyg^ass^, that Gratians
sentences are no law. Fourthly, I do find that Bellarmine de matrimonio. lib.
1. 2. 31. cannot prove this practice of prohibition of marriage to be ancient.
Bellar. de matr^m. lib. 1. c 31
Fifthly, the adversaries confess, it is lawful to contract marriage at any
time. Wherefore then should it not be lawful to publish and solemnize the
contract, seeing solemnization is nothing, but a declaration of an act done?
Finally the poor proofs of Owlyglass^ do much confirm me in my opinion.
For he alleges nothing for his opinion, but a conterfect Canon of the
council of Laodicea, that forbids solemnization of marriages in Lent. That
this Canon is counterfeit, it is apparent, for that there is no appare^ce of
such acts in any authentical record. Secondly, this Canon by Owlyglasse is
numbered the 52. so does also C^rranz^ number it, from whence he had it. But
Bellarmine lib. 1. de M^trim. c. 31. makes it 25 the Canon. Thirdly, these
Canons were written in Greek, if any such were made in L^odicea* but these are
merely latin, and very barbarous. In the 53. canon it is decreed non
oportere Ch^istianos ad nuptias eun^es balare, aut saltare. But were this Canon
truly made by the council of L^odicea, yet makes it nothing for Owly^lasse
his purpose. For those canons are not observed, and the Romanists cease not to
da^nce at marriages. Again, were this Canon observed, yet it ^aketh nothing for
prohibitions out of Lent. So that Owlyglasse will come far short of his
reckening, when he comes to conclude, that all proh^bitions of times of
marriage practiced in the Romish church, were also practiced in the ancient
church of Christ Jesus.

Page, 26.
Our adversary does further tell us, that other testimonies might be brought
for this purpose, but he will content himself with the practice of the Church
of England. And that he proves out of our Almanacks and faculties for marriages
in time prohibited. But this argument effects nothing, but only the disgrace
of him that made it* for it shows, that our adversary is better studied in
the Almanacke, then in Saint Augustine. Further, the Almanackes set down the
feasts and Saints of the Romish Church, and that for the benefit of Merchants,
that trade with other nations, although we observe not these Popish Saints
feasts. Thirdly if he were acquainted with our faculties as perfectly, as he
pretends, he might know, that these prohibitions are not much regarded.
Finally, if for a civil decency the same were by some observed; yet al ye
ceremonies and orders of every particular church, are not ancient; nor is that
any thing to the Romish church, whose superstitious and wicked decrees I
wonder, that so many do blindly receive without all ground of reason If then
Owlyglasse have any more testimonies in store, his friends would be glad to
hear of them, for his own credit and promise sake. Otherwise they will wish,
that he had been also prohibited to marie, and to beget children, least they be
troubled with a race of such dizards.

Sect. IX. That the regenerat cannot live without sin.
IN this ninth article, Owlyglasse does bewray his great ignorance, neither
well understanding, what we hold, nor what his own consorts hold. If he did,
he would not imagine, that we did distinguish sins into mortal and venial,
nor would he deny, that Papists hold, that the regenerat may live without
sin. Sess. 6. c. 5.
For first the conuenticle of Trent anathematizeth, whosoever shall say, that
freewill is lost since Adams fall. Secondly, Ibidem, c. 18.
the same anathematizeth all that shall affirm, that a man regenerar cannot
perform all the law and commandments of God. If then a man after Adams fall
have freewill, he may as well do all things well, and so live without sin,
as all things evil. Again, if he be able to perform all the commandments of
God, then may he live without sin: sin being nothing else, but the
transgression of the law.

Lib. de liber. arb. c. 3.
Anselme defines freewill to be a power to keep the will right, in respect of
righteousness it self. Bellar. lib. 3. de great. and lib. arb. c. 3. says,
that free will is a free power, of things tending to an end to choose one
before another. He says also, Lib. 5. de lib. arbit. c. 13.
that by force of freewill man without grace has power to choose that is good,
and to avoid that is evil, to observe precepts of manners, or to transgress
them. He holds further, that the regenerat is able to fulfill all the law of
God: Ibidem.
and consequently not to sin. And that he proves by the words of S. John,
qui natus est ex deo non peccat: which he expounds so, as if no regenerat man
did sin, or transgress Gods law. If then man has such a power, as they say,
and may fulfill all the law, and abstain from all sin, then I trust I do
the Papists no wrong, to say, that they hold, that the regenerat may live
without sin. And although they deny not, that a just man has venial
sins, yet of their doctrine it follows, that he may live without venial
sins* for if he be able to perform the law of God perfectly, and to love
God with all his heart and all his soul, and has free will to do whatsoever
is good, and to eschew whatsoever is evil; then may the regenerat live also
without venial sins. The Tridentine conuenticle grants, Sess. 6. c. 23.
that a man by special privilege may be without all venial sins. Whether
we speak then of great, or small sins, true it is, that the Papists hold,
that the regenerat may be without all sin, and our adversary denying this
point, neither understands the doctrine of his consorts, nor the sequel of
it.

But says he, this is not contrary to al antiquity, that the regenerate may
live without mortal sins. And his reasons are, because Gods commandments
may be kept, and are not heavy. Our Savior Christ says also, that his yoke
is sweet, and his burden light, and S. Luke affirms, that Zachary and
Elizabeth were just before God walking in all the commandments and
iustifications of our Lord without blame. The second council of Arausica C.
Vlt. teaches, that by grace received in baptism, Christ helping and working
with them, all that are baptized may, and ought to fulfill such things, as
pertain to salvation, if they will labor faithfully. Saint Basil says it is
a wicked thing to say, that the commandments of Gods spirit are impossible.
Saint Hierome makes no doubt, but God has commanded things possible. Finally
Saint Augustine Ser. 191. de tempore detesteth the blasphemy of them, that say,
that God has commanded any impossible thing to man. Let us therefore see what
antiquity says, and what is the meaning of the fathers in this point. Luke 11.
Our Savior Christ taught his Disciples, and the most holy men to pray,
forgive us our trespasses. But that needed not, if they did not commit any
sin. And S. James says, we offend all in many things. James 3.
The Apostle Peter signifies, that neither the Disciples of Christ, nor the
fathers were able to bear the yoke of the law. Act. 15.
that which was impossible to the law, says the Apostle Romans 8. He says also,
that the flesh is not subject to the law, nor can be. We know also that the
flesh evermore lusts against the spirit* the scriptures teach us, that no
man's heart is so clean, that he can say, that he has loved God with all his
soul, and with all his heart. Saint Jerome epist. 62. affirms that charity,
which cannot be increased, as long as a man lives here, is in no man. tanta
mandata sunt, says Saint Ambrose, In Galat. 3.
vt impossible sit seruare ea. Hierome likewise writing upon the 3. to the
Galathians, says the Apostle teaches us, that noe man can fulfill the law,
and do all that is commanded. nullus legem impleuit says Saint Chrysostom in
Gal. 2. Bernard upon the Canticles Sermon, 50. says, that in this life the law
cannot be fulfilled of any. And experience teaches us as much. For the blessed
virgin called Christ her Savior. But what needed she a Savior, if she had
not sinned? Neither can any be found, that can say, he is without sin. The
adversaries also confess it sometimes. Implere totam legem, says Thomas
Aquinas in galat. 3. lect. 4. est impossible.

As for the reasons of our adversary, they are trifling. Gods commandments may
be keept, as S. John signifies 1. Epist. 2. but in part, and in some imperfect
sort. Secondly, our Savior also says, that his yoke is not heavy. But
Christ's yoke is not the law, but his mercy and grace. Thirdly, his
commandments are not grievous, because every one that is borne of God
ouercummeth the world. 1. John, 5.
And this is the v^ctory that ouercummeth the world, even our faith. To the
council of Arausica, Orat. in haec verba. attend tibi.
and the testimonies of Hierome, S. Basil, and S. Austine Ser. 191. de
tempore: one answer will serve* for we do not say absolutely, That the law in
it self is imposs ble, but that man in this life cannot perform it, by reason
of his infirmity* neither do we say, it is impossible to perform the law in
part and imperfectly, or that ye law is impossible to be performed, because
man, if he had continued in grace might have performed it* Lib. 3. ad Bonifac.
c. 1.
and now as S. Austine says, Omnia mandata dei facta deputantur, quando
quicquid non fit ignoscitur. and as he says lib. 1. retract. c. 19. If now we
cannot, yet sometime we shall perform the law of God. But none of these say,
that we can perform the whole law, and that perfectly, or that we can be
without sin. posse omne vitare peccatum, S. Hierome does signify to be the
opinion of the Pelagians. Lib. 3. aduers. pelag.
If then Owlyglasse will avoid Pelagianisme, let him forbear to charge me
with untruth for saying, that the ancient fathers believed not, that a man
regenerat might live without sin. Again if he deny, that Papists teach, that
a regenerat man may be without venial sins, the council of Trent Sess. 6. c.
23. will give him the lie. He also in the latter end of the chapter does
contradict himself, where he says, That whether we speak of venial, or
mortal sins we abuse the reader, where we say, the fathers hold not, that a
regenerate man may be without sin* for he himself confesses regenerat men
have venial sins. But if he dispute no better of mortal and venial sins,
he will give a mortal wound to his own cause.

Sect. X. That the form of confirmation now used by the Romanistes is new.
LIkewise in the cause of the sacrament of confirmation, as he calls it, he
talks very idly and weakly, and is not able to confirm any thing which he
says, nor to disprove that, which I have written, although after his wonted
fashion he scoreth up untruths. I say, that the form of confirmation now used
by the Romanists is new, and not received before the council of Florence about
the year of our Lord. 1423. And that I say true, it may be confirmed, First by
the writings of the Apostles, wherein we cannot find either institution,
form or matter of that new sacrament. Secondly by the practice of the ancient
Church, wherein albeit we find the forms of other sacraments, yet we find
nothing of the form, or matter, or manner of administration of popish
confirmation. The old ordinall of Rome has nothing concerning it. Isidore,
Amalarius, and all ancient ritualistes omit it. Apud antiquiores authors, Lib.
de confirmat. c. 10.
says Bellar: speaking of the form of confirmation, haec omnia verba non
habentur, nec hoc ordine. Thirdly the ancient fathers do neither mention the
institution, nor the proper matter, nor the form used in this action by the
Romanistes. Bellar. albeit he searched all corners, yet found he nothing to
purpose. He cites Iustine, Tertullian, Cyprian, Jerome, and others, Ibid. c.
5. and 6.
but they speak only of a ceremony of unction and imposition of hands, and
that used in Baptism most commonly. Further more they have not any part of
that doctrine which the synagogue of Rome teaches concerning confirmation.
Fourthly the schoolmen differ about the institution of confirmation, some of
them holding, that it was instituted in a certain counsel at Meldis.
concerning the forms also and matter, or minister of this sacrament they are
not resolved. Fifthly, we do not find, that confirmation was received by any
authority before the counsel of Trent; unless we take the particular
instruction of the Armenians for a general establishment. Finally the weak
and absurd dispute of Bellarmine, that is not able to produce any institution
of this pretended sacrament, nor to confirm, either the form, or the matter,
or the doctrine of it, may resolve a man, that the whole, as it is practiced by
the Romish Church, is a new invention. Page, 31.
All this notwithanding our adversary says, that it is a palpable untruth.
viz. to affirm the form of Popish confirmation, to be a new invention. For to
omit says he, how the form of this Sacrament is as ancient, as the Apostles.
But if he had omitted this indeed; he should have omitted a bold and impudent
untruth. For how is it to be presumed, that this form of confirmation came
from the Apostles, when the adversaries themselves, before the conuenticles of
Florence and Trent, could never agree about the form? And what likelihood is
there, that the Apostles did practice this form, when we find no record or
memorial of it in ancient, and authentical histories? Is it likely that the
ancient church would not mention all the forms of their sacraments?

He says also, that we cannot show any later beginning of confirmation. as if
we did not note the time of the instruction of the Armenians, and conuenticle
of Trent; before which the schoolmen babled their pleasure, but they had no
certain resolution on which they depended.

Lib. 4. contra Donatist.
He tells us also, that, as S. Augustine says, we are to believe that to be
descended from the Apostles, which the universal Church holds, and has
always been observed, and is not instituted by councels. But where he says,
that this is the case of confirmation; he shows himself to be past shame in
auouching so gross untruths. For first we show, that the form of
confirmation was talked of in the conuenticle of Florence, and established in
the conuenticle of Trent. Secondly, Owlyglasse shall never be able to prove,
that the universal Church received, believed or taught the Popish doctrine,
and form of confirmation. Would he show the same out of the Greek Fathers,
and S. Augustine, and other doctors of Afric, Italy, and other countries, he
might win himself some good credit. Finally, he cannot show by any good
record, that the Church of Rome has always received the doctrine, and form
of confirmation, that now is.

This done, he proceeds on, and says: To omit this, and many notable things
else, that it is sufficient to convince master Sutcliffe of untruth, that Thomas
of Aquine almost two hundred years before the council of Florence, sets
down the very same form, affirming it to be the usual and common form
practiced in the church, and Bellarmine, notes this place of Thomas. But he
shows himself a simple fellow, to omit notable things, and to say nothing
worthy to be noted. But his simplicity is far greater, to think that either
Thom. Aquinas is an authentical witness, or that his testimony does convince
me. For albeit Thomas do speak of such a form, of which he must not think
me ignorant, yet it is a ridiculous conceit to believe, that all the vain
conceits of schoolmen were received generally in the Church, and great
simplicity, not to understand, that the church of Rome esteems but a little
the disputes of schools, until their school opinions be received by the
pope, or established by councels. Further, he is not able to show, that Thomas
Aquinas says, that the form of confirmation by him mentioned, was the usual
and common form generally received in the Church. Our adversary therefore
shows himself first to be a vain fellow to take exception against me in
this point, rather bewraying his own ignorance, then conuincing me of untruth:
and next, a lying compagnion, in belying his own master Thomas Aquinas.

Sect. XI. That in ancient time the sacrament was not usually kept in pixes,
after the fashion of the Romish Church.
IN my former Challenge I say, that the idolatrous adoration of the sacrament,
and the carrying of it about in procession, and keeping of it in pixes,
sauoureth of novelty. Owlyglasse not daring to deny all, only excepteth
against that, which I say of pixes* but if he had remembered the matter of his
Pamphlet, he would not have mangled my words, and accusing others of
falsification, have at every turn run into it headlong himself. Accusing
me also of untruth, himself most untruly and impudently affirms, that
testimonies of antiquity are plentiful for keeping the sacrament in pixes. for
he is not able to bring one authentical testimony for this point.

The council of Nice can. 14. decrees, that if there be in presence no Bishop
or Priest (viz. beside him that administreth the sacrament) that then the
Deacons shall, proferre and edere, that is, minister the sacrament, and receive
it themselves. But this is nothing to the keeping of the sacrament, the words
concerning the time of ministration or communion only, and the canon intending
to restrain the insolency of deacons, that at the communion presumed to
receive before either bishops, or elders, not that served at the altar, but
that were present at the communion, as appears by the old Romish ordinall.

Can. 12.
The same council also would have the excommunicat reconciled before they
depart this life, and to have the communion delivered to them* but he is a
simple fellow, that could not see, that the communion might be administered to
the sick, although the sacrament was not hung over the altar in a box.

Ambros. de O^it. Theodos.
Satyrus kept the sacrament about him in shipwreck; and a certain woman, of
whom Cyprian makes mention, kept sanctum domini in her chest. but our
adversary is a simple disputer, that would have the abuses of simple women,
and men unchristened, such as Satyrus then was, observed for law. Beside that,
it is one thing to hang the sacrament over the altar, and another thing to put
it in a woman's chest, or to lap it up in a clout* for this the Romanistes
themselves allow not.

Calvin 4. institut. 17. sect. 39. confesses, that the sacrament was in old
time reserved. But he does not say, as our adversary insinuates, that this
was the order of the church. Finally, our adversary himself purposing to
prove, that the sacrament was kept in pixes over the altar, concludes only,
that the sacrament was kept, abandoning the pixes to be defended by some other*
his dealing therefore sauoureth of great simplicity, if not of fraud and
malice, and vanity.

But that which I said, is most true, and is at large justified in my discourse
of the mass against Bellarmine, and is proved first by the words of our
Savior, who instituting this holy sacrament took bread, blessed it, and broke
it, and gave it to his Disciples saying, take, eat* where I would wish that
simple Papists would consider, that he said, take, and eat, and not depart
without eating, or else keep the sacrament in boxes, or hang it over the altar.

Secondly, the Apostle 1. cor. 11. declares, that the disciples of our Savior
at his last supper did take, and eat, and drink. How then happens it, that
the massepriests do not deliver the sacrament to the people, but hang it over
the altar? Will they prove themselves to be not only sacrificers, and killers
of Christ, but also hangmen of Christ, and the very famishers of Gods people?

Thirdly, the fathers give clear testimony against our adversaries, that
keep the sacrament in pixes. Apolog. 2. ad Antonin.
De ijs quae cum gratiarum action consecrata sunt, says Iustine Martyr,
vnusquisque participat, eademque ad eos, qui absunt, diaconis dantur
perferenda. Dominus panem says Origin. hom. 5. in Leuit. c. 7. quem discipulis
dabat, and dixit, accipite and manducate, non distulit, nec seruari iussit in
crastinum. they both signify, that the sacraments presently upon consecration
were received. Hesychius also writing upon Leuit. lib. 2. cap. 8. shows, that
what remained of the sacrament, the same was forthwith consumed.

Fourthly, councels have repressed the lewd customs of such, as in ancient
time began to reserve the sacrament. The first council of Toledo c. 14.
decrees, that he ought to be thrust out of the Church, as a sacrilegious
person, which eats not the sacrament, which he receives from the Priest. the
like decree is found in the council of Saragossa c. 3.

Fifthly, we do find the practice of Christ his church to be repugnant to this
reservation of the sacrament in pixes, as appears by the testimony of
Dionysius eccles. hierarch. c. 3. of Ambrose de sacramentis lib. 4. and 5. of
Euagrius lib. 4. c. 35. of Nicephorus lib. 17. c. 25. and all ancient
formularies of administering the sacraments.

Finally, the adversaries themselves in this point overthrow their own
practice, as appears by the chapter Tribus gradibus, and the chapter
Triforme. de consecrat. did. 2. and the chapter s^ne cum olim. de celebrat.
miss. that declares Honorius to be the first bringer in of pixes* if then
Owlyglasse have no more to say in this point, he will rather carry pixes out,
then bring them into the church. He will also overthrow the worthy decree of
Honorius the principal patron of the idolatrous worship of the sacrament in
the Romish Church; and disgrace himself, whose words are like painted boxes
full of empty words.

Sect. XII. That the prayers of the Romish Church to our Lady, to Saints, and
to Angels, were not in use in the ancient Church.
IN most of his objections Owlyglasse does not only give the lie unto me, but
to the whole Church. for that which I say concerning diverse points of popish
religion, is also mantained by the consent of Christ's Church, as may appear by
that which already is answered concerning the abuse of the sacrament,
prohibitions of marriage, and such like. In this place I touch an abuse of
Popish prayers, and say, that ancient Christians had noe mediators, but Christ
Jesus, and that they did not pray to our Lady, or to Saints, or to Angels, but
to God only, in the name of Christ Jesus. Of which assertion the first part
is proved by the words of the Apostle. 1. Tim. 2. Vnus deus says he, Vnus and
mediator dei and hominum homo christus Jesus. Likewise by the words of the
Apostle Hebr. 7. Whereby we understand, that our mediator must be pure, and
impolluted, and offer up himself. and Hebr. 9. where Christ is called, the
mediator of a new testament, and has that office ascribed unto him only to
intercede and mediate for us with God. Secondly, by the testimony of S. Austine
lib. 2. contra Parmen. c 8. Si Ioannes ita diceret, says he, haec scripsi
vobis, vt non peccetis, and si quis peccauerit, nos mediatore^ habebitis apud
patre^, ego exoro pro peccatis vestris, sicut Parmenianus quodam loco
mediatorem posuit episcopum inter populum and deum; quis eum ferret bonorum,
and fidelium christianorum? Albeit the Bishop does intercede and pray for the
people, yet Austine will not have him called a mediator. Thirdly, the same is
proved by diverse arguments drawn from the nature of a mediator. He must be
pure and impolluted, and able to reconcile us to God by his death and merits,
he must offer sacrifice for us* he must mediate our peace with God the Father:
as may be gathered out of the 7. and 9. chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
he must also be able to make a propitiation for our sins, as it is to be
gatherered out of the 1. John. 2. and finally he must be such a one, as can
hear us, and procure our requests to be granted. But neither are Saints
departed so pure and impolluted, that they can oppose their holiness to Gods
justice, nor are they able to reconcile us unto God by their merits. Nay
themselves need Christ's mediation, and therefore cannot mediate for others*
further it is derogatory to Christ's priesthood, to make them priests able to
reconcile us to God, and then appoint them mediators to make God propitious
unto us. Finally, Saints cannot be in all places to hear the prayers of those
that call upon them; nor are they able to give us that, we ask, nor do they
allow those, that leaving Christ Jesus come to the^. Owlyglasse answers to
this point and says, that Saints are mediators not of redemption, but of
intercession* and that Saint Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Desired the Thessalonians to
pray for him, making them mediators of intercession. But first the scriptures
and fathers allow none for mediators but Christ Jesus, that has redeemed us
and mediated our peace* they are also utterly unacquainted with this Popish
distinction. Secondly, it is a ridiculous thing, because the Apostle desires
the Thessalonians to pray for him, to whom he might come, and which did
understand his prayer, to conclude after Owlyglasse his fa^hion that therefore
either they were to be termed his mediators, or that we may pray to those,
which neither can hear us in all places, nor grant our prayers.

The Second part of my assertion is proved First, by the doctrine of our
Savior, that taught us to pray to the Father in his name. Which is also
confirmed by the practice of the Church testified in the 3 counsel of
Carthage. c. 23. Secondly the words of the Apostle are direct for us. How shall
they call says he, on him, on whom they have not believed? Romans 10.
Thirdly, the fathers condemn the practice of the Romish Church in praying to
Saints. Mariam says Epiphanius nemo adoret, neque muli^rum, neque virum. And
again, neque Tecla, neque quisquam sanctu; adoretur. non enim dominabitur
nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem, and adoremus ea, Romans 1.
quae ab ipso f^cta sunt. S. Ambrose says, that we have access to kings by
mediation of tribunes, and noble men, because they are men, but to come to God,
that we need noe spokeseman, but a d^uout mind. Fourthly, both councels and
fathers condemn worship of Angels. non oportet christianos say the fathers of
the council of Laodicea, Can. 35.
derelicta ecclesia abire, and ad angelos idololatriae abominandae
congregationes facere. They say christians are not to relinquish the Church,
and to run into corners to worship Angels* for that they signify* to be
Idolatry. Chrysostom in his 7. homily upon the Epistle to the Colossians,
refuteth the opinion of those, that used the mediation of Angels. Sunt nonnulli
says he, qui dicunt, non oportere per Christum reconciliari, and ad patrem
accedere, sed per angelos. propterea sursum ac deorsum, quae de Christo sunt
versat. Epiphanius and S. Augustine, where they talk of the heresy of the
Angelikes, condemn the worshippers of Angels for heretics. Fifthly, the
practice of the ancient Church does utterly repugne against the form of
prayer used by the Pop^sh Church* for if we seek all the rituall books of
ancient Churches, we shall not find, where christians prayed thus, Sancta
maria Matter dei ora pro nobis, and nunc and in hora mortis. Neither was this
prayer used, Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae,
Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe.


Neither do I believe shall Owlyglasse find, where christians prayed thus,
Sancta Maria succurre mis^ris, iuua pusillanimes, Men's. febr.
retoue f^ebiles, and so forth. Or as in the missall of Sarum, Vt haec munera
tibi accepta sint, sanctae Batildis obtineant merita. Neither can any forms of
litanyes to Angels, and Romish Saints in ancient books be found. Finally,
these forms of prayers to Saints and Angels are most absurd. for what reason
have christians, not to pray to God through Christ as they are commanded, but
to run to Saints, who neither understand men's thoughts, nor are present in all
places, nor can help us. Nay it is a thing very uncertain, whether many of
those, yt the Romish Church does worship, are Saints or no. the lie therefore,
that Owlyglasse would fasten on me, does touch the Apostles and holy fathers,
whose doctrine I follow, and not me only. and may well be returned back on him.

But says he, of prayers to Saints, and Angels, Page, 34
there are such plentiful proofs, that nothing can excuse him from
ashamelesse vnttuth. And there upon he both brings forth Basil, the Council
of Chalcedon, Chrysostom, Saint Ambrose, and Ruffinus. But no one of these
has one such prayer, as the Romish missals and breuiaries have many. Further
the twentieth homily in honor of 40. Marti^es, is not authentical, nor was ever
written by Basil. Neither is every rude voice that passed in council to be
ascribed to ye council, as authorized vy solemn act. besides that, many
Epistles and writings are set out among the acts of counsels, that deserve no
credit. so we say of the 66 homily of Saint Chrysostom, and Ambroses book de
viduis, that they have passed the hands of idolaters, and falsaries. Ruffin
tells us only, Lib. 2. hist. c. 33.
what some did, not what they ought to do. but suppose some of these fathers
should either by an apostrophe name Saints or Angels, or else desire in a
generality, that God will hear the prayers, which the triumphant Church
offers to God for the militant Church; or admit also that any one man should
pray to Saints: yet that is nothing to justify the blasphemous prayers of the
Church of Rome made to Angels and Saints; nor does it appear, that in ancient
time there were any public prayers to the Virgin Mary, to Angels, and Saints.
Finally the fathers did rather pray to God at the tombs of martyrs, then
pray to martyrs as God. And we are rather to follow the most authentical
fathers, and best learned, and their authentical writings, then either such
rags, as are falsesly countenanced by the names of fathers: or some hard
speeches of fathers.

Further Owlyglasse signifies that Hierome against Vigilantius defended
prayers to Saints. But he must allege good proof or else his reader, and
every one that reads Hierome will tell him he lies. Finally he alleges M.
Bell against me, and adioyneth M. Gough in a treatise against M. Fecknam unto
him. But we all agree against him, and his erroneous and superstitious
doctrine concerning prayer to Saints. For albeit some one or two long since
called upon Saints; yet we all agree, that ancient christians had no such
forms allowed, or publicly used and frequented in the church.

So it appears, that for prayers to Angels and our Lady, our adversary can
allege nothing, but the custom of Collyridians and Angelikes. Neither can he
allege any thing for prayers to Romish Saints, nor to Martyrs, but certain
counterfeit writings, and private practices of one or two Fathers, which against
the rest, and against authentical writings of the same authors are of no
validity.

Sect. XIII. That auriculer confession after the Romish fashion was not
established, nor received into the Church before Innocentius the third his time.
THe last exception which concerning matter of untruth Owlyglasse takes
against me, is, for that I deny the Romish auriculer confession to be
ancient. A matter that seems much to pinch my adversary, and his consorts.
for that upon this point, for the most part, depends the gain of their
faculties, the credit of massepriests with their clients, the access they have
into women's closets, and the ground of their treacherous practices. Take away
confession, the faculties of Priests, together with their dispensations and
absolutions fall, and massepriests will be put to their beads. Their credit
also will decay with their clients, if they cannot bring them on their knees
before the priest sitting iudicially in his chair. Neither shall they be
admitted further into women's closets, nor have such opportunity to corrupt
them. Et sic perierunt illae co^fabulationes amatoriae, labelloru^ molles
mors^unculae, carnales contrectatiu^culae, and multae ad rem gerenda^
opportunitates. Finally, they shall not be able any more to draw subjects from
their allegiance, nor to instill rebellion into men's minds under color of
religion. Owlyglasse therefore is longer in this point, then in any of the
rest, and would gladly prove his auriculer confession, if by any means he
could. but his testimonies are all weak and counterfeit. He alleges first
the testimony of the 2. council of Chalon. but first that council had no
confirmation, but from Charles the great; by whose authority it was, as is
said, assembled. Secondly, Surius Tom. council. 3.
that council does neither excommunicate those, that confess not their
sins, nor exclude them from christian burial, as does Innocentius. Thirdly,
C. omnis de poenit. and remiss.
the canons purpose was rather to instruct them how to confess, when they did
it, then to force men to do it. Fourthly, the 33. canon seems to allow
confession to God only in those, that are instructed, and shows, how that
diverse thought that to be sufficient. Finally, it were a hard law for the
Romanists, if they should be bound to stand to all canons of councels. Why then
do they urge us to that, which they will not perform themselves? Owlyglasse
his conclusions out of this canon concerning the distinction of public and
private confession might well have been spared.

Secondly, he produces Leoes testimony Epist. 80. ad episc. Campaniae, who
seems, to say, that it is sufficient in secret confession to declare the
guiltiness of men's consciences to the Priest. But neither does he command men
to do it, nor exclude from burial, those that refuse it, nor writes to
others, but his suffragan bishops of Campania, nor is his word a law, nor
finally must Owlyglasse think, that we are bound to believe this their
domestical witness, or whatsoever falsaries have published under the name of
Leo.

His third witness is Rabanus Maurus lib. 2. de instit. cleric. c. 3. who
says, that the penance must be secret for such matters, as by voluntary
confession are revealed to the priest or bishop. But this does not show, that
every man was bound to confess, or punished for not confessing, but rather
that it was voluntary, and of such sins as grieved men's consciences, against
which we dispute not.

His fourth witness is S. Bernard. but he deposes nothing for him, nor
against us, blaming only those, which for shame did hide their secret sins.
De interiori domo c. 37.
Which shows that men at that time were not bound to open their sins by any
law, nor punished for not confessing, as is now the practice of the Romish
synagogue.

His fifth witness is M. Calvin instit. lib. 3. c. 4. numb. 7. but he says
nothing, which may seem to make for the adversaries, but only, that the use
of confession was ancient. For us he says, confession was free, and that
there was no law binding men to confession, before Innocent the third: which is
that, which I hold. And that which Owlyglasse lays hold of, ^aketh nothing
for his purpose. For albeit in ancient time christians grieved in conscience
were wont to consult with such, as had charge of their souls, and some do yet
take that course among us; yet that does not prove, that Romish auriculer
confession was ancient, or that christians must necessarily confess all
sins, and be excluded from absolution, yea from christian burial, if they
do not confess in the priests ear.

His sixth witness is M. Bell in his survey p. 536. who acknowledges, as it
seems, auriculer confession to have been established the year 254. But he
speaks according to the conceit of the adversaries records, that derive it
no higher; and percase understands a voluntary free confession, and in cases
of public penance enjoined. But all our dispute, is, whether before
Innocentius the thirds decretal, men were bound to confess all their sins in
the Priests ears, and were excluded out of the church, and from burial, if
they did it not. To which point M. Bell says nothing, that will relieve
O^lyg^asse, in this point of confession, but that every indifferent man will
confess, he was an idle fellow to triumph upon such poor advantages.

His last testimony is derived out of our communion book, where a form of
conf^ssion is prescribed for the comfort of the sick. And this he enforces
because as he says, our communion book was framed after the imitation of the
Romish portesse and masse-booke, and thereupon imagines, that the book
speaks of auriculer confession usual in the Romish Church. But first he
wrongeth us, to compare our communion book to their filthy and abominable
mass book^s and portesses full of abominable and idolatrous prayers, and most
wicked and superstitious ceremonies, as I have declared in my refutation of
Bellarmines books de Eucharistia and missa. Secondly, he does wilfully and
maliciously utter untruths. For neither is there any affinity, betwixt our
books and the Romish missals and portesses, nor took we any pattern from
them, but rather from the old formularyes of the primitive Church, which
prescribed reading and singing of Psalms, reading of scriptures, prayers and
forms of ministratio^ of baptism and the Lords supper, and preaching, as may
appear by the testimony of Justin Martyr Apolog. 2. ad Antoninum of Dionysius
the Areopagite, and others that mention the forms of ancient liturgies.
Further, not this matter of auricular confession is enjoined by the missals, or
breuiaries, but rather public confession and absolution before the face of the
whole Church. Finally the form of confession, which the book requires, is
neither of all particular sins, nor enforced upon any, nor required but of
such, as are troubled in conscience. And therefore if Papists were not blind,
and obstinat, they would confess, that Owlyglasse had little reason or
honesty, when he went about to prove auricular confession out of our communion
book. and Owlyglasse himself, if he had not been past shame, would never
have affirmed, that auricular confession had been ordained of Christ. and he
means no doubt, the Romish auricular confession, Viz. Vt omnis vtriusque
sexus postqua^ ad a^nos discretionis peruenerit, omnia sua peccata solus
co^fiteatur proprio sacerdoti, and infunctam sibi poenitentiam proprijs viribus
studeat adimplere. That is, that every man and woman of years of discretion
confess all their sins to their own Priest secretly, and fulfill penance
that is enjoined them. Otherwise in his life time he is shut out of the Church,
and after his death prohibited christian burial. The council of Trent Sess.
14. c. 6. says, that auricular confession is necessary unto salvation by the
law of God Francis a victoria lib. de sacrament. c. de confessione, says that
a man being at the point of death is bound by Gods law to confess to a
Priest. If, I say, he had but one spark of honesty, or grain of modesty; he
would not have affirmed, that this manner of auriculer confession had been
ordained by Christ, having neither testimony of scriptures, nor standing with
the doctrine of the fathers. Delicta sua quis intelligit? says the Prophet
Psalm. 18. How then can a man confess all his sins, which no man is well able
to conceive, nor the papists in their multiforme cases of consciences able to
e^presse? Secondly, the Prophet says, that at what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin, God will put all his wickedness out of his
remembrance. If a sinner therefore repent, he may have remission of sins
without auriculer confession. Thirdly, the fathers do refell this
confessionall doctrine. nondico, vt confitearis (peccata) conseruo tuo, says
Chrysostom Homil. 2. in Psalm. 50. qui exprobret; dicito deo, qui curet ea. I
say not, confess thy sins, to thy fellow servant, which may reproach it to
thee, but speak to God, which cares for such matters. Ambrose upon the 10. of
Luke. c. 96. says, he reads of Peter's tears, but not of his satisfaction.
And again, let tears says he, wash your sins, that by word you are ashamed
to confess. Lib. 10. confess. c. 3.
what have I to do says Saint Augustine, with men, that they should hear my
co^fessions, as if they were to heal my griefs? Cassian also collat. 20. c.
9. teaches men to confess to God such things, as they blush to confess to
men. Fourthly, it is an absurd thing to say, Christ ordained confession, and
not to be able to prove it out of the scriptures. Fifthly, if confeson of all
sins were necessary; then who should escape damnation? Sixthly, Papists
themselves bring diverse cases, wherein they say confession is not necessary, and
the Pope dispenses in case of omisssion of confession, which shows that
confession is not iuris diuini, nor necessary to salvation. Finally, Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople took a way a kind of auriculer confession for public
sins which was used in that Church, as Sozomenus testifies.

And this is sufficient to clear me of all untruth objected against me by
Owlyglasse. If he think otherwise, or if any man will not be persuaded, let
him orderly answer this and other latin treatises, which I have written
concerning diverse of these several causes. If they cannot, let them leave for
shame to belche out their wicked slanders against us, that shall always be able
to justify our allegations, and writings better then the adversaries, that
care not much, how falsely they speak or write.

CHAP. II. An answer to Owlyglasses exceptions concerning thirteen
falsifications pretended to be committed in M. Sutcliffes late Challenge.
Sect. I. Of two allegations of Epiphanius and Augustine pretended to be
falsified.
SICVT canis qui reuertitur ad vomitum suum, says Solomon, Proverb. 26.
sic stultus qui iterat stultitiam suam. for if a fool have a toye, or fancy
in his head, you shall hardly bring him from it. This appears plain by the
foolish and fond devises of our adversaries, who having a conceit to work us
some disgrace under pretense of untruths and falsifications, are still talking
and prating of falsifications; wherein notwithstanding the cause being
examined, all the disgrace will fall upon themselves. Robert Parsons being at
Rome, and hearing of the conference, that had passed betwixt M. Plessis, and M.
d' Eureux, would needs forsooth send a pamphlet concerning that matter into
England, with a request, that a trial might also be made concerning
allegations by men of our side with us, as it had passed before in France. The
which pamphlet albeit he might see to have been answered two years agone, and
his challenge concerning matters of falsification, to be accepted by me, and
that I have begone to object against him diverse notorious and most material
falsifications, whereupon Romish religion seems to depend; yet is Owlyglasse
our adversary still returning to his vomit, and still babbling of
falsifications, himself being not able either to answer one word in defense
of those falsifications, which I showed to have been committed by the Romish
church, and principal men actors in the Popes cause, or well able to declare,
what falsification is, albeit by practice he be most cunning in it. And that
appears by the first section of his third chapter page, 47. for albeit I do
not set down any words either of Saint Augustine or Epiphanius, yet he
pretends, that I have falsified both. A strange matter, that a man should
commit a forgerie in writing, and yet neither make, nor preduce any writings at
all. But I quote them in the margent. for that he may allege in excuse of
his dizardrie* as if every man that quoted an author in the margent, either
unfitly, or erroneously, were to be charged with the crime of falsification.
The worst therefore that he is able to say against me, is error, and mistaking,
but if I have not erred or mistakene, ither Saint Augustine or Epiphanius, I
hope, some cacolike massepriest will tell Owlyglasse, that himself was much
ouerseene in the very first setting out of the harbor, which is a very evil
presage, and a most certain sign, that he will make no good voyage, as long
as he deals with me in this cause. That I have said truly, it will appear,
by comparing S. Augustines, and Epiphanius his words with mine. I say, the
Heracleonites did anoint their followers departing out of this life, and gave
them a certain kind of extreme unction. And I quote Augustine de haeres. c.
16. and Epiphanius de haeres. 36. Let us then see, whether S. Augustine and
Epiphanius do not prove my words true.

Heracleonitae says he, feruntur suos morientes nouo modo quasi redimere, id
est, per oleum, balsamum and aquam. Likewise says Epiphanius: H
quandoque aliqui ex ipsis oleum aqua mixtum capiti defuncti immittunt. I say
further, that those heretics said prayers for the dead. and that is proved
both out of Augustine and Epiphanius. Augustine said they used certain
inuocations. inuocationes says he, quas Hebraicis verbis dicebant super
capita, scilicet morientium. Hoc faciunt says Epiphanius, vt hi qui has
inuocationes in vitae exitu accipiunt, cum aqua and oleo, aut vnguento
permixtis incomprehensibiles siant. So it appears, that these heretics did
anoint their Disciples with oil, hoping thereby to redeem them and save
them. It appears also, that they said prayers over the dead, in a tongue not
understood. Do not then the papists resemble them, greasing their disciples
that are dying, and teaching them, that by this sacrament they are justified,
and mumbling prayers over them in a tongue not understood of the assistants?

But says Owlyglasse, the matter of our extreme unction is only h^llowed
oil* theirs was oil, water, and balm* Page, 49.
the form of ours is a short prayer; theirs a strange invocation in Hebrew
words* the reason of ours is for the saving of the sick, the lifting of him
up, and if he be in sins, that they may be forgiven him; theirs to make
themselves invisible* ours is ministered on the five senses; theirs upon their
head* ours before death, theirs after death. And this he proves by alleging
the words of Augustine and Epiphanius at large, to the wearying of his reader
to no purpose. For we deny not any thing concerning this matter, which either
Epiphanius or S. Augustine affirms. But all his allegation notwithstanding
will not serve to clear the Papists from the blot of Heracleonisme. for admit
they did not approve all their errors, and in all points, shall they therefore
be discharged? Again, it is false, that the Heracleonites did anoint only the
dead* for S. Augustine says, quod suos morientes vngunt. so it may be they
anointed them both before death and after. Again it is false, that the
Heracleonites did not use a short prayer, and in a strange tongue. If then they
borrow greasing and praying in a strange tongue over the dead from the
Heracleonites, and hope to justify their disciples by these fond ceremonies;
then I hope I have said true in comparing the Papists to Heracleonites. Nay I
did them favor, that I said they were no worse then Heracleonites. for the
massepriests oftentimes vex poor souls, that lie upon dying and are
tormented otherwise with sickness, and tumble them sometime up and down in
their beds, and percase kill them, that otherwise might according to moral
conjectures have escaped. Beside that, they touch women very indecently, and
very absurdly they put oil in men's eyes, noses, and ears. Finally, our
adversary speaks foolishly where he says, extreme unction is ministered on
the five senses. For that is a senseless thing to say, that the senses may be
greased, and the Papists that speak orderly, say the instruments of the
senses, and not the senses are anointed.

He says also further, that S. James Chap. 5. makes mention of extreme
unction. And that S. Augustine and Epiphanius number Aerius among Heretics for
denying prayer for the dead* and that the Heracleonites did not say prayers for
relief of men's souls in purgatory. But if it would do Owlyglasse any good,
his fellows had need to say masses and dirges for him, albeit he be not yet
in purgatory* so simply does he handle his matters. For it is false, that S.
James makes mention of popish extreme unction, or that he thought that
unction, which he speaks of, to be a sacrament of the church; or that men
were justified by that unction. Nay he does not speak so much as one word of
the institution or form of extreme unction. Secondly, albeit Aerius was
condemned for denying the orders of the church, and not allowing the
commemoration of the names of the dead, at the time of the celebration of the
Lords supper, as then was used; yet that touches us nothing. For our Church
has taken away the superstitious abuses of the papists; and we do not
willingly oppugn any order of the ancient church by laws established among
us. Finally, albeit Epiphanius, and Augustine talk of prayers for the dead;
yet did they not think, that only those were to be prayed for, or remembered
in the holy ministration of the sacrament, that were in purgatory* for they
rehearsed the names of good and bad. And it may be, the Heracleonites did also
believe a certain purgatory* for else why should they pray for the dead,
especially, if our adversaries argue well?

Finally he asks, Page 50.
with what conscience I could so entreat the fathers in concealing their words.
As if Owlyglasse himself did not conceal Epiphanius his words concerning
Aerius, whom he charge with Arianisme, and other heresies, and not only for
denying prayer for the dead. I answer then his fond question, that I had no
reason to rehearse Augustines or Epiphanius his words, otherwise then I did,
alleging them only to one point, which I intended to prove: and that I did
justly and truly. Neither can any man except against my doing therein, unless
Owlyglasse would have men to cite whole chapters. And as for Owlyglasse, he
may hold his peace with shame enough, unless he can speak better for his
clients.

Sect. II. That Epiphanius was fitly alleged page 49. of my former Challenge.
THe like vanity does Owlyglasse show in taxing me for alleging the
testimony of Epiphanius. for the words that I cite, are truly described. The
other testimonies I do not describe, but only quote them. Wherein then
consists this high point of falsification? Forsooth says he, because he does
most untruly charge us, as coming near to Marcions heresy* but this is not
falsification, as he might have known, if he had known any thing. Nay it is
not untruth neither* for as Marcion suffered women to baptize, and extolled
virginity although he was a false lecher, and taught abstinence from living
creatures, and separated marriage for religion, as is before declared in the 4.
chapter of my challenge, so do Papists suffer women to baptize, and their
lecherous priests, albeit they extol virginity and abjure marriage, yet live
most dissolutely. Their Monks abstain from flesh, and they use to separate
marriages for religion, and all this Owlyglasse was contented to pass over in
silence, as if it had been delivered unto him under the seal of confession,
although the same was plainly and publicly objected in my former challenge,
and was easy to be found, being set down in the same place, where he
supposes, that I have committed this foresaid falsification.

But says he, he does falsify Epiphanius, wresting him contrary to his
meaning* as if Bellarmine were to be charged with falsification as often, as he
does wrest places contrary to the meaning of the authors. He says also, that
I conceal his words* but he must be a miraculous fellow, that will make him a
falsifier, that does not so much as allege any writing. Such a simple fellow
is Owlyglasse, with whom I do contend, that the poor fellow cannot tell what
he would say. I will therefore help to tell his tale, and show that he is the
falsifier, and not I.

In my challenge I do charge the Papists, as sauouring of diverse points of
heresy maintained by Marcion, and his followers. Among other things I say,
that Marcion taught that by Christ's descending into hell diverse men's souls
were thence delivered, and that he separated marriages for religion. And
afterward I add, that the Papists savor strongly of these heresies, and
namely, in that they separate marriages contracted after vows, and by vows
break marriages before contracted, and also in that they defend that diverse
men's souls were delivered out of limbus patrum, which is a place in hell, as
they confess. All this Owlyglasse iumbleth together concealing two or three
sentences, and setting down what he pleases* he is therefore without color
taken in the act of falsification. As for me, he cannot charge with any such
trick; nor justly say, that I either set down Epiphanius his words falsely,
or speak untruly. But says he, Marcion held, that Jews and Infidels were
delivered out of hell, which we believe not, and therefore we are not to be
charged with Marcionisme. neither do I charge them otherwise, then sauouring
of that heresy. And this is most true* for albeit they agree not in
particulars; yet both Marcionistes and Papists believe, that souls may be
delivered out of hell. Nay they are not ashamed to teach, that by the prayers
of Gregory, Traians soul and the soul of an idolater called Falconilla were
delivered out of hell, which Owlyglasse confesses to be Marcions opinion. And
if souls may be delivered out of hell (which is the place of the damned, as
appears by diverse testimonies of scriptures) why may not wicked men's souls
be delivered out of hell?

Finally he quoteth the fourth council of Toledo c. 1. Ignatius his Epistle ad
Trallianos. Cyrilles Catech. 4. Epiphanius haeres. 46. Hierome upon the 4. to
the Ephesians. Gregory's morals lib. 13. c. 20. But the silly fellow had drunk too
much, when he calculated his distempered exceptions* for else I believe, that he
would have remembered, that we do not dispute here, what the fathers hold
concerning limbus patrum, but whether Epiphanius were truly alleged, or not.
He told us in the beginning, that he would make his readers see and feel
falsifications, and that by opening the books, as it were, with a wet finger*
and yet here he is not able to show any such matter with all the skill he has.
Nay if falsification be committed, when fathers are falsely alleged, then is
this Owlyglasse a notorious falsificator. For not one of them once speaks or
mentions limbus patrum. Nor is Bellar. albeit farther traueiled in the
fathers then Owlygl. able to find limbus patrum in the fathers writings, or
that they distinguish hell into parts, or provinces, or speak of Abraham's
bosom, as the Papists do. And that may plainly appear by Bellarmines dispute
de anima Christi cap. 14. from whence our adversary borrowed all his broken
quotations, and allegations touching this point; if any man list to read the
place.

Sect. III. Of Epiphanius his words concerning the worship of Angels.
TO prove that the Caians were reputed heretics for the worshipping of Angels
and praying bnto them, I allege the words of Epiphanius Haeres. 38.
vnusquisque eorum vniuscuiusque angeli nomen inuocat. Here my adversary says,
that I have chopped of some words in the midst of the sentence* but if I had
said thus, that Epiphanius speaking of the Caians, says, they call upon
several Angels: then this accusation of Owlyglasse had fallen to the ground,
for all the chopping, that I used was to join the nominative case with the
verb* such heinous matters are they, that Owlyglasse obiecteth against me* he
says also, that I curtold the latter end of the sentence. As if it were not
absurd, when a man cites a father to a point, to allege that which makes
nothing to the point. Besides that, the words which I omitted, do rather make
against the Papists, then for them* for as the Caians do call sometime on true
Angels, sometime on those which they suppose to be Angels; so do Papists in
their prayers pray to Vriell, and other supposed Angels. They also pray to the
Angel, which they suppose to be their keeper, as grossly as the Caians, saying,
obsecro te Angelice spiritus, cui ego indignus peccator ad prouidendum
commissus sum, In hortulo animae paris. excus. anno. 1565.
desinenter protegas, defendas, mundes, munies me. they pray to Angels to be
cleansed from their sins* and afterward, notum mihi facias finem meum,
diemque obitus mei. That is, make me know my end, and the day of my death: as
if Angels did know such things. But says Owlyglasse, he has perfidiously
perverted the whole sense of that father. But if he and his consortes did use
no more perfidious dealing against their prince and contry, then I have done
in this case they would not so perfidiously combine themselves with foreign
enemies. As for this charge of perfidiousnesse, it falls not upon me* for I
do allege Epiphanius to prove only, that the Caians did worship and inuocat
Angels. And this I have proved out of his words most justly and truly. But had
I mistaken his meaning, yet is not that falsification, but an error: where as
commonly the detector both falsifieth and erreth.

Being therefore not able to say much concerning the point in question,
Owlyglasse asks me, with conscience I could charge his consorts the Papists
with the abominable heresy of the Caians. But this is another accusation far
from the purpose. Beside that, I showed him the point of the charge, and told
him as plain as I could, that both Papists and Caians worship Angels. But
says he, do we teach that each Angel has done some horrible sin upon
earth? or do we inuocat false Angels, or any Angel at all in that sort, that
the Caians did? And in the end, he cries out, what is lying, what is
falsification, if this be not? But his reader has reason to cry out rather,
what is foolery, what is dizardry, if this be not? For I do not charge the
Papists in all points to agree with the Caians. Neither can the Papists
discharge themselves of the note of heresy, if in any sort they agree with the
Caians. but yt did I declare plainly, and Owliglasse cannot deny, that both
Caians, and Papists worship and call upon Angels. Again it apeareth, that the
Caians were condemned not for calling upon false Angels only, as Owlyglasse
does insinuate, but upon true Angels. Vniuscuiusque Angeli nomen inuocat, tum
eorum qui sunt Angeli, says Epiphanius, tum eorum qui ficte dicuntur Angeli.
It appears therefore, that Epiphanius accounted the^ heretics that
worshipped true angels, and not only false angels as Owlyglasse falsely
supposes. But if the Papists could avoid that charge; yet if they worship
new orders of angels, and their angelical keepers, it should seem, they
cannot avoid the charge of calling upon false Angels. Finally as the Caians
called upon angels having committed great sins, so the adulterous and
sodomitciall Priests confess their great sins to angels, and desire their
help. In the old ordinall of Rome printed at Rome anno. 159. and dedicated to
Sixtus quintus, every priest in this common form of confession beginning
confiteor deo omnipotenti, says, peccaui in Sodomia. Owlyglasse therefore may
do well to try his skill, if he can clear his consorts of this blot also. But
he must beware, that he blurre them not as well with sodomy, as he has blotted
them with the worship of angels, being not able to touch any of the rest of my
arguments, which are diverse. So brave a patron is Owlyglasse of the Popish
cause.

Sect. IIII. Of the heresy of Manicheyes in condemning marriage of their
Priests.
Having shifted his hands after a poor sort of the heresy of the Cai^ns,
Owlyglasse in his iades pace passes forth to treat of the heresy of
Manicheyes, But I fear he will yield his consorts no better satisfaction in
this place, the^ in the other. He says according to his wonted vain of
railing, that I make no scruple to falsify Saint Augustine, and to conceal
his true report, to infame the Papists with the heresy of the Manicheyes. But
see I pray you the simplicity of Owlyglasse. I do not so much as allege S.
Augustines words* how then can he say, that I do falsify him? Secondly, I do
not conceal any part of his meaning, that belongs to the matter in question*
other points that were far from the purpose I had no reason to report, seeing
I do not say, that the Papists are in all points Manicheyes. My words
therefore will easily clear me of both my adversaries his imputations. The
Papists say I, agree with the Manicheyes in diverse points of heresies* for as
the Manicheyes condemned marriage in their Priests, which for their excellency
they called electos, so likewise do the Papists in their Monks, and greater
orders of their clergy. It appears therefore, that I do not falsify Saint
Augustine, as this false and foolish fellow says. For you see, and he must
needs confess, I set not down his words* neither do I conceal his true
report. For that which I say of the electi, or priests of the Manicheyes, is
most true, and to be proved by S. Augustine, which is the reason, that I quote
that father in the margent. auditores qui appellantur apud eos says S.
Augustine speaking of the Manicheyes, Epist. 74.
and carnibus vescuntur and agros colunt, and si voluerint, vxores habent,
quorum nihil faciunt qui vocantur el^cti. He says, the lay people or auditors
of the Manicheyes have wives, if they will, but the Priests among them have
none. In this therefore the Papists savor of Manicheisme. Further, their Monks
abstain from flesh, as did the electi of the Manicheyes. Thirdly, they hold,
that Christ's body may be in many places at once, which S. Augustine disputing
against Faustus shows, to be a conceit of the Manicheyes. They do also grate
upon diverse other points of Manicheisme, as I do object in my Challenge, and
Owlyglasse seems to confess by his silence: especially if silence be a kind
of confession, as it is in cases that law and reason does bind us to answer.
But says Owlyglasse, why does he not t^ll us out of S. Augustine de
haeresibus, Page, 58.
what the heresy of the Manicheyes was? as if it were not sufficient to
declare, what their heresy was out of other books of S. Augustine, and other
authors. Does he believe, that because S. Augustine does not note down all
points, that they are no heresies? But says he, it appears by S. Augustine
de haeresis. c. 46. that the Manicheyes forbad marriage to all. He says also,
that Papists maintain no such damnable doctrine* but that of the general
prohibition is reproved by S. Augustines words before alleged. Neither is t^
material, that they forbad generation* for it is one thing to forbid marriage,
and an other to forbid generation, the Popes and popish priests forswearing
marriage, and not generation, as appears plainly by the multitude of their
bastards. Beside that, in some things the Papists seem also with the
Manicheyes to condemn generation, allowing public stews, and not remedying
more unnatural abuses, of which no generation ensues. I hope therefore
hereafter Owlyglasse will not charge me, either with falsification, or unjust
dealing in this point, the filthiness of popish priests, and their abstinence
from honorable marriage approaching so near to the filthy errors of the
Manicheyes.

Sect. V. Of the heresy of the Pepuzians.
Here our adversary spends some idle talk about the heresy of the
Pepuzians. But if he had but cast his broad eyes on the title of his chapter;
he might have well perceived and remembered, that he took upon him to convince
me of some notorius falsification; and how that was the subject of his chapter,
and that all the rest of his discourse was idle and impertinent. He shows
himself also to be a notable idiot, to charge me with falsifiyng S. Augustine,
when I do neither cite S. Augustines words, nor name him. He was also some what
to hasty to charge me, with belying the Papists, in that I make them like to
the Pepuzians. For my words do clear me of the first, and the practice of
Papists does justify my words in the second. I say, that both Papists and
Pepuzians suffer women to administer baptism. But Saint Augustines words to
this point I do not quote, but only to a former matter concerning the honor by
the Pepuzians given to Pepuza, as my book will show, and Owliglasse, if he
were not owlesighted, might have seen.

That the Papists are like to Pepuzians (albeit this should not have been
disputed in this place) it appears First, for that as the Pepuzians did honor
the town of Pepuza, as Jerusalem, and the mother Church of all christendom,
so do the Papists honor Rome, and believe that see, to be a Rock, and a
divine thing. Hanc isti (scilicet Pepuzam) says Saint Augustine, De haeres. c.
27.
diuinum aliquid esse arbitrantes, Jerusalem vocant. The Papists think noe
less of Rome. Secondly both Papists and Pepuzians suffer women to minister
baptism. Thirdly, the Pepuzians had women prophetesses. mulieres apud istos
says Epiphanius, Haeres. 49.
vocantur prophetissae. So likewise the Papists have their women prophetesses,
Hortul animae. excus. paris. 1565.
as appears by Hildigardis, Mechtildis, Brigit, and others. They also call
the blessed Virgin Oraculum Prophetarum, and the teacher of the Apostles.
Fourthly, the Pepuzians had women Preests. Episcopi apud ipsos, says
Epiphanius, sunt mulieres. The Papists in this point pass them. For among them
a woman was Pope, as is testified by Martin Polonus, Marianus Scotus, Platina,
and diverse others.

Now what says the falsificator, and grand excoriatour of men's writings to all
this? First, he confesses, that it is most true, that his consorts permit
women to baptize. But our Savior sent his disciples to baptize, and not any
women. Neither did he give to women that power. Further we may not think, that
women may with better right Baptize, then preach. Yet the Apostle, permits
not a woman to speak in the congregation, Haeres. 49.
and Epiphanius alleges that place of the Apostle against the Pepuzians. Why
then should not Pepuzians and Papists in this case be like? Secondly, he goes
about to show, that the Pepuzians, and Papists are unlike, and namely for that
the Papists do permit women to baptize only in time of necessity. And for
that the Pepuzians did give priesthood to women. In which two points he would
infer, that there is a main difference betwixt Papists and Pepuzians. But
his conclusion is so simple, that it can abide noe touch. For he is an
heretic, that holds any point condemned for heresy, and not those only
which do iumpe with heretics in all points, and circumstances. If then the
Papists should differ in two, or three points from Pepuzians; yet must they
needs savor of that heresy, in permitting women to baptize, and deriuing the
succession of Popes from Pope Ioane, and other particulers before rehearsed.
Finally he would willingly prove the unlawfulness of weme^s baptism by the
practice of our Church. For says he, the same doctrine is found in the
communion book in the treatise of private baptism: where albeit women are nor
mentioned, yet for that weme^ are then present only, they are expressed. He
affirms also, that M. Hooker does defend women's baptism, and that I must
defend it, unless I will change my opinion. But while he goes about to excuse
his consorts, he runs himself into danger, and like a shameless fellow
bouldly avouches diverse untruths. For first the practice of the Church of
England is against wemens baptism, and diverse Popish callats have been
punished for attempting to administer that holy sacrament. Secondly, the book
does express no such matter, as Owlyglasse pretends, but only would have
children in extremity baptized privately, which may be done by the minister, if
the parents and friends of the child be diligent. Thirdly, M. Hooker never was
of that opinion, that the communion book allowed private baptism, as Owlygl.
impudently affirms. Nay, albeit he will not deny such baptism to be of
validity* yet he says, that such persons as do baptize infants, being no
ministers, do unlawfully usurp the ministers office. But Owlyglasse
alleging M. Hookers first book p. 62. for the fifth book sect. 62. seems
not to have read the book, which he quoteth. Finally for my self I answer
that he cannot with any devise make it appear, that in this point, or any
other, I do oppugn, or digress from the communion book. Owlyglasse therefore
may do well to bring better stuff, if he will convince me of falsification,
and to cease to talk of tippets and caps, himself having as much learning
almost in his cap as in his head, and so well deserving a Tiburne tippet for
his treacherous Divinity.

In the mean while let him put on a pair of spectacles, and he shall see,
that he was much deceived, where he says, I do guilefully quote S. Augustine.
For to this point of wemens baptism I quote him not at all.

Sect. VI. Of the heresy of barefooted brethren.
OF Heretics, that went barefoote, Owlyglasse speaks very nakedly, poorly
and barely. If the men he speaks of, had been like to his discourse, they
should not only have been called Nudipedales for their going barefoote, but
Adamitae for going naked. He promised to convince me of falsification. but here
forgetting his argument, he charge me for not setting down S. Augustines
words. As if it were a crime, not to set down impertinent words; or as if all
lawyers and divines, that refer themselves to places not set down, were to
be accused in so doing. For the matter it self, Owlyglasse cannot take any
just exception unto my speech, unless he will deny, that barefooted brethren
were numbered among heretics, or that the Franciscanes, and Excalceatae and
Capuchins go barefoot. Neither is it material that Augustine c. 64. de haeres.
does account these fellows heretics, for that they went barefoote upon a
misunderstanding of scriptures, and not for penance. For it is not the
misconstruing of places only, but the very evil opinion, that heretics
hold, that makes them heretics. Admit then, that Capuchins, Franciscans and
their dear sisters the Excalceatae go barefoote upon other reasons, then the
old barefooted heretics; yet in the substance of their opinion, that is in
the singularity of going barefoote, both of them do well agree. Unless
therefore this masked brother of the Capuchins Owlyglasse can bring better
ground of his accusation, he has no reason on the behalf of his barefooted
brethren and sisters, to complain of injurious slander. But contrariwise we
have reason to wish, that seeing he will needs go masked, he would take a shoe
laid aside by some one of his holy barefooted sisters, and make a mask of it
to cover his false visage, that no honest man may ever know so impudent and
foolish a wrangler.

Sect. VII. Of S. Augustines relation concerning the Priscillianists.
SAint Augustine speaking of the Priscillianists says, Haeres. 70.
they disioyned married folks for religion sake. And these words I quote most
truly. why then am I charged by Owlyglasse with falsification? Forsooth says
he, because ye leave out the words following. But if this were a rule to
prove falsification, then would it be proved, that Bellarmine has falsified
almost all the places, he quoteth. for he in most places leaves out words
following; yea and sometimes words going before, and coming in the midst.
To show the agreement of Papists and Priscillianists in one point, I leave out
nothing. that they agree in all points, I do not affirm. Yet in making
slight account of oaths, they both do well agree. And in this point also,
wherein our adversary pretends disagreement, yet they agree better, then
Owlyglasse thinks. For albeit Papists in open terms do not say, marriage is
unlawful; yet if those, that are married, live in the flesh, as is said in a
decretale under the name of Syricius, and if married folks be a state
imperfect, and cannot please God, as diverse stiffly hold; then by a consequent
the Papists condemn marriage. Finally, if that was a property of
Priscillianists to separate married folks one from another against the will of
either party, then in separating marriages not consummate, the Papists are
Priscillianists by the confession of Owlyglasse. They are also in this
Priscillianists, that they keep married couples a sunder being once separated
by ^nsent, and will not let them come together again, although they much
desire it. Of which point I have discoursed more at large in the chapter going
before* which may abate his rage in crying out of falsifications and lies, if
he be not altogether furious, and beside himself.

Sect. VIII. That Infidels sin in all their moral actions.
OF the Pelagian heresy now lately revived by the Papists, I have spoken
already sufficiently in my former treatise chap. 4. I did also deliver diverse
arguments and testimonies in my late Challenge to prove Papists to be
Pelagians, which if Owlyglasse had been the man he takes himselte to be, he
would have encountered and answered. but he poor idiot had no such stuff in
him. Therefore denying not that Papists and Pelagians agree well in the
definition of sin, and that they jointly hold, that a man may be without
sin, and that both maintain that concupiscence is sanctified after baptism,
after a sort, and diverse other points of Pelagianisme, he only snatcheth at
three or four places of S. Augustine, and so with a mask on his broad face
passes on to play the Zanni in other matters. Where I say, that Saint
Augustine holds against the Pelagians, that the Gentiles sinned in all their
actions: he says, I belie S. Augustine, and maliciously pervert the sense and
scope of his writing. Afterward he denies, that it is Pelagianisme, to hold
that Infidels sin in all their actions. Again he says, that this point is
forged by me, and falsely fathered upon S. Augustine. And so he runs on in a
vain of railing, led on as it seems by his dictates, and not reading the
place alleged. for otherwise he would never so impudently have faced out an
untruth, nor ignorantly denied that, which is to plainly, and in diverse places
of the chapter quoted, by S. Augustine affirmed. And of this I will make any
indifferent man judge. Lib. 4. contr. Julian. c. 3.
Cum non ad suum finem says S. Augustine, referuntur dona dei, hoc ipso mali
his vtentes efficiuntur iniusti. He says, that wicked men using Gods gifts,
are made sinners and unjust, for that they refer them not to the right end.
And afterward, si gentilis, qui non viuit ex fide, nudum operuerit,
periclitantem liberauerit, aegri vulnera fouerit, diuitias honestae amicitiae
impenderlt, ad testimonium falsum nec tormentis potuerit impelli, quaero abs
te, says Augustine to Julian the Pelagian, vtrum haec opera bona been faciat
an male? Si enim quamuis bona, male tamen facit, negare non potes eum peccare,
qui male quodlibet facit. He says plainly, that Gentiles sin in all their
actions, though the act be good. Again, bonum male facit, qui infideliter
facit, qui autem male facit, profecto peccat. Again he says, that Infidels
sin in doing that, which of it self is good. He does also prove it out of
the Apostles words, because, that whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. If
then the Archpriest have any power over this railing fellow; he may do well to
give him some discipline, that has maintained Julian the Pel^gians opinion,
and denied S. Augustines doctrine, and like an ignorant dolt cries out, that I
have forged these words and fathered them upon S. Augustine.

But says he, S. Augustine does not note this error in the Pelagians, viz.
that Infidels sin in all their actions, but reproves the heretic for a
different matter, to wit, for maintaining that Infidels had true virtues. and
to this point he reports a sentence out of S. Augustine. But therein he does
also bewray his ignorance. for as S. Augustine disputes this point in the
beginning of the chapter, so he disputes the other in the latter end of the
same chapter. But either our adversary had not so much learning, as to
understand latin, or else he took this quotation out of Bellarmine, or out of
his dictates. Again, our adversary shows himself to be blind, not seeing,
that, what I say, does follow of that, which himself alleges. For if
Infidels have no true virtues; then do they sin in all their actions,
unless our adversary will have their moral actions neither to be good, nor
bad. Furthermore, if the will of Infidels be like an evil tree; then can it
bring forth nothing, but evil fruit. And if whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin; then if the actions of Infidels do not proceed of faith; it follows
that Infidels sin in all their moral actions. and this is the conclusion of
S. Augustine. Was not Owlyglasse then a wise fellow trow you, to avouch an
untruth so impudently? and do you not take him to be a simple disputer, that
alleges words, that convince him of folly, ignorance, and pelagianisme?

Sect. IX. That man is not able now in this frailty of nature to perform the
law of God perfectly.
THis point has also heretofore been debated. it rests therefore now, that
we examine only Saint Augustines opinion herein. I say, that this is the
Pelagians argument to prove, that man is able to perform the law of God,
because that God would not, say they, command things impossible. And this I
prove by Saint Augustines words lib. de gratia. c. 16. Magnum aliquid se
scire putant Pelagiani, quando dicunt, non iuberet deus, quod sciret ab homine
non posse perfici. His words are clear, that the Pelagians used so to say, and
argue, as I have set down. What is then the reason, that moved my adversary
to charge me with falsification? Forsooth says he, because he leaves out
these words following of S. Augustine, quis haec nesciat? As if every one,
that leaves out words following, were to be charged with falsification.
Beside that, albeit words following were to be rehearsed; yet purposing only to
rehearse the argument of the Pelagians, I had no reason to join Saint
Augustines words with theirs. But says Owlyglasse, S. Augustine ^eprehendeth
not the Pelagians for bringing this reason. But therein he shows his
ignorance, if not malice. For what reasonable man cold ever have imagined, that
S. Augustine disputing against the Pelagians did either allow their opinions,
or their grounds? But if a man cold have imagined so, yet S. Augustines words
that follow, would have taught him, that he disputes against the Pelagians
argument. For says he, God does command us things, that we cannot do, that
we may learn, what to ask of him. For faith by prayer obtains that, which
the law commands. His words are: ideo iubet aliqua, quae non possumus, vt
nouerimus quid ab eo petere debeamus. Lib. de great. and lib. arb. c. 16.
ipsa est enim fides, quae orando impetrat, quod lex postulat. Now what can be
more contrary then that, which the Pelagians say Viz. That God would not
command, if man were not able to perform; And that which S. Augustine
teaches, Viz. That God commands us some things, that we cannot do?

Furthermore if man were able to perform the whole law, because God would not
else command it; then were it possible, for just men to live without all sin;
which Saint Augustine in his books against Pelagius, and where he sets
down the Pelagians heresies, does note to be flat Pelagianisme. with Saint
Augustine also does Herome accord. Fateberis says Critobulus, Lib. 3. contra
Pelag.
that susteineth the part of the Pelagians, eos qui Christi baptisma consecuti
sunt, non habere peccatum, and, si absque peccato sunt, iustos esse. That is
thou will, I trow, acknowledge, that such as are baptized have noe sin, and if
they have noe sin, that they be just. But if man be able to keep Gods
commandments; then may he also be perfectly just, and without sin* our
adversary therefore has no reason in this place to call me, a notable
falsifier. But every indifferent man may see, that it stands him upon to
clear himself of Pelagianisme* he must also understand Saint Augustine
better, before he dispute of his doctrine of freewill, which is, so repugnant
to school divinity, as nothing more. Thomas Brandwardine doubted not to charge
the schoolmen with flat Pelagianisme. In lib. de gratia and libero arbitrio.


Sect. X. Of the subjection of sin to our will.
IN my challenge page 59 I allege these words of the Pelagians, that we have
freewill strong, and firm, not to sin. And this I confirm by Saint
Augustine, who ascribes these words to the Pelagians. But my adversary being
but a nouice in Saint Augustines writings was not able to find them, and
finding them not, or not well discerning them, see I pray you, how rudely he
comes upon me. False it is, says he, that Saint Augustine holds it to be
Pelagianisme to say, that we have freewill: or that sin is subject to our
will. He adds of his own these words, that we have freewill, as if I had
simply denied all freedom of will, or as if that were here the question
betwixt us. And afterward he says, the place which he quoteth, find I cannot,
and therefore do confidently challenge him of playing false under board. But
see, I pray you, the blindness and impudence of this paltrie companion* the
words, which I cite, are found in Saint Augustines first book de gratia
christi contra Pelagium and Celestium. c. 28. Cum tam forte, inquit (scilicet
Pelagius) tam firmum ad non peccandum liberum in nobis habeamus arbitrium, quod
generaliter naturae humanae creator inseruit, rursus pro eius inaestimabili
benignitate quotidiano munimur auxilio. Seeing we have so strong and firm
freewill in us, not to sin, which God the creator generally has inserted
into man's nature, again of his inestimable bounty we are strengthened by his
daily help. Hereby it appears, that Pelagius taught, that sin was so
subject to our will, as that thereby we were able to avoid sin. And that
this is oppugned by Saint Augustine, it appears in the words following. quid
opus est says he, hoc auxilio, si tam forte ac firmum est ad non peccandum
liberum arbitrium? I hope therefore the Papists will be ashamed of their
champion, the ground of whose bragges is ignorance.

But says Owlyglasse, Saint Augustine never denied freewill. As if I had said,
that he did, or else because we have freewill after a sort, that therefore we
have freewil and power not to sin. This the poor idiot imagines: and
therefore he produces diverse places out of S. Augustine. But I do not speak
one word against freewill, but of the strength of freewill, to hold sin in
subjection, and to abstain from sin and that this is plain Pelagianisme, it
appears both by Saint Augustine in the place already quoted, and by S. Jerome
lib. 3. contra Pelagianos. Nay our adversary denying, that my words are to be
found in Saint Augustine, himself afterward unawares page 73. does cite them
out of S. Augugustine: showing himself therein a vain, and ignorant brabler.

Finally Owlyglasse by producing diverse places out of S. Augustine, where
freewill is mentioned, imagines that in the controversy of freewill, he
joins with the Papists, and is contrary to us. But that he shall never be
able to prove. nay he denies, that man has such a strength of freewill, that
he is able to abstain from sin* which notwithstanding both Pelagians and
Papists hold* we also deny not, but God by his grace is able of unwilling to
make us willing, and willingly to walk in the ways of his comma^dements; and
that by his own freewill, man does commit sin, which is the sum of S.
Augustines doctrine of freewill, of which I may say freely, that Owlyglasse is
ignorant. But what need I to stand longer upon this point, seeing the question
is not here of freewill, or the power thereof, but whether I alleged Saint
Augustine truly or not? what need I, then to make any long discourse of that
which I have already sufficienly cleared?

Sect. XI. Of the representing of God by images.
IN this section Owlyglasse does charge me with no less fault, then injurious
slander, Page 75. and. 76.
and malicious falsification And why? forsooth because I say, that the men of
Trent do permit the divinity to be figured and affirm, that this does savor
of the heresy of the Anthropomorphites. Let us therefore consider the words of
the assembly of Trent, and the practice of papists in this point. If it shall
happen sometime, Sess. 25. council Trident.
say the men of Trent, that the histories of scripture for the profit of the
people, be expressed in imagery or pictures, let the people be taught, that
the divinity is not therefore figured, as if it might be seen with the eyes
of the body, or expressed with figures* the words in latin are, quod si
aliquando historias and na^rationes sacrae scripturae, cum id indoctae plebi
expediet, figurari contigerit, doceatur populus, non propterea diuinitatem
figurari, quasi oculis conspici, aut figuris exprimi possit. So it is apparent,
that they forbid not God the father, and the holy ghost also to be expressed in
imagery, or painted, when any history or narration of scripture requires the
same, but the people must be taught, what to understand by these images and
pictures. In exp^icat. 1. praecepti.
The Roman catechism likewise teaches, that the divine majesty is iniuried,
if any shall endeavor by art to express the form of the divinity, as if that
might with eyes be seen, or colors and images expressed. Which shows, that
the papists forbid not men to make the image of God the Father in the form of
an old man, or the holy Ghost in the similitude of a dove, but to believe,
that the divinity it self may be figured with colors, or seen. Likewise,
the common practice of the church of Rome is, to figure the person of the
Father in the image of an old man, and the holy Ghost in the likeness of a
dove. If then God the Father be like an old man, or the holy ghost like a
dove; then do the Papists savor of the heresy of the Anthropomorphites. If
these images do not resemble God the Father, and God the holy Ghost; why are
they permitted? Finally, why do papists paint and grave the holy trinity, and
to the image thereof set up lights, and give the worship, that is due to God
himself? The rehearsal therefore of the act of the assembly of Trent, and the
doctrine of the Romish Catechism, does rather intricate Owlyglasse, then
acquit him. The same certes does clearly discharge me from my adversaries
clamorous accusation.

Sect. XII. Of the definition of a Romish Catholic.
THat the Romish religion, as it differs from that religion, which we
profess in England, is nothing but a pack of impostures, lies, fables, and
superstitious toys, I shall have occasion to declare at full in some other
treatise. But least any might think, that I wronged the sea of Rome, from whom
all these abuses are derived; I would pray every man, that has skill and
leisure with indifferency to read the Legends of the Romish Church, the
Rubtikes of the mass, their rituall and ceremonial books, their treatises of
the Popes authority, the fabulous lies of Caesar Baronius, that filthy lying
Cardinal, and such like testimonials as they prove their religion by. Now we
will only talk of the definition of a Romish Catholic, that every man may
see, what a bare fellow he is, and how little religion and honesty he has. I
say that Bellarmine teaches, that he is a good Romish Catholic, and a true
member of the Romish church, that professes the Romish faith, and
communicates with the Romanistes in their sacraments, and is obedient to the
Pope: yea although he have neither inward faith, nor charity, nor other inward
virtue. And thereupon I conclude, that the Papists are like to the Eunomians,
that taught, that so a man were of their religion, it skilled not, what sins
he committed. That Bellarmine so teaches, it is apparent by his words in his
second chapter de ecclesia militanti. Nostra sententia est, says he, ecclesiam
vnam esse, and non duas, and illam vnam and veram, coetum hominum eiusdem
christianae fidei professione, and eorundem sacramentorum communione colligatum
sub regimine legitimorum pastorum, ac praecipue vnius Christi in terris vicarij
Romani pontificis. And afterward he says: Non putamus requiri vllam internam
virtutem, sed tantum externam professionem fidei, and sacramentorum
communionem: scilicet, vt aliquis aliquo modo dici possit pars verae ecclesiae,
de qua scripturae loquuntur. If then he be a good Roman catholic, of whom,
the true definition of a Roman catholic may be affirmed, then may all wicked
and damnable heretics be true Romish catholics, if they profess the Romish
faith, and communicate with the Romanists in sacraments, and submit themselves
to the Pope. But says Owlyglasse Bellarmine says not, that such as want
inward verrues, are good Catholics, but only, that they are true members of
the Church. As if the true members of Christ's church were not good catholics;
or as if he were not a good citizen, of whom the definition of a citizen may
truly be affirmed: and as if he could not be a good, and true pope, that is no
good man. Of which point our adversary must beware, least he touch too rudely
the sores of his holy father, and of a pope make no pope.

He says further, that this objection of Eunomianisme is rather to be charged
upon Lutherans and Caluinists (for so this papal swad does call Christians) and
upon M. Willet, they giving excessive prerogatives to faith, and such as teach,
that a true faith cannot be lost. But albeit he take his pleasure to rail upon
me; yet should he forbear to wrong those, that are either at rest, or at the
least never wronged him. And in this place having his hands so full of me, he
might well have spared to contend with others, being no match for any. To his
charge I answer, that Eunomius his heresies touch us nothing. For neither do
we deem them good Christians, as Eunomius did, that have no inward faith, nor
works; nor did Eunomius talk of the faith of Christ Jesus, as we do, when we
say the just shall live by faith, but of his own new devised faith. Owlyglasse
therefore has no reason, for any thing done by me, to cry out, that
Bellarmine is abused, and his words falsified; nor to charge us with Eunomius
his heresy. But his consorts will, and justly may think him an idle fellow,
if he can no better either clear himself, or convince others, especially
taking upon him to do both.

Sect. XIII. Of second marriages, and whether the Papists dislike them, or no.
THe last place out of which our adversary goes about to fasten an imputation
of falsification upon me is, for that I say, that the Papists like to the
Montanists dislike second marriages, and deny to bless them, accounting these
marriages not so holy a sacrament, as the first. And this he says is a slander,
for that Papists do not mislike second marriages. But here, as before
oftentimes, he forgets the subject of his discourse* for he should have
convinced me of falsifications, if he had remembered, what he had in hand. And
yet in this place he does not so much as touch any place by me alleged, or
supposed to be falsified. Only to convince himself of notorious ignorance, he
has quoted a marginall note belonging not to this, but to the next place (as
he might have perceived by the direction, if he had not been blind) and has
set the same over against my words in this place, as if I had proved my sayings
of the Montanistes by Damascens chapter beginning, Christianocategori, in his
book de haeresibus. such a learned adversary have we to deal withal.

I answer further, that I do not slander the Papists, as my adversary
charge me, when I say, that they savor of Montanisme in disliking second
marriages* for their counterfeit canons do pronounce them punishable by
excommunication, that marie more then once. De his qui frequenter vxores
ducunt, say they, and de his, quae saepius nubunt, 31. q 1. de hi^
tempus quidem poenitentiae his manifestum constitutum est. And afterward: Cum
praecipiatur, say they, Ibidem
secundis nuptijs poenitentiam tribuere, quis erit presbyter qui propter
conuiuium illis consentiat nuptijs. It appears therefore that they enjoined
penance for second marriages, as for a grievous crime: and forbad the priest, to
be present at the feast of such married folks. Beside that, they do not allow,
that a Priest shall bless the second marriage: nor do they account the second
marriage to be so holy a sacrament, as the first. Finally, Syricius calls
married folks, C. Plurimos. did. 82.
and defenders of priests marriages followers of lusts, and teachers of vices,
sectatores libidinum, C. proposuisti. Ibidem.
and praeceptores vitiorum. And Innocentius, as if they were unholy, and could
not please God, and were in the flesh, excludes married folks from the
ministry of the altar. Which shows, that they savor of Montanisme, if not
worse.

But says Owlyglasse, if it be Montanisme, to deny second marriages to be so
holy a sacrament, as the first, what then be they, that deny first and second
marriages, to be any sacrament at all? But this is a balde kind of disputing,
to propose a man's argument, otherwise, then he frames it. We do not say, they
be Montanists in denying the second marriages to be a sacrament, but that they
savor of Montanisme in disliking second marriages, and preferring the first
before the second. Of which that is an argument, that the Papists account not
the second marriage so holy a sacrament, as the first.

Secondly, he denies that Papists mislike second marriages* but the Canon de
his 31. q. 1. does testify against him.

He says thirdly, that the blessing of the first marriage remains* and that
therefore they bless not second marriages, because they had blessed them
before. But how does the blessing of the first marriage remain, when a maid is
married to a widow? Further, the Canon de his 31. q. 1. shows, that second
marriages were punished with penance, and priests forbidden to be present at the
feast, as if such marriages were impure, and unlawful.

He would fourthly prove, that second marriages are not to be blessed by the
testimony of S. Augustine sermon. 243. de tempore, and the 7. Canon of the
council of Neocaesarea. But after his cogging manner he belyeth S. Augustine,
who speaks nothing of the blessing of the second marriages, nor of the
blessing of the priest, but rather of Gods blessing denied to such, as keep
first concubines, and then marie. The council of Neocaesarea has nothing of
the blessing of second marriages, but enioyneth priests to abstain from such
marriage feasts, and condemns them as unlawful* so that, I doubt, Owlyglasse
will hardly, without some sly distinction, be able to defend this councels act.

He says finally, that Montanists were not counted heretics for not blessing
the second marriages, nor for reputing second marriages not so holy a sacrament
as the first, as I would make my reader believe, but for condemning them
utterly as wicked and unlawful. He bears his reader also in hand, that I do
maliciously suppress the authors words, to the end, not to have my iugling
espied. But notwithstanding his iugling, and lying, he cannot so escape the
note of Montanisme. For first I do not argue the Papists to be Montanists for
the reason surmised by Owlyglasse, but for their dislike of second marriages*
and this dislike I prove by those, which he mentions, and by other
arguments. Secondly, if such as condemn second marriages, as sinful, be
Montanists, then must they either blot out the Canon, de his 31. q. 1. or
confess themselves Montanists. The gloss is driven to poor shifts to salve
the hurt of this Canon; and yet cannot rid his hands with any honesty of the
matter. Thirdly, it is a ridiculous point, to charge me with suppressing an
authors words, when I do not so much, as intend to name an author, nor aim
at any man's words. Owlyglasse therefore might do himself more credit to
leave his lewd terms of iugling, and slandring, and such like, and bestow them
on the massepriests his consorts, whose whole practice is nothing else almost,
but cogging, lying, and iugling, and most shameful dealing.

And thus all that smoke, which our adversary first raised with his fiery
and turbulent exclamations, is vanished away, and all doubt either of supposed
untruths, or falsifications cleared in the judgment of all indifferent
readers, and by the confession of the adversary also, unless he be able to
maintain the quarrel which he has begun, and to put away my answer to his
former exceptions. If then he should be taken halting in schools, as he has
been in this writing; I think he would as soon make a simple end of
himself, as he has made a poor dispatch of his cause.

CHAP. III. An answer to the detectors idle observations.
IT is a common rule well known to Logicians, that the conclusion does follow
the weaker part of the premises. Philosophers also hold, that by common course
of nature, nothing can be made of nothing. If then the premises, out of which
our adversary goes about to deduce certain conclusions and corollaries, be
false, weak and very evil faitured; it is a great presumption, that his
abortiue, and odious conclusions and corollaries are like to his former
propositions, false, evil favored, foolish and slanderous. And if his former
accusations concerning untruths and falsifications, be nothing; it is very
probable, that these idle fancies, which he calls observations are nothing,
if not less then nothing, and that they are like to castles built in the air,
and foolish conceits of a man of distempered humors. The which albeit the
reader may well understand by himself, and by my former answer, wherein all
his odious slanders are well rebated; yet least Owlyglasse should run mad
by conceit of his own prowess, I am determined for every indifferent man's
further satisfaction, to proceed forward, and to yield an answer to his
vain, weak, and absurd observations and conclusions.

Page 82. obseruat.
First he observes, that a filthy fardle of foul lies, and corruptions is
contained in my whole book, when one Chapter of my Challenge has affoorded so
many. But this filthy railing compagnion compounded of a fardle of fooleries
and impostures, and sauouring like the bottom of an old broken lamp, of the
Popes greasy superstitions, has no reason to charge me with lies or
corruptions, unless he could convince me, and justify his exceptions
concerning matters supposed false and forged. Whether he be able to convince me
or no, I appeal to the indifferent examination of both our discourses. I do
therefore retort this argument upon Owlyglasses masked visage thus. If where
our adversary thought to find most matter of advantage, he has wearied
himself in his vain cauilling course, and yet neither found untruth, nor
corruption, but rather contrariwise plain and honest dealing; I hope all
moderat papists (for of others I make no question) will neither suspect my
dealing without cause, nor believe such vain clamorous compagnions without due
proof. Again if Owlyglasse with his broad eyes, notwithstanding all his
diligence and endeavor, could not find in so many authorities, as I alleged,
any just subject of sclander; it is a great argument, that he could not well
take exception to the rest of my discourse. For it is a mere simplicity to
think, that he would have spared me in any thing, if he could have taken me at
any advantage, seeing he has cried out so loud upon no advantage, and
amplified his most idle and frivolous conceits, being nothing but the flatuous
blaste of a frantike massepriest. Let all Papists therefore beware, how they
trust such clamorous and slipperie companions.

He notes further, that I would be loath to have these points examined before
any learned auditorie. But how much he is abused, and presumes to abuse his
reader, may well appear by my former answer, where not only before a few,
but before the whole world I have answered all his vain objections.

I do also further promise him, God sending me life, never to fail him, as
often as he shall dare to come forth against me in like trial. But, I believe, he
poor idiot will not answer my objections* for he has already fled out of
the listes, and failed to answer such falsifications, as I have in my answer
to Parsons relation objected against him, and his consorts.

He does in the end of this observation again desire me, to procure him a
free conference. but what shall that need, when I yield him more, then is
desired? Notwithstanding, if he think to win any thing at my hands by
conference; let him procure me first a free conference at Paris and Salamanca;
and I do promise to procure him a free conference at Cambridge and Oxford. In
the mean while I pray him, I provoke him, I by all means urge him to answer
in writing such lies, as I auerre his consorts to have made, and to clear the
Church of Rome, and her principal proctors of such notorious falsifications,
as I say they have committed. If he be not able, as indeed I take him to be
altogether insufficient, let Robert Parsons, Friar Garnet, or the Archpriest
answer, and maintain the quarrel which this idle compagnion has begun. And
let them set their names to their writings, and come forth with bare faces,
that we may know, what they are we deal with, and not as hitherto, fight with
N.D.E.O. and such like hollow fellows, and mere shadows. If not, let them
assure themselves; I will by public writing discover such a pack of
impostures, lies, falsifications, villainies, and treasons committed by Rob.
Parsons and his consorts, that they shall wish Owlyglasse hanged, that first
provoked me, and began this quarrel. I will also make it known, that they
are so guilty, that they cannot answer.

His second observation is, that no credit is to be given unto me concerning
matter of fact. because in matters of faith and learning, as he says, I make
no scruple to corrupt, and use broad falsification. But his collection is so
childish, and foppish that his own clients, if they list, may see, that he
knows not what concerns fact, and what concerns faith and learning, that
distingusheth learning from matter of fact (as if no learning were required of
To. Parsons to discuss matters of fact) and would make faith and learning both
one (as if his consorts, that take themselves to be learned, were also
faithful christians) and teaches, that the controversy concerning
falsifications and untruths objected by him, touches faith and not fact, as
if we did not as well contend about matter of fact, as faith in this idle
quarrel begone by our adversary, and wherein the state of the main
controversy is, whether I have spoken untruth or not, and whether I have
falsified any authors alleged by me, or not.

Secondly if no credit be given to those, that tell lies and falsify authors,
as Owlyglasse affirms; then by his sentence we are not to believe, either the
pope of Ro^e. or his agents, ye most notorius liars and falsifirrs yt ever the
world sustained. Again if no credit be to be given unto my discourse
concerning ye packing and treachery of his consorts, why does he not answer me,
and convince me of untruth? And what reason has he to desire his readers, not
to believe that, which himself is not able to control? Is not such a bald
compagnion ashamed, to take to him as much authority as the Pope. that all the
generation of antichriste is to believe upon his own bare word?

Thirdly if all his idle obiectio^s concerning pretended corruptions and
falsifications he so cleared, as that I look for no more answer of so nastie
a disputer as this Owlyglasse is; then it can be no credit for him to cry so
loud, or to use these odious and slaundrous terms of corruptions. and
falsificatio^s, but he ought rather to look down upon his own, and his
consorts filthy factes, then to pinche at others men's faults.

Fourthly if the papists his clients be so clear, as he makes them, why does
he not answer for them plainly and honestly refuting every point of my charge?
If they be guilty why does he not rail a spirt at Rob. Parsons, that so
foolishly brought them forth to this trial, and there left them to speak for
themselves?

Fifthly, if he list not to excuse any Papist for the carriage of his life, as
he confesses, what reason has he to blame me if I upon so just occasions
given me by that rinegat, and false traitor Rob Parsons have toulde them some
part of their faults?

Sixthly if he will not have my verdict admitted against his clients, though
convinced by plain evidence and witness, he has no reason to require, that
the verdict of Robert Parsons a most notorious and infamous libeller, and a
known and professed traitor, and an infamous person convicted by his own
wicked and treasonable writings, and by the testimony of his own consorts, or
the accusations of such libellers, as Owlyglasse and such worthless and
namelesse fellows should be admitted or received. Again if he will have
nothing to be affirmed without authentical testimony and proof; then must he
and his malicious mates forbear to send forth so many vain and fabulous
pamphlets.

7. Further if he charge me hereafter with wilful and witting falsification,
as he sticks not very boldly and often to do; then must he prove first
falsification, then this quality of wilful knowledge: whereof hitherto he has
done neither again, if I object that to him which he cannot deny; then modesty
would require, that he should confess; and shame force him not to defend any
more matters known notoriously to be false.

8. If he take to himself and his consorts the name of Catholic Church, and
will needs charge me with a settled malice, and desperate resolution against the
Catholic Church, he must prove two things. First that Popish religion is the
ancient catholic religion; and next, that I oppugn the catholic faith. Unless
he do this, his reader will take him for a lewd begging compagnion, that
takes that for granted, that is in controversy, and we must account him for a
paltry fellow, that is not able to answer our arguments, whereby we prove
that Popish religion, which we refuse, is neither catholic, nor ancient.

9. If boldly and falsely he will deny that our faith has had continuance and
succession from Christ's time, and challeng both to himself; he must then deny,
that the faith taught in the Apostles creed, and established in the four
first general counsels, and contained and grounded upon the holy canonical
scriptures, has always continued since Christ's time, and has had continual
succession until our days. And to prove the Popish faith, he must show, that
the Apostles taught, and that the holy fathers believed, First that Christ had
a body invisible and impalpable, and that might be in heaven and earth and many
distant places all at one time. secondly, that Christ's body did not fill the
place wherein it was. 3. That accidents may subsist without foundation, or
subject. 4, that priests may celebrate mass without communion. 5, that the
priests may take away the cup of the new testament from Gods people. 6,
that christians are to worship the cross, and the sacrament with Latria, or
divine worship. 7, that the priest does offer up the true body and blood of
Christ to God the Father for the sins of quick and dead. 8, that christians
are justified by greasing, which they call extreme unction and by all other
Romish sacraments. 9, that the Devil is coniured out by the blasphemous Romish
exorcismes. 10. that the pope is head and monarch of the Church. 11, that it is
sin to eat flesh upon imbre days. 12, that the popes decrees are the
foundation of the faith, and other such like points of popish doctrine,

10. If he, be not able really, and plainly either to justify his own cause,
or to disprove ours; as he walks by night himself, so he may do well to
keep his conceits secret, and to talk of them by night rather then by day.
credit he can win none by his vain babbling, railing or lying.

Finally, either let him acquit himself like a brave fellow, or else desist
from his odious terms, of odious stuff, paued faces, desperate dealing,
treachery, legerdermain; Page 86.87.82.
false packing, crafty conueyance, filthy fardle of foul lies, and such like.
And let him not think, that he shall win any thing with such courses. For
nothing can be devised more odious and desperate, then the cause of the wicked
priests of Baal. Neither did ever any sect use more cogging, iugling, or lewd
impostures, then the Papists. to conclude this point, nothing is more easy,
the^ to declaime against the Pope, and the priests of Baal, and their
impostures, frauds, vilenyes, superstitions, trecheries, blasphemies, and all
their abominations. I would therefore advise this paltry fellow to beware* that
he give me not just occasion to take the like course against his consorts. I
assure him, I shall make all the pack of them infamous to posterity.

In the second observation he says further, that he will touch one lie of
mine, and that he says, is known to be one, both to Spain and Italy. But
unless Spain and Italy do understand English in which tongue I wrote, it can
hardly be known to these two countries; unless by Spain and Italy he
understand bastardly and unnatural rinegat English, which are either
Italianated, or turned Turk or Spanish, beside that it must needs be a
strangelye, that has filled two so great contries, and not unlike their
fantastical corpus domini, that is really in Spain and Italy and every
altar, as the Papish fancy, at one time. Let us therefore hear him tell this
wondrous lie, and by his testimony the only lie of all my book set out against
these lying and traytorous wardeword, Page, 84.
framed by Robert Parsons. He says, that I affirm, that Cardinal Allen was
in the Spanish armado (he should say armada) in the year 1588, and that I
repeat it diverse times, and namely (as he quoteth in the margent) reply. p. 61.
p. 98. and. 110. But what if I did not once name the Spanish armada, when I
talk of Allans coming against his contry? was not this lying companion armed
with a Vizor of impudency, where he talks of lying, to lie so grossly? I
hope his best friends will not deny it* well then let us see what my words are,
that Owlyglasse takes hold on. I say in my reply. p. 62. that anno 1588.
diverse rinegat English, and among the rest Cardinal Allen came with the
Spaniardes to fight against their country. I say again page 98. that
Cardinal came with the Spaniardes anno. 1588. With fire and sword to destroy
this land. In my challenge p. 110. I say, cardinal Allen, and not so little
as a hundred preistes came with the Spanish army. And out of these words he
gathers, that I say, he was in the spanish armada but he was blind, that
could not see, that there is great difference betwixt an army, and an armada,
that signifies a fleet; betwixt the Spanish forces, and the Spanish fleet.
And a great wonder it is, that an hispaniolized english mass priest should no
better understand, either spanish or English. Although then, it were true, yt
Cardinal Allen was not in the fleet: yet was he to come with the Spanish
Army. Neither is there any untruth in my words, as appears by the testimony
of Allen himself in his wicked libell, to the nobility and people of England
and Ireland, where he writes thus. I hope every man will believe Allen
himself, and his own words, before the base fellow our adversary, that was
not privy to all his treasons.
Thus much my good Lords and dear friends, I have thought good to forewarne
you, of the whole cause of these present sacred wars, and of his holiness,
and Catholic majesty's sincere intention therein, and both their incomparable
affections toward our nation: whereof I could give you far more comfortable
intelligence, if I were personally present with you, as I trust I shall be
very shortly. For that is fully meant by his holiness, and by his majesty,
and of me so much desired, that every short day seems a long year, till I
enjoy you in our Lord. Note I pray you, that by the Popes special appointment
and the king of Spaines good liking, that unnatural Cardinal was to come with
the Spanish army against his country. Note also, how much this traitor desired
this invasion, and how that he thought every short day a year, until it was
accomplished.

He says also, that the Pope preferred him to a high function, intending to
send him, as his legate with full commission and commandment to treat, and
deal from time to time, as well with the states of the Realm, as with his
holiness and the kings majesty for the sweeter managing of this godly, and
great affair. Do you not see, and is it not plain by the Cardinals own
confession, that this sweet Cardinal was appointed a principal commander in
that sweet action, wherein he sweetly intended to cut our throats? And yet
this sour varlet in sour terms gives me the lie, for making him one of
these inuadors, that meant to destroy this our native country, which all
honest men (of which Owlyglasse is none) with all their power ought to defend
against such traitors, as Allen was. But says Owlyglasse, Card. Allen was
never out of Italy, but either at Rome, or at Grotta Fe^rata. Suppose he were
not, yet might he be of the party, and so far engaged, as I related* for the
Spanish forces and army was not then drawn together, but part was in the low
countries, and France, and no small parts yet remaining in Italy and Spain.
And certes if the Cardinal was not come in person to the army; yet was he of
the army, and to come with it, as appears, not only by his own words but
also by the testimony of many others, that well knew it, and in not coming, he
was to be taken as a desertor, and so to be punished. But yt he that was in the
way toward England, and when he heard of the discomfiture of the Spanish
fleet, turned aside to weep at Grotta Ferrata, deserving rather to be
strangled as a traitor in Cauea Ferrata, then to take the fresh air at Grotta
Ferrata, if that were material, it will be verified by diverse priests, if they
be asked on their oaths. Why any man should believe this lying compagnion, that
speaks without proof or probability; there is neither color, nor cause.

He excepteth also against that, which I say of the number of Priests, that
were likewise to come with the Spanish army, and thinks that a hundred
Priests could not then be found; there being then but two Seminaries, Rome,
and Rhemes, and not above fifty in both. But he should be an eloquent fellow,
that could persuade me to believe that lying mate without all proof. Why I
should believe the contrary I can allege good reasons. For first, this being
the end of the erection of the Seminaries, to reduce England underneath the
Popes yoke; we are not to doubt, but that all the English of the Seminaries
should have been employed in that action, and the whole sink of treason let
out.

Secondly, albeit in the Seminaries there were not so many Priests to be found;
yet might that number have been filled up by diverse other priests, that lived
here and there dispersed. Her Majesty having dismissed and banished above
fifty priests, that deserved death by her laws rather then banishment, not
past two or three years before. These therefore and others should have come
into England. Neither would that barking curre Stapleton have failed, if he
could have seen opportunity to hurt those, against which he had so long
barked. Thirdly, diverse priests now in England testify, that many priests were
to come with the Spanish forces. Finally, Allen in his wicked libell reports,
that priests came with the Spanish forces to serve every man's spiritual
necessities. But how could that be, unless the number were competent? Among
the rest I am informed, that R. Parsons should have come with his assistants,
and whole council of reformation, and that to avoid idleness in the mean
time he help to write and publish the most wicked declaration of Sixtus
quintus against her Majesty. It may be also, Owlyglasse had an ore, if not in
the fleet, yet in the army, or else was in England to attend the coming of it.
Let him therefore thank God, that he is not sought out, and punished as a
traitor, that endeavors to plead the cause of traitors. And let all
indifferent men judge, whether I have not said truly, and he most falsely,
both concerning Allen, and the Priests.

The third observation, as he says, is, that my deali^ does declare the
weakness of the cause I maintain, the little conscience I possess, and
small learning I am master of. For so it pleases our great master Owlyglasse
in a pang of popish zeal to rail. And his reasons are, for that a good cause
needs not the help of lies, and a good conscience will not be strained
beyond the limits of truth, and sincerity, These venerable sentences, the
execrable Iebusites and massepriests pare and pole most dispiteously, as their
poling indexes expurgatorie, and their treatises in the Popes cause plentifully
declare.
nor pare nor pole the venerable sentences of antiquity, nor a man of learning
frame such arguments, as fly over his adversaries, and may be driven back
upon his own head. And this he speaks standing upon his tiptoes, and looking
upon himself very prowdly, and verily believing, that he has spoken very
bravely, and almost eloquently. But if he had better looked upon himself, his
conscience, and cause; he would have extended more favor to us his poor
friends, himself being a sot of 24. carats, and deuoid of all learning and
conscience, having given proof of his learning in his miserable detection, and
having his conscience grounded on the cases of conscience resolved by Allen and
Parsons, and Peter Nauarrus, that teach men against all conscience to play the
villains; and so a man stand for the Pope, to swear and forswear; and
finally to do what a man list, so he have the Popes faculties for it. And what
face had he to talk of sincerity, his cause standing upon falsifying of
fathers, lying of legends, counterfaiting traditions, railing upon innocents,
cogging of fabulous histories, and upon devising of frauds and impostures to
abuse the world? His want of learning, I say, is proved by his weak and base
talent of writing, wherein it appears he could not so much, as tell how to
frame a sentence, or how to understand the things he handles. Alleging but
two words of latin page 30. he shows he can no latin, using the plural for
the singular, saying prope initia, where a latinist would have said prope
initium, or rather in principio. quoting one verse he marreth it page 4. his
testimonies are Hierom Verdussen, and English almanacks, such proofs as a man
may have three or four for a groate* his arguments are such, as I have
declared in my answer. His want of conscience may, I say, appear by the most
damnable resolutions of cases of conscience of Nauarrus, and other Romish
casuistes, and especially the resolutions of Allen and Parsons, Vide resolut.
casuum conscientiae nationis Anglicanae, per A. and P.
two rather devils, then divines, teaching nothing, but how their scholars may
forswear themselves, deny their names, and profession, and play the traitors:
in which cases of conscience Owlyglasse without conscience seems to be well
practiced. The third is made manifest by the fabulous lies of Caesar Baronius,
lying Romish legendes, counterfeit canons and writings lately published, and
such evidence, as I shall in part hereafter discover, and that to the great
grief of this detector, if he be not a man stupide altogether, and senseless.

This also does touch the cause of popery in general. for if a good cause
need not to be supported with lies, and fables; then is the Popes cause very
bad, that cannot stand without lies. If a good conscience will not be strayned
beyond the limits of truth and sincerity, nor pare nor pole the venerable
sentences of antiquity; then has Bellarmine and Parsons no good conscience.
For Parsons makes no conscience to tell any lies, as I have proved in my
answer to his wooden wardword, and the priests have notoriously proved in
all their books against him, and his treacherous faction. Again, then have the
Iebusites no conscience, that lie and falsify according to the rules of their
order, and that most shamefully, Le catechism de Jesuits.
as is proved in their Catechism. Thirdly, then has the Pope no conscience,
that by his lewd, and treacherous indexes, and by his Talmudicall traditions,
and perverse expositions, has taken a course to corrupt both scriptures and
fathers. If they have no learning, whose arguments conclude not effectually,
but may be retorted back upon the faces of the proponentes; then if Owlyglasse
be judge, neither has Bellarmine nor Stapleton any learning. For in diverse of
our treatises, we have made their arguments, to rebound back upon them.

As for my self, I refer my cause to be tried by any indifferent man, that
shall read Owlyglasses objections and my answers. My conscience, and plain
dealing the judge of all men's consciences does best know, and I hope all the
course of my writings will justify against all the cauils of such vain
banglers. My learning, I acknowledge, is not comparable to that, which many of
my brethren have, but yet I hope by the grace of God to maintain a truth
against the prowdest of the Popish faction. But were it never so sclender; yet
until my books against Bellarmine be answered in that plain and
scholasticall sort, that I do answer him; neither has Owlyglasse, nor any of
his consorts any reason to despise it, or to object want of learning unto me.

Yet seeing he does undertake to prove, that I have no learning; let us see,
whether Owlyglasse has any better success in this, then in his former
allegations concerning his supposed untruths and falsifications. First he
says, I bring such arguments to prove the Papists to be no Catholics, and to
maintain new doctrine, and heresy, as touch not them, but wound the Church of
England. But if this had been so, why does not Owlyglasse undertake to answer
my arguments? why does he not dare to refute my discourse? If they hurt the
Church of England, no doubt, but such caterpillars as he, that seek our hurt
and ruin, would not have omitted to take that advantage. His words therefore
are but vain bragges, and need no other refutation then his own lewd
performance in this encounter, and deep silence in the rest.

Next he says, he will take a scantling of my learning, nothing answerable to
my looks, and countenance. But his scantling is very short, and
unproportionable, being but one only argument. Beside that, it shows, that
both learning and honesty is very scant with him. for where I go about to
prove, that the Church of Rome is not the true church of Christ, for that it
wants true bishops, and Priests, the palfrey fellow only repeateth my
words, whereby I prove, that every true Church has true bishops and priests,
but durst not set down my words, whereby I show, that the Church of Rome
has neither true bishops, nor priests. And where he touches any reason of
mine, he marreth it with his lewd handling, and mangleth my whole discourse,
omitting my three last reasons, and not daring to set them down. I will
therefore now let the ignorant idiot know, that my reasons, whereby I
conclude, that the Church of Rome has no true bishops nor priests at this
time, are strong and effectual, and that his cauillations against my words,
are vain and frivolous.

First then I say, that no man has ordinary power to ordain bishops or
priests, but he that is a bishop and a priest. But the Pope of Rome is neither
true bishop, nor priest. ergo. the proposition our adversary denies not. The
assumption I prove by these arguments. First the Pope was ordained priest, but
to offer sacrifices, and to say masses for quick and dead. But neither does
this ordination make a priest, nor had true priests and elders ever any such
ordination. That this ordination does not make a priest, I prove, for that
thereby the ordained neither receive power to preach, nor to administer the
sacraments, nor the keys of the Church, wherein priesthood consists. If they
receive any thing, it is to offer sacrifice. But the Papists confess, that
there is great difference betwixt the sacrament of the Eucharist, and a
sacrifice, as appears by Bellarmines large disputes. Lib. 1. and 2. de
sacrif. missae.
Further, this ordination does not give to priests the right of apostolical
succession, which consists in preaching, and administering the sacraments,
which our Savior committed to his Apostles, and their successors to the
worlds end, as appears by Christ's words Matthew. 28. that priests in
ancient time never had any such ordination, it appears by the commission,
that Christ gave to his Apostles Matthew. 28. by the office of Pastors described
Ephesians. 4. and 1. Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. where no mention is made of sacrificing
for quick and dead. neither does this clause, hoc facite, in any author
signify, sacrifice for quick and dead. It appears also by monuments of
antiquity, and ancient formularies. In the 4. Council of Carthage, priests
are ordained by imposition of hands, but not to sacrifice for quick and dead.
This argument our adversary for all his contemptuous speeches of my arguments
durst not once touch.

Secondly, the Pope is not ordained, to teach or govern a certain flock, but
to be the universal bishop, Bellar. lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 31. Prooem.
Clement.
the head of the Church, the spouse of the Church, the foundation of the
Church, and a little demi god upon the earth, with power over purgatory, and
the keys of heaven, and hell. And if he have not this power; then is he not
Pope. But this power is no where delivered by any good commission to any. nor
does it belong to any bishop, for any thing we can yet learn. for if it did,
then should all bishops have that power. Owlyglasse therefore may do well, to
show us this power out of scriptures and fathers. or else his silence will
teach him, that the Pope is no bishop. Bellarmine tells us of, pasce oues
meas: and, tibi dabo claues. But he must find out a better commission for the
Pope. or else all bishops will have like power, and the pope will prove to have
no power, unless he feed, and have the keys of the Church. which by
Owlyglasse, I am assured will not be proved.

Thirdly, the Pope does not feed the flock by teaching, or administer the
sacraments, or govern the Church, as other bishops did, but contrariwise
takes upon him to be Emperor, or governor of Rome, which the ancient
bishops of Rome never did. But no man can be a King, and a bishop both
together: nor a bishop without doing the office of a bishop. For Episcopatus,
as the Apostle teaches us, That is, a work, and not a title o^ hono^
is opus, and not only, ho^os. Our adversary answers, that it is Donatisme
to affirm, that the efficacy of sacraments does depend upon the good, or bad
life of the ministers, and that we are to harken to those, that sit in Moses
his chair, albeit they be Pharisees, and bad men otherwise. And this he
proves by diverse testimonies out of S. Augustine, and the harmony of our
confessions, being copious, where no need is, and silent when he should
answer. But all this is no more to purpose, then if he should tell us a tale
of a horse nest, or of the popes mules and mulets* for what is that to me, or
others, that say not, that the Pope or popish bishops are not lawful bishops,
nor have power to administer sacraments, because they are Sodomites,
adulterers, and wicked men, but rather, that the pope is no bishop at all,
because he does not opus episcopi? He will perhaps say, he does opus episcopi.
But then he must show, that he feeds the flock by teaching, and that he
does administer the sacraments of the Lords supper, and baptism orderly, and
ordinarily as other bishops do: wherein I believe he will fail.

Fourthly, I have proved, that the pope is Antichrist advanced above all, that
is called God, and the principal Patriarch of Antichrists kingdom. But light
and darkness shall as soon concur, as the tyranny of Antichrist, and the
office of a bishop in one person. I have proved, that he is Antichrist in my
fifth book de Pontifice Romans against Bellar. which because he so abounds in
learning, and I have none, I would pray him to answer with his great learning,
and especially seeing it makes so much for the credit of his father the pope,
that begot him on a strumpet the hoar of Babylon, his maships mother. A brave
fellow he is, no doubt, that is so well borne of father and mother. And if his
stomach will brook no latin, let him refute my answer to Parsons wardword; if
not all, yet so much as touches the Pope.

Finally, the Pope is an heretic, an apostata, and a most notorious simoniacal
person, entering by brigues, and faction, and composition with the Spanish king,
and cardinals, as is notorious to the world, and appears in every co^claue,
and is not dissembled by popish writers* but such by canons, albeit otherwise
bishops, are suspended from ordaining bishops, or co^ferring orders. That they
are heretics it cannot be denied, unless Owlyglasse can show, that the points
we have handled in the 4. chapter of our former discourse, are no heresies;
which if he be able to show, I doubt not, but the pope for his pains will make
him cardinal. That the Pops are apostatates, it apeareth for yt they have
declined from the ancient faith, as I have likewise declared in my former
challenge. That they are simoniacal creatures, their buying and selling of the
papacy, and of all ecclesiastical livings, of masses, of sacraments, of
faculties, does manifestly declare, and that this is a common fault of Popes,
it appears by their rules of chancerie by the Penitentiaries tax, Vid.
regul. Cancellar. and paenitent.
by the glosses of their canons, by Albericus de Rosate in verbo, Roma: by
Theodorica Niems treatise of schism, by baptist of Mantua, and all stories,
that write any truth. Neither is this a fault of late crept into that see*
que^ dabis mihi de tota maxima vrbe says Bernard lib. 4 de consid. ad
Eugenium, quite in papam receperit pretio, seu spe pretij non interueniente? He
signifies, that the Pope was chosen by simony, without simony certes no
cardinal can see to find the Popes chair.

By this it may also appear, that the Romish church has no true bishops, or
priests* for first they are ordained by the Pope, that is no bishop. Secondly
the Bishops neither preach nor administer the sacraments, nor account that any
part of their episcopal function. Thirdly, Pope Ioane had noe power to
ordeine Bishops or priests being a woman. But all that have lived in the
Church of Rome along time have been ordained by none, but such as were
ordained by her, or by bishops that were made by her. Fourthly, all preests are
ordained to sacrifice for quick and dead. As appears by Machabeus, in lib.
de missis episcoporum pro ordinibus conferen dis. Bellarmine also says, yt
preistes are made by these words, accipe potestatem offerendi sacrificlum: that
is, receive power to offer sacrifice. Which is no sufficient ordination, nor
gives priests power either to preach or administer sacraments, but rather a
power in ancient time never belonging to preests, as I have proved against
Bellarmine in my book de sacrificio missae. Fifthly no simoniacall persons or
heretics have power to order others; and if they do it, their ordination by
canons is declared void, and they are pronounced irreguler* and this I think
Owlyglasse will not deny* but he will answer percase that the Popish bishops
are neither heretics, nor simonicall persons let him therefore, if he will
make his answer good, make answer to my objections concerning the heresies,
and simonyes of the Church of Rome. Sixthly, the popish bishops are all slaves
of Antichrist, as appears by their slavish oath. c. ego. N. de iureiurando. If
then the pope be proved Antichrist, and the adversary of Christ, and his
Church: his adherents cannot be deemed true bishops. Finally, albeit the Popish
Church had a certain form of ordination, and bishops and priests so called;
yet nether can the ordination be accounted lawful being contrary to canons nor
can they be deemed true bishops and priests, that neither preach that, which
Christ commanded, nor observe his commission, nor administer the sacraments
according to Christ's institution. Oftentimes also the Pope has ordained boys,
ignorant persons utterly incapable of episcopal function, bishops and preests.
And such being so ordained never did any part of ministerial function, if then
the Romish Church be like her bishops; then as she has false and defective
bisshops, so is she a false and defective Church. But says Owlyglasse, Page ^2.
the council of Trent has made such wholesome decrees, concerning the diligent
and often teaching and preaching of bishops, and preests, as Master Sutcliffe
can find no just cause of complainte. But if he had let down these wholesome
decrees, he would have been much ashamed of the decrees themselves and more of
the slender exequution of them. For Council. Trid. Sess. 5, c. 2. they decree,
that bishops shall teach by themselves, or others* so yt by this rule women may
be preests* for they may teach by others, and this may be fulfilled, if bishops
never teach at all. Beside that we do not read, that the first bishops of
Rome, did preach by others, or set up louzy friars, to prate in pulpits as now
is the fashion of the Romish Church. Our Savior Christ bad his Disciples
preach themselves, or else he would not have sent them. And S. Peter preaches
himself, and used no deputation for the matter, as now the Romanistes do*
furthermore now the execution of this law is so neglected, that I do not
believe, that Owlyglasse, albeit he has well frequented all corners of Rome,
has heard the pope preach. And when the old Cardinal of Lorrein offered to
preach, he was derided for his labor, of all his compagnio^s, so unseemly a
thing it seems for a Cardinal, and bishop to preach.

He answers further. That I would be loath that our church should continue no
longer, then bishops do their duties in preaching and feeding. But he does
wrong our bishops to compare them to Romish prelates, that neither preach, nor
think that preaching belongs to them, and for the most part, unless it be
some friar or fox inroabed with bishops apparel, preach not, nor speak more
then stocks and images in Churches. He does also mistake me much, if he
think, that I conclude, that any congregation is not the true church, where
bishops do not their duties. For that is no part of my meaning* but I say,
that the true Church cannot long want true bishopes, and teachers, and that
therefore the Romish Church is not the true Church, having no bishops, nor
priests at all, but in name. And that I proved, for that they wanted true
priesthood, and true ordination, and were ordained and sent by antichrist, by
heretics and simoniacall persons, and such as had no authority to ordain, or
send forth bishops and priests.

He answers finally, that I have no reason to carpe at the Romish clergy for
their bad life* and lack of learning, seeing, Page 96.
our Church, as he says, admits most base, lewd, and unlearned artisa^s.
and this he indeuoureth to prove by M. Parries words in his preface before
Vrsinus his catechism. But he lies like a lewd and base fellow, if he
suppose, that such are admitted by our Church* they do thrust in, I confess,
by ye abuse of so^e on, or more* but ye church allows the^ not* nay there are
canons made, that none is to be ordained minister, but bachilars of art, or men
otherwise well qualified and known to be able to teach. If any do otherwise
by indirect means come into the ministry, which abuse Master Parry notes;
yet I hope they are not so rude, or so lewd, as mass Preests, which are the
scumme of all vileny for the most part, as those that travel Spain and Italy
know by practice, and our rinegat English mass Priests by their lewdness
and insufficiency plainly prove.

Having answered according to his best skill, and broken as he thinks all our
bonds, like Dalilaes cords (though some of his friends say, that a certain
Dalila has strong hold of him) he goes about to retort this argument upon us,
and says: if the true Church has always true bishops and preests, that the
Church of England, Page 100.
is not the true Church, as wanting true priests and bishops. And with this
argument he hops to give us such a dry shauing, as he doubts not, but he
will mar the whole beauty thereof* but he shows himself to be but a simple
barber, and a worse dry shauer* for now he cannot show, but that we have true
bishops, having both lawful ordination, and our bishops exequuting the office
of bishops loyally, and orderly. Before this reformation also our bishops had
all that, which our adversaries think necessary in the outward calling of
bishops. Besides that there failed not among our bishops and priests at all
times diverse men, which detested the abominations of the Romanistes, as Robert
Grosted bishop of Lincoln, Richard Vllerston that lived about the council of
Constance, John wicleffe and diverse others. But says he, who laid hands on
bishop Parker. He seems also to make the like question of Luther and
Zuinglius. I answer that bishop Couerdale and Skory, and others which were
bishops in King Edwardes time laid hands upon bishop Parker. I confess also,
that bishop Cranmer, Luther and Zuinglius had an external calling, though
corrupt, and in a corrupt state, yet such as Owlygalsse dare not deny to be
sufficient. And beside that external calling, it pleased God to reuele to them
his will extraordinarily, and to call them out of Babylon to the knowledge of
his truth* our adversary therefore of all men has least reason to challenge
them for their calling. Beside that he cannot conclude, because that external
calling was then thought sufficient, that now the popish Church has a calling
sufficient. For albeit the priests of the Jews, that worshipped Baal, had an
external calling, which was not disabled, when they returned to the true
worship of God; yet was not their Idolatrous service done to Baal, nor that
preesthood lawful* the like we may say of mass preests. They should have
served God aright, yet when they served at their massing alters, they
worshipped strange Gods. But when they left their Idolatry, then their calling
took effect they doing that, for which they were principally called.
Furthermore he cannot say, because now all Idolatry and superstition being
abandoned, we are the true church, that the papists that retain still their
superstitions are the true church* for ye true church is tried by true faith,
true worship, and service of God, and not by external rites and ceremonies,
and succession without Gods true worship or the true faith. Owlyglasse would
also gladly have me to set down the names of those bishops, that governed our
Church ever since Christ. As if all bishops, that mayntained the Apostles
creed, and catholic faith, were not our bishops. If they digressed from the
faith, we are not to seek for a new rank of bishops, but to acknowledge them
to be true bishops, that professed the true faith. He talks also of my being
at Cales, but it is more honesty for me to go in the service of my Prince and
contry against foreign enemies, then for him with foreign enemies like a
disloyal traitor to fight against his prince and contry, and like a base slave
to serve the popes turn. And this may serve to justify my argument against
the popish preesthood.

It rests now, that I answer his frivolous objections concerning some points
which he supposes to contain matter of contradiction: which he vanteth, that
he will handle to the little commendation of my learning, as he says. But if
he would indeed have disgraced me, he should have taken in hand the answer
of some latin treatise which I have published against Bellar. For therein he
might have showed lerning, whereas this discourse concerning falsifications and
untruths is nothing but a little fardle of foolery, and a vain babble for his
clients to sport themselves with all. Well in the mean while let us know his
worships pleasure concerning these supposed contradictions.

First he charge me with saying, that the number of seven sacraments was not
certainly established, nor received before the late council of Trent: and this
he supposes to be contrary to that, which I affirm in another place, viz.
that the just number of seven sacraments, and neither more nor less, was first
delivered by the council of Florence under Eugenius the fourth, and afterward
confirmed by the council of Trent. But the poor idiot does rather bewray his
own ignorance, that knew not how this doctrine of seven sacraments crept into
the Romish church, and great dullness, that could not distinguish betwixt
instructions, and canons; talking or mentioning matters, and confirming them by
solemn act and decree. To reform his error therefore, I must let him
understand, that the conuenticle of Florence did not by any solemn canon
establish the just number of seven sacraments, but certain idle Friars, or
others in that conuenticle, or at the least under the credit thereof, delivered
this doctrine of seven sacraments to the Armenians. Furthermore, not all
Churches, but the Armenians had this doctrine delivered unto them. I speak
therefore warily, where I say, that albeit that doctrine was talked of perhaps,
and delivered to the Armenians; yet it was first confirmed by solemn act of
the conuenticle of Trent, and so received of as many, as liked that
conuenticle. So I may say likewise, that the paradoxe of the Romish church
concerning the subsistence of accidents in the sacrament without subject was
prated of, and debated in schools before the conuenticle of Constance; but yet
I may say also, that it was not received generally, nor by solemn act
confirmed before the co^uenticle of Constance, where Pope John the 23. was
deposed for Sodomitrie, Atheism, and other grievous and enormous crim^s in the
acts of that assembly recorded.

Secondly, he would gladly find some contradiction in my words, for that page
21. I say, as he sets it down, that the opinion of Luther concerning the
real presence concerns not any fundamental point of faith, and yet page 54.
of my Challenge, affirm, that the Papists holding transubstantiation do bring
in Eutychianisme, teaching that Christ's body is in the sacrament without
visible shape, or true dimension, or circumscription; which as Leo teaches
sermon. 6. de ieiunio 7. mensis, is flat Eutychianisme. But he strives in vain
to force contradiction out of these words* for papists may well be
Eutychianists, and yet not Luther, as I believe, they teaching that the
substance of bread is abolished in the sacrament (of which follows Eutyches
his error) and Luther holding the contrary. For if the bread be abolished,
and the sacrament is like to the person of Christ, consisting of two natures;
then it follows, that as bread remains not in the sacrament after
consecration, so Christ's humanity is abolished after the union of the two
natures: which is flat Eutychianisme. Further, he was a simple fellow, to
leave a charge of Eutychianisme upon the Papists, upon a small hope of taking me
in contradiction. Indeed I confess, he denies it in terms, and says, that
Christ's body in the sacrament is not without shape, and true dimensions. He
should also have said circumscription, if he would have avoided the note of
Eutychianisme. but if that be so, he discharges me of contradiction. But in
the mean while, he shows himself to be ignorant of the state of his own
cause, and very impudent to say, that Christ his body has all his true
dimensions, and shape in the sacrament* which at large is disprooued in my
treatise de missa against Bellar. Finally, going about to take me in
contradiction, like a falsarie he does alter my words, and pervert my
meaning. For I say only, Reply page 21.
that Luthers and Caluins private opinions, concerning either princes sovereign
authority, or the real presence concern not fundamental points of faith. And
my reason is first, for that our faith is not built on private men's opinions, as
the faith of the papists, that are bound to believe all the determinations of
every Pope, that do concern the faith. And secondly, for that Luthers opinion
is not heretical in it self, and as it may be expounded, but by inference of
such conclusions as follow of it.

His third supposed contradiction is forced out of my words, where I say,
that the Fathers make against Bellarmine, and yet seem, to make Gelasius and
Gregory Papists, that lived above a thousand years agone. But herein is
neither contradiction, nor repugnance. For first it will not be proved, that
either Gregory or, Gelasius makes for Bellarmine in their authentical
writings. Secondly, these two are not for antiquity or learning to be compared
to Hierome, or Augustine, or the Fathers, that lived in their time, and before.
Finally, albeit the dialogues, that go under the name of Gregory, or the
decree of Gelasius C. sancta did. 15. did savor of the pumpe of Popery, and
fopperie; yet that makes nothing for the papists. For it shall never be
proved, that Gregory did write so foppish fables and lies as are contained in
his dialogues; nor that Gelasius did indeed set down all that decree, that is
reported C. sancta. did. 15. especially that of lying and fabulous legends.
Neither, if in any one point, or ceremony Gregory, or Gelasius does differ
from us; is he therefore to be reputed to speak wholly for the papists. But
says Owlyglasse, we may as truly infer, that seeing the protestants do
with great applause admit the acts of their holy Martyrs written by M. Fox,
they receive fabulous martyrologies, and lying legends, as it is inferred that
Papists receive fabulous martyrologies and lying legends* but the case is so
unlike, as Owlyglasse though a ridiculous fellow is unlike to Gelasius* for
neither do we read our martyrologies in churches, as the papists do their
legends; nor do we believe them as grounds of faith, as the papists do their
legendicall traditions, nor does M. Fox report any such abominable and
ridiculous fables, as are contained in the Romish legends. But all this
notwithstanding if Owlyglasse will impudently still compare our martyrologies
with the lying legends; let him show, if he can, where M. Fox tells tales of
men walking without heads, talking without tongues, passing the sea without
ships, going invisible, restoring of birds to life, of a cow bellowing
being boiling in a cauldron, of remoouing mountains and such like, as are in
the legends very common, and must be believed as ecclesiastical traditions.

His fourth observation is, that it were a point of some cunning to guess by
my writings, of what religion I am. But it is a point of small cunning to
guess, that Owlyglasse is a man of no religion, making no conscience to snatch
at any thing, that may serve his turn, though never so false; to lie, to
falsify, to rail at all, that are not of his damned humor. If any religion he
have, it is some relics of popery, which he notwithstanding is neither well
able to understand, nor any way to defend. A religion (if we may call faction a
religion) most fond, foppish, absurd, vain, superstitious, false and impious,
as partly in this treatise is declared, and shall God willing more at large be
declared other-where. As for my self I do him to wit, that I am a Christian,
and a true Catholic, believing the Apostolic faith, and professing the same,
as it is set down in the Apostles creed, in the confessions of faith
published in the four first general councels, and in the creed of
Athanasius. I do also believe whatsoever is expressed in holy canonical
scriptures, or may be deduced out of them, and I do detest all popish
superstition, blasphemy, heretical abominations, and all other heresies* and
this Owlyglasse might well have understood by all the course of my writings, if
he had read them, or would or could understand them. But says Owlyglasse,
Page, 110.
on the one side, reason there is, to think him a conformable protestant, etc.
Afterward he talks his pleasure of new Geneua Iigs, and of harmony
puritanicall. Which course of railing, if he do continue, there is good hope,
that to accord with this Iigge, he may ere it be long, sing a base de
profundis at Tiburne. To the matter I answer, that in England, albeit there
has been some difference between private persons about ceremonies and
government, and that without disagreement in religion; yet now all that
quarrel, to the great grief of Owlyglasse and his consorts is ended, and all
godly christians jointly concur to the repressing of the seditious
massepriests, and their adherents, that by faction, and heresy seek to
undermine both the Church, and state.

In this observation he goes about also to prove, that I do not seem to
allow the doctrine established in this church of England. But as in the rest,
so in this Owlyglasse does but trifle. I do hold, I confess, that baptism
is not so necessary, but that diverse may, and have been saved without it,
especially where there is no contempt committed in procuring it. Further I do
believe, that it is unlawful for women to take upon them to administer
baptism; and do advise in case of extremity all christians to procure the
ministers presence. Thirdly, I do utterly condemn the doctrine of the
papists concerning their limbus patrum. Fourthly, I do much mislike their
superstitious stationary obambulations about the limits of parishes for the
blessing of new corn, and their superstitious letanies and ceremonies used in
the fame. Fifthly, I deny, that ever the catholic church had any precepts, or
canons to forbid marriages on such days, and in such sort, and for such
respects, as the Romish Church does practice. Sixthly, I do believe, that
Luthers opinion absolutely considered in it self is not a fundamental point
of religion, especially if we give his words a favorable construction.
Finally, I account none to be true christians and professors, that make no
conscience of sin, and live not according to their profession. But what of
all this? do I therefore teach contrary to any point of doctrine maintained
by the church of England? so Owlyglasse my good friend would insinuate. But his
proofs are simple, and his assertions most false. He says, Page, 111.
that the Church of England teaches, that baptism is necessary to salvation.
But the book, which he alleges, out of which he cannot bring one word to
prove his saying, does convince him both of lying, and impudency. Secondly he
affirms, that to deny women's baptism is contrary to religion established.
But it is not contrary to his religion to lie and face out lies most
impudently. Thirdly to prove, that our church believes limbus patrum, he
should have alleged our confession, and not a certain verset of the creed
in meeter. Beside that, in that verset nothing is said, but that Christ
illuminated those, that sat in darkness; which is nothing to limbus patrum, a
place, that cannot be illuminated, as papists hold. Further, that verset may
be rather an exposition of the words of the song of Zachary, Luke, 2.
of the illumination of the ignorant, and of the like words of the Prophet
Esaias chap. 9. then an assertion of limbus pactum. Fourthly, the papists in
their perambulations of parishes use to bless, or rather to exorcise corn,
and to say most wicked litanyes. They use also diverse superstitious ceremonies,
which unless Owlyglasse prove to be allowed by our Church, he will prove
himself a cogging compagnion. Fifthly, he talks of prohibitions of the
solemnizations of marriages at certain times; but he alleges neither law,
nor record to prove, that our Church allows either the doctrine, or the
ceremonies of the Romish congregation in this point. And there, whither he
sends us, we find nothing, but the testimony of an Almanacke. Sixthly,
albeit the church of England does not hold Luthers real presence of Christ's
body in the sacrament, yet cannot the detractor show, but that his opinion may
be reconciled with the Christian faith, if a man will not urge those points,
that follow of that doctrine too severely, and further percase, then at the
first Luther himself allowed them. If a man do gather what does follow of
it, then is the doctrine dangerous, as I and others confess.

Finally, he does not so much as go about to show, that I have delivered any
thing contrary to the doctrine of our Church, where I affirm, that good life
is as well required in a true professor, as true faith. Why then is this point
touched in this place? Does it grieve him, that I touch the filthy Sodomiticall
priests, and friars, and shut that abominable generation out of Gods church?
It seems so* and therefore to requite me, he says, that this doctrine may
touch me, for that I have falsified and maliciously corrupted the fathers. But
if I have cleared my self of all those matters, that he has laid to my
charge; I hope the vanity of his collection will manifestly appear to all
indifferent men. But he poor idiot, appears not: but seeing the Romish
Church, and diverse of her principal pillars to be charged with notorious lies
and falsifications, passes away in silence, and is not able to answer one
word. Nay, he leaves his clients in the briers, and signifies, for ought he
can do, they must plead for themselves.

Wherefore to leave off further to urge this distressed follow, that is able
to say nothing for the defense of them, whom he does principally favor, I may
well conclude, seeing the arguments which I brought in my Challenge stand
immooueable, and the detectors exceptions are proved to be vain, and
frivolous, first, that the Romish church is not the true Church of Christ
Jesus. Secondly, that the religion of Papists, is neither ancient, nor
catholic, Thirdly, that all papists maintaining the doctrine of the Pope, and
his adherents, are heretics. Fourthly, that such as embrace popish religion,
are idolaters. Fifthly, that all the Popes adherents and agents that have
suffered for his cause in England, are to be reputed no better, then disloyal
traitors, and not, as some would have it, Martyrs. Finally, that my adversary
by his frivolous objections has much confirmed, and strengthened our cause,
against which he was not able to object any one thing of moment; and justified
my allegations, being not able to take any just exception against any thing
said by me, nor to object any thing, which is not fully answered.

CHAP. IIII. Of diverse falsities committed by the Popes and Church of Rome.
IF our adversary had well remembered his promise, he ought not only to have
convinced me of untruths, corruptions, contradictions, and falsifications,
according to the title of his pamphlet, but also of maliciousness, and
wilfulness. for so he vaunteth, he will. I challenge the challenger says he,
of many malicious untruths, Cap. 1. page 8.
and many palpable and wilful falsifications. But when it comes to
performance; of corruptions he says nothing, contradictions he touches
slenderly, untruths and falsifications he can by no means fasten upon me. The
quality of maliciousnes and wilfulness being a matter purposed, and fully
promised, he utterly forgot. In the rest how poorly he has demeaned himself,
by my answer to his whole dispute it will appear, But suppose I had either
mistaken a report, misalleadged a place; yet that is nothing to the cause,
which by private men's errors cannot be either charged, or prejudiced.

But if the Pope of Rome, to whom the papists fly in all controversies and
extremities commit falsifications; then is the cause of popery quite ruined,
and overthrown. For he is the Sanders Rock. and Bellar. in praefat. in lib. de
pontif.
rock, and Bellar. ibid. and lib 2. de pontif. Romans and Stapleton doctrinal.
princip.
foundation, upon whom the papists build all their religion. Again, if the
Church of Rome have practiced these falsifications, then is no trust to be
given to her. If both the Pope himself, and the Church of Rome do deliver
unto us lies, and fables; then is the pope no upright judge, but a lying
hypocrite, and the Church of Rome is not the true Church, nor a mistress of
truth, but a mistress of errors and lies.

Let us therefore see whether the pope or Church of Rome may not in this point
be more justly charged then we, and whether they be clear of this fault or no.
For that is a point far more material, then any thing, which the adversary
can devise against us. Let us also consider how Bellarmine and Baronius and
others the Popes agents have acquitted themselves in their narrations, and
allegations. For so it may best appear, how unadvisedly this detector began
his quarrel. our adversaries being so notorious offenders in telling untruths,
and committing most gross and wicked forgeryes, and we so clear and
innocent, at the least from all willfulness violence and malice, if not from
error.

L. qui testame^tum. ff. ad. leg. Corneliam de falsis.
Whosoever shall conce^e or hide away a testament, or take it from a man, or
shall blot it, or add by interlining, or else shall forge, or write a false
testament, or exhibit it, or sign it, or use it and fraudulently rehearse it,
is punishable, as guilty of forgery by the law Cornelia, concerning forgery
and falsitie. And this is the determination of Paulus the lawyer, and allowed
by all men of understanding, and judgment in law. Qui testamentum amouerit,
celauerit, eripuerit, deleuerit, interleuerit, subiecerit, resignauerit, says
Paulus the lawyer, quiue testamentum falsu^ scripserit, signauerit,
recitauerit. etc. legis corneliae Poena damnatur. Those also are guilty, and by
this law punishable, Ibidem.
quorum dolo malo id factum est: by whose procurement, and fraud any of the
foresaid points are committed. But the pope, and Church of Rome many ways
offend against this law, as is most euidente by many particulers.

of our doctors, and not without streite limitatio^s do they permit chr^stia^s
to have scriptures translated into vulgar tongues by themselves, publicly by no
means will they have scriptures red being translated into tongues understood of
the multitude. And all these three points are manifestly proved by the index of
prohibited books set out by Pius quartus, and by the decree of the council of
Trent speaking of our men's translations. librorum veteris testamenti versiones
viris tantum pijs and doctis, Index. lib prohib. regul 3.
says he, iudicio episcopi concedi poterunt. And afterward: versiones noui
testamenti etc. nemini concedantur. Speaking of vulgar translations of
scriptures, Ibid. regula. 4.
he says hac in part iudicio episcopi, aut inquisitoris stetur, vt cum
consilio parochi, vel confessarij bibliorum a catholicis authoribus versorum
lectionem in vulgari lingua concedere possint. So it appears they first
absolutely forbid al vulgar translations made by any of our doctors; and
Secondly with hard conditions grant license, and that to very few, to read
their own vulgar translations of scriptures: and Thirdly, that they do forbid
all latin translations made by us of the new testament, and with conditions and
limitations permit our translations of the old testament, to be read, and that
of very few. Council Trid. Sess. 22. c. 9.
In public liturgies of the Church they also signify, that scriptures are not
to be read in vulgar tongues. And by their practice we gather, that they think
the public reading of scriptures in vulgar tongues to be nothing for their
profit, and purpose. Who then sees not, that by all means the pope and Romish
Church endeuore to suppress Gods testament, and show themselves therein
notorious falsaries?

si quis test^mentum deleuerit. Neither could the law speak more plainly
against Papists unless, it had said, si quis testamentum dei combusserit.

Thirdly, they have deprived the Lords people of the cup, which our Savior
Christ calls the new testament in his blood. hic est calix, says he, nouum
testamentum in sanguine meo. Luc. 22.
In the conuenticle of Constance they decree, vt sacramentum a laicis sub vna
specie tantummodo recipiatur. that is, Sess. 13.
that lay men are to receive the sacrament only under one kind. In the
conuenticle of Trent they pronounce them Anathema, or accursed, that shall say,
that the faithful ought to receive the sacrament under both kinds, Sess. 21.
c. 1. and 2.
or that shall deny, that they took away the cup from the communicants, and
ministered the communion under one kind only. for just, and reasonable causes.
Whether then the Lords cup be the new testament, or the seal of the new
testament; it is evident, that the Pope and Church of Rome do show themselves
to be notorious falsaryes. the words of the law are clear. si quis testamentum
celauerit, amouerit etc. that is, whosoever does concele or keep a testament
out of the way, he is to be punished as a falsary. the same also is apparent,
for that they go about to break* the seal of Gods testament. And although
man cannot, or will not punish this falsity in the Romish Church, and in the
mass preests; yet God will assuredly punish so notorious a falsification of
his eternal testament.

Fourthly, the Pope and Romish Church have added to Gods eternal testament
corrupting the same by their traditions, and makg ivnnwritten traditions equal
to the canonical scriptures. omnes libros tam veteris, quam noui testamenti,
Sess. 4 council. Trid.
say the Popes slaves assembled at Trent, cum vtriusque vnus deus sit author,
nec non traditiones ipsas tum ad fidem tum ad mores pertinentes; tanquam vel
oretenus a Christo, vel a spiritu sancto dictatas, etc. pari pietatis affectu
ac reuerentia suscipit ac veneratur, scilicet haec synodus. and afterward they
pronounce al^ cursed, Lib. de verbo Dei.
that shall conte^ne the said traditions. Bellarmine also and the rest of his
consorts teach, that there is one word of God written, and another unwritten,
and that both are of equal authority. But it is plain falsity to forge any
part of a testament, Galat. 3.
or to interline it, or to add to it. hominis testamentu^ says the Apostle,
nemo spernit, aut super ordinat. that is, no man adds to a testament, or
takes on him to superordinate or set down more, then is declared by the
testators will. And he signifies, that it is much more odious, to add to Gods
testament, and as it were with pretended nuncupatiue additions to corrupt Gods
written will and testament. Qui testamentum falsum scripserit, signauerit,
recitauerit dolo malo says Paulus, L. qui testame^tum. ad. L. Cornel de falsis.
cuiusue dolo malo id factum erit, legis corneliae, (de falsis) poena damnatur.
Again, si quis legatum sibi ascripserit, says Africanus tenetur poena legis
corneliae. So if the Romish Church have added to Gods eternal testament, any
traditions upon the credit of ye church, L. siquis legatum. ff. ad. L. cornel.
de falsis.
and made them part of Gods testament, or mean to receive benefit, or as it
were a legacy, or authority by any thing therein contained, the same is
guilty of falsification.

Fifthly the Romish Church has committed falsehood by making the old latin
translation authentical, which differs in many points from the original
books, of the old and new testament. Statuit and declarat says the
conuenticle of Trent speaking of it self, vt haec ipsa vetus and vulgataeditio
quae longo tempore tot seculorum vsu in ipsa ecclesia probata est, Sess. 4.
in pub licis lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus, and
expositionibus pro authentica habeatur. Now that this translation does differ
from the original books, it cannot be denied. For that by collation of both
is apparent. Beside that it is proved by the testimony of Isidorus Clarius in
his preface to his translation of the Bible: of Erasmus, and diverse other
learned men; and sometime confessed by the adversaries themselves. that this is
falsehood, it is proved, for that to exhibit a false copy of a testament, is
falsity. It is also a notorious absurdity to prefer a translation, or a copy
before the original.

Sixthly, it is falsity, to add to the rule of faith, or canon of scriptures.
For if a man may not add to the rules and laws of men, but he shall fall
within the danger of the law cornelia de falsis, much less may a man add to
the rule of faith, and canon of scripture, Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
but he shall be condemned for falsification. But the Church of Rome has in
two sorts added to the rule of faith, first making the books of Tobias.
Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, the Machabees, and others by the council of
Laodicea and Hierome and other ancient Fathers excluded out of the canon,
canonical, and next by making the Popes determinations, and unwritten
traditions the rule of faith, as is proved by Stapletons discourse de
doctrinalibus principijs, and other treatises of the Romanistes, concerning
that argument. Neither has the Romish Synagogue any thing to allege in
excuse of her falsitie, but that such books have sometime been accounted
canonical by the council of Carthage, Can. 47.
and S. Augustine: and next, that traditions have been much stood upon by the
ancient Fathers. But the third council of Carthage and S. Augustine speak
only of the books of the Bible, that were publicly read, and of the canon,
as it prescribed a rule for the reading of books, and not otherwise, and by
tradition they mean no other doctrine, then that which is contained in holy
scriptures; and gathered out of them.

Sixtus Quintus, or Clement the 8. egregiously falsified the holy scriptures.
For both of them having taken upon them to set out the same according to the
old latin translation, we find in diverse places, either manifest
contradictions, or at the least notorious differences betwixt them. As for
example, Genesis 4. the Clementine edition has, in foribus pettatum aderit? In
Sixtus Quintus his edition set out at Louain peccatum tuum aderit? Genesis 5. v.
3. Clement reads, genuit ad imaginem and similitudinem suam: Sixtus has,
genuit filium ad imaginem. Contrariwise Genes. 1.27. Clement reads, creauit
deus hominem ad imaginem suam, ad imaginem dei creauit illum: and Sixtus has,
creauit deus hominem ad imaginem, and similitudinem suam, ad imaginem dei etc.
Genes. 9. Clement reads, de manu viri and fratris eius requiram: Sixtus has
only, and de manu fratris eius requiram. Exodus 16. Clement reads, cur
eduxistis nos in desertum istud? Sixtus contrariwise reads, cur induxistis?
Exodus 23. Clement reads, victimae meae: and Sixtus, victimae tuae. Leuit. 27.
Clement reads, iuxta aestimationem tuam: Sixtus, iuxta aestimationem suam.
and it the 28. verse of the same chapter, Clement reads, non vendetur; and
Sixtus, non veniet. Deuteronomy. 24. Clement reads, animam opposuit tibi, Sixtus,
apposuit tibi. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Clement reads, and absumat ebria sitientem:
Sixtus reads, assumat ebria sitientem. Iosue 11.19. Clement reads, non fuit
ciuitas, quae se traderet; and Sixtus quite contrary, quae se non traderet. 2.
Reg. 6. v. 13. These words, that are found in Sixtus his edition: dixitque
David, ibo and reducam arcam cum benedictione in domum meam: are not found in
Clements bible. 2. Reg. c. 15.23. Clement reads, contra viam, quae respicit
ad desertum. Sixtus reads, contra viam oliuae. 2. Reg. 16.1. Clement has,
and vtre vini. Sixtus reads, duobus vtribus. 3. Reg. 7.9. Clement has,
extrinsecus vsque. Sixtus, intrinsecus vsque. 1. Paralip. 8. v. vlt. Clement
reads, vsque ad centum quinquaginta omnes. Sixtus reads, ad centum
quinquaginta millia. lib. 1. Ezrae c. 2. v. 66. Clement reads, septingenti
triginta sex: Sixtus, sexcenti triginta sex. Sapientiae c. 2.11. Clement has,
sit fortitudo lex iustitiae nostrae. Sixtus reads, lex iniustitiae. Eccles.
8.8. Clement reads, in g^udium nolumus venire: Sixtus reads, volumus
venire. etc. 21. v. 15. Clement reads, est autem sapientia. Sixtus has, est
autem insipientia. John 6.65. Clement reads, qui essent non credentes: Sixtus
reads, qui essent credentes. Heb. c. 5.11. Clement reads, grandis sermo and
ininterpretabilis; Sixtus reads, grandis sermo, and interpretabilis. Infinite
repugnances also there are more betwixt these editions, which who so list to
see, let him peruse M. Th. James his painful treatise entitled, Bellum
papale, wherein he has compared these two editions throughout. And if in the
edition of Sixtus Quintus his bible at Antwerpe Anno 1599. thou do not find
these lections mentioned, thou may thereby further understand, that some of
late, since Sixtus his death, have taken pains to falsify his edition, and to
make him to speak contrary to himself. If then Hierome say true, In praefat.
in Iosue. and in praefat. in 4. cuangel.
non posse verum esse quod dissonat, that is, that what does differ, cannot be
true, then is it notorious, that one of these two popes has falsified not
only the scriptures, but also the authentical latin translation, as they call
it. And if they make no scruple to falsify the holy scriptures of God; it is
no marvel, if impudently they falsify the writings of men.

The Popes also and their consorts have committed notorious falsifications in
publishing cou^terfeit canons and constitutions partly under the name of the
Apostles, and partly under the name of diverse ancient bishops of Rome, and
lastly of diverse councels and fathers. C. sextam synodum did. 16. Ibidem.
canons under the names of the Apostles. Hadrian the Pope allows and
receives the vi. Synod, and all her canons, in one of which the canons of the
Apostles were confirmed* and thereupon Grati^n concludes, that they were
authentical. And commonly the church of Rome alleges these canons,
whenever she hops to win any advantage by them. But many reasons declare
them to be counterfeit. As first, for that contrary to the doctrine of the
Church, the baptism of heretics is condemned can. 45. Secondly, can. 65.
saterdaies fast is forbidden. Thirdly, once dipping in baptism is deemed
vnsufu^cient can. 49. contrary to the orders of the Church. Fourthly, the
catalogue of scriptures rehearsed can. 84. is by none allowed* for neither will
the Church of Rome allow of the third book of Machabeyes, nor of the Epistles
of Clement. Fifthly, the Apostles, as is said, in those canons confirm the
Gospel of S. John; yet stories report, that the same was not written before
the rest of the Apostles were dead. Sixthly, these counterfeit canons mention
diverse orders of ministers, of fastes, of bestowing of ecclesiastical livings,
and such like, not used in the Apostles times. Finally, not only Isidore c.
canones, did. 16. and Leo c. Clementis. did. 16. but also Gelasius c. sancta
Romana. did. 15. does number these canons among apocryphal writings.

But in nothing does the impudency of the Romish Synagogue and her agents
appear more, then in the falsis^ation of the acts of councels. For they have
not only falsified diverse particular acts, and canons, and foisted them in
among the acts of councels, but also devised whole proceedings, as passed in
ancient councels, which notwithstanding are merely forged.

Sinuessa reported by Peter Crabbe and Surius seem to be much falsified. For
first of the three copies, that are in Surius not one agrees with another.
Secondly, seeing as 318. bishops could hardly be drawn to the great council
of Nice, in the peace of the church, albeit Constantine called them out of all
parts of the world; if is not like, that in time of persecution 300. bishops
could be drawn to Sinuess* about Marcellinus, according as it is reported in
the act^s of the council. Thirdly, the speeches of Marcellinus and the rest
are so simple, and the style so much differing from those times, that he must
be of a very dull understanding* that perceives not the falsehood of the author
of those acts. Fourthly, the acts of that pretended council are contrary to
themselves. For in the latter end they say, prima seeds non iudicabitur a
quoquam: and yet a little before, it is said, that the bishops did condemn
Marcellinus. damnauerunt cum say they, extra ciuitatem. Finally, the proceeding
in M^rcellinus his sacrificing to Idols, and in his trial by 72. witnesses,
is most ridiculous, and no way to be justified by authentical records.

Neocaesarea and Ancyra to be counterfeit. For in times of persecution it was
not like, that many bi^hops could assemble, or had any care of command and
superiority, or any credit to make laws concerning government. Besides that,
histories authentical make no mention of law-making councels before the
general council of Nice. Finally the acts are so simple, and so evil agree
with those times, in which they are said to pass, that we must either have
authentical proof for them, or else must have leave to believe them to be
forged.

Siluester do so plainly appear to be forged, that I do wonder, that our
adversaries are not much ashamed of them. The number of bishops is said to be
greater, then in the council of Nice. The names of them are mere One is
called Squiro, another Cleopatris, another Vultibus. and the rest also seem
names of coniuration.
barbarous; and One is called Simplex, another Exitiosus, the 3. spe^ in deo.
the 4. quod vult deus.
Greek bishops coming to that council commonly have latin names. The fable
of cleansing of Constantine from his leprosy is there reported. 57. bishops of
I would gladly know, where this is.
Rinocoruris are said to be present; yet did they not subscribe. The council
was said to be assembled by the advice of Constantine, or of his mother: they
seem not to know, whether. The acts are most disagreeing from those times,
and some of them very ridiculous, as for example, that Nonnes should not
profess virginity, until the age of 72. years, when such profession is
needless. Finally, the words are so barbarous, that they savor of gothicall
and lombardicall monkerie; and the acts so beneficial to the sea of Rome,
that every man may see, that later Popes under the title of this council meant
to cover their own ambitious decrees, and humors.

Nice. Ruffin and all authentical writers mention no more, but only 20.
canons. C. viginri. did. 16.
Pope Stephen also confesses, that there are but only 20. canons received of
the Romish church. viginti tantum capitula Nicenae synodi in sancta Romana
ecclesia habentur, says he. C. septuaginta. did. 16. Summa council. apud
Horatium Cardon excus. anno 1601.
But Gratian under color of an Epistle of Athanasius affirms, that there are
seventy canons made in that council: and now of late one Alphonsus of Pisa a
Iebusite has set out 80. canons of that council translated, as he says, out
of Arabicke. He might have done well to have said translated out of the
language of China* for then rather would diverse have believed them, then gone
to China to search or examine the truth of Alphonsus his report.

Carthage Sozimus bishop of Rome was manifestly convinced by acts of the
council sent from diverse places to have foisted in a false canon into the
acts of the council of Nice. His agents auerred, that the council of Nice
had decreed, vt si episcopus accusatus fuerit, and iudicauerint episcopi
regionis ipsius, and de gradu suo deiecerint eum, and appellasse episcopus
videatur, and confugerit, ad beatissimum ecclesiae Romans episcopum, and voluerit
audiri etc. That the appeal should be received, but the whole council did take
him in the very act of forgerie. The same also may be proved by the true acts
of the council, and by all authentical writers, that report the acts of that
council truly.

Paschasius one of the Popes agents in the 16. action of the council of
Chalcedon according to instructions given him alleged a piece of a
counterfeit canon of the council of Nice, beginning thus, Ecclesia Romans semper
habuit primatum. That these words are foisted into the sixth canon of the
counsel, it appears by the view of the canons themselves, as they are set
down, not only by Ruffinus in his ecclesiastical history, but also by Peter
Crabbe, Surius, Carranza, and other Romanists.

Carranza, Renouantes quae a sanctis patribus 153. qui in hac regia vrbe
conuenerunt, and 630. qui Chalcedone conuenerunt, dece^nimus, vt thronus
constantinopolitanus aequalia priuilegia cum antiquae Romae throno obtineat,
and in ecclesiasticis negotijs vt illa emineat, secundus post illam existens.
post quem Alexandrinorum metropolis numeretur. deinde Antiochiae, and post eum
Hierosolymitanae ciuitatis. But this canon is diversely falsified by the
Romanists. for first they cut out certain words, as they are found in the 18.
canon of the greek copies of the acts of the council of Chalcedon; and this
canon of the sixth synod they turn contrary to the meaning of the Fathers,
setting it down in these terms. C. Renouantes. did. 22.
Renouantes sancti constantinopolitani decreta concilij, petimus, vt
constantinopolitana seeds similia priuilegia, quae superior Roma habet,
accipiat, nec non in ecclesiasticis rebus magnificetur, vt illa, sed haec
secunda post illam existens, prius quam Alexandrina seeds numeretur; deinde
Antiochena and post eam Hierosolymitana. Thus is it set down in the canon law
corrected by Gregory the thirteenth, and yet differs much from the original*
but in all ancient copies we read, non tamen in ecclesiasticis rebus
magnificetur vt illa: which is a far greater corruption then the other.

Carthage c. 3. determines, that bishops and priests and deacons should
abstain from their own wives, (...), that is, as Balsamon interprets it,
te^pore vicis suae, or during the time of their turn of service* to make the
best of it, yet can it not signify propria aut priora statuta. Yet the
Romanistes did. 33. c. placuit. have falsiffed the canon, adding subdeacons,
that were left out of the canon, and making this canon absolutely to exclude
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons from their wives at all times.

Mil^uis c. 22. African priests, deacons, and inferior clerks are forbidden
absolutely to appeal beyond the seas. But Gratian like a falsary has added to
the canon, nisi forte sedem Romanam appellauerint, that is, unless they
appeal to the fee of Rome, which is quite contrary to the meaning of the
canon. And therefore Gregory the thirteenth in his books of the canon law,
has set down these words in an other letter. but he rather hurts, then
helps the matter, testifying that all the Romanists that alleged, or used
the canon thus before his late correction, were falsaries.

Laodicea the Fathers can. ^5. forbid Christians idolatrously to worship
angels, ad angelos idololatriae abominandae congregationes facere. But the
Romanists being guilty in their own conscience of the idolatrous worship of
angels, for angelos have set down angulos, as appears by Surius, Carranza,
and diverse late editions of councels. Now that this is a falsehood, it is to be
proved by the testimony of Chrysostomes homilies, and Theodorets commentaries,
upon the Epistle to the Colossians, and Bellarmine in his first book de cultu
sanctorum cap. 20.

Pius the fifth in a certain contention betwixt him, and the Emperor, Vita di
Pio. 5. in literis.
to help his own cause, does most falsely allege a canon of the council of
Nice, whereby he would prove, that by the determination of that council the
Pope of Rome was made Lord, and governor of all Princes that bore the name of
Christians, and that the council did anathematise all, that dare say contrary.
E sentenza, says he, di tutti theologi e canonisti, e determinatione de
concilij, massimamente del Niceno, Ch' il succcessor di san pietro sia signore
e rettore di tutti i principi del nome christiano, de tutte le prouincie, and
tutte le genti, anathematizando chiunque cio ardisse contradire. A wonderful
great principality, certes, if he should he made governor of all christian
Princes, of all provinces, and nations. But this principality is grounded upon
no other foundation, then lewd lies, and forgeries. For in the acts of the
Nicene council there is no such matter, as may appear both by the testimony
of Ruffin, and confession of Surius, Carranza, Bellarmine and Baronius, that
are not able to show us any such act in the Nicene council. We must therefore
pray Robert Parsons, otherwise Howlet, and his disciple Owlyglasse to show us
this noble canon alleged by Pius their holy Father: unless they mean, that
the world shall be made acquainted with the impostures, and falsifications of
the Romish church. For as laws determine, they are falsaries, that shall add
to laws, constitutions, and canons, and are as falsaries to be punished. L. si
quis falsis. ff. ad l. cornel. de falsis.
Si quis says Modestinus, falsis constitutionibus nullo authore habito vtitur,
lege cornelia aqua and igni interdicitur.

Rome pretend to have been made by Constantine is sufficient to convince them
of falsification. for therein by a trick of forgery they claim, not only a
souerainty over the whole clergy, but also a great part of the Western
empire. And so stiffly do they stand in the maintenance of this grant, that
they will hardly be induced to hear the contrary. Augustine Steuchus in a
large volume goes about to defend it. But, notwithstanding all his pleading,
he is a simple fellow, that does not see this grant to be counterfeit; and very
bold, if not impudent, that will defend it, as does the gloss set out by
Gregory the thirteenth, alleging the testimony of Anselme, Deusdedit, Leo
nonus, Petrus Damianus, and such other forged devises. For first it is
entitled Palea, which argues, that it was thrust into Gratian, and was for
credit as light as chafe. Secondly this donation seems to be translated out
of the legend of Syluester. Thirdly, all stories report contrary to this
donation, that Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia a little before his death.
Constantinus Nicomediae baptizatus est says Theodoret, paulo ante mortem. Lib.
hist. 1. c. 32.
distulerat enim vsque ad illud tempus, in Iordane stuuio hoc promereri
desiderans. The same is also confirmed by the testimony of Eusebius, Hierome,
Ruffin, Socrates, Sozomen and others. But this donation does signify, that he
was baptized by Siluester, and as it is in Siluesters legend, cured of a
leprosy, and that before the wars with Licinius and Maximinus. 4. This
donation was granted as is said, in the beginning of Constantines reign. But
that cannot be true, seeing it mentions Constantinople, yt was not so named,
nor founded by Constantine until long after. In the Nic^ne council Alexander
was called episcopus Bizantij, and Sozomen testifies, that Constantinople was
founded in the height of Constantines prosperity. 5. This donation preferring
the bishop of Rome before the other patriarchs is plainly repugnant to the
counsel of Nice, that makes all ye patriarchs aequal. 6. The bishop of Rome
never enjoyed any such prerogatives, as are given him by this counterfe^t
grante, either in Greece or other places. 7. He is called Vniuersalis episcopus
by that grante; yet did Gregory the first refuse that title long after this
time. 8. The Popes now wear a triple crown, yet Siluester would not, as this
donation pretends, wear an imperial crown. 9. No authentical history
makes mention of this great donation. 10 Nay contrariwise histories relate,
that Constantines sons, and successors did long after enjoy those things,
which are in the gift pretended to be delivered to Siluester. 11. Never were
Constantine and Gallicanus consulls together. Finally the rude and rascal
style, and the circumstances of this grante, nothing fitting Constantines time,
nor person, nor yet the person of Siluester, that yet scarce was secured from
persecution, do plainly declare the same to be forged.

Ludouicus mentioned did. 63. c. ego Ludouicus. Is most grossly forged. For
first the same contradicts the donation of Constantine. For what needed this
grant or donation, if Constantine had given the same, and much more before?
Again if the Popes of Rome had been in possession of this right, the french,
that were great benefactors to that see, Theodiric. a Niem. and Langius.
would never have disturbed them. 2. histories teach, that until Boniface the
9. his time, the popes were never possessed of the temporalties of Rome. 3.
there are diverse copyes extant of this grant, as may appear by Gratian, and
volaterran Geograph. lib. 3. Which do contradict one another. But writings
repugnant one to another, L. scripturae. Cod. de fid. instrument.
and containing manifest contradictions deserve no credit. Scripturae diuersae
say lawyers, and fidem sibi iniuicem dero gantes nihil habere firmitatis
possunt. Neither can two contrary propositions be taken for true as lawyers
hold. in l. si is qui. vtrum. ff. de rebus dub. and. l. vbi pugnantia. ff. de
regulis iuris. 4. The Romanistes never did choose the pope according to this
grant, nor did popes of late time grant, that emperors had any authority to
give a form for the election of the Pope. Finally, the rude and barbarous
style, and terms of the grant, and all histories, that write of the government
of Rome about the time of this Ludouike do prove it to be conterfect.

Justinian and John bishop Rome, which are now thrust into the code. C. de sum.
trinit. and of fid. Cath. s. inter claras. And are commonly alleged for the
Popes authority, and jurisdiction, as appears by the disputes of Bellarmine,
and the fabulous narrations of Caesar Baronius. the forgery is detected First,
by ancient manuscript books, where these two epistles are not to be found, as
Alciat testifies parerg. lib. 5. c. 23. Secondly, these epistles are repugnant
to the law next precedent. For here the emperor does signify, that he did then
pubish this confession first, L. cognoscere. Cod. de summa Trinit. and fid.
Cath,
and sent it to John bishop of Rome to be allowed, or dissallowed; wher-by the
law precedent and law beginning cum saluatorem. in the same title it is
manifest, that he had published the same a year before, and sent it to
Epiphanius bishop of Constantiople, and to other Churches. 3. Ado of Vienna in
his chronicle, and Platina in the life of Boniface the 3. testify, that the
bishop of Rome was not called head of the Church before Phocas his time. 4. the
law decernimus. C. de sancros. ecclesijs and law Constantinopolitana, in the
same title, does give that yt to the bishop of Constantinople, that is here
claymed by the bishop of Rome. 5. Here the emperor promises to do nothing in
causes ecclesiastical before he had made the bishop of Ro^e acquainted withal.
but that is refuted by the laws called nouellae nu. 6. 11. and. 123.
concerning the creation and ordination of bishops, the number of patriarchs and
archbisshops, their jurisdictions and privileges: and likewise by the nouel
constitutions. 3.5.16.58.133 and. 137. al which concern mere ecclesiastical
causes. Finally the letter being written in Greek to a Romayne bishop from a
Romayne Emperor, and translated after a most barbarous fashion does plainly
declare the same to be forged.

Alexander the third, under the color of some counterfect grantes, challenge
is made by the popes to the crown and souereinty of England. it behooves us
therefore to look unto the fingers of these impostors and falsaries, that by
one trick of forgery are wont to usurp a whole kingdom* nouit prudentia
tua, says Alexander the third, Anglorum regnum, ex quo Christi nomen ibi
glorificatum est, sub apostolorum principis manu et tutela extitisse. his
meaning is if he durst utter it, that the souerein dominion over England
belongs to the pope. Whosoever list to read over Augustine Steuchus ye popes
bibliothecary, or rather babbling falsary, shall find diverse counterfect
instruments of ye sa^e nature, whereby the popes claim the kingdoms of
Croatia, Aragon, Dalmatia, Denmark, Spain, Hungary, Poland, Russia, yea and
the empire of Rome to belong to their sea. So gaynful has the craft of forgery
been to that see. And so shameless are the popes agents in their forgeryes.
Otho to swear fealty to John the 12. or as some reckon. the 13. did. 63. c.
tibi domino. A matter so against reason forged, as nothing more. For there is
not any one historiographer, that does mention any such matter* nay histories
report, that Otho deposed this John, and caused another to be placed in his
seat. So far was he from swearing fealty to him. beside that, not any man of
credit ever wrote, that the emperor held his crown in fealty of the Pope.
Bellarmine albeit he wish well to the Pope; yet does he not hold, or believe
any such mattter. Or at least he dare not speak or write so much. Thirdly, it
is apparent, that Otho and his successors claymed jurisdiction in Rome, and the
territory adjoining, long after this supposed decretale. Therefore unlike it
is, that the emperor should, as is here pretended, forswere it. Finally, the
frame of the oath is most ridiculous, and the style most brutish, the emperor
calls the pope dominum: and says, tibi domino Ioanni papae, ego rex Otho
promittere and iurare facio. Which is a most absurd kind of speech. For he that
swears himself, takes his oath directly, and makes not others only to
swear, or promise* but no man can deny, but that it is falsity to exhibit or
use any false instrument, or to corrupt or falsify any public or private
writings by any means whatsoever. paulus respondit, says the law, legis
corneliae poenateneri, L. instrumentorum. ff. ad L. cornel. de falsie
qui etiam extra testamenta cetera falsa signassent; sed et ceteros, qui in
rationibus, tabulis, literis publicis, aliaue qua re, sieve consignatione falsum
fecerunt, vel vt verum non appareat, quid celauerunt, surripuerunt,
subiecerunt, resignauerunt.

Clement, Anacle tus, Euaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus, Hyginus. Pius,
Victor and other ancient bishops of Rome are nothing but mere forgeryes. For
first, seeing they lived in times, when latin was most purely spoken, it is not
likely, but their epistles should be good latin. But these supposed epistles
are most barbarous and Gothical, and very unlike to the style of Tertullian,
Cyprian, Lactantius, and other fathers. Secondly, it is not like, that living
in ancient time those bishops should speak as the Italians spoake about a
thousand years after Christ. Thirdly, seeing there is such difference of style
in diverse writers, that no two or three write all alike; it is not like, if all
these epistles had been written by the men, whose names they carry, yt the
style of al should be like. Fourthly, if they were written by diverse, how
happens it, that in diverse epistles diverse writers use the same words, phrase
and sentences? Again what is the reason, that some of them allege the words
of the scriptures according to Hieromes traslatio^ that was made long after?
Fifty, neither Bellarmine nor Baronius dare maintain; that all these epistles
are authentical. 6. The Romanistes themselves do not give any credit to these
epistles For they hold that Linus succeeded Peter immediately* but Clement
epistle. 1. tells contrary, that he did succeed Peter, being ordained by
Peter himself. Finally, they contain some matters disagreeing far from the
times wherein they wrote, and others very impossible, and sometimes contrary
to authentical histories. Clement epist. 1. writes to James of the death of
Peter, who seems to be dead before Peter. He talks of sending of bishops
into France, Germany and Italy, as if he had then had men to command at his
pleasure, and could have disposed of things then, as in latter times. He
talks of a form and face of government, which then was not usual. In his
second epistle most arrogantly he takes on him to instruct James the Apostle,
which had his instruction from Christ Jesus. Qualiter tenere de sacramentis
debemus, That is, of the dong of mise in the sacrament, which he calls the
Lords portion.
says he, te ex ordine nos decet instruere. And then full wisely he talks,
de murium stercore inter fragmenta dominicae portionis. Anacletus in his first
epistle, would have all hard questions referred to the church of Rome. But it
is not likely, that the true Anacletus would have so written, that died before
John the Apostle, who was better able to decide controversies of faith, then
Anacletus. In his second epistle he says, that the Apostles appointed the 72.
disciples, which the gospel shows us to have been ordained by Christ. In
his third epistle he says, that Abilius succeeded Mark in Alexandria; whereas
Anianus did follow Mark, and Abilius followed Anianus. He says also, that
Cephas signifies a head in greek. The same man denies the lesser orders
under priests and deacons to be instituted by Christ or the Apostles. Euaristus
talks idely of ordaining priests without titles, and consecrating of
Churches, and stone altars; whereas titles, and churches began not before the
peace of the church, and stone altars were not built for many years after.
Sixtus begins his epistle thus, Sixtus vniuersalis apostolicae ecclesiae
episcopus: whereas this title was by Gregory the first, and long after Sixtus
his time refused. It is not like that Hyginus being a Greek, wrote to the
Athenians which were Greeks in latin: which notwithstanding is signified by
his epistle. Beside that he affirms, that the first epistle of John was
written to the Parthians. Calixtus in his second epistle argues against those,
that refused repentance to those, that had fallen in time of persecution, which
was the heresy of Nouatus, that rose up some pretty while after his time,
Pontianus in his epistle joins Christ and Peter together, contrary to the
style of those times. Marcellinus says, non licet imperatori, Epist. 2.
vel cuiquam pietatem custodienti aliquid contra mandata diuina praesumere:
whereby he signifies, that the Emperor then professed christian religion. In
his first epistle he disputes against the Arrians, which denied Christ to be
of one substance with his Father, very stoutly, and yet in his time the heresy
of Arrius was not known in the world. Infinite other exceptions may be taken to
these, and to the rest of the decretale epistles, that go under the name of
ancient bishops of Rome. But the rest being like to these, of which we have
already spoken, there is no question, but they are all of one stamp.

Melchiades 12. q. 1. c. futuram ecclesiam. tells us, how Constantine was
christened, and gave his seat, and other great possessions, to the church of
Rome: and yet Melchiades was dead before Constantine was christened, or had
given any thing to the Church. This act therefore must needs be forged. and so
does the gloss confess after a sort. falsus est titulus says the gloss in
the canons set out by Gregory the 13. which shows, that the Romish Church
impudently uses false titles.

Augustine de doctrina christiana lib. 2. c. 8. they describe this sentence, in
canonicis scripturis ecclesiarum catholicarum quamplurimum diuinarum
scripturarum solertissimus indagator authoritatem sequatur, inter quas sane
illae sunt, quas apostolica seeds habere, and ab ea alij meruerunt accipere
epistolas. Where these last words and ab ea alij, are foisted in: and
thereupon in the rubrike they affirm, that the Popes decretale epistles are to
be reckened among canonical scriptures: and that they go about to prove most
falsely by the testimony of S. Augustine, that does not so much as speak one
word of the popes decretale epistles.

Trullo say, that James and Basil (...): that is, in the holy ministration of
the Lords supper taught, that the cup was filled with wine and water. But the
papists make them say, that James and Basil did deliver unto us missae
celebrationem, that is, the first form of celebrating mass, as they expound
it.

C. species. de consecrat. did. 1. there is a place alleged out of Gregory
homil. paschali. but falsely.

C. vtrum. de consecrat. did. 2. is pretended to be taken out of Saint
Augustine. yet the words are not found in Saint Augustine, as they are there
set down.

C. in Christo. de consecrat. did. 2. is otherwise set down then in Hilary,
from whence the place is said to be taken. In the same chapter these words,
corpus Christi quod sumitur de altari, and these which follow are also foisted
into Hilary.

and aeterni, mysterium fidei.

Clement they have published diverse constitutions by him affirmed to be
apostolical Of like stamp also are Clements fabulous recognitions. yet
Gelasius does place those constitutions among apocryphal writings. Tertullians
and Origens tractates are often alleged by papists; yet does Gelasius note
them, as books corrupted. Under the title of Martialis, Africanus,
Amphilochius, Prochorus, and such like ancient writers, they allege most
vain and idle Pamphlets, neither sauouring of the piety of those fathers, nor
bearing the state of the times, wherein those Fathers lived.

Under the name of Cyprian are these treatises published: De montibus Sion and
Sinah. de reuelatione capitis beati Ioannis. de singularitate clericoru^. de
cardinalibus operibus Christi. de laud Martyrij. de disciplina and bono
pudicitiae. epistola ad Nouatianum. sermones aliquot. orationes duae. which by
diverse arguments appear not to belong to Cyprian. In the book of the
Revelation of S. John's head, there is mention made of king Pipin, that lived
diverse hundredth years after Cyprian. and in this our opinion not only
Erasmus, but diverse other authentical writers concur with us.

Under the name of Hierome there are also extant, diverse counterfeit treatises,
as first, a sermon de assumptione B. Mariae virginis, 2. a treatise de septem
gradibus ecclesiae, wherein the author reckeneth bishops for a distinct order
from priests, and leaves out exorcistes. 3. a treatise entitled laus
virginitatis. 4. de attributis dei ex scripturis. 5. certain sermons upon
principal feasts. 6. de vinculis beati Petri. 7. de diuersis generibus
leprarum. 8. regula monachorum a Lupo quodam tempore Martini quinti collecta.
9. ad Tyrasium de morte filiae. 10. ad oceanum de ferendis opprobrijs. 11. de
vita clericorum. 12. epistola Damasi ad Hieronymum, and Hieronymi ad Damasum.
13. Catalogus ad Desiderium. 14. de virtute Psalmorum. 15. de oblationibus
altaris ad Damasum. 16. regula monacharum. 17. de natiuitate Mariae: and other
treatises.

Under the name of S. Augustine we have certain sermons de tempore, de
sanctis, and ad fratres in eremo, which both style, matter, and other
circumstances show not to be his. There are also meditations, and soliloquies,
ascribed to him, but most unworthy to bear his name. In the meditations he
establishes the worship of angels, which in his book of heresies, he reputeth
to be an heresy. that book I have seen under the name of Anselmus, yet
unworthy the learning of Anselmus. in the soliloquies we read the fable of
Longinus. Beside that, both these books in style, and grace savor nothing
less, then of Augustines spirit. In the Manual, that goes under Augustines
name, beside much foolery there is plain heresy. In the 16. chapter he
shows, that it is in man's power to merit the kingdom of heaven; which is
Pelagianisme, and a saying of S. Augustine in diverse places refuted. Beside
that, the terms savor of a scholasticall vein. The books called scalae
paradisi, de duodecim abusionum generibus, de contritione cordis, de cognitione
verae vitae, de speculo, de vita christiana, de assumptione beatae Mariae, de
contemptu mundi, de vanitate seculi, de obedientia and humilitate, de bono
disciplinae, de visitatione infirmorum, de consolatione mortuorum, de quarta
feria, de tempore barbarico, de cataclysmo, de sobrietate and virginitate,
speculum peccatoris, de vtilitate poenitentiae, de quatuor virtutibus
charitatis, and diverse other set out under his name are manifestly to be
proved, not to be his, and that not only by the testimony of learned men, but
also by the style, circumstances of the time, the monastical and gross vein
of the authors, and diverse other notes.

Under the name of Basil. and Chrysostom they have set out, not only
commentaries and masses, but also epistles and sermons; whereof some are no
where to be found in Greek, the rest savor rather of a friar like vein,
then of those two fathers spirit.

And the like they have done under the names of the rest of the fathers. But as
it is forgerie to father bastards upon wrong fathers; so it is forgery, and
great wrong to set out such base stuff under the name of fathers. And this may
be gathered out of the law, qui falsam. ff. ad l. cornel. de falsis. and l.
cum suppositi. Cod. etiam ad l. cornel. de falsis. Likewise if it be falsehood,
to give us base metal for gold, and to pare true coin, as appears by the
law, quicunque nummos. ff. ad leg. Cornel. de falsis: then is it likewise
falsehood, to give us base stuff for the writings of the fathers.

Herein they do also commit another point of falsehood. for having themselves
abused the names of fathers, they by all means endeavor to suppress the
original writings of the Greek fathers. Posseuin in his rapsody, which he
entituleth bibliothecam selectam (albeit it is rather bibliotheca scelesta)
persuades all, that have greek copies to keep them from the sight of
students in divinity. Bellarmine also and Baronius, and diverse others confess
sometimes both books, and decretal epistles set out under the names of
fathers, and ancient bishops of Rome to be forged. Their own testimony
therefore does condemn them to be falsaries, if they use these false writings,
and allege them, as they do most commonly.

indexes they openly profess themselves to be falsaries. In epist. ad Pium 5.
ante bibliothec. san^am.
For what is falsity, but to take away, to add, to alter men's writings? but
this the papists do ex professo. Sixtus Senensis confesses, that Pius 5.
caused all the writings of the fathers to be purged, and cleansed. Expurgari
and ernaculari curasti says he, omnia catholicorum scriptorum, ac praecipue
veterum patrum scripta, haereticorum aetatis nostrae faecibus contaminata, and
venenis infecta. But under color of purging, and cleansing away of things
noxious, it appears the Romanists have taken out such things out of the
fathers, as made against them. As for other writers, they alter and mangle
them, at their pleasures. In Bertram they change visibiliter into
inuisibiliter. Index expurgator.
All that comes between the words, considerandum quoque quod in panc illo,
and the sentence beginning, sed aliud est quod exterius geritur; they dash out.
and so they deal in the rest. In the censures of Erasmus, and annotations of
Viues upon S. Augustine, and in the scholiaes, marginall notes, and indexes of
Augustine, Chrysostom and others, they take themselves liberty, to do what
they list. Capnioes speculum oculare, Fabres commentaries on the gospels, and
epistles, Beatus Rhenanus his annotations on Tertullian they falsify most
impudently. Likewise do they deal with all late writers. Not long since we
^nde they have corrupted both the gloss, and sometime the text of the canon
law. And this is now a common practice of Iebusites, according to a direction
and commission given them of the Pope to corrupt all authors, that pass their
fingers. Posseuima shameless compagnion curtalling ancient writings says, ex
lib. 2. Hermetis col. 16. Select. bibliotheca lib. 1. c. 19.
deleatur, recte audisti. and paulo post, qui enim crediderunt, aut credituri
sunt. In transitu sanctae Mariae, qui falso ascribitur B. Melitoni, deleantur
illa verba, in solatium ferendum angugustijs, quae superuenturae sunt mihi.
deleatur etiam a capite 8. vsque in finem tractatus. ex libro Nicolai Cabasilae
deleantur capita 29. and 30. In quaestionibus Anastasij quaest. 87. scribatur
in margin: haec intelligenda sunt de gloria corporis. The treatise of Antonius
Abbas he turns, and mangleth most impudently, and practices the like in
diverse other authors works. If then any man seek for falsaries, let him go
to papists, that make profession of forging and falsification, and which
without forgery cannot maintain their new forged devises, as themselves by
their indexes of books prohibited confess, and by books plainly falsified,
it manifesty appears.

Finally they are falsaries, that produce or suborne false witnesses, or that
use their depositions. Poena legis Corneliae irrogatur ei, L poena. ff. ad l.
cornel. de falsis.
says Marcianus, qui falsas testationes faciendas, testimoniaue falsa
inspicienda dolo malo coierit. But the Popes produce counterfeit fathers, and
legends to testify for them. They have also suborned diverse vile persons to
speak shame of honest men, as Bolsecus of Calvin; Laingius of Buchanan, and
others; Sanders, Rishton, Robert Patsons and Creswell against King Henry the
eighth, Queen Elizabeth, the late Lord treasurer, the Earl of Leicester, sir
Christopher Hatton Lord chancellor, sir Francis Walsingham, and others. The
falsehood of these witnesses is convinced by diverse public acts, and
sufficient witnesses. Bolsecus in a synod in France publicly recanted his
slanderous book, and professed, that he was hired, and drawn on by the
adversaries. Parsons shall hear some of his lies hereafter. His conscience in
the mean while has often told him of his lying. Wherefore, unless
Owlyglasse can answer in these points, the accusation of falsification does
fall on his dearest friends far more heavily, then upon us.

CHAP. V. A brief Catalogue of certain notorious lies uttered, and recorded
by the Popes, and Church of Rome.
TO go about to comprehend in one Chapter all the untruths, and lies of the
popes of Rome, and the synagogue adhering unto them, were as possible, as to
measure the sand, or to bring the Ocean sea within the compass of one vessel.
I will therefore out of many, choose some few, that by the example of some
part, every man may judge of the rest, and discern, and hate the false packing
of papists, and their adherents.

Innocentius the first, or rather some other Pope under his name affirms,
that none did found Churches in Italy, France, Spain, Afric, Sicily and
Islands lying between these countries, but those whom Peter and his successors
made Priests. He denies also, that any of the Apostles taught in those
countries, beside S. Peter, and those which he sent. Cum manifestum fit, says
he, in omnem Italiam, Gallias, Hispanias, C. quis nesciat. did. 11.
Africam atque Siciliam, insulasque interiacentes nullum instituisse ecclesias,
nisi eos, quos venerabilis apostolus Petrus, aut eius successores constituerunt
sacerdotes. aut legant, si in istis prouincijs alius apostolorum inuenitur, aut
legitur docuisse. quod si non legunt, quia nusquam inuenitur etc. A loud and
large lie. for we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Apostle Paul,
who was not ordained, nor sent by Peter taught at Rome, and other places in
Italy. Freculphus writes yt Philip the Apostle taught in France. the French
acknowledge Dionyse of Areopagus, whom Paul converted, to be their Apostle,
and first teacher* Iereney joins Paul with Peter in the foundation of the
Church of Rome. In the old records of our Church it is reported, that Joseph of
Arimathia first planted the gospel in Britany. Saint Augustine shows that
the Gospel came into Afrike from other contryes, then from Rome. For he
distinguishes Rome from those countries, from whence the sound of the Gospel
first passed into Afrike, as appears by these words of his epist. 162. ad
Glorium, Eleusium et alios: Cum se videret, and Romanae ecclesiae, in qua
semper apostolicae ecclesiae viguit principatus and ceteris terris, vnde
euangelium ad ipsam Aphricam venit, per. communicatorias litteras esse
coniunctum. Finally so loud was the lie, that the gloss is constreined to say,
that the word Alius; does signify, contrarius: which is quite contrary to
Innocentius his purpose. For if his argument stand upon this point, that
therefore all the Churches in the provinces mentioned are to obey the Church of
Rome, because she was their founder; then if other not contrary to Peter did
found those Churches; it follows that the same were not to harken to the
pope or the Church of Rome but to their founders.

Gregory the fourth says, that all bishops causes, and the discussing of
matters of religion belongs to the apostolic Roman See, as the head of all
Churches, and the place, from whence the Church took her beginning. cum nulli
dubium sit, says he, quod non solum pontificalis causatio, C. praeceptis.
did. 12.
sed omnis sanctae religionis relatio ad sedem apostolicam, quasi ad caput
ecclesiarum debeat referri, and inde normam sumere, vnde sumpsit exordiu^.
Anatorious lie. For the law went out of Sion, and not from Rome: and bishops
causes were handled in times past in councels, and not before the bishops of
Rome. There also were matters of faith decided, and not by the Romish bishops,
as this lying Pope affirms. Nay the causes of the bishop of Rome himself, as
well as of all other bishops, were handled in councels.

Athanasius the Church of Rome c. Septuaginta. did. 17. teaches, that the
counsel of Nice published 80. canons, which were reduced afterward to the
number of 70. according to the number of 70. disciples; and that the copy
brought to Alexandria was burnt by heretics. But authentical stories do
refute this lie, and show, that there were only 20. Canons established in that
council. Beside yt, Luke. 10.
Luke says, that Christ sent 72. disciples, As the old latin transtation has.
Thirdly, if the canons were 80. it were a mere falsity to cut of, or reduce
80. to 70. Finally, of the burning of the canons of the Nicene counsel there
is no record in any authentical writer.

Marcellus says, that these words. Psalm. 81. ego dixi dij estis, are spoken of
Priests. And thereby would prove them to be above magistrates. Si seculares
in publicis iudicijs says he, C. synodum did. 17.
libellis vtuntur appellatorijs, quanto magis sacerdotibus haec eadem agere
licet, de qubus dictum est, ego dixi, dij estis? The Pope therefore may be
convinced of notorious lying and forging by all interpreters, and not only by
the text it self.

Leo. c. ita dominus. did. 19. They teach, that Peter was assumed into an
inseparable bond of unity with Christ. hunc in consortium indiuiduae vnitatis
assumptum; id quod ipse erat, voluit nominari; a matter untrue and blasphemous,
and unworthy to be vttred by Leo. For albeit Christ consist of two natures; yet
no man ever yet said beside this counterfect^ Leo, that Christ and Peter made
one person.

Anacletus says, that Peter was made bishop, when Christ said to him, thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it, C. innouo. did. 21.
and I will give thee the keys of the kindome of heaven. He says, also, that
the rest of the Apostles made Peter their prince; ceteri vero apostoli cum
eodem pari consortio honorem and potestatem acceperunt, ipsumque principem
eorum esse voluerunt. But this second point is refuted by the whole tenor of
the euangelical history, and the acts of the Apostles recorded by Saint Luke.
For in no place we find, where the Apostles did ordain or make Peter their
prince or governor. Nay we rather find, where Christ made all the Apostles
equal. The first point is contradicted also by the words of Christ, who in the
future tence said: Dabo tibi, and not Do tibi. Bellarmine also holds, that
Peter in this place received nothing, but a promise. quorum verborum says he,
planus and obuius sensus est, lib. 1. de. pontif. Romans 10.
vt intelligamus sub duabus metaphoris promissum Petro totius ecclesiae
principatum. He speaks of the sense of the words rehearsed by Anacletus, and
by his exposition it appears, that Anacletus said untruly, that Peter was
made bishop by christ's words vttred Mat. 16. which may also be proved by
Turrecremata in his treatise de ecclesia. Finally all the Popes agents hold,
that Peter received the primacy from Christ, and not from the Apostles.

Gelasius says, that the Church of Rome obtained the primacie not by any
ordinances of synodes, C quamuis. did. 21.
but by Christ's own words in the Gospel. A matter most untrue. For the
scriptures speak no where of the primacy of the Romish Church* neither can it
be proved out of the words, tu es Petrus: alleged by Gelasius. Neither does
every prerogative of Peter belong to the Church of Rome. Nor had the apostle
Peter any such high primacy, As the Pope now claymeth; and practices.

Nicolas says, that Dioscorus was not condemned for matter of faith, C. in
tantum. did. 21.
but for denouncing an excommunication against Leo bishop of Rome. But the
acts of the 2. council of Ephesus being in favor of Eutyches, and the
council of Chalcedon do reprove him, and plainly convince him of untruth. The
same also may be gathered by the chapter Canones* did. 15. And therefore the
gloss to salve this lie, says we must so understand Nicolas his words, as if
he had said, that Dioscorus was not condemned for matter of faith only; which
was no part of Nicolas his meaning.

Omnes sieve patriarchij cuiuslibet apices, sieve metropoleon primatus, aut
episcopatuum Cathedras, vel ecclesiarum cuiuslibet ordinis dignitates, C.
omnes. did. 22.
says Nicolas the Pope, instituit Romana ecclesia. But he tells a gross
untruth* for the scriptures tell us, that the Apostle Paul ordained bishops in
Crete, Ephesus, and diverse places both in Europe, and Asia; and ecclesiastical
histories tell us, that neither the Church of Jerusalem, nor Antioch, nor other
eastern Churches, nor their dignities were founded by the Church of Rome.
Finally the acts of councels tell us, that councelles did appoint the several
limits of bishops diocesses, and did enlarge their dignityes according to
diverse occasions; and that emperors, and the dignities of great cities did
add dignity to the bishops.

Nicolas also affirms, that Christ gave to Peter terreni simul, and caelestis
imperii iura. that is, the right both of the kingdom of heaven, and kingdom
of earth. Ibidem.
But our Savior Christ's words show, that he gave him no earthly kingdom, but
promised him only the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Nay if he be Christ's
vicar, then he must claim no earthly kingdom. For our Savior Christ's
kingdom was not of this world.

Anacletus affirms, that Peter and Paul were both crowned with Martyrdom in
one day, and at the same time. C. sacro sancta. did. 22.
a matter denied by Prudentius peri steph. him 12. Arator in Act. Apost. lib.
2. and the author of the 18. Sermon de sanctis, that goes under Saint
Augustines name, and diverse others.

Nicholas says, that Constantine called the bishop of Rome God. Constat a pio
principe Constantino (quod long superius memorauimus) deum appellatu^. C.
satis. did. 96.
And upon this ground he goes about to prove, that the Pope is not to be
judged by any. But this ground is an impudente lie, and cannot be justified by
any authentical writing.

Co^stantinus. did. 96. ye Canonistes affirm, That Constantine the emperor
gave his crown, and all regal dignity in the city of Rome, and in Italy, and
in the western contries to the Pope. Constantinus imperator Coronam, and omnem
regiam dignitatem in vrbe Romana, and in Italia, and in partibus occidentalibus
apostolico concessit, say they in their decrees* but this is an impudentlye
refuted by all authe^ticall writers, that describe the state of the empire of
Ro^e, and of the western empire after Constantines time. and is co^tradicted
by the princes of Italy, yt for the most pa^te deny to hold any thing of the
Pope in fealty. Like unto this fable is that, which is reported of Constantines
leprosy, and how he was counseled to bathe himself in childrens blood, and
was at last cured by Syluester bishop of Rome by baptism. For this is contrary
to physic, to cure leprosy by bathing in childrens blood, and not well
agrees with divinity, unless it can be showed, that baptism cures corporal
diseases. Finally, the same is not found in any good author, but only seems
to be devised by the writers of fabulous legendes.

Anacletus tells, how provinces were distinguished by the Apostles, C.
prouinciae. did. 99.
and by Clement. But that fabulous relation is refuted by acts of councels,
and constitutions of emperors, that from time took order for the limits of
provinces, and diocesses, and did innouate old limits oftentimes; which
assuredly they would not have done, if the same had been ordered by
apostolical constitutions. The same is also contradicted by those, that
attribute, the distinction and limitation of parishes to later Popes. Finally,
it is disproued by the records of ancient time, that signify, how the Church
being in persecution, the bishops that lived obscurely, had no reason
ambitiously to contend, either about the limits of provinces, or else lesser
diocesses.

Tharasius they say, that Peter deposed those, C. multipliciter. 1. q. 1. in
Cod. Greg. 13.
that were ordained by Simony, as he did Simon Magus. Cum Petrus diuinus ille
apostolus, cuius and Cathedram sortita est fraterna vestra sanctitas, say they,
hos deposuerit, vt Simonem magum. But Simon Magus was not ordered, nor did ever
Peter depose any so ordered, as may appear both by the acts of the Apostles,
and authentical stories. Is not this then a fable, that they tell of Peter,,
and of Simoniacall persons pretended to be deposed by Peter?

Innocent the fourth affirms, that the kingdom of Sicily is the special
patrimony of Peter. Ad apostolicae. de sent. and re iudicat.
Regnum says he, est speciale patrimonium Petri. But Peter neither claimed so
much, nor acknowledged so much, nor knew so much. Neither do we read, either
in scriptures, or fathers, that he had any such patrimony.

that in the person of Peter it was said to himself also, Ibidem.
whatsoever thou shall bind upon the earth, shall be bound in heaven. And
therefore he concludes, that he has power to depose Princes. Does it not then
appear, that the Pope by lies, has usurped power to depose princes? and does
he not absurdly and falsely affirm, that Frederike was deposed by God, because
he like a rebel pronounced him deposed, being a wicked man?

Clemens the fifth affirms most falsely, that the Emperors having the crown
of the empire set upon their heads, swear fealty to the Popes. That this
assertion is false, Clement. Romani. de iureiurando. Ibidem.
it may appear by the emperor Henry's protestation, by all histories, that
talk of the emperors consecration, and by Bellarmines disputes. For though he
was willing to gratify the Pope with any thing, that lay in his power to
grant; yet durst he not say, that the empire is holden in fee of the Pope, or
that the emperor swears fealty to the pope. How much then is it to be
wondered, that christian emperors should so patiently endure these usurpations
of popes? Does it not plainly appear, that S. John's prophecy is fulfilled,
how they shall give their authority and power to the beast? Certes, Apocal.
17.
if this were not, they would never have resigned their crown so basely into
such beastly creatures hands, and take that of antichrist, which is originally
their own, and given them of God.

Clement affirms, that the king of Sicile is the Churches, and his vasal,
Clement. pastoralis. de sent. and re iudicat.
and that he is the emperors superior judge, and during the vacation of the
empire, does succeed the Emperor. Nos tam ex superioritate says he, quam ad
imperium non est dubium nos habere, quam ex potestate, in qua vacant imperio
imperatori succedimus. But this does not only convince the Pope of singular
pride and arrogance, but also of falsehood and treachery. For Gregory the first
called the emperor dominum, that is, his Lord* and Peter was subject to the
emperor, and also taught subjection to kings. Furthermore it is simplicity, to
teach, The king of Spain will not yield to it, I think.
that the church does possess earthly kingdoms, and hardly will the pope
prove, by any authentical testimony, that the king of Sicily is his vassal.
Finally, it is a shame to all the empire, to endure this lying beast to
disgrace the imperial state; and a matter of mere impudency for any to
affirm, that the Pope is Emperor during the vacation. And, I think, neither
Bellarmine, nor Baronius, albeit well paid for lying, will affirm, ye all that,
which the Pope writes in that shameless decretale, is true.

Boniface the 8. says the Romish church has two swords. In hac eiusque
protestate says he, C. vnam. extr. de maiorit. and Obed.
duos esse gladios, spiritualem scilicet and temporalem, euangelicis dictis
instruimur. But, that the Church has a temporal sword, is most untrue. for
the Church has the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and no swords to govern
terrestrial kingdoms. It is also most false, that the evangelists teach us,
that the Church has the temporal sword. For Christ said to Peter, Pasce, and
not, macta oues meas. that is, feed my sheep, and not, kill my sheep.

vnam sanctam. extr. de maiorit. and obed. we read, that the Romanists
affirm, that no man can be saved, unless he be subject to the Pope. Si
Christo Capiti, and eius vicario subesse nolumus, salutem non poterimus
adipisci. The same is also gathered out of the text of Bonifaces decretale. But
this is a maine untruth. for the Apostles, and diverse of the Eastern, and
Africane churches, and others not subject to the Pope are saved, and I hope the
papists will not deny, but they are saved. If they do, I hope we may say,
their denial is a damned denial.

Boniface also affirms most untruly, that the Pope cannot be judged of any,
but God. but the Emperor, he believes, may be judged by the Pope. That he
speaks untruth in both these points, I have showed in my books de Pontifice
Romans and de coneilijs. Histories also report, that diverse popes have been
justly deposed by councels and emperors, as for example John the 12. John the
23. Eugenius the fourth, and others. but that the Pope did justly depose the
emperor, we read not. For men of great excellency have condemned the fact of
Gregory the 7. Paschalis, Gregory the 9. Innocent the fourth, and others, that
attempted to depose the emperor. But we read not of any man, that ever allowed
it, but such as were hired to commend all the popes rebellions, and practices.

Clement the sixth says, that Christ shed more blood, then was sufficient for
the redemption of the world, C. vnigenit^ extr. de poen^. and remiss.
and that the overplus was laid up in a treasury for the Popes to bestow for
remission of temporal punishment. He tells also a tale of the image of
Christ, that appeared on the wall of the Church of our Savior built by
Constantine. Matters if not blasphemous, yet very untrue, for not the shedding
of blood absolutely, but the death of our Savior was the satisfaction, that
was to be paid for the sins of the world. Secondly, Christ died not, nor
shed his blood, that the Pope might make say of it by his indulgences, as is
his fashion; but that every one, that believes on him, might have remission of
sins, and be saved. Which belief cannot stand with the popes dispensations
and indulgences. Thirdly, the fable of the apparition of this image would be
proved; or else it may easily be proved, that it is a false fable devised of
idolaters for justification of their abominable idolatry. To relate all the
lies, that are set down in the Latin, Italian, Spanish and English legends
would require a great volume. Baronius has set out nine or ten volumes of
legendarie lies. Yet has he not comprised the one half of them, that are
contained in the legends. I will therefore only give you a taste of a few,
that you may the better judge of the rest. Andrews legend set down partly in
the Breuiary we read, that he being brought before Aegeas the proconsul of
Achaia did most freely reprehend him; and that he should say, ego omnipotenti
deo, qui vnus and verus e^, immolo quotidie non taurorum carnes, nec hircorum
sanguinem, sed immaculatum agnum in altari. Which words are not found in any
authentical writer, no nor in Abdias, albeit not authentical. Beside that,
the name of Aegeas is rather greek then latin. But in those times the
Romans made no Greeks proconsuls. When Andrew came to the cross, he is
reported to have said o bona crux: which is no apostolical speech; neither can
it be found, that in any authentical writer the Apostles are said, to have
sacrificed an immaculate lamb upon the altar. Finally the legend says, that
his body was translated first to Constantinople, and then to Malphi in Italy,
and that his head was brought to Rome in Pius the second his time. Matters
merely forged, and by the illusions of Satan believed, for the establishment
of the worship of Saints.

Nicolas it is said, that being an infant, every wednesday and friday he
refused to suck his nurfe until night, ^ bre^ar. Men's. december.
and that being far distant he appeared to Constantine, and so threatened him,
that he delivered three tribunes, which by calumnious accusations he had
condemned to death. But these are matters, not only false, but also
incredible. for neither do infants understand what is fasting, much less
laws of fasting: nor can a man's body being in Lycia. as was the body of
Nicolas, appear at Constantinople: nor can men understand the prayers, much
less the thoughts of men being absent, unless God reuele them, of which here
is no mention.

Lucia a maiden of Syracus^ by one Paschasius governor of that Island, In breu.
Romans
is said to be much importuned to sacrifice to idols. But not prevailing, he
purposed to send her to the stews, and a man would think he did what he
purposed* but see what happened. She stood so immovable, that no force could
move her, nor fire, pitch, nor rozine, nor boiling oil hurt her; as it is in
the legende. But these reports seem utterly false and destitute of all
proof. nay, we do not read of any such governor of Sicile in Dioclesians
time.

Antony and Paul the eremites are in the Romish breuiary said to have bread
brought them by a crow. Mense Ianuar. in festo Paul^.
We do also read, that Antony saw Paul^s soul carried by angels into heaven.
Finally they tell us, how Antony wanting means to dig a grave to bury the
corpse of Paul in, two Lions did dig a hole capable enough of a body. Nay it
is said, that they did mourn at his grave. so they plaide the parts, and did
the office both of the Sexten, and of Mourners. But these fables, as they are
contrary to all reason, so they are destitute of all proof out of antiquity.
Neither is R. Parsons able to show how souls may be seen, or lions can
mourn. Further, 3. Reg. 17.
beside Helias we read of none fed in such extraordinary sort by Ravens.
Owlyglasse therefore may do well to allege as good authority for the feeding
of Paul and Anthony by a crow in the wilderness, as we can for the feeding of
Helias by Ravens; and then he shall discharge the Romish synagogue of suspicion
of telling untruth.

Daemones ita contempsit (Antonius) says the Romish breuiary, vt illis
exprobraret imbecillitatem. that is, In fest. Anton^
Antony did so contemn devils, that he reproched them with their weakness.
But holy men mentioned in scriptures did not so. therefore it is not likely,
that so holy a man would digress from their footsteps. Neither is it likely,
that they were so afraid of him, as is reported: or that he gathered monks
together; and gave them that rule, that now goes under S. Anthonies name* for
these are legendicall fables, destitute both of proof and probability.

Prisca, Agnes, Agatha, Catharine and other Saints. Our legends report wondrous
matters of S. George, that killed the Dragon. but the Romanists are ashamed of
S. George, and leave his legend out of the breuiary. The like fables are told
of S. Christopher: and yet the papists are not able to show that ever there was
a S. Christopher, or Saint Catherine in the world.

Capgraue tell strange matters, which of English papists were believed in time
past. Capgraue in Bernaco.
Saint Bernacus says he, killed a mortiferous beast at Rome, that before had
killed, and devoured much people, and cattle. but it is not like, that Bernac
could do more, then his holy father the Pope. A certain fellow, that stroke
S. Bernac was punished with swarms of flying lice: toto corpore pediculis
says Capgraue; alatis obsessus. He spoke with Angels, sailed over the sea upon
a broad stone* turned oak leaves into loaves (viz. by changing one letter)
stones into fishes, water into wine. his cow being cut in pieces, he restored
notwithstanding to life, and committed her to be kept by a wolf. Finally ke
yoaked Hearts, and made them draw in a cart. which Owlyglasse will hardly defend
to be n^ lies.

that Christ appeared to Augustine the monk, and talked familiarly with him;
Capgraue in Augustino.
and tells also how he plagued the men of Dorset with fire. But the Saints
of God in time past, did rather pray for poor men, then call for fire down
from heaven upon them. Saint Peter also, a man of as good credit, as Capgraue,
says the heavens must contain Christ, that is thither ascended, until the
time of the restoring of all things.

Bartilmew a monk came to Durrham, and saluted the crucifixe, the same wodden
crucifixe bowing down himself, says Capgraue, resaluted him again. He says
also, that he saw the devil sometime in the form of a mouse, sometime of a
cat; and that he imprisoned a Hawke two days, and made her to fast, for
killing him a little bird* and many such lies tells Capgraue of Bartilmew the
monk.

Scripsit ex ore angeli sanctus Brendanus sanctam regulam, says Capgraue, In
Brendano.
quae vsque hodie manet. that is, he wrote his rule, as he received it of an
Angel. When as a poor fellow being followed by his enemies, that meant to kill
him, fled to Brendan desiring succor, he willed him to get up upon a stone
hard by, and not to move* this done, his enemies that followed, stroke the
stone for the man, and believed the man to be the stone. He caused a fountain
also to rise out of a dry ground, and was carried into paradise* as for dead
men, he raised them to life without any difficulty. Which things no man can
pass for truth, unless he be as senseless, as the stone, that Capgraue
talks of.

Edith Capgraue writes, that when she died, Angels were heard to sing
harmoniously, In Editha.
and seen carrying her soul to heaven: that, she appeared to Dunstane being
dead, that her body remained without corruption, especially her thumb, with
which she made the sign of the cross: That she did quiet the seas, and
delivered Aldred Archbishop of York being in danger in the Adriaticke sea,
when he called upon her. All which lies, if Owlyglasse will believe; he must be
very credulous, and one of those, that are given over to believe lies. But to
make others believe, that these are no lies, he needs more eloquence, then he
has now ignorance.

In the 8. session of the council of Constance, as it is called, the popish
church affirms, that Wickleffe taught, quod deus debet obedire diabolo. That
is, that God must obey the devil* also, that Princes being in mortal sin,
are not to be obeyed. And diverse other matters never taught by Wickleffe*
which may appear first by his books; and ne^t by the articles collected
against him, and recorded by Thomas Walsingham. Neither have our adversaries
any arguments to prove the contrary, unless a man will believe those infamous
articles, which were by his adversaries objected against him after his death*
which neither law, nor reason will admit to pass for proof.

John Husse in that wicked assembly, condemning him for holding articles, which
he in open audience denied. One reported, Sess. 15.
that he should affirm, that there was a fourth person in the trinity;
others, that he should call Gregory the first, rimer, matters which he utterly
disclaymed. Yet these and many more lies that conuenticle believed of him, and
condemned him for them* and these lies of that holy man the synagogue of Rome
now commonly believes.

Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Beza and others, and the
principal agents either in shaking of the popes tyranny, or the establishing
of religion, and namely her Majesty's most noble father, her mother, her
brother, her self, her counselors and principal agens, the prince of Condey,
and his father, the Admiral of France, Henry the 4. now reigning, and diverse
others in Scotland, Germany, and otherwhere. Unto Luther Leo the tenth imputes
calumnious assertions, which he never held. Commonly the papists give out that
he taught, that if the wife would not yield to her husband, that the husband
might go unto his maid* that he died suddenly, that his body did stincke, and
many such like slanders stinking in the nostrils of all honest men. Of Bucer
they report, that he turned Jew, and died blaspheming; a matter refuted by the
testimony of his enemies, that were present at his death, and not only by his
friends. Of late they published a lying pamphlet of the revolt of Beza, and of
his death, which he yet living refuted. The slanders of Sanders, and ribaldry
of that ribald Ribadineira, which the papists receive with such applause, shall
shortly (godwilling) be made manifest to the world. Now it may appear, that
they are false, being devised by Sanders, and Rishton, two lewd lozels
unacquainted with state matters, and, as it is thought, published, and much
increased by Rob. Parsons the most notorious traitor, and infamous libeller,
that the congregation of Jesuits ever did afford us.

Pius the fifth in his letters to the Emperor most impudently affirms, In vita
Pij quinti.
that the council of Nice made the Pope (which he terms the successor of
Peter) Lord and governor of all Princes christened, and also of all provinces
and nations whatsoever, and that the same council did anathematise all, that
should contradict that authority. A matter proved to be a notorious lie, by the
acts of the council* for therein no such matter is found. The same also is
refuted by this argument, for that councels have not to do with the disposing
of temporal states.

Sixtus Quintus in his railing bull against the king of Navarre, now reigning
and swaying the scepter of France, and the Prince of Condey, publishes most
notorious lies. He says, they polluted and spoiled Churches, and with torments
killed Priests, monks and friars, and did compel men to religion with
threats, and bastonadaes; minis, verberibusque: No one point being to be
proved against them, or that they did any thing more, then the laws of arms
enforced them for their own necessary defense. The like slandrous Bulls did
Paul the third publish against Henry the 8. king of England, and Pius Quintus,
and Gregory the 13. against her Majesty.

Wherefore unless Rob. Parsons and his consorts can justify these matters to
be true; it will appear, that the Romish religion is not only maintained with
lies, but also grounded upon a pack of lies. For such as these are, an
infinite multitude of lies may be found in the Popes, and the Churches of Romes
principal records. Of which I shall have occasion, if God be pleased, to
talk more at large otherwhere.

CHAP. VI. A taste of Bellarmines unsavory falsifications.
I Would be loath to wrong any, especially in writing, where all that read may
be witnesses of the wrong, if any be offered. Wherefore to answer my
adversaries accusation, that says, I have slandered and infamed the worthy
prelate Cardinal Bellarmine, Praeface.
where I charged him, with falsifications and lies; I will now, godwilling,
justify my saying, and show, that his works are not, as Owlyglasse says,
the sword of Gedeon; but rather the sword of Goliath, whereby a man with
labor and diligence may cut off both his own head, and the head of
antichrist. The same is also like a leaden sword guilted over, and fair in
show, but nothing trenchant in proof. He might more fitly have compared them
to Augias stable, that contained an infinite heap of dung, but to be purged, if
learned men would take the pains to examine them. For my part, I do testify
before God, that they have much confirmed me in the truth, and truly affirm,
that they are more tedious to read, then hard to refute, in matters especially
that concern us. But now to come to the matter, I will offer to the reader a
taste of his falsifications and loud leasings, purposing to add more, if our
adversaries please to continue this course of examination of ours and popish
authors writings. I will also join with him his fellow Caesar Baronius with
his x. legions of lies. Not doubting, but if they understand their errors,
their faces will turn crimsin. And why not their faces as well as their
roabes, especially if they have any remaynder of their pretended Virginal
modesty?

Nice lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 13. the canon begins thus, mos antiquus
perdurat in Aegypto, vel Lybia, vel Pe^tapoli. But Bellarmine makes the canon
to begin far otherwise. Obseruandum says he, in libris vulgatis d^esse
initium huius canonis, quod tale est. ecclesia Romans semper habuit primatum. but
these last words are plainly forged, as may appear by all the copyes of the
acts of the Nicene council. neither can it excuse him, that one Paschasius
act. 16. council, chalced. has these words, or that Copus a counterfect
c^mpagnion does affirm, that a certain Abbot called Dionysius does so read
this canon for Abbots may prove forgers as well as others, and little credit is
to be given to the Popes agente in his own cause. Further Paschasius his words
so stand, that we may probably conjecture, that some latter falsary has so set
down the words of this canon, as we read them now in the t^mes of councels set
out by Papists. Finally, all authentical histories testify, that before the
council of Nice the Church of Rome was little respected: and Aeneas Siluius
does in plain terms confess so much. Neither can Parsons deny it, vnlesie he
put on his visor of impudency.

de pontif. Romans c. 31. he falsifieth Hieromes words, and peruerteth his
meaning to prove, that he called Damasus the foundation of the Church.
Hieronymus says he, in epist. ad D^masum de nomine hypostasis: super hanc
petram ecclesiam aedificata^ scio. vbi Damasum petram ecclesiae vocat. But
Hieremes words stand thus. ego nullum primum, nisi Christum sequens beatitudini
tuae, id est, cathed^ae Petri co^munione consocior super ^am petram ecclesiam
aedificatam scio. Whereby it appears that Hierome meant to follow none but
Christ, and that he meant Christ, when he speaks of the Rock. For so the
pronoune Illam, that is referred to that which is further of, does teach us.
But Bellar. to prove the Pope to be the foundation of the Church, leaves out
Christ, and for the pronounce Illam, writes hanc, like a cunning falsary.

Chalcedon. septimum est says he, caput ecclesiae, quo vtitur concilium
Chalcedonense in epistola ad Leonem. qui but tu ve^ut caput membris praeeras.
These words I say are falsely alleged. For first it cannot be proved, that
this epistle was written by the council, as Surius has recorded Act. 3.
Council. Chalced. Secondly, admit the whole epistle was not forged; yet there is
no mention made of the head of the Church, as Bellarmine affirms* for the
word Caput, in these words, quibus tu velut Caput membris praecras: is
referred to certain Priests of Leoes order, in which rank he shows himself
principal. Bellarmine therefore to make some show, leaves out both the words
going before, and the words following after, which plainly show, that the
authors of that epistle never meant to call him the head of the Church. His
falsehood may appear by the words, as they follow in that epistle Act. 3.
council. Chalced. set out by Surius. Si vbi sunt duo aut tres congregati in
nomine eius say they ibi se in medio eorum fore perhibuit, quantam circa
sacerdotes peculiaritatem potuit demonstrare, qui and patriae and labori suae
confessionis notitiam praetulerunt? quibus tu quidem sicut caput membris prae
eras in his qui tuum tenebant ordinem, beneuo lenriam praeferens: imperatores
vero ad ornandum decentissime praesidebant. The Latin is rude and barbarous
savoring of a monkish humor. But by the words we may see, that the authors of
that epistle made Leo head of priests, and men of his cote, and not of the
Church, nor council, Wherein emperors most decentely did praeside, and sit
as chief moderators: as the fathers of that council teach us.

Rome, he says that Eusebius in his cronicle anno. 44. does give them the
title of Pontifex Christianorum. Which is a mere forgery. For not the bishops
af Rome, but to Peter only, is that title given, if it be not thrust into the
text. But what belongs, and is peculierly given to Peter, may not be claymed
by every bishop of Rome. For I hope every one of them will not be called Simon,
nor an Apostle, nor the chief or first Apostle. Nor will they, I suppose,
write, as Peter did, in his second epistle: Simon Petrus seruus and apostolus
Jesus Christi. Finally I hope Clement the 8. will not write. Clemens octauus
alter Simon Petrus, and seruus and apostolus Jesus Christi.

de Monachis. c. 6. We read these words. Dicit (Lutherus) and saepissime
repetit and inculcat, Paulu^ cu^ ait, se potuisse circumducere sorore^ mulierem
1. cor. 9. voluisse dicere, se potuisse ducere vxorem. that is, Luther does
say, and often repeat, and inculcat, that Paul, when he said; he might lead
about a sister, a woman, as it is. 1. cor. 9. meant, that he might mary a
wife. But he does falsify Luthers words. For Luther says only, that the
words 1. cor. 9. do not compel us (to believe, that Paul had no wife) but
rather show, In. 1. cor. 7.
that he had a wife, and would not lead her about with him. for speaking of
this place, and of those, that collected out of it, that Paul was unmarried:
hoc says he, non cog it, verum multo magis indicat, eum habuisse vxorem, sed
eam circumducere noluisse. He does also impudently affirm, that Luther does
repeat, and inculcat that often which he is not able to show to have been
once vttred by him. He speaks also very improbably. For seeing Luther
affirmed that Paul had a wife already, it is very unlikely, that he should
say, and that often, that Paul might mary an other wife. If then he will not
be condemned both as a falsary, and a lying fellow, let him set down Luthers
words, where that is often repeated.

Luther; Voueo castitatem paupertatem, and obedientiam* dicit says Bellarmine,
formam vouendi hanc esse debere, si pie vouendum sit, voueo castitatem,
paupertatem, and obedientiam vsque ad morte^ libere, id est, vt mutare possim,
quando volo. yt is, Luther says, that this is the best form of vows, if we
will make godly vows; I do vow chastity, poverty, and obedience unto death,
but freely or conditionally, that is to say, that I may change, when I please.
But Luther speaks not one word, of the vow of poverty and monastical
obedience, nor ever thought, that any godly man might make a vow concerning
either; nor does he speak, or place his words so ridiculously, as Bellarmine
does report. All that Luther says to this purpose is this. Videtur forma voti
apud deum sic habere, De votis monast.
voueo castitatem, quam diu possibilis fuerit, si autem seruare nequi ero, vt
liceat nubere. That is in effect thus much. That form of vow seems most
pleasing to God, that is thus uttered: I vow chastity, as long as I am able
to contain, if I be not able, then that it may be lawful for me to mary. Does
it not appear, that Bellarmine has falsified Luthers words and made him,
contrary to his own doctrine, to allow vows of poverty and monastical
obedience, and to speak ridiculously, and foolishly, and far otherwise, then
ever he spoke or wrote?

chap. 31. He says, that Chrysostom in his commentaries (upon the 19. of
Math.) teaches us, that Christ by the similitude of Eunuchs would prove, that
it is easy and profitable to abstain from marriage. facile and vtile esse
abstinere a nuptiis. But like a falsary where Chrysostom has possible, there
he places facile. But many things are possible, that are not facile, and
easy.

chap. 27. he falsifieth a place of Saint Chrysostom homil. 15. in priorem ad
Timoth. He rehearses Chrysostomes words thus, and vidua in uiduitatis
professione christo consentit, id est christo nubit. But these words id est
Christo nubit, are added by Bellarmine, and that peruersely. For Christ is the
spouse of the Church, and not of every capriccious nonne,

de notis ecclesiae. c. 9. he makes Luther to speak thus: non alia via potest
homo cum deo conuenire, aut agere, quam per fidem. opera ille non curat. But
Luthers words, as they are set down in his book de captiuitate Baby Ionica.
c, de Eucharistia, which book with ye rest of his works were set out at
Wittemberge, are these. nec alia via potest homo cum deo conuenire, aut agere,
quam per fidem, id est, vt non homo operibus suis vllis, sed deus promissione
sua sit author salutis; vt omnia pendeant, portentur, seruenturque in verbo
virtutis suae. So it appears, that Bellarmine cutteth off the end of Luthers
sentence, and adds these words: opera ille non curat, to make his doctrine
odious.

Bellarmine falsifieth another place of Luther, making him to speak thus. tam
dives est homo Christianus, vt non possit perire si velit, quantumcunque male
viuat. But Luthers words in his book de Capt. Babyl. c. de baptismo, of the
edition above mentioned, stand thus: tam dives est homo Christianus, vt volens
non possit perdere salutem suam quantiscunque peccatis, nisi nolit credere.
These words quantumcunque male viuat, are added by Bellarmine, to make Luthers
doctrine seem contrary to good works.

that Calvin should say, that God is cause of sin. De notis eccles. c. 9.
The place quoted instit. lib. 1. c. 18. does acquit Calvin, and show
Bellarmine to be a falsary. for he does not teach any such matter, nor has any
such words.

Caluins instit. Ibidem.
lib. 1. c. 18.. 2. non solum permissu, sed voluntate dei homines peccant, ita
vt nihil ipsi deliberando agitent, nisi quod deus apud se decreuerit, and
arcana directione constituit. but he forgeth these words, quod dei voluntate
homines peccant, and alters the latter end of the sentence.

Lib. 3. instit. c. 23.. 24. dicit Caluinus says Bellar. lib. de notis
ecclesiae c. 9. dei non solum praeuisione, and permissione, sed etiam voluntate
in peccatum lapsum esse Adamum. But these words are no where to be found in
Calvin. for he has only these words: lapsus est primus homo, quia dominus
ita expedire censuerat.

Calvin has these words lib. 3. instit. Ibidem.
c. 24.. 14. quod aliqui verbum dei audire contemnunt, ipsorum est prauitas,
sed in hanc prauitatem a deo addicti sunt. but these words a Deo are
Bellarmines addition.

Philip Melancthon: dicit says he, ita fuisse opus dei Iudae proditionem,
Ibidem.
ac Pauli conuersionem. and these words says he, are found in his
commentaries upon the eight Chapter of the epistle to the Romans. But the place
viewed does declare his falsehood. for he has not the word ita, nor uses this
frame of sentence.

Eunomians: docebant says he, non posse homini vlla peccata nocere, Ibidem.
modo fidem habeat, vt testatur Augustinus lib. de haeres. c. 54. But he has
wronged Saint Augustine in reporting, that these are his words. Fertur
(scilicet Eunomius) says Saint Augustine, adeo fuisse bonis moribus inimicus,
vt asseueraret, quod nihil cuique obesset quorumlibet perpetratio, ac
perseuerantia peccatorum, si huius, quae ab illo docebatur fidei, particeps
esset. Let indifferent men therefore judge, whether Eunomius spoke absolutely
of faith, or of his own peculiar faith. And whether it is all one, to condemn
good works, and to say, that howsoever Christians are most carefully to walk
in Gods works; yet that they are not justified by good works, but by the
grace of God communicated to them through faith in Christ Jesus.

Origenis haeresis fuit, perdidisse Adamum imaginem dei, ad quam creatus fuit,
says Bellarmine. Ibidem.
And this he says is affirmed by Epiphanius haeres. 64. but he falsifieth
Epiphanius, and belyeth Origin in this point. for his error was not, that he
supposed man to have lost the image of God through sin, but that the soul
did loose the same, being created and joined to the body. Illud secundum
imaginem dicit Adam perdidisse: says Epiphanius speaking of Origin, and inde
dicit, corpus esse intelligendum, quando deus fecit vestes pelliceas, and illis
induit illos. for so the greek text does plainly teach us.

that Origin taught; that hell was nothing, but the horror of conscience.
Ibidem.
and this he avouches upon the credit of Hierome in epist. ad Auitum de
erroribus Origenis. But in this point also he does mistake Origin, and falsify
Hieroms words. For Hierome does not set down any such words, but only
shows, that Origin taught, ignem Gehennae and tormenta non poni in
supplicijs, sed in conscientia peccatorum. He may therefore do well to report
Hieroms words the next time better, least those, that are of Origens heresy
be therein confirmed by his false dealing.

Calvin he affirms, that he taught, that the image of God was lost in Adam;
and to prove it, does allege these words, as out of the 2. book of his
institutions c. 1.. 5. per peccatum primi hominis obliterata est coelestis
imago. But that which he says of the loosing of the image of God in Adam, is a
gross lie. for Calvin never taught, that the image of God was quite lost, but
blemished and much defaced. The words also are falsified. for he says not, as
Bellarmine reports quod imago obliterata esset, absolutely, but quod tanquam
scriptura bella calamo transuerso obliterata esset.

Epiphanius reports haeres. 64. that Proclus an heretic taught, Ibidem.
that sin did always live in the regenerat, and that concupiscence was
truly sin, and that the same was only dulled by faith, and not taken away
by baptism. He says also, that Theodoret reports as much lib. 3. haeret.
fabul. of the Messalians. But he does abuse both Epiphanius and Theodoret, and
does ascribe that unto them, which they never taught. Theodoret lib. 4. haeret.
fabul. cap. de Messalianis does not so much, as mention concupiscence, or utter
any such words. but rather contrary to Bellarmines report of them he says,
that the Messalians taught, that baptism like a razor cut off all former
sins.

Haec est ipsissima sententia says Bellarmine, Lutheri art. 2. and 31. Ibidem.
etc. item Philippi in locis communibus c. de peccato Originis, and Caluini
lib. 4. instit. c. 15.. 10. scilicet peccatum in renatis semper viuere. but in
no one of these, can he find, that sin is said to live in the regenerat. For
our doctrine is contrary, and every christian professes, that he ought to
mortify his concupiscences and earthly members, and to be quickened in the
spirit. Wherefore either the man lies intolerably, or else he does falsely
allege the words of Luther, Melancthon, Calvin. And that shall appear more
plainly, when Robert Parsons goes about to justify his old acquaintance
Bellarmine.

The chief error of the Nouatians says Bellarmine, was, that there is no
power in the church, to reconcile men to God, but by baptism. And this he
goes about to prove out of Theodoret lib. 3. haeret. fabul. c. de Nauato. But
Theodoret does convince his false report both of his own words, and of this
heresy. For first he shows, that Nauatus did deny to reconcile those, that
had fallen in persecution. And afterward, that his followers did utterly deny
the use and grace of repentance. Poenitentiam a suo conuentu arcent penitus
says Theodoret speaking of the Nouatians. It is also apparent, that they did
not restrain remission of sins to baptism only.

Nouatians, he tells us, that Cornelius witnesses, that the Nouatians
taught, Ibidem.
that the Church had no power to reconcile men to God, but by baptism, and
that such as were baptized, were not by the bishop to be anointed with
Chrisme. And this he says is found in Eusebius his history lib. 6. c. 33. but
neither has Eusebius nor Cornelius any such words.

de eucharistia c 9. he has these words, Dixit (Cyprianus) latere sub specie
visibili panis deum verum. but Cyprian says only, diuinam essentiam
ineffabiliter se visibili sacramento infundere. And there is no small
difference betwixt these two propositions. for the divine essence may work in
sacraments after an unspeakable sort, albeit Christ God and man be not
contained under the visible form of bread in the eucharist, or water in
baptism: Especially after the form imagined by papists.

Hilary does often repeat these words, Christum naturaliter esse in nobis per
sumptionem eucharistiae. But the same are not to be found in the 8. book of
Hilary de Trinitate, once, which he says are found often.

Cyrill he says, Ibidem iubet vt flexo genu and in adorantium morem accedant
ad eucharistiam* And these words he supposes to be in his fifth mystagogicall
and catechisticall instruction. But neither are the words there to be found,
nor has he any such commandment, nor did he ever believe or teach, that the
sacrament was to be worshipped after the popish manner.

Augustine de Trinit. lib. 3. c. 10. he would make his reader believe, Lib. 2.
de eucharist. c. 24.
that our Savior Christ appeared to the eyes of mortal men in the forms of
bread and wine. A matter never uttered, nor thought of by S. Augustine, nor to
be found in that place, or otherwhere in his writings.

Augustine he says, that in his 12. book contra Faustum c. 10. he teaches,
that the faithful receive that blood with their mouth, wherewith they were
redeemed. And in the 20. chapter of the same book, that they drink that,
which issued out of Christ his side. But S. Augustine has not one word of
receiving of the blood of our redemption with our mouth* neither does he mean,
that we do properly and carnally drink his blood, or with corporeal
instruments.

Hesychius lib. 2. in Leuit. cap. 8. he quoteth these words lib. 2. de
eucharistia c. 32. sanctum altar esse locum, vbi sanctus sanctorum requiescit.
but the same are falsely fathered upon that father, being neither to be found
in that chapter, nor otherwhere.

Lib. 1. de missa. c. 19.
Out of Chrysostomes homil. 79. ad populum Antioch. he cites these words,
altari assistens sacerdos, pro terrarum orb, pro episcopis, pro ecclesia, pro
gubernantibus ecclesiam iubetur deo offerre. but Chrysostom has no such
words of the priests offering, but says, that the people of Antioch do pray
for all these sorts of people.

Ibidem.
He affirms, that Chrysostom homil. 72. in Matthew. says, that the eucharist
is offered, pro infirmis, pro sanis, pro terrae fructibus. but he has no such
like words, either there, or any other place: but he says only, that we pray
in the celebration of the eucharist for such as are possessed with devils, for
sick persons, and such like.

Hippolytus in his oration of the end of the world has these words, venite
pontifices, qui pure mihi sacrificium die, nocteque obtulistis, ac pretiosum
corpus, and sanguinem meum immolastis mihi quotidie. Bellarmine lib. 1. de
missa c. 15. leaves out these words, qui pure mihi sacrificium die nocteque
obtulistis: least we should know, that he speaks of spiritual sacrifices, and
not of the mass, that is seldom said in the night.

Lib. 2. de missa c. 9. speaking of the multitude of private masses, he
endeavors to prove the same by a most ancient custom, as he says, and for
this end alleges an epistle of Telesphorus, and a testimony out of Gregory
homil. 8. in euangel. but not only the epistle of Telesphorus is counterfeit,
but both the same, and Gregory's testimony is falsely alleged. for neither of
them speak any one word of such a custom, or of the custom of saying three
masses in one night. In the same place also prosper is falsely alleged. For
he speaks not one word of offering one sacrifice twice in a short time.

lib. 4. de eucharist. c. 29. he falsely alleges Gregory Nazianzen in laudem
Gorgoniae, Cyrill of Jerusalem Catechis. 5. mystagog. Eusebius. Emissenus homil.
5. de Paschate. for not one of these speaks one word of adoration of the
sacrament, as he affirms most falsely.

It were infinite to touch all the places falsified by Bellarmine; and I
suppose, that these are more, then our wooden Owlyglasse, alias Woodward will
answer. And yet these are but falsifications of one kind. but he has also
run into diverse other kinds of falsifications. ff. ad leg. Cornel. de falsis.
For whereas law does declare them to be falsaries, that shall either suborne
false witnesses, or father bastards upon those, who are not their true fathers,
or that shall in a testament add a legacy supposed untruely to himself, or
that shall commit any falsehood about coins, or laws; it is an easy matter
in every of these points to charge Bellarmine with falsification.

For first he has produced infinite false witnesses, as for example Clement,
Martialis, Anacletus, Africanus, Abdias, Amphilochius, Leontius, Paulinus,
Simeon Metaphrastes, and such like false compagnions, that either write fables,
or take on them false names.

Secondly, he has fathered infinite base and paultry sermons, and epistles,
and other treatises upon Cyprian, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Cyrill, and other fathers.

Thirdly, he has alleged diverse counterfeit decretales under the name of
Euaristus, Telesphorus, Alexander, Marcellus, Syricius, Innocentius, Gelasius,
and others, wherein they mention diverse prerogatives due to the Church of Rome,
and to themselves, setting down as it were false legacies, with their own
false hands, in false and forged testaments or records.

Fourthly, for the original scriptures he has oftentimes alleged
apocryphal writings, and the old latin translation, albeit differing from
the original text, corrupting after a sort, Gods eternal testament.

Fifthly, for the pure writings of the fathers, he has oftentimes given unto
us the dross of Peter Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, and other schoolmen: and with
them has also joined the corrupt testimonies of legends, and such like trash.

Finally, he has cited infinite false canons, and counterfeit councels, and
acts of councels. And this I will justify by diverse thousands of examples, if
the wooden detector, or any of his partakers will stand to the quarrel, which
he and Rob. Parsons have begun. I have also in diverse treatises set out against
Bellarmine, discovered diverse thousands of his corruptions. I hope therefore,
that our adversary hereafter will say, that I have not slandered that voluminous
Cardinal Bellarmine: especially, when he shall have perused the note following
concerning his untruths and leasings. Which now according to my promise, I
purpose sincerely, and truly to deliver.

CHAP. VII. A note of certain notorious untruths, and lies boldly avouched by
Bellarmine.
NExt after falsifications, we are to report some few untruths boldly
avouched by Card. Bellarmine. which albeit he uttered, being yet in minoribus,
as they call it; yet we are not therefore to esteem them to be less
material, seeing he is the Popes principal proctor.

Habemus in eodem testamento veteri says he, Heliam and Helizeum ac filios
prophetarum, Lib. de Monach. c. 5.
sine vxoribus and diuitijs in hoc mundo vixisse. That is, we learn in the
same old testament, that Helias and Helizeus, and the sons of the Prophets
lived without wives, and riches in this world. A plain and evident untruth
refuted by a plain text of scripture 2. Reg. 4.1. where we read, how a
certain woman of the wives of the Prophets cried to Elizeus. there also we
read, that she had sons likewise. I doubt not therefore, but Owlyglasse will
confess this to be a lie.

that almost all the fathers write, that John Baptist was the first founder of
monks, and eremites. Ioannem Baptistam says he, Ibidem.
Monachorum and Eremitarum principem fuisse scribunt fere omnes patres. and
afterward he names Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Hierome, Cassian, Sozomenus,
Isidorus, and Bernard. But this is a notarious untruth consisting of diverse
parts. For first this number is far from almost all the fathers. Secondly,
Nazianzen in the place quoted does not speak so much as one word of
monastical life, In laudem Basili^.
much less of the vow of John Baptiste. Thirdly, Chrysostom and Hierome
speak not of cloister monks, but of ermites, that lived in the wilderness.
Fourthly, Cassian collat. 18. c. 6. does make Paul and Antony, and not John B
ptiste, the founders of ermites life. Fifthly, Sozomen, lib. 1. c. 12. speaks
of Ermites and that not according to his own, but according to other men's
opinions, Sixthly, Isidore and Bernarde do not say, that John Baptist was the
first founder of eremitical, and monkish life but rather, that Eremites went
into the wilderness after the example of Elias and John baptist. Finally I.
Baptist in nothing was like to monks. for he was not shut up within a cloister,
nor did he forswere marriage, nor observe a certain rule, but was the
forerunner of our Savior, the minister of baptism, and a great prophet and a
most excellent good man. Furthermore he had course clothing, and a thin diet,
and was no tamperer in matters of state. Contrariwise the Iebusites, and other
monks live in gorgeous houses, fare dayntily, are cladde richely, drink wine,
and albeit they be a sort of locusts, yet neither care to eat locustes, nor
wild honey. Further they observe a certain rule, forswear marriage, and
disturb states and common welthes, and are neither Priests nor Prophets, nor
any way profitable for the Church or commonwealth.

Tertullian and Cyprian he says, that both of the^ spoke of religious women or
nuns, and such as by solemn vow had consecrated themselves to God. Vterque
loquitur says he, de virginibus religiosis, Lib. de monach. c. 5.
and p^r solennem professione^ deo consecratis. A matter most untrue* for
albeit Tertullian wrote de virginibus velandis, and Cyprian de habitu virginum:
yet ye vele and habit was such as those fathers thought fitting for all
christian women. For no man does think it fit, that all christian women should
become nonnes and religious women. Secondly, neither of those fathers talks
of any solemn vow, or denies liberty to those Virgins to mary, or thought
it fit they should be shut up in cloisters, or governed by peculier orders or
rules. But popish nuns make solemn vows, and after them may not mary.
Beside that they live in cloisters, and are subject to rules, and yet which is
most strange, are not so good maids as those, which Tertullian and Cyprian
talks of, though no votaryes.

vere primi fuerunt monachi Christiani, says Bellarmine. that is, most truly
the Apostles were the first monks among Christians. But it is not the first
lie, Ibidem.
that he made among the Romanistes. Howbeit a lie it is, and that very
apparent. For Christ sent his apostles abroad into the world to teach and
baptize, and not to live in eremitages or cloisters. Secondly, the Apostles
never took bond of vow upon the^, nor lived under monkish law. But says he
they had all things common. So had also all the first christians* yet it is
ridiculous to say, that all Christians of those times were monks. He alleges
also Saint Augustines words, lib. 17 de ciuit dei. c. 4. hoc votum potentissimi
vouerunt. but by votum there, he understands no monkish vows of obedience
chastity and pouerly; but of leaving all for Christ's sake* which manner of
vow not only the Apostles, but all christians also do make, and perform, as
often as occasion requires.

de monachis. c. 5. speaking of Luther: asserit mulieres, says he, non nisi ad
matrimonium creatas fuisse. that is, he affirms, that women were created for
no other purpose, but for marriage* but this is a most impudent untruth. For
Luther has no such words, nor meaning. In. 1. c^ 7.
For he affirms only, and viros and mulieres ad generanda^ sobolem creatos
esse, that is, that both men and women were created for bringing of children
into the world. So it is apparent, that he foisteth in his words, non nisi, and
turns that to women, which Luther spoke both of men and women, and finally
makes Luther to exclude all other ends of the creation of women, where he
speaks of one end, and excludes none besides that one.

Luther taught, that it was all one to consult, whether a man should mary a
wife, as if he should consult, whether he should eat and drink. dicit. says
Bellarmine, idem esse consultare, sit ne duce^da vxor, and sit ne comedendum
and bibendum. But Luthers words do plainly discover his packing and lying. In
procem. exeg. in ^. cor. 7.
Stultum est dubitare says he, an mulieres copulandae sint matrimonio, vel an
aliqua in vxore^ d^cenda sit. perinde enim quaeri posse, an edendum, vel
bibendum sit. And his meaning is, that when a man's frailty will not permit him
to contain, it is then all one to ask whether a man shall mary a wife, or
whether he shall eat and drink. Now between these words, which are ascribed
to Luther by Bellarmine, and the words written by Luther, there is great
difference* for Luther speaks indefinitly First, and says, that it is a
folish thing to doubt, whether women are to be joined in marriage, or not: and
then in case he cannot contain, whether a man is to mary a wife or no* and
Thirdly, he talks of doubting, and not of consulting betwixt which there is
no small difference* for of things, which we are to resolve according to our
own knowledge, it is folly to consult with others yet may we doubt, before we
resolve* so it appears, that Bellarmine leaves out the indefinit proposition
of Luther, and expresses not Luthers case, where he reports his words, and
falsely and leudly changes doubting into consultation.

that Luther taught, that Moses commanded all the Jews to marry, so that it
was not lawful by any means to be without a wife in the old testament. De
monachis c. 6.
dicit says Bellarmine Moysem praecepisse omnibus Iudaeis matrimonium, ita vt
nullo modo licuerit in vetere testamento carere vxore. But the words of Luther
do plainly convince him to have vttred untruth. In. 1. cor. 7.
For he says only, in Iudaismo neminem non coniugatum esse oportuisse: that
is, that the Jews ought to be married. But he does not say, non licuisse vllo
modo in veteri testamento carere vxore, as Bellarmine affirms. Nor does he
absolutely deny all exceptions to the ordinary rule and course. Finally; he
talks of the custom of Jews, and not of an express written law, whereas
Bellarmine notwithstanding makes him to speak of a written law.

Athanasius tells, how Antony the ermite did hear holy Angels in a vision to
say that all his sins were remitted, when first he entered into a monastical
life. Lib. de monach. c. 6.
Testatur Athanasius in vita Antonij says Bellarmin, B. Antonium in visione
audiuis^e sanctos angelos dicentes, omnia peccata sibi remissa fuisse, quando
monasticam vitam suscepit. A notorious untruth, notwithout some touch of
forgery also* for first, ye very discourse of Antonies life, that passes under
ye name of Athanasius is forged. Secondly that counterfect fellow says no
more, but that Antonies former sins by Christ's bounty were sopited or covered.
quod priora peccata Christi bonitate fuissent sopita. of remission of si^ by
virtue of a monastical Coule, which Bellarmine intends to prove, there is no
inkeling.

de monachis. c. 13. He has these words; Augustinus, Bernardus, Thomas
existimant hoc praecepto, diliges dominum deum tuu^ ex toto cord tuo, simul
imperari medium and indicari finem; ideo docent, non posse impleri perfect hoc
praeceptum in hac vita; and tamen non esse praeuaricatorem, Lib. de perfect.
iustitiae.
qui non perfect illud implet. And again docet idem Augustinus motus
inuoluntarios concupiscentiae, licet hoc praecepto prohibiti sint, tamen adeo
non esse peccata, vt non sit opus dicere pro eis dimitte nobis debita nostra.
But in these words he laypeth up together diverse round lies. For first false it
is-that Saint Augustine says, that such as fulfill not the law, whereby we
are to love God with all our soul and all our strength, are not thereby made
transgressors, de spirit. and litera^ c. vlt.
but rather the contrary* for he shows, that it is necessary for every man to
give that he may receive, and to forgive, that it may be forgiven him, and in
the latter end of the book de perfectione iustitiae, he teaches us, necesse
esse dicere, dimitte nobis debita nostra, that it is necessary for us to say,
forgive us our trespasses. Secondly, Saint Augustine does not deny, that
motions troubling us against our wills are sins. Thirdly, he speaks not
one word, of showing the end, and commanding the means. Fina^ly, neither does
Bernard, nor Thomas Aquinas so write, as Bellarmine affirms* would his
cardinalship therefore prove, what he written, and verify his assertion by
their words, he should deliver himself from a note of great falsehood and
untruth.

Corinthians 9. chapter: Lib. de monach.
quo toto capite says he, Paulus conatur ostendere, se plus fecisse, quam sibi
esset praeceptum, and propterea singularem gloriam apud deum meruisse. And
afterward he says, ita exposuerunt omnes patres. that is, the fathers do also
expound the Apostle, viz. that it may appear, that he taught works of
superogation. But neither does Paul in the whole chapter, nor in any part of
the chapter show, that he did more, then was commanded, nor does he signify,
that therefore he merited any singular glory. Secondly, it is untrue, that all
the Fathers do so expound the Apostle, as Bellarmine reports. for he cites
none, but Chrysostom, Ambrose and Augustine: whereof Ambrose in 1. cor. 19.
does not so much as once mention works of supererogation. Chrysostom
commenting upon the same chapter, talks of works done over and above the
thing commanded. But he speaks not of the whole law, which requires all,
that we can do; but of some one particular precept. Saint Augustine lib. de
opere Monachorum c. 5. says, that Paul did erogate more (erogasse amplius)
because he did remit that stipend, which he might have exacted. So it
appears, that he speaks of doing more, then was required at his hands, by
one particular precept; but not more, then the whole law required. Finally,
none of these fathers that he speaks of, mentions singular glory, nor
says, that the same is due for works of supererogation.

Iustine Martyr Apolog. 2. and Tertullian Apologet. c. 9. he tells untruth of
them both. Justinius ait says he, apud nullam gentem coli Caelibatum, vt apud
Christianos, vbi sunt plurimi vtriusque sexus vsque ad senectutem in
virginitate permanentes* quod idaem scribit Tertullianus. But neither does the
one, nor the other speak de Caelibatu, in which state of life both widowers
and hoore-mongers may live, but de virginitate, that is, of chastity and
virginity, a matter, with which the Romanists have not much to do, albeit
their monks, friars, and priests be Caelibes.

Hieromes words in epist. ad Eustoch. de virginitate. for Hierome says not,
fuisse suo tempore in coenobijs homines omnis aetatis pueros, viros, senes: as
Bellarmine reports lib. de monachis c. 35. for he mentions no boys, but
deuideth the whole company into senes and paruulos, that is, into the elder
sort, and such as were nouices, and paruuli. By which, not children are to be
understood, but those, that were newly entered, albeit men of ripe years.

de nocis ecclesiae c. 9. he signifies, that we confess, that the doctrines
taught by the Papists were also holden by the fathers. He says directly, that
Calvin in diverse places of his Institutions confesses, that he dissenteth from
all antiquity. Finally, speaking of the Centuriastes: in singulis Centurijs
says he, ad finem quarti capitis annotant omnes fere doctores illius seculi
docuisse ea dogmata, quae nos tuemur. All which three points are so many
untruths. for neither do we confess, that the doctrine of the papists,
wherein we dissent from them, is ancient: nor does Calvin in any place
affirm, that he dissenteth from all antiquity: nor do the writers of the
centuries either in so many places, or any one place confess, that all the
doctors of every age almost, did teach the doctrines maintained by papists. Nor
finally does it follow; because Calvin, and they of Magdeburge, or other private
men do hold strange points of doctrine, that all our Churches concur with
them; or because in some one point, or two they differ from us, that therefore
they maintain the whole doctrine of the papists. Wherefore as his premises be
false, so his collections upon them are fond, foolish and foppish.

that the Eunomians taught, that no sins could hurt a man, so he had says. And
that this was Simon Magus his heresy to hold, that a man was justified by
grace, and not by works. Eunomiani docebant non posse homini vlla peccata
nocere, modo fidem habeat, vt testatur Augustinus lib. de haeresib. c. 54. And
again: haec erat impijssima haeresis Simonis, qui dicebat hominem saluari per
gratiam, non per operas iustas. And these heresies he affirms to be holden by
Luther, Calvin, and Brentius and others. But to cast some good color upon his
accusation, he has made diverse gross lies. First, the Eunomians taught not,
that no sins could hurt a man, so he had faith: but so he were partaker of that
faith, which he taught. Haeres. 54.
Docebat Eunomius says S. Augustine, nihil obesse cuiquam quorumlibet
peccatorum perpetrationem, and perseuerantiam, modo eius, quam ille docebat,
fidei particeps esset. Secondly, neither does any of us, nor did Luther, or
Calvin, or any true Christian ever hold, that perseverance in sin does hurt
no man* nay we say, that he that believes truly, works also by charity. Why
then does he charge us so impudently with this error? Thirdly, we speak of a
true faith, and not of the heresy of Eunomius. Fourthly, not Simon Magus, but
the Apostle Paul taught, that we are saved by grace. As for the disciples of
Simon, they taught, that men are saved by the grace of Simon. Lib. 1. aduers.
haeres. c. 20.
Docebant says Irenaeus, seruari homines secundum gratiam Simonis, non
secundum operas iustas. Fifthly, we say anathema to all, that believe to be
saved by Simons grace, or the Simoniacal Popes indulgences. Are the papists
then not ashamed, to see their champion ouerlash so far in the report of
these matters? Finally, we do not deny, but good works are the way, we are to
walk in, if we mean to attain the kingdom of heaven, though not the causes
of obtaining that kingdom.

that as Florinus taught, that God was the author of sin, Lib. de notis
eccles. c. 9.
so Calvin did likewise teach. Florini haeresis erat says Bellarmine, deum
esse causam peccatorum. And again, eadem sine vllo pudore docet Caluinus lib.
1. instit. c. 18.. 2. Non solum permissu inquit, sed etiam voluntate dei
homines peccant. etc. and lib. 3. c. 23.. 24. dicit non solum dei praeuisione
and permissione, sed etiam voluntate in peccatum lapsum esse Adamum. and infra
c. 24. 14. quod, inquit, aliqui audire verbum dei contemnunt, ipsorum est
prauitas, sed in hanc prauitatem a deo addicti sunt, vt in eis potentiam suam
and seueritatem ostendat. He does say also, that Luther, Peter Martyr, and
Melancthon held the same opinion. Dicit Melancthon in comment. in c. 8. ad
Romanos says he, ita fuisse opus dei Iudae proditionem, ac Pauli conuersionem.
But here needs a fellow with a talye, to score up the Cardinals maine lies.
For first Calvin does expressly deny, that God is the author of sin, as may
appear by his first book of his institutions chapt. 18. Secondly, it came
never in Luthers, Peter Martyrs, or Melancthons mind, to hold any such wicked
opinion, as Bellarmine does ascribe unto them. Thirdly, Calvin has not these
words, non solum permissu, sed etiam voluntate dei homines peccare; or that
God is author, or cause of sin. Nay he directly teaches, that the next cause
of sin, is the deprauation of man's will. Fourthly he forgeth lies, where he
says, that Calvin writes, that men are addicted to do evil by God, and that
Adam did sin by the will of God. for neither of these points will be found in
his third book of Caluins institutions, from whence Bellarmine would seem to
derive the^. Fifthly, he does impudently and without shame charge Luther and
Peter Martyr with teaching, that God is author of sin. And if Robert Parsons
be not able to allege their words, out of which this may be proved, he
cannot deny, but that the Cardinal is a liar. Finally, he does slander Philip
Melancthon, and without color belie him* for if Melancthon had taught any such
wicked doctrine, as he reports; then would he never have failed to set down
his words. Which not being done, we will not fail to charge him with untruth*
which I doubt not but Rob. Parsons will discharge him of, if he can.

Origenis fuit error, says Bellarmine, infernum nihil esse, nisi conscientiae
horrorem, test Hieronymo in epistola ad Auitum. Ibidem.
idem docet Caluinus lib. 3. instit. c. vltimo.. vlt. But he does impudently
belie Calvin. for he never thought, much less taught any such matter. if he
had done, Bellarmine uses not to conceal his words. He belyeth also both
Hierome and Origin, as I have showed ^ the chapter ^ing before.

that in England a woman is our chief bishop. Et iam reipsa says he, Lib. de
notis eccles. c. 9.
Caluinistis in Anglia mulier quaedam est summus pontifex. A shameless lie of
the Popes chief parasite. for albeit we give her Majesty supreme authority in
ecclesiastical ^am^es; yet the same does not include any power of ministerial
(...) in preaching the word, and administering the sacraments, or using the
keys; nor does it comprehend more, then does belong to the French king, and
all other kings, if they will take it, and not suffer the same to be usurped by
Antichrist, and his adherents. His slandrous words, where he like a slave of
antichrist does call us Caluinists, does show his had humor, and how without
lying and railing, neither he, nor his consorts can maintain their credit.

Proclus Haereticus apud Epiphanium haeres. 64. says Bellarmine, Ibidem.
dicebat peccatum in renatis semper viuere. concupiscentiam enim vere esse
peccatum, nec tolli per baptismum, sed sopiri per fidem, quod idem docuerunt
Meslaliani haeretici apud Theodoretum lib. 4. de haeret. fabulis. haec est
ipsissima sententia Lutheri artic. 2. and 31. Item Philippi in locis communibus
c. de peccato Originis, and Caluini lib. 4. instit c. 15.. 10. But to report
somewhat, that may tend to slander us, he has reported a number of lies all
upon a heap. for neither did Proclus say, that concupiscence was sin, and
that it was not taken away by baptism, but only made dull by faith: nor did
the Messalians teach any such matter. nor does either Epiphanius say that of
Proclus, or Theodoret of the Messalians, that Bellarmine reports. nor does
either Luther, or Melancthon, or Calvin teach, that sin does live always in
the regenerat. Proclus believed, that the body was vinculum animae, and that
the souls were created before the body: which was also the heresy of Origin.
But this which Bellarmine talks of, he never taught, nor was any such thing
condemned in him as an heresy. Luther, Melancthon, Calvin and we all do
hold, that every christian man ought to mortify his earthly members, and
concupiscences, and that some do it more, some less. Neither does any man
teach, that concupiscence does reign, or live in the regenerat, as this lying
and slandrous mouth affirms.

Nouatus denied reconciliation to such as had fallen in time of persecution,
Ibidem.
or as Bellarmine says, power to reconcile men to God, otherwise then by
baptism, he charge Calvin with this heresy, as if Calvin did deny
reconciliation to repentant sinners, or had said, that the church has no power
to reconcile such as are fallen. As not this therefore gross impudency, to lie
so manifestly? But says he, Calvin denied, that there was any sacrament of
repentance, beside baptism. as if he, that denied this, must needs say, that
the church has no power to reconcile sinners to God. This certes, is not only
untruth, but want also of all understanding, and modesty.

that Luther and Calvin denying freewill, do fall into the heresy of
Manicheisme. Manichaeorum est, inquit Hieronymus, says Bellarmine, Ibidem.
hominum damnare naturam, and liberum auferre arbitrium. and Augustinus de
haeres. c. 46. peccatorum originem, inquit, non tribuunt Manichaei libero
arbitrio. idem aperte sectarij omnes. Now by sectaries he understands all,
that profess the truth. Afterward he does specially name Luther and Calvin.
but if he had any shame, he would not have said, that either Luther, or Calvin
does condemn the nature of man, as the Manicheyes do, or teach that man does
sin necessarily, and not by his freewill. And albeit they deny the force of
man's will (which is called commonly liberum arbitrium) to be sufficient to
understand the will of God, or to perform the same; yet it does not therefore
follow, that they savor of Manicheisme. But how the papists savor of this
heresy, we have showed heretofore.

Ho^ tamen est magis impius Caluinus Manichaeo, quod Manichaeus deo malo
tribuat peccatorum originem, Caluinus deo bono. Herein, says Bellarmine,
Ibidem.
does Calvin show himself more wicked, then the Manichey, because he
attributed unto an evil god the beginning and cause of sin, and Calvin to a
good God. But if he passed not the Manicheyes, and all other heretics in
impudent lying, he would not have thus falsely affirmed this of Calvin, who in
his first book of institutions chap. 18. does expressly prove, that God is
not the author of sin; and in all places does detest this opinion. Why then
did not Bellarmine allege his words, if he had said any such matter? In the
place quoted certes he teaches the contrary of that which Bellarmine
affirms, and belloweth out against him.

that all of us teach, that the visible church has been lost now this many
years. Ibidem.
ecclesiam visibilem a multis seculis perijsse says he, and nunc solum esse in
septentrionalibus partibus, vbi ipsi sunt, docent omnes, praecipue Caluinus
lib. 4. instit. c. 2.. 2. But he does belie Calvin, and all the rest. for we
believe, that in Italy there is a visible church now, albeit the Pope see it
not. and that the church at all times consisted not of spirits, but of men
visible, albeit every one did not know them. neither do we say, that the
church at any time shall fail, or has failed. nor is this lying cardinal
able to prove it out of our writings.

Luther, Melancthon, and Calvin he affirms, that they cannot deny, Ibidem.
but that the seeds of Arianisme are sown in their writings. Which is a lie
most odious and malicious. for all the points of Arianisme they not only
detested, but have learnedly refuted. and those proofs that Bellarmine
brings in his preface to his treatise, de Christo, are nothing but railing
terms, and proofs of his own malice.

Iouinian taught, that a man after baptism could not sin, Ibidem.
especially if he were truly baptized, and the same error he does impute to
Calvin. But he lies both of the one and the other. for neither did Iouinian
teach so, nor Calvin: though by his lying reports he do endeavor to conioyne
them in one opinion.

Hierome does impute these heresies to Vigilantius, first, that he taught, that
the bodies of the Saints were unclean, and to be thrown out: next, that the
prayers of the Apostles and Martyrs are not heard: and lastly, that the
ministers of the Church ought to be married. But if Bellarmine do say, that in
these three points we agree with Vigilantius, Ibidem.
as he does; then does he make a threefold lie. For neither do we allow those,
that would have men's bodies thrown out to the beasts of the field, and fowls
of the air, or otherwise use the bodies of holy men departed this life
irreverently; nor do we doubt, but that God does hear the prayers of the
church triumphant; nor do we think any man is to be constrained either to
marry or not to marry. Would the^ Bellarmine show more plain and true dealing
in his disputations, his readers would better like of him, and his cause.

Pelagius he affirms, that he taught that righteousness is lost by every
little sin, Ibidem.
and that therefore every sin is mortal. and this says he, is confirmed by
the testimony of Hierome lib. 2. contra Pelagianos. But neither was this the
error of Pelagius, who rather, as the papists suppose and teach, held, that a
regenerat man may be without all sin, and that he is able to perform the law;
nor does Hierome affirm any such thing of Pelagius.

Zuinglius he reports, that he did simply deny original sin to be in every
man. He says also, Ibidem.
that Calvin and Bucer deny original sin to be in the children of the
faithful. Matters utterly false, and which by the whole course of their
writing is refuted. neither does it follow, albeit the children of the
faithful be holy, that therefore they are not borne in original sin. For
this holiness they do not otherwise ascribe unto them, but in regard of
spiritual regeneration, and remission of sins. But if it be Pelagianisme to
teach, that original sin is not in all men, then are the papists Pelagians
by Bellarmines confession, which exempt the blessed virgin from this sin.

Xenaias persa primus palam asseruit, says Bellarmine, Christi and sanctorum
imagines non esse venerandas. testis Nicephorus lib. 16. c. 27. But this lie is
confuted by the law of God against the worship of images, by S. Augustine, that
condemns Marcellina for worshipping and burning incense to the images of Jesus
and Paul, by Epiphanius and other fathers, which I have cited as witnesses
against the idolatry of papists in my former challenge. He does also falsify
Nicephorus, in adding these words primus palam, unto him.

de notis ecclesiae: he tells us, how Dominick raised three dead men to
life, and that he and Francis did many miracles, as they are record do in the
discourse of their lives. He says also, that Francis de Paula did great
miracles, and that Xauier a Iebusite did cure deaf and dumb men, and those
that were sick of the palsy, and restored one dead man to life. But all these
report^ of miracles are nothing but miraculous lies. for Ignatius doing no
miracles, how is it likely that Xauier should do so many?

how Luther died suddenly, that Oecolampadius was found dead in his bed, lying
down in good health, that Carolstadius was killed by the devil, that Calvin
died eaten of worms, as did Antiochus and Herod and others. Lies devised by
men hired to rail upon honest men, and refuted by the histories of their life
and death, and by the testimony of all that were present at their ends.

de eucharistia c. 6. he has these words: Irenaeus probat Christum esse
creatorem, ex eo quod panis fit corpus Christi per consecrationem. But Irenaeus
has no such matter. nay if he should have used any such argument, then must it
follow, that Christ's body is created, as often as mass is said. Furthermore it
appears by the place of Irenaeus lib. 4. contr. haeres. c. 34. that he
disputes not against those, that denied Christ to be the creator, but which
denied God to be the creator. And that he proves, not as says Bellarmine,
because by consecration the bread is made Christ's body, but because heretics
offered to God bread, which by consecration was made Christ's body, and because
this sacrifice had been ungrateful, unless it had consisted of Gods
creatures.

Finally, because it were long to set down the particulars of all sorts of
lies uttered by Bellarmine, this I do give the reader to understand in
general, that almost all his reports of his lying legends, unwritten
traditions, feyned miracles, new devised prophecies, and of the fathers
testimonies concerning the special points of the late Romish religion
established in Trent, are either plain lies, or untruly let down by him. and
that shall every man perceive, that lists to read my books de missa
papistica, de Pontifice Romans de purgatorio, de ecclesia, de concilijs, de
monachis and others set out against him; especially if he list diligently to
compare the fathers writings with that poison, which he like a spider has
sucked out of them.

CHAP. VIII. A Catalogue of certain lies and falsifications of Caesar
Baronius, taken out of a small part of the beginning of his first book of
Annals.
NOw least Bellarmine should seem to be in lying and forging singular, I will
adioine unto him his fellow Caesar Baronius a cardinal forger and liar, and
one of all the authors that ever I read, that most impudently abuses and
detorteth scriptures contrary to the intention of the holy ghost to serve his
own humor.

Romish church in form of a woman, with a heavy wooden cross on her
shoulder, and the triple crown upon her left hand, with two great keys of the
Popes sellar, as it should seem, hanging down under it, and on the one side
placing this word, vicit haereses, and on the other, subegit gentes: he does
give us to understand, that he means to tell little truth in his book, that
tells so many lies in the first front and face of it. For first it is most
untrue, that this Romish church, that is now possessed of the triple crown,
was ever subject to the cross of Christ Jesus. For the Pope, he claymeth a
power above all Emperors, and lives in all delights and pleasures, and though
he carry with him headlong into hell great multitudes of souls; yet may no man
say to him, domine cur ita facis? His cardinals also and other adherents live
like princes without all fear and danger, unless it be in regard they fear
their panches. Finally, all these persecute others and are not persecuted
themselves.

Christ gave the keys to the Pope, and to his adherents. For he gave them to
Peter, and to such as should succeed him in feeding Christ's lambs, and that
by preaching the Gospel and administering the sacraments, and ruling the Church
according to instructions given them by Christ, and now contained in the
Apostles writings. But the Pope is now become an earthly potentate; he feeds
not, but rather cutteth the throats of Christ's lambs: his followers have
adulterated the faith, and changed the institution of Christ's sacraments and
now do rather handle clauas quam claues: that is rather clubbes, then keys,
murdring as many, as will not suffer the Pope, and his mass priests with
their counterfect keys, to creep into the secrets, both of their
consciences, and their worldly estates.



Baronius show in all his voluminous legends, that the true Church in time
paste did worship the wooden cross, as the Pope, and Baronius, and others do.
If then he by his wooman represent the true Church, he lies. if he
re-represent the Romish church, and the purple hoar apocalypse 17. He says
truly. For with the superstitious worship of the cross, and the Popes tyranny
and false doctrine she is much oppressed, and grievously burdened. Yet that is
nothing to this purpose,

Baronius represents unto us in this figure, ye Saracenes, Turks and
Gentiles have prevailed against the pope, and his followers, as may appear by
diverse disastrous attempts made against them for the regayning of the land of
Palestine commonly called the holy land. Baronius therefore plainly coggeth,
where he tells us, how the popes have prevailed against the Gentiles. for all
the victoryes they have gotten, have rather been to the prejudice of christian
princes from whom they have taken Ro^e, Italy and other territories, the^ of
Turks and Heathen, who by the popes false doctrine and turbulent government,
have subdued a great part of the christian world and yet are suffered for
their idolatry and heresy to prevail against papists.

Peter and Paul supporting the worship of our lady which do all contain
notorious lies. For we may not think, that the holy Ghost has any thing to do
with the mayntenance of the popish triple crown, or that these men were
inspired with gods spirit, which leaving the preaching of the Gospel sought
for triple crowns and earthly kingdoms. Secondly it is impious, to teach, yt
our savior Christ is now an infant, or that he has communicated his government
with his mother. Thirdly, neither does Peter nor any other Disciple of Christ
teach or maintain the Romish doctrine concerning the worship of our Lady,
and the Popes authority. All these figures therefore are lying and false
figures.

Sixtus quintus in his decretall epistle profired before Baronious his books
says, that he has faithfully and diligently reported the stories of the
Church, and delivered the true fountains of apostolical traditions. speaking
of his book he calls it opus fideliter scriptu^, and not only reports so
of his books, that already were published, but of those, that yet he had not
seen, prophesiyng belike of Caesar Baronius his future works, perfections,
and exploytes. speaking of his diligence in describing of Romish traditions: he
says, that in his books of Annals, apostolicarum traditionum purissimi
fontes aperiuntur. But this is a notorious and large untruth. for not only his
traditions are fabulous, but his discourse most vain and false, being
grounded, for the most part, upon lying legendes, counterfect sermons, and
orations set out under the names of fathers, lewd authors, and such as Simeon
Metaphrastes, Anastasius, Gratian, Iuo, Theodorus Studites, and certain books,
that never yet saw light, and Baronius allowing this Epistle of Sixtus must
needs prove himself a liar.

haec basis quaedam, ac fundamentum annalium esto, says he. Appara^us ad
annals eclesiast.
But that he has erred in that point, it is very probable. Epiphanius in
panario haeres. 51. says that our Savior was borne Augustus and Siluanus
being consuls. Seuerus hist. lib. 2. says he was borne when Sabinus and
Ruffinus were consuls* why then should we rather believe Cassiodorus, who^e
Baronius follows, then the other two? But if this were not erroneous, yet in
the supputation of years continually he erreth reducing matters rather to the
false tradition of the Romish Breuiaries, and other rituall books, then to the
truth.

in petra exaltauit me, and nunc exaltauit caput meum super inimi cos meos; he
does falsely apply to the Romish church, contrary to the meaning of the Prophet
Psalm. 26. For he speaks of himself. Beside that, he says abscondit me in
tabernaculo suo^ in die malorum protexit me in abscondito tabernaculi sui. yt
is, he has hidden me in his tabernacle: and in the days of my trouble has
protected me in the secret place of his tabernacle. But the Romanistes will not
grant, that the Church of Rome is a congregation hidden, or yt God does place
the same in ye secret place of his tabernacle. Furthermore, that which the
prophet speaks of himself, cannot by any means be applied to the Pope, or
Romish Church* for it is not God, that has advanced the Pope to this height of
pride, nor do those heresies, which the Church of Rome maynteineth, nor those
massacres, and impostures which she works proceed from god. Finally God
shall destroy antichrist with the breath of his mouth, and shall not exalt him,
nor suffer him long to be thus exalted.

Sixtus quintus he gives the title of Universal or Catholic to the Romish
Church, and doubts not to affirm the traditions of the Romish Church to be
holy and ancient: pro sacrarum traditionum antiquitate says he, ac sa^ctae
Romanae catholicae ecclesiae potestate. but of the profaneness and nouelty of
the Romish traditions, I have spoken already both in my challenge, and in my
books de missa, and other treatises against Bellarmine, and I doubt not, but
thereby every man may convince him of lying both concerning the holiness, and
also the antiquity of Romish traditions. To affirm, that the Romish church is
catholic concerning faith universally taught, I have declared in my challenge,
to be most false* to affirm, that the Romish Church is the universal and
catholic Church in regard of time and place, is not only most false, but also
most absurd* for were the Church of Rome the true church, as it was sometime;
yet as well may we call London all england, as the Romish Church the catholic
Church.

Jacob Genes. 27. surge sede, and comede de venatione mea, vt benedicat mihi
anima tua: to himself, as if he had been a hunting about Rome, and brought
Sixtus quintus a goat, or some like venaison; and as if Sixtus quintus were a
prophet like to Jacob. And to fit the words to his purpose he adds to the
text, the word Pater, and takes away the word sede: and says, surge pater and
comede de venatione mea, vt benedicat mihi anima tua. Which is a false and lewd
kind of abusing of scriptures.

In praefat.
Catholicae ecclesiae visibilem monarchiam says he, a Christo domino
institutam super Petrum fundatam, ac eius legitimos verosque successores
romanos nimirum pontifices inuiolate conseruatam etc. demonstrabimus. But if
Christ had appointed any such visible monarchy, it is strange, that neither the
Apostles, nor first church of christians could ever see it. Again it is absurd
to think, that general councels would have made laws, if there had been a
general monarke appointed over them. Thirdly if Peter had been a monarke, yet
it is absurd to say, that the visible monarchy is founded upon him. For no man
says, that the kingdom is founded upon the King, neither is it probable, the
foundation being invisible, that the building should be visible. Finally, this
being a ground of his legendicall fables, that the bishops of Rome succeeded
Peter in the visible monarchy of the church, it must needs follow, if this
ground fail him, the cardinal lies in every page of his annals, and as
often, as he talks of this matter. But that neither Peter was constituted
monarke of the church, nor the bishops of Rome have succeeded in any such
fantastical monarchy, I have at large proved in my book de pontifice Romans
set out against Bellarmine, some four or or five years sense.

Clement. lib. strom. 6. most simply and falsely, he affirms, Apparat. p. 17.
Cod. Antuerp.
that as the Jews knew God by the prophets, so God did separat from the common
multitude of the Gentiles, the most excellent of the philosophers, and made
them capable of Gods beneficence. He alleges also an apocryphal text out of
Paul and seems to affirm, that some Gentiles did know Christ.

Ara coeli in Rome was built by Constantine in memoriam dei genitricis Mariae:
In apparat. ad annal. eccls.
and so called for that Augustus the emperor being admonished by a Sybille did
there see the virgin Mary high above in the air with christ in her arms, and
built an altar in that place, where he saw the vision. Matters very fabulous.
for neither does any authentical story affirm, that Christ was made known to
Augustus, nor is it likely, that the blessed virgin and her son should be
transported out of Judea to be showed to Augustus at Ro^e, nor did any Sybille
live in Augustus time, nor could he learn when our Savior Christ would
appear in the air, by the books of the Sybilles, nor does there appear any
such matter in the Sybilles writings. It should seem therefore, that Baronius
was abused with some idle tale of the friars of hara poreorum, that dwell in
the house called Ara coeli. and the rather I do believe it for that no churches
were built in the honor of the blessed virgin in the time of Constantine,
neither was she then in plain terms called dei genitrix.

Orosius he is bold to tell us, that in the place, where now the Church of our
lady stands beyond Tibre, a certain founteine ran oil a whole day
together* and not content herewith, he affirms, that Callistus bishop of
Ro^e, (who lived long before the council of Nice) built there a large Church
in the honor of the mother of God. Meruit locus says he, nobilissima memoria
illustrari, ecclesia nimirum amplissima dei genitricis titulo a Callisto
pontifice prima omnium, Ibidem.
quarum extet memoria, olim erecta. Matters not only false, but incredible. For
what probability is there, that in the times of persecution, when Christians
did hide themselves from their enemies, Callistus should erect so brave a
fabrike* as that Church is? or what reason had Nestorius and other heretics to
deny the blessed virgin to be the mother of God, if so be in Rome so many
churches had been built in honorem dei genitricis, as Baronius reports?

Anna the mother of Mary had, Ibidem.
and that she was but once married, and bore Mary in her hold years, after
she had made a vow to consecrat her to the Lord. And these are the brave
traditions, that Sixtus quintus commends unto us, as coming from most pure
fountains. But if we are to give no more credit to scriptures, then to such
traditions according to the determination of the conuenticle of Trent, with a
little help this cardinal will discredit the scriptures. For neither are
these things to be found other where then in legendes, nor was it a fashion in
the ancient time to consecrat nonnes to God, nor do we read of many such
vows.

Epiphanius he does likewise allege a certain tradition, how an Angel told
Ioachim, the father of Mary being in the desert, that his wife had conceived*
Ibidem.
and out of Gregorius Nyssenus in orat. in Natal. domini: that Anna the mother
of Mary went into sanctu^ sanctoru^, and there prayed, (seeing mothers had more
honor, then those that were barren) that she might not be deprived of the
benefit of law, but might be a mother. And that then she did vow, that she
would consecrat unto God, that which should be borne unto her* but we do not
read, that Angels did in scriptures foretell the birth of any, but of great
and singular men. Again, the law tells us, that women might not come into
sanctum sanctorum. Thirdly, we find not, what service women did in the temple,
that the holy virgin should be consecrated to Gods service. Finally, those
which report these strange things, do not agree together, as may appear by
the conference of the report of Epiphanius haeres. 79. aduers. Collyrid. with
Gregory Nyssens oration in Natali domini, and Hieromes epistle ad Chromatium
and Heliodorum tom. 9.

Euodius, that she was presented into the temple at the age of three years,
Ibidem.
and there lived eleven years, and was afterward by the hands of the priests
delivered to Joseph to be kept. Trimula cum esset says he, in templum
praesentata, ibi in sanctis sanctorum traduxit annos vndecim. deinde vero
sacerdotum manibus Joseph ad custodiam est tradita. Matters devised by idle
fellows, not without the suggestion of Satan, as it should seem* for when he
could not discredit the gospel, then he devised other fables, which being
either false, or improbable might bring the truth of christian religion into
question. That the virgin Mary should remain in sanctis sanctorum, is against
the law* Exodus 30. and Hebr. 9.
for thither went the h^gh priest only once a year. That she should be
presented at three years of age into the temple, is against reason* for what
service could a child of those years do? again, where are women commanded to
serve in the temple? Thirdly, the priests keeping her eleven years, as a thing
consecrated to God, they had no reason to deliver her over at the time of most
danger to be kept by Joseph. Finally, the treatises set forth under the name
of Euodius, Gregorius Nysse^us, Damascenus, Germanus, Andreas Cretensis,
Georgius Nicomediensis, and Cedrenus, alleged by Baronius, are counterfeit,
and differ much one from another. Is it not therefore much better, to content
our selves with the history of the gospel, that reports that, which was
necessary to be known concerning the birth of our Savior, and the holiness
of the blessed virgin, and to omit such vain fables, as both to Jews and
gentiles make christian religion contemptible and ridiculous, and yet have no
sufficient testimony, either of the Apostles, or other authentical writers?

of the glasses of women, Exodus 38.
that watched at the door of the tabernacle; Baronius does gather of it, that
there were certain women, which renouncing the pompes and delights of the
world, did together with the things they possessed, especially such as were
intisements to sin, mancipate and consecrate themselves, to the service of
God, and giving themselves to continual prayers, did watch at the door of the
tabernacle. But seeing God appointed all the ministeries, and services of his
tabernacle, and appointed no service to be done of women at the gate thereof,
it is a most ridiculous conceit of an idle brain to believe, that these women
did any such imagined service at the gate of the tabernacle. Beside that, it
were very strange, if so many women were employed to the service of the
tabernacle, as that a lauer and a base for it might be made of the trimming or
cases of their glasses, that we should find no mention of them in scriptures.
Finally, the description of the tabernacle, tents, and orders of the
Israelites, which do not import, or give any signification of such an order of
women, but rather the contrary, does clearly refute this vain fiction, devised
without color of reason, or testimony of good authors.

Page 33. and 34.
he must show first, that women among the Israelites did vow virginity, and
the rather, for that we read, that it was a reproach for women of that nation,
not to be mothers of children. Secondly he must show, that young women before
the age of fourteen did make such vows. Thirdly he must answer and clear
those places of scripture, that say she was betrothed to Joseph. for after
solemn vows Nuns neither marry, nor are betrothed. Finally he must bring us
better proofs, then supposals of Epiphanius and Augustine, and a counterfeit
tale under the name of Gregorye of Nyssa. For S. Augustine, or at least he,
that lurketh under that holy fathers name says, that vows of virginity did
not then stand with the fashions of the Israelites. Lib. de virginit. c. 4.
He signifies also, that the holy virgin thought it impossible, having once
vowed her maidenhead to God, that she should know a man. But that shows, that
all the Romish Nuns are most unlike to this holy virgin* for albeit they vow
and swear, and are walled up, so that none come at them; yet they neither
think it a matter impossible, nor difficult to know men, as experience and
diverse witnesses can testify, and the Romanistes know very well, if they durst
speak it.

Joseph the spouse of the blessed virgin, had by his first wife diverse
children; and namely Hyppolytus, as witnesses Nicephorus hist. lib. 2. c. 3.
Origenes in Matthaei c. 13. Eusebius hist. lib. 2. c. 1. Epiphanius haeres. 28.
51. 78. Nyssenus homil. de resurrect. Christi homil. 2. Chrysostomus homil. de
annunt. Virg. Euthymius in Matthew. c. 2. Hilarious in Matthew. can. 1. Ambrosius in
epist. ad Galat. And yet all this notwithstanding Baronius says, this is but
an apocryphal fable. Why then should we believe his apocryphal fables
testified by one or two witnesses only, and that in writings very doubtful,
seeing he will not believe this narration, that is confirmed, as himself
confesses, by many fathers? Further, why should we believe him, that John
Baptist was conceived in September, in the time of the solemn fast, or in that
form, which he reports? And why should he desire any to give credit to his
narration, concerning the city of Zachary S. John Baptists father, and the
sanctification of S. John Baptist in his mothers womb, for which he alleges
no proof, seeing he will not believe others, that bring testimonies of fathers*

Luke shows, that Christ was baptized going upon the thirteeth year of his
age: Luc. 3.
Jesus erat incipiens says he, quasi annorum triginta. and so do most fathers
and other learned men expound Lukes words. But Baronius, to maintain the
credit of the Romish ordinall, will have Lukes words to be so expounded, as if
he were going upon the age of one and thirty, when he was baptized. But if this
were so, then would Saint Luke have said, quasi annorum triginta and vnius.

Christ's time, he follows the tradition of the Romish church, that seems to
allow the translation of the seventy interpreters, rather then the Hebrew text.
But what is this else, but to digress from the canon of original scriptures,
to follow either corrupt translations, or unwritten traditions?

Bethlehem, and in a stable, and that he was laid in a manger* and albeit the
place was very mean for the king of heaven and earth to be borne in; yet it is
very much to be presumed, that there was neither Ox nor Ass in the room* for
they are no fit compagnions for men and women, especially for a woman being
with child. But Baronius by unwritten traditions issuing from that pure
fountain, which Sixtus quintus speaks of, has found, that our Savior
Christ was borne in spelunca that is, in a cave, within the ground. Saint
Matthew calls it a house, but he finds it was no house, but a den or
cave. He finds also that Christ was borne in this cave, which is some pretty
way out of Bethlehem* for so Burchard in his description of the holy land part.
1. c. 7. testifies. He says further, that our Savior was laid in a manger
cut out of the rock, and proves it by the testimony of Hierome; albeit we
read but of few mangers cut out of rocks, and although afterward he says it
was of wood* and so must he say, unless he will deny that to be the manger,
that is showed in the Church of our Lady ad praesepe, in Rome. He alleges
Chrysostom also, that says the manger was of earth or clay. Finally he
bears us in hand, that there was an Ox and an Ass tied in that stable, and
thinks it sufficiently proved, because Hierome alluding to the words of the
prophet, says, that when Christ was borne, the Ox knew his owner, and the
Ass his masters crybbe* and this he alleges out of the third of Abacuck,
where no such thing is to be found. Of all which traditions, the sole reason is
this, that he may maintain the credit of the manger, which together with hey
they show at Rome as a holy relic. He endeavors also by these fables to
uphold the pilgrimage to the holy land, where little is remaining to be seen,
but holes, dens, rocks and mountains. But if he believe these traditions as
well as the gospel; a man of small learning may see, that he is a man of a
strange faith.

Lipomanus; a man whose lies a man may feel with his hands. The Apostles
certes, never taught us to keep such relics, or rags rather. neither does
any authentical s^ry report any such thing. Nay, whosoever will examine them
narrowly, shall soon see the notorious impostures of the Romanists, that
devise and maintain these superstitions, not for any other purpose, then for
their own credit and gain.

three kings. but he makes kings without kingdoms, and like his holy father
the Pope, by ^is charter or testimony gives kingdoms away at his pleasure.
Very unlike it is, certes, that three kings should consort together, and take
such a journey putting themselves, not only in the mercy of Herod a most
cruel and covetous king, but also of all the kings and states, by whom in
their journey they passed. He tells us also, that they were Arabians. but he
knows, that Clement of Alexandria, Chrysostom, Cyril, Theodoret, and Leo
sometime bishop of Rome says they came out of Persia. Basil and Hierome
suppose, they came out of Chaldaea. Seeing then all these countries are to the
Eastward of Judea, what reason has any to believe Baronius, rather then these
fathers? I looked also that the Cardinal should have told us the names of the
kings, and how their bodies came to Collein, and other places. for the Romish
tradition is, that their names are Gaspar, Melchior, and Baltasar, or such
like, and that their bodies are at Collein, and as they say, at other places
to. Percase as they are said to be three, so every one had three bodies. and
this is the assurance of Romish traditions, on which the papists build their
faith.

Bethlehem, Annal. to. 1. de anno Christi. 1.
and for that he is beholding to the calendars of the Romish Missals and
Breuiaries. such brave monuments and testimonies have the Romanists of their
traditions. But Eusebius in his Chronicle, and Epiphanius in panario say, they
came to Bethlehem two years after our Saviors nativity. And what is he, that
without proof can set down the certainty?

that the wisemen in returning homeward did not lodge in any Inn, but in
mountains and dens. Ibidem.
But how knows he this? forsooth because Simeon metaphrastes says so, and
for that he produces the testimony of Cyril in his history de vita Theodosij,
who as Baronius believes, is a faithful historian. But neither can he name a
more fabulous author, then Simeon Metaphrastes, nor will it be proved, that
the writing that goes under Cyrils name was framed by any man of credit. such
brave witnesses has this Cardinals legendary for his traditions.

Luke c. 2. shows, that when the days of purification of Mary was ended, she
went to Jerusalem, Ibidem.
to offer and do according to the law of Moses: there Baronius has found
out, that she was no way bound to do it, but as a ceremony, or complement. Cum
alioqui says he, nullatenus astringeretur virgo sanctissima. But if she were a
mother, and bore a son, and if he were like to other men, then was she bound
to do, as other women did, although she remained a most holy virgin. As for
the wicked opinion of the Romanists, that in their catechism teach, that our
Savior passed from his mother, as the sun beams pass through glass, I
hope Baronius will not defend it. if he do, he then adds heresy and
blasphemy to his fault of lying.

Anne, of whom Luke makes mention chap. 2. he affirms to be a most
religious Nun. Ibidem.
and this he would prove by the authority of Cyril cate^. 10. But unless he
can prove, that she vowed chastity, poverty and obedience to a certain rule,
Bellarmine may inform him, that he tells untruth. for these vows he
supposes to be essential points in monastical life.

Sozomen and Nicephorus he tells us, that a certain great tree near
Hermopolis in Egypt, Ibidem. P. 80.
when as Joseph passed by with Christ being yet a little child, did bow it
self and worship Christ, and that with the bark, and leaves of this tree all
diseases are cured. And this does Baronius tell very sadly, and believe
soundly, as a Romish tradition. But unless he bring sounder proof, then yt
heresay, of Sozomen; we must needs believe, that he is of the number of those,
which because they would not believe the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
are given over to believe lies.

that between Heliopolis and Babylon, Annal. to. 1. p. 82.
there is a little fountain, where the holy virgin did wash Christ's clothes,
and him two, while he was in Egypt, and a certain stone also hard by, where
she dried his clothes, and that both christians and Saracens have this
fountain and stone in veneration. Which if he were not stupide as a stone, he
would not believe to be true, notwithstanding any credit, that is to be given
to Borchardes fabulous narrations of the holy land.

Philo de temporibus, as an authentical witness to prove, Ibidem. P. 83.
Antuerp.
that Herod killed his own son among the children, that dwelt about
Bethlehem. But we do not read, that Herod's son dwelt about Bethlehem.
Beside that the treatise of Philo de tempo^ibus is conterfeit. Finally, is not
he a brave author of traditions, that by tradition is able to prove, that the
Romish Church worshippeth Herodes son, that was an infidle, for a young
saint^.

Zachary the father of John Baptiste was slain of Herod, Ibidem. P. 84. and
85.
for that he did hide away his son in the slaughter of the children of
Bethelem, and that the color of blood remained many years after upon the
pauement in the place of the slaughter. but Hierome in his commentaries upon
the 23. of Matthew does condemn this fable, and show, that it was a dream
taken out of apocrypha^ books. Whereby it may also appear, that diverse Romish
traditions are nothing else, but dreams taken out of apocryphal writings.

Ibidem.
But this may seem a small fitton of a lie, in respect of that which
follows, where speaking of the 9. year of the age of our Savior, he says,
Page 96.
that our ladies house wherein our Savior was brought up, was by the ministry
of Angels taken up all whole into the air, and so carried first into Dalmatia,
and then into Italy to Loreto. And to prove this, he alleges the words of the
Angel concerning the miraculous conception of Christ, that said, non esse
impossible apud deum omne verbum. As if because a virgin could conceive
without man, it were likewise credible, that Angels should carry an old house
over the seaes into strange contries: or as if it were not a strange thing,
that this cardinal should believe the transportation of this house to Loreto
as firmly as he believes Christ his incarnation. Histor. Lauret.
Tursellinus that writes a long discourse of this fable, speaks of one
house of our Lady, and does not distinguish between the house, where the
virgin heard the salutation of the Angel; and where our Savior was brought
up. But the curious cardinal does diligently distinguish both; and yet he is
not able to show, why the one house should rather be transported then the
other. Beside that both he and Tursellinus do differ about the place where this
house should first be seated in Italy. I for my part wonder, that they should
publish such vain lies with so great ostentation. Now to prove this to be true
Baronius is not ashamed to test a greater lie; affirming that Gregorius
Thaumaturgus did remove not a house, but a mountain. Which if he cold do, it
were to be wished, that he would remove the 7. hills of Rome together with the
Pope, and this lying cardinal, and place them at the foot of mount Tabor, for
whence Baronius believes, that our Ladies house did fly over the Seaes into
Dalmatia first, and then into Italy.

Augustus he says, Ibidem. 97
that he made laws against such as lived single, and yet honored those, that
kept themselves continually true virgins: which contains a notorious
contradiction. be^de that, it is absurd, to prove vows of virginity from
heathen emperous, and very prejudicial to the Romish church, that he allows
not fictum caelibatum, nor any but those, that indeed are true virgins, of
which he shall find very few among his fellow cardinals, and not many among
priests, monks, friars, nuns.

Pilate, as John chap. 19. says, wrote the title over the cross in Hebrew,
Ibidem. Page 103.
Greek and Latin letters, and as Luke testifies. chap. 23. in Hebrew, Latin
and Greek; Baronius supposes, that the order is changed, and that the Latin
inscription ought to be first. But this is nothing but to contradict the
evangelists, and to respect neither the apostles, nor their writings, so the
Church of Rome may win any pre-eminence above other churches. He alleges, I
confess, the testimony of pope Nicholas in epist. ad Michaelem. But it is a
point of blasphemy to believe, that Nicholas knew those matters better, and did
report them more truly, then the evangelists. Beside that, it may well be
doubted whether Nicholas wrote that epistle to Michael, or some other in his
name, that without all truth, and modesty aduanceth the privileges of the
Romish See.

Luke does expressly set down, that John Baptiste began to preach, Page 113.
when Annas and Caiphas were high preistes, Baronius says that only Caiphas
was high priest in the soccession of Aaron. And that he is forced to hold for
fear, least he should overthrow the monarchy of the Church of Rome. Annas he
says, was chief priest as head of his rank, and one of the principal heads
of the Sanedrin. But if he were not high priest; why should he be named before
Cayphas? or why should Luke so call him? if he might not be high priest, as
contrary to law, he must understand, that at this time neither the law of
Moses, nor the order of succession was rightly observed.

John Baptist he says, he dwelt in the wilderness, Ibidem. p. 114.
and keept in a den called Sapsas. And that our Savior Christ did visit him
oftentimes in this den. And this he proves by the testimony of Sophronius,
and one John a monk, to whom Saint John appeared as he believes, in this
hole, and told him all this story. matters fabulous, and ridiculous. For who
will grant, that Saint John Baptist, whose soul was with God, keept in this
den? it is as like that he dwelt there being dead, as being alive. yet this
is also a Romish tradition. but whether Locustes, that S. John Baptist did
eat, were living creatures or no, as yet Baronius has not found out any
certain tradition. Isidorus of Pelusium holds that (...) in the gospel
signified the tops of herbs and plants.

Page 110 he says, that S. John Baptist did lay the foundation of monastical
life, and that all Catholics confess it to be so. A lie notorious, as
appears by my answer to Bellarmines treatise de monachis. Furthermore this
his assertion may be convinced first, for that John Baptist neither made vow,
nor lived after any certain rule, nor forswore marriage. Secondly, for that
this manner of life was but for a time. for after a while, he left his
habitation in the desert of Iudaea, and came to Jorden, and into cities.
Thirdly, John was ordained to be a forerunner of Christ, and is commended, as a
singular prophet. but monks and friars are rather the forerunners, and
staf^ers of Antichrist, then of Christ. Neither is there any mention of them in
scriptures, but in general terms, Apocalypse. 9.
where we read of locustes issuing out of the bottomless pit, and such like
places. Prophets certes they are not, unless we give the name of prophets to
false teachers. Fourthly, if John seem in his manner of life to have given any
example to Eremites; yet that serves other monks and friars nothing, that live
in most frequent cities, and are in continual action. Finally, albeit
Chrysostom, and Hierome say somewhat of John Baptist, as if he first had
showed an example of solitary life; yet neither does that serve to prove, that
he was a precedent to other monks, nor do other fathers or catholic authors
affirm, that he laid the first foundation of monastical life. I hope Rob.
Parsons will not say, that John Baptist was like his father Ignatius Loyola,
that mad maranicall Spaniard, and swaggring compagnion, the first author,
founder and foundation of the hispaniolized Jesuits.

Page 117. he says Christ was baptized the sixth of January, and this he would
prove by the testimony of a letter of Eusebius ad Marinum, whose fragments are
in the edition of Christopher after the history of Euagrius, as he writes. But
seeing the holy scriptures have concealed the exa^t day, he shows not
himself wise, curiously to dispute of this point. Beside that, he should do
us a favor to show who this Christopher was, that set out Eusebius. otherwise
his followers will believe, that he took Christopher for Christopherson.
Finally there is no credit to be given to such vain fragments set out under
the names of ancient writers. In the history of Eusebius we read not, that he
had any thing to do with this counterfeit Marinus. so that this tradition
seems to be built upon a rotten foundation.

Gregorius Turonensis tells, how leprosy is cured by washing in water, where
our Savior Christ was baptized: and Baronius believed he said true. But yet
was this Gregory no good witness in this case, writing nothing, but by
hearesay. We are taught by holy scriptures, that baptism was ordained a
sacrament of remission of sins, and not that Iordane was made a medicine to
purge lepres.

Page 119. he supposes, that he has soundly confuted those, that say, that it
was not said to Peter, tu es Petra, sed tu es Petrus. but either must he lie,
or must he charge the Evangelist Matthew with untruth, which is a point
blasphemous. He says also, that such as translate the word Cephas, and say it
does signify a head, are not to be reprehended. But if he had had either head
or brain, having taken upon him to relate histories, and things done in
ancient time, he would have omitted all curious disputations for the popes
usurped supremacy, for which his gross head fit to believe all fond fables,
was never framed.

Abdias, which he confesses to be an apocryphal author, he tells, that John
the Evangelist by Christ's persuasion did never desire marriage. as if Christ
were an enemy to marriage.

that it was Simon Zelotes that was married, when Christ was present in Cana of
Galiley, Tom annal. 1. p. 122. Antwerp.
and turned water into wine: and declares, how the memory of that miracle
being celebrated in the Church the vi. day of January diverse rivers and
fountains that day ran wine. Matters merely fabulous, and which bring
christian religion into question, if not into contempt, being avouched without
any good ground.

Page 132. he allows the epistle of Abagarus to Jesus Christ, and his epistle
also to Abagarus: which by the testimony of Gelasius c. sancta Romans did. 15.
are testified to be apocryphal, and by the letters themselves appear to be
forged.

that our Savior Christ printed his image in a cloak, and sent it to Abgarus.
The painter should have taken the portrait, but says Baronius for the beams
that came from his countenance, he could not do it. He shows also, that by
this image diverse miracles were done. and all this to confirm the worship of
images.

Page 157. he tells us, that by divine and humane laws one chief bishop
both in time past did, and ought to decide all ecclesiastical controversies.
But the place Deuteronomy. 17. and diverse places of the new testament do show this to
be a notorious untruth, as I have showed in my books de Pontifice Romans

Page 167. he tells out of Euthymius, that the rich man Luc. 16. was called
Nynensis, and doubts not to affirm, that this was a story and not a parable,
because diverse churches are erected in the honor of Lazarus. but the fathers
think otherwise. And the naming of tongues, fingers and other things which are
corporal, where our Savior talks of souls, does show this discourse to be
parabolicall, and the papists to be idolaters, that worship their own fancies,
and imaginations. In the mean while, it is no hard matter to discern Baronius
to be a fabler.

Page 176. he would make his reader believe, that our Savior did celebrate his
passover in S. John the evangelists house. But Simeon Metaphrastes denies it,
which is often alleged by Baronius as a grave witness: and the words of the
gospel seem to speak of the owner of that house, as of a stranger.

Page 191. he says Missa is derived from the Hebrew or Chaldey word. but
Bellarmine his fellow tells him, Lib. 1. de missa,
he is deceived.

In the same page, he alleges the counterfeit epistles of Pius ad Iustum,
and Cornelius ad Lupicinum, and other forged writings, and all to show, that
the word Missa was used in their times.

Gregory of Tours he reports this fable, that diverse making thonges, put them
about the pillar, whereto Christ was tied, when he was scourged, and that the
same heal diverse diseases. He would have told us als^ if he could have
brought any proof for it, that the same pillar is to be showed in Saint Peter's
Church at Rome. for that is a Romish tradition. but he perceived, that he had
told a lie sufficient already.

And thus we may see, albeit I tell not all, how many lies are contained in the
beginning of his first book of Annals, being by judgment of all men the
best, and most free from lies. and yet I neither touch his errors in
Chronology, nor much meddle with his forged and false writings. After this he
tells things most incredible, and yet without good testimony of any man of
credit. Of S. Paul he writes, that his head being stricken off, there issued
out milk in stead of blood. He tells also, that Peter's chains being kept
by Plautilla work great wonders, and says, that when John the Evangelist
wrote the gospel, it thundered and lightened, as when the law was given in
mount Sinah. Infinite such strange tales are contained in his huge legends. If
then we would do him right; we should rather call them Aniles fabulas, then
Annals.

CHAP. IX. A sampler of Robert Parsons alias Coobucke his manifold falsities
and lies, taken out of diverse libels and pamphlets published by him.
NOw I come to Robert Parsons, alias Coobuck, a man, I confess, unworthy to
be joined with Bellarmine and Baronius, being far inferior to them in
learning; yet in regard of his falsehood and treacherous dealing, comparable
with the most wicked and shameless Iebusite of the whole order, and with the
most false packer of all the popish faction. His scholars believe, that he is
learned. but if his treacherous complots and packings were not more to be
feared, then his learning; he were not to be reputed half so dangerous, as we
find him. The which, albeit I meant not here to dispute, being without the
reatch of my purpose; yet because I would not have every such wooden fellow,
as Philip Woodward alias Owlyglasse (for so men call the author of the
detectio^) to take exceptions unto my sayings, as destitute of proof, I will
briefly verify in this place; and that by two of his books, which his
followers for learning and workmanship believe to be singular. If any man need
any further trial; he may, if he please, read my reply to his wardword, where I
have sounded his learning to be very shallow.

The first of the two is entitled, a brief discourse containing certain
reasons, why (papists, whom falsely he terms) Catholics refuse to go to
Church* and this book Parsons under the mask of John Howlet, a fit name for
such a nightbird, does presume most impudently to offer to her Majesty. The
next is called a christian directory, and commonly known by the name of
Parsons his resolution.

His former discourse is wholly grounded upon this rotten foundation, that the
popish religion (which the Iebusiticall faction and their followers, by all
their wit, learning, and other means seek to promote) is the true Catholic
religion. This being the foundation of the work, if he had been a wise
builder, he would have confirmed, and proved so strongly, that her Majesty,
before whom he pleads, might have conceived well of his cause, and allowed of
his reasons. but alleging no one word to prove this, the whole work does
not only fall to the ground, but also ministers matter, that may be turned
back upon himself, and employed to the hurt and prejudice of his clients. For
as it is a good reason, if the popish religion be the true christian religion,
to move men to refuse all religions opposite unto it, so if the same be false,
odious, treacherous, damnable; then neither have papists any reason to profess
it, nor others to bear with those, that obstinately defend it. but I have
showed, that it is not only new, and false, but also superstitious and
heretical. Again, if Parsons can say nothing, why the religion professed in
England, is not Catholic and apostolical; then all his reasons fall to the
ground, and all his pretenses of fear of infection, of scandale, of schism,
of casting away the mark of distinction, of participation with us, of
dissimulation, of naughty service, of the benefit of popish religion may be
retorted against himself and his clients. For neither are Christians to suffer
the practice of the idolatrous mass, nor the faction and packing of wicked
dissembling papists; nor may any magistrate or other good christian with good
conscience, suffer Gods true religion by schismatickes and heretics to be
scorned. And these reasons are so effectual, that I doubt not, but those that
have the managing of these causes, will both take up such Howlets, and deliver
Christian religion from contempt of such impostors, and Atheistes.

Secondly purposing, and promising three things, whereof the first was a
demonstration of reasons, why Papists should not go to the Church, the next
contained a declaration of means how papists should remedy, or ease themselves
of their afflictions, the third was an instruction how with patience to endure
affliction: the first he handles most lewdly and loosely. the other two parts
he was not able to make out, abusing both his friends and his adversaries with
his false promises. Further, it may be, that his remedies were nothing, but
practices of treason and rebellion, and that he meant nothing less, then to
exhort men to patience: and that therefore he omitted to speak of these two
points. But why then did he promise? does he promise that, which he purposes
not to perform? and does he mean to keep no touch in any thing?

His directory also is a most idle and vain discourse. It should consist of
three parts, whereof the first, as he says, appertains to resolution, the
second treats of entrance, the third of perseverance. but as his fashion is,
of three parts promised, he keeps back two, and performs the third most
simply. For first, that which he has written concerning resolution is very
impertinent. for it is a very evil sign of resolution in matters of christian
religion, for a man to dispute, whether there be a God or no, and whether
christian religion be true or no: as Parsons does. Again, despair of Gods
mercy, temptations, fear of persecution, and such like impediments, as Parsons
alleges, do rather hinder a man to lead a christian life, then help to
resolve him to do it.

Secondly, the greatest part of his discourse, is either stolen out of Gaspar
Loarti, or Granatensis, or Stella, or such like friar like and idle discourses.

Thirdly, it argues, that he has a bad conceit of popish cacolikes in
England. for if he took them to be christians, he would neither go about to
teach them, that there is a God, nor that christian religion is true, nor that
there are rewards offered to those that do well, both in the life to come, and
in this life, and punishments likewise for evil doers both in this life, and
after this life. for every child among christians knows all this without his
teaching.

Fourthly, we do not find, that this directory has made any one christian,
or directed him the way to life. But I do hear many complain, that diverse
simple young men have been directed by him to the gallows.

Fifthly, it should seem, that this book has wrought little good effect in
Parsons himself, that having so long stood upon resolution, is not yet come to
the entrance of religion.

Sixthly* as laws are made to restrain common abuses, so likewise divines
should discourse of such matters, as may make most for reformation of christian
men's manners. This discourse therefore of his, wherein he endeavors to
prove, that there is a God, that there is one true religion, that there is a
heaven, and a hell, among christians already well persuaded is impertinent, and
would better have been bestowed upon Italians and Spaniardes, that scarce
believe in God, or know any of the principal points of christian religion.

Furthermore, entreating of resolution, which as himself declares, goes
before entrance, and perseverance; yet does he very wisely divide the treatise
of resolution into speculation and practice. The first part says he, shall
contain matter of discourse, speculation, consideration; the second shall
handle things appertaining to exercise, use and practice. As if a man could
practice, that is not entered into the exercise of religion, or as if
resolution were not far different from practice.

Finally, the book is so full fraught with idle discourses, and the principal
points so weakly proved, that it will rather make Christians to doubt of
religion, then Atheistes to believe. It does also contain so much poison, that
no physic can make it wholesome.

I would therefore advise all Christians to beware of his book of resolution
by him entitled a directorie, containing little truth, but much superstition
and heretical poison. The same is also a disgrace to all papists, whom he
presumes as yet not to be resolved, that there is a God, or that christian
religion is true. To christians it can yield no instruction being a pack of
stolen and bad stuff evil trussed together. Neither is the same good,
although it has been purged, the whole substance being lewd, and full of
poison. Much I wonder, that any christian would set it forth in this Church,
and more, that christians should believe, that any good was like to come of
such a wicked writing. And I doubt not, but that such as are in authority will
remove both that, and other such venomous treatises out of all true Christian
men's hands, being rather fit for Italian atheistes, then the English nation.

To leave the rest of his treacheries, heresies and other faults; which are
rather to be corrected by the public exequutioner, then noted by the style of
a writer, I will only in this discourse set down certain notorious
falsifications committed by him in sundry pamphlets set out under diverse
counterfect names, and give you a taste of his unsavory lies, of which in
Parsons writings there is great store. And this so much the rather, for that
in his relation sent us from Ro^e, concerning the conference some two years
agone passed in France between Monsieur de plessis, and the pretended bishop
of Eureux, he seems earnestly to desire a trial concerning these points. The
man also in his preface before his reasons of refusal of going to the Church,
under the name of John Houlet desires that some indifferent trial may be had
either by disputation or otherwise: wherein I desire he should be satisfied.

Dolman, who was never acquanted with the matter. Wherein albeit he has
committed far more heinous faults then forgery, endeavoring by notorious
untruths to set ye crown of england upon the Infantaes head; yet is it a
fault also worthy to be censured, to father his bastard writings, upon others*
that this is forgery, it is apparent by the testimony of the doctors in L.
Cornel. de falsis. and their judgment is grounded upon great reason. For if it
be forgery to add one clause to a testament or other writing: then it is a
main forgery, to publishe a false testament, a false book, or other false
writing under other men's names.

D. Bagsh. in his answer to his late apology charge him with 8. sundry
libels.
Secondly he has published under the name of Sanders, and Rishton diverse
enormous and wicked slanders against King Henry the 8. of famous memory,
against her majesty, and the principal persons of this church and realm of
Enland, setting out his own vilanous lies under the name of Sanders long
before dead, and of Rishton, a man no way likely to commit any such wickedness
against his Prince and country, of Howlet, Dolman and others. As for Rishton it
is now well known, he had small intelligence of state matters. Neither did he
use to meddle or practice in them. Further those that know him, do testify
that the style of Sanders his book is far unlike his. Thirdly, his credit
was not such, as that he was able to get his books printed, especially being
of that nature. Finally, we do not believe, that Rishton having received grace
at her Majesty's hands, and being delivered from death, which he had deserved,
by her great favor, would thus requite her, or that being a man of mild
disposition he would rail so maliciously and falsely, against his prince and
contry. And therefore I believe, if the man be alive, and were examined upon
his oath, that he would deny that book to be his, and declare it to be Robert
Parsons his work. And though he do it not; yet diverse others do plainly
declare so much, and we have great reason to believe their declaration to be
true. For he is a great stickeler in matters of state, and he has written such
like libels before. Furthermore at his request Ribadineira his fellow Iebusite
seems to have set forth the same book translated into spanish. Finally I do
not think, that Parsons will upon his oath, and without all equivocation
affirm, that he had noe finger in the making and publishing of that most
wicked and slanderous book.

Sanders and Rishton, Robert Parsons has committed diverse particular
falsities, and namely in publishing diverse letters in the name of Friar Forest
and others, which never were made by the authors, whose name they carry. For
first we do not find them in the first edition of that book anno 1585.
Secondly it is absurd to think, that either Forest, or simple women did
write, as is reported. Finally they do rather savor of Parsons his vein, who
is able to make to speak, and to write whom he pleases, and what himself
lists. So plentiful and impudent he is in forging false writings.

John Houlet, whom now all the seculer mass priests in England do wonder
at like an Owlet, he has set forth an impudent discourse, concerning reasons
why papists go not to the Church. He will not I think, deny it to be his.
how then can he deny himself to be a falsary?

To come to particular falsifications, albeit in his book of resolution he
has noe reason to falsify any place alleged, winning no advantage by it;
yet has he so dealt therein, and so has he enured his fingers in this
practice, that he cannot forget to forge and falsify.

fol. 8. he says it is an old trick of heretics to abuse simple people with
obscure places of the scriptures: and for this he quoteth Epiphanius contra
haereses, and Augustine ad quod vult deum: as if they should say so. He would
also infer, that it is a matter very dangerous, to allege scriptures. But if
he do not exhibit their testimonies, it will be an easy matter to prove that
this is an old trick of Parsons to father his own bastardly fancies both upon
the fathers, and upon others. Is not this then bastardly dealing?

fol. 10: he ascribes this sentence to Luther in epist. ad Johan. Her^agium
Typographum Argentinensem: their opinion of the sacrament they began with
lies, and with lies they do defend the same. And they do broch it abroad
with wicked fraud of corrupting others men's books. Likewise he affirms of
Zuinglius, that in his book de sacrament. fol. 412. he should call Luther a
foul corrupter, and horrible falsifier of Gods word, and one that followed the
Marcionistes and Arians, that razed out such places out of holy writ, as were
against them. He makes also Carolus Molinaeus in translat. testam. noui part.
11. to accuse Calvin, that he made the text of the gospel to leap up and
down at his pleasure, and that he used violence to the same, and added of his
own to the very letter for drawing it to his purpose. But who so list to
peruse the writings of Luther, Zuinglius, and Molineus, shall plainly perceive,
that like a falsary he changes and alters their words at his pleasure.
neither can he excuse himself, unless he be able to show these words out of
the authors, which he mentions. He charge Beza also, for that in the
preface to his new testament set out anno 1556. he accuses Oecolampadius with
all his brethren the divines of Basil, for great impiety in abusing the sacred
scriptures translated by them. But he abuses his reader in laying that to
Bezaes charge, that was never uttered by him, nor is to be found in his preface.

Fol. 11. of his preface, he quoteth Saint Augustine lib. 8. confess. c. 12. as
if he should say, that Saint Anthony had revealed to his mother a religious
rule of life, which he should follow. And fol. 12. he says that Saint
Augustine did so reverence Anthonies doings, that he made the same a principal
motive to his own conversion. But Saint Augustine does not so much as in one
word mention any rule of religious life, nor did he follow Saint Anthony in
other matter, then in reading the scriptures. Nor does he say, that Saint
Anthony revealed any religious rule to Monica S. Augustines mother. In this
therefore Rob. Parsons follows his old rule, or rather unruly course of
forgery.

Page 64 of his books printed at Louan, he alleges for his ground, the
counterfeit writings of Aristaeas, which he calls Aristeus; and upon his
credit tells diverse histories. But such false grounds are more likely to
pervert, then to confirm men in the faith.

Page 259. he corrupts Saint Augustines words de fid. and operibus c. 14.
and peruerteth his meaning, quoniam haec opinio tunc fuerat exorta says Saint
Augustine (scilicet vt praecepta and professa fide opera iustitiae
contemnantur) aliae apostolicae epistolae Petri, Ioannis, Iacobi, Iudae, contra
eam dirigunt maxim intentionem, vt vehementer astruant fidem sine operibus
nihil prodesse. These words Parsons translateth thus, for that this wicked
opinion of only faith was sprung up in the Apostles time by ill understanding
of S^int Paul, etc. he adds to Saint Augustines words wicked; and where he
speaks of a sole faith, or rather solitary faith deuoide of works, he
makes him to speak against these, that say, that faith only justifies, or
applies justice unto us, which Saint Augustine misliketh not. for in that same
chapter he says, that works follow him, that is justified, and go not before
justification.

Page 269. he alleges a counterfeit writing under the name of Athanasius,
wherein Saint Anthonies the ermites life is described: and of the lives of Paul
and Hilarion supposed to be Hieromes: but altogether false, like Dolmans book
of titles.

Cyprian to say, that Christ appeared to a bishop in the form of a goodly
young man. He says also, Sermon. de Mortalit.
that Saint Augustine did often use to recount this example, and alleged
Posidonius for his witness He says further, that Cyprian writ a book de
Mortalitate. But first this discourse is but one poor sermon, and no book.
Secondly it is uncertain, whether this sermon was his or no. Thirdly he says
not, that Christ appeared, but that a goodly young man appeared to that Priest.
Finally he lies of Saint Augustine, as well as Cyprian: and in his allegations
forgeth as fast, as if he were the son of a blacksmith, and brought up in his
forge.

ad fratres in eremo, which he fathereth most falsely upon Saint Augustine* and
this his own side as well, as the learned men of ours could have told him, if
he had but had so much sense, as to understand them. In the two pages
following, he tells certain fables of the apparitions of good and bad
angels; and lays them upon Gregory the dialogiste and Bid, whose books are
much corrupted by monks, and such like falsaries.

Augustine, entitled de vera and falsa poenitentia, and a forged prayer
supposed to be said by Saint Ambrose, when he went to say mass, and such like
counterfeit stuff, as may be found in his directory page 369. and the pages
following.

Lib. 1. p. 1. c. 11. of his directory, he alleges a place out of Saint
Ambrose ser. 2. in psalm. 118. where he supposes him to speak of popish
purgatory, but he speaks of purging only in this life, and of such a
purgatory, as that some passed through it to hell. But the papists teach, that
no man passes out of their purgatory into hell. He is therefore fitter to
talk of the fire of his putatiue fathers forge, then of the fire of purgatory,
which he shall never be able to prove with any forgery.

Lib. 1. p. 2. c. 1. he makes Saint Augustine to say, confess. lib. 6. c. 12.
that his own passions, and the devil would needs persuade him before his
conversion, that he should never be able to abide the austerity of a virtuous
life. But S. Augustine has neither any such words, nor any such meaning. For
first he speaks not of a virtuous life, but of abstinence from marriage, to
attain to wisdom. Secondly he says, the Devil or Serpent went about
through him to persuade Alypius, and speaks nothing of the Devils persuasions
to himself. Thirdly, he does not so much as mention austere life in that
place* neither is it so austere a matter to forswear marriage, as is pretended,
especially if God give men grace to live chaste. The Jesuits and massepriests
certes have no reason to talk of austeritie of life, albeit they forswear
marriage, especially if they live at ease, and fare daintily, and wallow in all
filthiness, as they shall hear particulerly hereafter, if they content not
themselves with this present payment.

Meditations, and Sermons under the name of Saint Augustine, pratum spirituale
under the name of Sophronius, the legend of Barlaam under the name of
Dam^scene, and diverse other forged and counterfeit writings. He does also abuse
both the scriptures and fathers most impudently, as I shall at more leisure
particulerly demonstrate. Especially, if he or any other dare undertake to
answer my challenge, and to reply upon my answer to his disciple Owlyglasse.

Fifth reason of refusal.
Where Saint Paul 2. Tim. 4. speaks of Alexander the copersmith, he changes
his words, and says, he commanded Timothy not to consent to Alexander the
heretic. And this corruption seems to be committed in favor of his putatiue
father the blacksmith, whose occupation, percase, he was loath to see disgraced.

Reason 6.
Alleging Saint Augustine contra Maximinum, he seems to signify, that he
wrote but one book. Again, he would make Saint Augustine to say, that it was
the fashion of heretics, to have scriptures in their mouth. But Saint
Augustine in all his three books against Maximinus has no such words. nay
himself in those books alleges scripture often, and reasons out of them,
and plainly signifies, that his instructions were drawn from thence. De
diuinis scripturis instructi, says he.

Reason 7.
Speaking of the Pope, he gives his reader to understand, that Cyprian de
simplic. praelat. and epist. 47. and 55. and Chrysostom. lib. 2. de sacerdot.
Innocentius epist. 93. apud Augustinum, and Leo epist. 84. and the Synod of
Alexandria apud Athanasium, and Theodoret lib. 2. hist. c. 4. call the Pope the
high priest of the Church, the bishop of the universal Church, the pastor of
the Church, the judge of matters of faith, the repurger of heresies, the
examiner of all bishops causes, and finally the great priest; in obeying of
whom, all unity consists, and by disobeying of whom, all heresies arise. But
scarce does he speak truly of any one of these fathers or councels, as any
man may see both by examining the places, and in my book de Pontifice Romans
against Bellarmine. would Parsons set down the fathers words, he might also
see it himself, if he pleased.

that the fathers of the primitive Church with one consent affirm, that the
body and blood of Christ was by Christ appointed to be offered up daily for
remission of sins of quick and dead, and quoteth Dionyse, Ignatius,
Tertullian, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory, Hierome, Cyprian and others; with
one breath he falsely alleges them all, as I have particulerly demonstrated
in my third book de missa against Bellarmine. which if Parsons do answer, I
marvel.

Whosoever list to see further trial of Parsons his falsifications, let him
read his treatise of the discovery of Nicols, and other such like pamphlets
set out by him, wherein I dare be hold to say, that every second place
alleged by him in any matter of controversy, is falsely alleged. Yea
sometime to keep his forging fingers in ure, he alleges fathers and
scriptures falsely, where he does not gain any thing to himself by the false
quotation, and allegation, but only a perpetual note of a wicked falsary.

Neither is it a matter much to be marvelled at, if Robert Parsons has
committed diverse falsifications, seeing in cases of conscience resolved by him
and Allen, he teaches, that it is lawful to change a man's name, to deny his
country, to equivocate, dissemble and speak untruth, yea to swear and
forswear most falsely: most of which points are counted plain forgery. beside
that, his putatiue father by his occupation was a forger. If then Owlyglasse
seek a pattern of falsifications; let him go to Robert Parsons, who is the
only master, and a more excellent forger then Coobucke his putatiue father,
albeit all his life long he wrought in a blacksmiths forge. Only it were to be
wished, that he had been a forger of horshoonailes, and not of false writings.

CHAP. X. A note of certain notorious lies, and untruths uttered by Robert
Parsons, alias Coobucke.
I Need not say much to convince Rob. Parsons to be a most false Iebusite, and
a most impudent lying compagnion. The seculer priests in their reply to Parsons
his treatise entitled a manifestation of the folly and bad spirit etc. and in
their answer to the Jesuits apology, have eased me of that labor* for they
convince him plainly of lying, cogging, and facing, and doubt not to affirm,
that he can say nothing without lying. But yet because his wooden scholar
Owlyglasse has begun this course, and thinks to win some advantage by
scoring up my untruths, I will briefly note some untruths of the master
lye-maker, and excellent imitator of him, that is, the father of lies.

Sanders and Rishton, of Andreas Philopater, of Didimus Veridicus, of Allen in
his letters to the nobility and people of England, and Ireland, and all those
libels which have been published within these 20. years against the late Lord
treasurer of England of worthy memory, against the Lord of Leycester, and
others, all which were either made by him, or published by him, or by his help
and counsel, he lies in gross. For the books from the beginning to the
ending are full of notorious and villainous lies against king Henry the 8.
against his principal agentes, against Queen Elizabeth and her counsel, and
the whole Church and state of the Realm of England. and this, if God be
pleased, I purpose shortly to show at large. Neither need I to declare any
particular, seeing there is no man, that has any intelligence of matters of
state, but he knows, that the same be most false and slanderous. But to
leave to speak of those books, that consist of nothing but lies, I will note
diverse particular leasinges out of other books of his, wherein,
notwithstanding, he pretends more truth.

wardworde page 69. he says, it appears not, that Jesuits sought her
majesty's blood; especially not Parsons. A most notorious and shameless lie.
For it is not only most true, that these wicked assassinors of princes, and
King killers have also sought her majesty's blood, but also now most apparent.
For not only Palmio and Codret two Jesuits did resolve Parrie to kill the
Queen, and that it was an act meritorious so to do, Parries voluntary
confession.
but also sense that time Holt and Walpoole have excited diverse to take on them
that wicked interprise. The first appears by the confession of Parrie about
the year anno. 1584. the second by the confessions of Squire, York, Willams,
Patricke Ocollen, and others. It appears also that Parsons was well
acquainted with Parries treason both by co^fessions, and witnesses. Further
this many years he has endeavored, to the uttermost of his power, to stir up
forrayne enemies against her majesty, which no man can do, but he must needs
entend her destruction* and if he deny that, his own letters which are to be
shown, and the testimony of the seculer preistes, In diverse treatises, and
namely in their answer to Parsons his late apology.
and the wicked libell under the name of Allen directed to the nobility and
people of England and Ireland, which he help to print and publish; and which
wholly and openly aymeth at her majesty's state and person, will convince him.
But this point I have discoursed in my reply to Parsons his wardworde at large,
and the same is diversely confessed in the seculer priests books. And
therefore thus much may serve in this place to prove him both a liar, and a
most wicked assassinor of his liege prince and souereine.

wardword he says, that those that oppose themselfes against the Jesuits, are
either Jews, Turks, and Infidels; or those that make division and say, I am
of Calvin, I am of Luther, or those that have made shipwreck of faith; or
false brethren such as love praeheminence as did Diotrephes; or else
worldlinges. And in these few words he tells diverse notorious lies. For
first neither Jews, nor Turks do oppose themselves against the Jesuits.
Secondly, among all those, that profess religion he cannot bring forth one
that says I am of Calvin, or Luther. Thirdly, Parsons himself is a Jesuit,
and a principal stirrer among them, and yet like Diotrephes sought to be a
cardinal, which dignity for his bastardy and vileny he has missed. Fourthly,
he will not say, that Sixtus quintus was a Jew or Turk, nor that the college
of Sorbona, and clergy of France, or parliament of Paris are within the
compass of his division; albeit all these have opposed themselves against the
encrochements of the Jesuits. Finally, the seculer priests, that deal
against the Jesuits, are neither Turks nor Infidels in Parsons his reckening.
Yet have they manfully stood against the Jesuits treacherous plots for their
contry, as Parsons will not deny. Does it not then appear, that he has told
untruth, and that the I^suites are an odious generation contrary to Parsons his
assertion?

battles, Wardword.
murders, destructions of countries. And that towns, cities, houses and
particular men, three princes, two Queens, and one King have thereby been
brought to their bane. He says also further, that the houses and linages of
Hamiltons, Douglasses, Stuards in Scotland, of desmond and other peers in
Ireland have been thereby ruinated. And finally, that in France and Flanders
there is no end of those, that have been destroyed by this change of
religion. A most shameless and palpable untruth. For not religion, or any
alteration therein, but the malice of the Pope and wicked practices of
Jesuits, and there consorts have caused most of these troubles. The rest have
happened upon other accidents. By the Popes secret practices, and Charles the
9. his great disloyalty many thousands of innocents were massacred in France
the year of our Lord 1572. by the working of Claude Matthieu a Jesuit and
others his consortes that league was made, which brought infinite calamities to
the people and kingedome of France. Paul the third stirred up wars against
the princes of Germany. P^us the fifth was the firebrand, that inflamed the
Northren rebellion in England. Sanders the Popes legate was the original cause
of the destruction of the earl of Desmond. And happy had the late Queen of
Scots been, if she had not been to credulous to believe Sammier and other
seditions Jesuits entisinge words and promises. the attempt of Spaniardes
against England anno. 1588, was set forward by Friar Sixtus quintus at the
solicitation of Robert Parsons and his fellows, albeit here he would gladly
discharge himself, and lay the fault upon others. the Jesuits were the causes
of the destruction of the Duke of Guise, of Henry the french King, that was
murdered by James Clement, of the Duke of Parma, of the coffeehouse of the
Prince of Transiluania. neither was the loss of Sebastian King of Portugal, of
his whole army and his estate to be ascribed to any other the^ to ye wicked
counsel of the Jesuits, which governed him wholly and drue him into that
action they have also brought the King to Poland in danger to loose his
kingdom of Suethland, and caused the overthrow of Ferdinand of Croatia by the
Turks: and finally both have they ruined as many, as have harkened to their
turbulent counsels, and will they ruin as many, as will be guided by them. And
this is not only proved by experience, but also testified by diverse records,
and books in England, and France of late set out by men of their own
religion. The divisions certes which they have caused in ye emperors army in
Hungary have wrought many calamities to christendom.

that before the late alteration of religion, there was one form of service,
one number of Sacraments, one tongue, one Sacrifice, one head of the Church
throughout all christendom. but in my reply page 19. I have showed, that this
short sentence contains (...) the truth have respected temporal commodity,
or as if we did not urge them with the truth of apostolical doctrine, and the
ancient christian faith.

directory. fol. 13. p. 2 he says, that S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Gregory
and S. Bernard persuade men by their examples to be afraid of purgatory. A
fourfold lie. for neither did S. Ambrose, nor any of the rest speak of a
purgatory, wherein christians did satisfy for the temporal punishment of sins
remitted in earth. nor did they believe any such purgatory. Whatsoever they
held of another purgatory, viz. for venial sins; yet false it is, that they
persuaded men to be afraid of it by their examples.

directory lib. 1. p. 42. he says, that the world knows, that Socrates was
put to death for i^sting at the multitude of gods among the gentiles: a matter
which the world knows to be a lie, and is refuted by Plato, and all that write
of his death.

Plato was wont to report of Zeno the stoike, that he should say, that either
there was one God, or no God. but the record of the report will not be found.
Further, if Plato lived before Zeno, it was not like, that he should prophecy
what Zeno would say. These lies certes being the grounds of Parsons proofs
where he goes about to show, that there is a God: are rather like to make a
gentile, or heathen man obstinate, then to make him believe in one God.

Page 174. he tells, that the number of infants slain at Bethlehem was 14.
thousand. and this he goes about to prove by the greek calendar, and the
liturgy of the Aethiopians. but such fables as he brings, do rather
discredit christian religion, then prove it. We believe, that Herod killed the
young children in Bethlehem, and thereabouts. but so many as 14. M. could not
be found in that quarter, as is very likely.

Page 269. he says, that Philo the Jew does set forth strange things in the
life and exercises of S. Mark, and of his disciples, that lived in Alexandria.
But if Philo in his book de vit. conte^plat do neither speak of S. Mark, nor
his disciples in Alexandria, I hope that Parsons disciples will be ashamed of
their masters ignorance, and confess that he has lied.

It were an easy matter, to set down infinite lies of this lying compagnion,
who without lying is not able to speak any thing, as his consorts the seculer
priests say. but when he has cleared himself of these, he shall have twice so
many more objected against him, and drawn out of his simple writings. In the
mean while it may appear, that neither he, nor his disciple Owlyglasse had
any great reason to challenge the combat of us for falsifications and lies.

CHAP. XI. That Owlyglasse himself has falsified diverse authors and
allegations in his little lewd Pamplet, wherein he charge others with
falsifications.
IS it possible, think you, to work somewhat out of nothing? certes no.
Strange therefore it may seem unto you, that I endeavor out of this small
Pamphlet, that is as nothing, to make something. Yet if you please to consider
the particulers ensuing, you shall find, that in this trifling discourse of
the wooden detector, wherein he has showed neither wit, learning, nor
honesty, nor any good thing; that there are diverse points contained, that may
convince him both to be a falsary, and a false lying compagnion.

Origin page 11. c. 2. he cites these words, qui renascitur debet sale saliri.
Homil. 6. in Ezech.
But the fathers words are these, oportet ergo eum, qui renascitur, vtique in
Christo renascentem rationabile and sincerum lac desiderare, and prius quam
rationabile and sine dolo lac desideret, debet sale saliri, and pannorum
inuolucris colligari, ne dicatur ad eum, sale non es salitus, and pannis non es
inuolutus. So then by this it appears, that he cutteth away the words in the
midst, and leaves out the words in the end of the sentence, and ye maliciously
to serve his purpose. for otherwise it would have appeared, that Oregin spoke
allegorically, or that al children and others, that are to be baptized, must as
well drink milk, and be lapped in cloutes, as salted, or touched with salt.

Hostiensis and Panormitane making them to say, that three things precisely
are required in a falsary. And that damage or hurt ensues of every
falsification. the fellow quoteth their words out of a pamphlet printed at
Antwerpe by Hierom verdussen concerning the conference betwixt Plessis and
Eureux. and therefore no marvel, if he cite them falsely, taking their words at
the second hand of so base and lying an author.

p. 20. these are my words. They dissolve marriage contracted by entering into
religion, as they term it, and although it be consummated, yet they hold, that
by mutual consent, the married couple may depart a sunder, and that it shall
not be lawful for them afterward to company together. They separate also
marriage for spiritual kindred, and force all, that-will be preistes, monks, or
friars to forswear, marriage. Matters not only strange in the catholic
Church during the times of the Apostles, and their successors for many hundred
years, but also contrary to Christ's doctrine. For what man can separate them,
whom God has joined? And what reason has man to command any to forswear
marriage, which the spirit of God pronounces to be honorable? But my adversary
like a falsary, that is, like himself, first leaves out the beginning of the
sentence; secondly he cutteth somewhat out in the midst, Page 14
and finally he curtalleth the end of my sentence, reporting only these words,
and in this sort. They hold that by mutual consent the married couple may
depart a sunder, and that it shall not be lawful for them afterward to company
together, a matter not only strange in the catholic church during the
Apostles, and there successors times, for many hundred years, but also
contrary to Christ's doctrine* for what man can seperat whom God has joined?
So it appears, that he cutteth out that, which I said of dissoluing of
marriage contracted, by monkish vows, and upon pretense of spiritual kindred,
and that also, which I say of forswearing of marriage* he does also make me to
speak in the singular number, where I speak in the plural. which course if
any man take with the fathers writings; he may easily make them speak untruth,
and what he lists. But in the mean while Owlyglasse shows himself a
falsary.

Page 24. of my former challenge I say, that papists of late time have devised
masses, and offices in the honor of the cross, of the virgin mary, of S.
Francis, Dominike and other saints, and that unto their images they burn
incense and offer their prayers and devotions: Page 20. chapter 2.
Owlyglasse according to his fashion does thus transform my words, as if I had
said only, that the Papists offer their prayers and devotions to the images of
our Lady, S. Francis, S. Dominike. Whereby it appears, he does detruncate my
words leaving out the beginning, and that which I said concerning the cross,
and burning of incense, upon which points the argument, which I brought was
principally laid. If a man should so use him, as he has used my words, I
doubt not, but he would be much offended.

Page 62. of my challenge I say, that Damascene accompteth them heretics, that
worshipped the images of our Savior, of the blessed Virgin, and the Saints, as
the gentiles did their gods: and I added, that this was the case of the
papists, because both gentiles and papists bow to images, pray to them, burn
incense to them, and offer sacrifice before them: and yet both deny, that they
worship stocks or stones, but rather those persons, that are represented by
them. But Owlyglasse crushing my words together, as if he meant to wring
veriuice out of them, and taking out, what he pleases, does so report my
words, as if I had said only, that the papists worship the images of Saints,
as the gentiles did their gods, and that they pray to them. And thus this
butcherly falsifier of men's writings has mangled my words, as I have
particulerly noted heretofore.

Rome had power to make laws in ancient time, and did practice that power, he
alleges a forged canon of Hilary sometime bishop of Rome, that lived about
the year of our Lord 461. but the same is not extant in ancient record.
neither is it like, that he would use such a thundering style, as did the author
of this decretale epistle. thirdly, no godly bishop would match his own
decrees with Gods ordinances. Nulli fas sit, says he whatsoever he was, sine
status sui periculo, vel diuinas constitutiones, vel apostolicae sedis decreta
temerare* finally, if the bishops of Rome in this time had used this style, all
the world would have laughed at their folly.

Page 23. Chap. 2. he does also curtall my words with an etc. and makes me to
speak of one particular, where I speak of diverse things, and leaves out some
principal parts of my assertion. I say, if a man seek all antiquity, he shall
not find, where the church of Christ has commanded us to keep this popes
day, or that popes day, and to abstain from work on S. Francis, and S.
Dominikes day, and other canonized friars days, or where the same has
enjoined Christians to hear mass, or to fast Lent or Ember days, or vigils
of Saints, and other tides according to the fashion of the Church of Rome. but
my adversary leaves out all that, which concerns hearing of masses, and
keeping of holy days of the popes canonized saints, and of other tides, and of
the manner of fasting.

page 26. he mangleth my words and sentences, and gives them a new form,
never devised by me. I speak of diverse things together, page 32. of my
challenge, and say, that they are not to be found in all antiquity. he makes
me to speak of solemnization of marriages in times prohibited by the Romish
church.

page 32. leaving out that, which I speak of adoration, and carrying about the
sacrament. The like dishonest dealing he uses in most of those places, which
he alleges not of my challenge, as may appear by my answer to his former
exceptions, and by the words themselves, if any man list to compare my book
with his pamphlet. What then need I to touch him for particular falsifications,
when the allegations of his woorthlesse treatise are nothing almost, but
continued falsifications?

Page 32. he cites the 13. canon of the council of Nice for the 12. and where
the council speaks of excommunicate persons only, he makes the same to
speak of all Christians, and to determine, that the holy communion should be
denied to none at the point of death: as if the eucharist, as now is the popish
fashion, were then carried to all sick persons, which is no part of the
councels meaning.

Page 35. he brings in a counterfeit book of S. Ambrose, de viduis, and yet
clippeth his words, forcing him to speak for prayers to angels, which true S.
Ambrose, as may appear by my answers to his exceptions, condemned.

Page 36. he produces Hierome as a witness for prayers to saints, and
alleges his book against Vigilantius for that purpose* but unless he
falsify S. Hieromes words, he shall not find any thing in him, that makes for
his advantage.

Page 53. and 54. he falsely alleges the 4. council of Toledo c, 1. Ignatius
his epistle ad Trallianos, Cyrilles cateches. 4. Epiphanius haeres. 46. Hierome
upon the 4. to the Ephesians. Gregory's Morals, lib. 13. c. 20. and all to prove
Limbus patrum, which the papists fancy to be in hell, and a receptacle of the
fathers before Christ. His falsehood may appear, for that not one of these
testimonies makes for Limbus patrum. and that, if he will not believe me,
Bellarmine will teach him, lib. de anima Christi c. 14. where he shall not once
find his Limbus patrum mentioned in any father.

Page 62. he does falsely ascribe the defense of women's baptism to Master
Hooker of blessed memory. whosoever lists to read Master Hookers fifth book
of Ecclesiast. policy sect. 62. shall find, that he condemns women that
presume to baptize children, albeit he do not pronounce the baptism by them
administered, to be of no validity.

Page 80. and 81. he alleges S. Augustine ser. 243. de tempore, and the
council of Neocaesarea c. 7. to prove, that the custom of not blessing
second marriages is no new device, but a practice of the primitive church* and
yet neither does the canon alleged, nor the author of that sermon speak one
word of blessing of second marriages. Furthermore, neither this sermon, that he
alleges, seems to be S. Augustines, nor are the acts of the council of
Neocaesarea authentical.

Finally, if this simple fellow had alleged more places, more he would have
alleged falsely, being not able to allege any thing almost truly.

If then the Archpriest Blackewell do happen to meet with this owl of Canke
wood; he may do well to admonish him, not to abuse the testimonies which he
alleges, and his readers patience, which he tries to the uttermost with such
notable falsities. he himself confesses, that it is a flagitious matter, to
poule and pare the sentences of venerable antiquity. There rests therefore
nothing, but seeing he has confessed his fault, that the Archpriest set him to
penance, and afterward cause him, if he have a good voice, to sing mass,
seeing he can say no better.

CHAP. XII. A Note of diverse untruths told by Owlyglasse in his pamphlet,
wherein he pretends to charge others with untruths.
IT is a shame for any man to lie. but for him, that takes upon him to charge
others with lying, every foot to lie, is not only a great shame, but also an
argument, that he is past shame. let him therefore the next time look better
to himself, and desist to rail, face, and slander, unless he stood himself
upon better ground, and did use more truth in his dealing.

that popish religion was planted here by Gregory the great* but he tells a
great untruth. for neither was Gregory ever here in this Island, nor did
either he, or his agents maintain that doctrine, that is published by the
conuenticle of Trent, or those points, which I have declared neither to be
ancient, nor generally holden.

that Gregory received that religion, which now the papists profess, from
Peter. Let him therefore show, that all those points of doctrine, against which
I except in my challenge, were received from Peter, or else he must receive
answer, that speaking of religion, he speaks without religion, reason, or
conscience.

Willet, with assaulting the impregnable fort of Gods church, and battering
that rock, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. but if he mean
the true church, then does he make a lie of us. if he mean the present Romish
congregation adhering to the pope, he makes a lie of the pope and his church.
for we have by many arguments declared, that the Romanists and their adherents
are not the true church. We have also showed, that the gates of hell have
prevailed against them, and that declining from the apostolic faith, they are
fallen into many foul heresies.

they repair to the continual tradition and practice of the church, and that
we reject the same* but he lies both in the one and the other* for neither do
the Romanists regard the general practice of the apostolic church for many
hundred years after Christ, nor do we desire any thing more, than that late
customs and traditions rejected, we may return to the sound form of
apostolic faith, and government.

they have recourse to the consent of the ancient learned fathers, and that we
reject them. but the first is proved a lie by Bellarmine, and other popish
proctors, who most lightly reject the fathers, when they make against them* the
second is reproved by our confessions, wherein we show, that we desire nothing
more, than that all latter decretals called, we may return to the ancient
fathers faith.

that papists appeal to general councels, and that we will not admit them.
but after his fashion he hudleth up lies by couples. for neither do they
admit any councels, but such as pleases them; nor do we refuse to admit any
article of faith established by ancient and lawful general councels.

that popish religion is most severe. and yet the world knows, that in all
places papists maintain open stews, and in Rome and diverse great cities
suffer Jews and Turks to dwell quietly. Further, the pope does set to sale
all sins, and every polshorne paltry fellow thinks he can give absolution
to sinners; which brings the keys of the church into contempt. Finally, no
sect ever lived more loosely, or leudly. These things therefore, unless they
be better answered, do sufficiently convince him of lying; and his consorts of
loose living, and popish religion of lightness.

that protestants (doctrine) loses the raines to all liberty, that unbridled
sensuality will never put up petition for any greater. and by protestants, he
understands true Christians, that abhor the abominations of Babel. but if
he had not given the raines to his unbridled tongue to speak all villainy of
honest men, he would not have uttered, and if he had not been a brutish beast,
that uses not to be rained, he would not have written such impudent lies. Let
him therefore set down our doctrine, wherein we seem to let loose our
sensual affections, and let him if he can, show any man of our side, that
allows public stews as the Jesuit Weston, Jesuits in Wisbich taught that
whores were in Rome. with as good right as the pope.
and his consorts did at Wisbich some three or four years agone, affirming
that whores were in Rome, cum approbatione, and to trusse all short, with as
good right as the pope. And if he dare, or hope to win advantage by it, let him
compare the lives of the popes, cardinals, and Romish clergy and people, with
such as truly profess our religion; and examine the honesty of both. and if
not, let him leave his lying, and railing upon honest men.

Page 11. chap. 2. For spittle, says he, speaking of the ceremonies of
baptism, we have the warrant of S. Ambrose lib. 1. de sacrament. c. 1. but
whatsoever he has, we have here a notorious lie delivered by him. for S.
Ambrose in that place has not one word of spittle, much less of spittle in
baptism, for which he is alleged. I wonder then, if Philip Woodward have
made up these wooden animaduersions, that the other mass priests do not spit
in his face, and defy him. and the rather, for that he supposes every word of
S. Ambrose, or the author of that counterfeit treatise to be a sufficient
warrant, whom the papists in diverse points regard not, as I have showed in my
treatise De missa, now published against Bellarmine.

page 12. he says, that for ceremonies used by the Romanists in baptism, viz.
for exorcismes, blowings, salt, spittle, hallowed water, anointings, light and
others (for of these he speaks) he has the testimony of antiquity,
whatsoever I say to the contrary. But can any man believe him on his bare word?
sure no. for taking on him to prove these ceremonies, like a simple idiot he
does not so much as bring any testimony of antiquity for light, holy water, and
greasing in baptism. And the rest, which he brings, are far short of his
purpose. so that to prove Owlyglasse a lying companion, I need no testimony,
but Owlyglasse himself. his own loose dispute does prove Ph. Woodward to be a
wooden fellow.

page 11. he writes, that I utter an untruth so manifest, that Calvin does
confess it. and yet Calvin was dead long before I wrote any thing. Beside
that, he does not confess that to be untruth, which I affirm. for he says
not, that the ceremonies in question were practiced by the ancient church,
which I deny: but only affirms, that he knows how ancient they were.
which may be true, albeit they were neither ancient, nor practiced by the
universal church, but by some few superstitious persons. Finally, he is a
simple fellow to tell us of Calvin, or to make him our judge, albeit we
reverence his memory, as being a learned and godly man, and an excellent
instrument used by the Holy Ghost, to set forth the truth of the Gospel
wickedly suppressed by Antichrist.

in the same book, says Page 13.
he, lay men and women are permitted to minister baptism. but no man did
permit him thus to lie, and to speak without book. neither would he have
taken himself liberty in things not permitted, unless the archpriest or some
false Iebusite had given him liberty to lie and speak untruth. That he has
maliciously uttered untruth, the book will declare, wherein there is not one
word either of lay men, or women permitted to minister baptism.

page 15. that Epiphanius and Hierome affirm, that married persons used not to
be admitted to holy orders, except they did promise perpetual continency from
their wives: he tells a notorious untruth. for neither did Epiphanius
haeres. 59. nor Hierome aduers. Vigilantium, speak one word of promise, or vow
made in that case. Beside that, if they should make such a promise, yet were
that no warrant to permit men to leave their wives in that sort, nor can men
depart or abstain from their wives without their consent, as the adversary
knows, if he know any thing.

page 16. that in married couples disioined, the band of marriage continues
still. but the conuenticle of Trent. sess. 24. c. 6. and other authors In the
challenge.
before alleged will tell him, that in marriages dissolved before consummation,
this his assertion is untrue.

most certain it is, that they said masses, and prayers for the souls
departed, says he, speaking of the fathers of the primitive church. but in
this point not being able to bring forth one father, that ever said mass or
dirge for the dead, he does after a close manner give himself the lie. and to
make his lying more manifest, I have in my answer to his exceptions taken away
all the colors, that he with his little learning could set upon the matter. If
he rest not with his loss, let him in his next return show where any ancient
father said requiem aeternam for the dead, or prayed thus, absolve Domine
animas omnium fidelium defunctorum ab omni vinculo delictorum. and finally, let
him prove, that the ancient fathers believed, that Christ's body and blood were
really offered for quick and dead in the mass. If he can not do this, he
talks idly of his mass, and shows himself to be a mass priest rather
in a foolish intention, than in certain knowledge, or true popish devotion.

Page 21. chap. 2. he denies, that papists put any hope in images, or that
they worship them, as the Gentiles did their gods, or that they offer their
prayers or devotions unto them. but he lies falsely, as his own conscience
may tell him, if he have any conscience, and be not as stupide as any stock or
stone, which he is wont to worship. secondly the practice of the Romish church
must needs convince him of lying. for among the Romanists simple people and
priests also, not unlike to heathen idolaters, fall down before stocks and
stones, set up lights before them, burn incense to them, pray before them.
thirdly, their usual forms of prayers do show, that he has told untruth,
and that lying is with him an usual form. in their rituall books they say, o
crux aue spes vnica. and friar Bartilmew of Siena, that is now said to work
miracles, has these words for his devise, Christ and his cross, and Mary, be
my guide and keeper* and to the portrait of our Saviors face, they say, salve
sancta facies* fourthly their common doctrine is, that the image is to be
worshipped with that worship, that is due to the original. but it is to be
doubted, whether the heathen were so gross idolaters, as to give that honor
to their images. finally they go on pilgrimage to their images more then ever
did the heathen, and doubt not but they are able to do more, then the heathen
idols, as may appear by the vows made to the lady of Loreto, and such other
saints. for never did the heathen more superstitiously worship Diana at
Ephesus, then the Romanists worship the image of our lady at Loreto.

fastes in Lent, on ember days, and on the vigiles of saints, he says, that
antiquity is plentiful, viz. of testimonies in this case. and yet the wooden
fellow does not bring any one testimony for the fastes upon vigiles of saints,
nor can he prove the practice of the Romish church by any one testimony
alleged by him, precisely.

Page 28. chap. 2. he denies, that papists hold, that Christian men may live
without sin* an impudent untruth, and wherein he contradicts himself. for
if Christians can fulfill all the law of God, as he goes about with all his
little skill to prove, and that by diverse arguments; then does it necessarily
follow, that they may live without all sin.

Page 31. he affirms, that the form of confirmation, is as ancient, as the
apostles. a lie of great length, reaching to the apostles times, and thereof to
convince him no man needs to go farther then his own confession, who is not
able to allege either the testimony of the apostles, or any ancient father for
this form of confirmation: signo te signo crucis, and confirmo te Chrismate
salutis.

the form of consecration practiced by the Romanists has always been
holden* and would therefore prove it to be a constituion apostolical* but his
assertion is refuted both by histories and fathers, and especially by his own
silence, that speaks more in a line, then he will prove all his life.

Page 34. he says papists grant, that there is but one mediator of redemption,
but doubts not to hold, that there are many mediators of intercession* but he
lies in both these points. for in the mass the priest is said in plain
terms to offer pro redemptione animarum. and sure, if they offer up Christ
Jesus properly and really; then are they mediators of redemption. the second
point I have declared to be a notorious lie in my former discourse.

Page 43. he hudleth up diverse lies upon a heap. first he says, auricular
confession was ordained by Christ. secondly, that by the law of God men in
mortal sin were bound to repair to the sacrament of auricular confession*
thirdly, that mortal sins are not remitted without auricular confession* the
first lie is refuted by the testimony of scriptures, wherein neither form, nor
institution of auricular confession is to be found. The second is convinced by
the book of Gods law, wherein we find no color of such an ordinance. the
third is manifested by diverse testimonies of scriptur^s, which declare, Galat.
3.
that we receive the promise of the spirit through faith: that Act. 15.
faith purifieth our hearts: that, we are washed by Christ his blood, whom we
put on; not by outward confession, but by our faith and inward conversion to
God. Furthermore all these lies may be refuted also by the silence of
Oulyglasse, that is not able to justify any one of his assertions by any text
of scripture* beside that all papists hold, that confession is a sacrament of
their new law, and not established under the law of Moses, as Oulyglasse would
insinuate. finally the decretale of Innocentius, upon which auricular
confession depends, being long after the times of the apostles and ancient
fathers, is a plain conviction of Oulyglasses false dealing, for how can that
be either instituted by Christ, or authorized by the law, or deemed necessary,
that before Innocent the thirds time was neither established, nor deemed
necessary?

Page 49. that saint James makes mention of the sacrament of extreme unction*
but that may appear to be a lie, both for that there is no mention of a
sacrament there, and for that sacraments are not to be instituted by men, but
by God. finally no ancient father did ever expound these words of popish
extreme unction.

Page 113. he says, that I deny, that the matter of the real presence
concerns any fundamental point of faith* but if he cannot prove it out of
my words, I hope he will not deny, but that after his woonted fashion he has
told untruth.

The rest of his lies you shall find noted in my answer to his exceptions to
my challenge. if then he has begun to lie so fast, what are we to look for,
if he continue his course of writing? and if his clients do commend him for
these lies; what will they, if he proceed on as he has begun? I, for my part,
will give my voice, to have him canonized for lying.

CHAP. XIII. Corollaries, and conclusions gathered out of the former challenge,
and the answers to the exceptions taken to the same.
I Need not, as I suppose, make any large discourse in drawing out particular
conclusions out of the former challenge and answer* for he is very simple, that
does not perceive, whereto they both do tend. Beside that, I have heretofore
touched some principal points which especially seem to deserve consideration.
but seeing Robert Parsons in his relation sent us from Rome, beside the report
of matters then passed, began first to draw out certain idle observations; and
perceiving well, that his wooden scholar Owlyglasse does second him, and has
likewise endeavored to make observations, and to draw great conclusions out of
his slender and misshapen premises, I have thought it not amiss to encounter
him, although not in so weak manner with the very like course, and for his
observations to send him likewise other observations and conclusions, being
very loath to be behind him in any course that may serve either to manifest the
truth, or to correct the error and treachery of such lewd companions.

Deuteronomy. 13.
Moses speaking of false prophets says, propheta ille aut fictor somnioru^
interficietur, quia loquutus est ut auerteret vos a domino deo vestro. that is,
that prophet or dreamer of dreams, shall be slain, because he has spoken, to
disturne you from the Lord your God. where it is to be noted, that false
prophets and teachers are fitly joined with dreamers of dreams. for that he,
that teaches doctrine not grounded upon the infallable word of God, is no
better then a dreamer of dreams. Christian kings they ought to be nurses of
Gods church, and have the sword committed unto them, not only to repress
seditious persons and wicked malefactors, but also such idolatrous
massepriests, as disturb the peace of the church, and seek to disturne men
from the truth by their false doctrine. with princes also all true Christians
ought to concur in the detecting of such wicked members. If thy brother,
says Moses, or the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or thy
wife, that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend, whom thou love as thy soul,
would persuade thee, saying, let us go and serve other gods, which thou know
not, nor thy fathers, thou shall not yield unto him, nor hear him, nor shall
thy eye spare him, nor shall thou pity him, or conceal him, but shall cause
him to be slain. for it is not sufficient for a Christian man to know and
follow the truth, but he must also avoid false doctrine and the service of
Baal. Christ's sheep, as John 10.
he says, they follow the true sheperd, and a stranger they will not follow.
neither may we regard their fair pretenses, of reconciling men to the
catholic Romish church, as they call it. for even wolfes though ravenous, yet
now and then come unto us in sheep clothing. but our savior Christ gives us
a caveat, to beware of them. Beware says Matthew. 7.
he, of false prophets, which shall come unto you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. these will smoothly tell you, that they come
to save your souls, and pretend to come from Christ's vicar; but they are the
ministers of antichrist, and the idolatrous priests of Baal, and come to
destroy your souls. by their fruits you shall know them. their study is
sedition and alteration of state, their religion heresy and superstition,
their life full of filthiness and abomination. neither do we read of any,
that have harkened unto the Jesuits of late years, but they have been
utterly ruined by them. examples hereof we have diverse, and the truth which I
affirm appears by the Scottish Catechism. de Iesuitis.
Queen ruined by the wicked counsel of Sammier, that came disguised unto her
all in yelow satin: by the duke of Guise and the leaguers of France brought to
destruction by Claude Matthiew: by king Phillip the 2. of Spain intricated by
the most wicked counsels of Parsons: by the king of Poland that stands in
danger to loose his kingdom of Suethland: by the death and overthrow of
Sebastian king of Portugal in Barbary: by the prince of Transiluania, that is
now by their means dispossessed of Transiluania: Ferdinande of Croatia, who
together with his army was overthrown by a few Turks. listening to these
presumptuous fellows consultations: by the emperor, that is weakened by their
seditious practices, losing the aid of diverse princes of religion, by the
importunity of these trouble-states. as for inferior lords and gentlemen, that
have been drawn into practices by Jesuits, and so have overthrown
themselves, and their houses, the number of them is infinite.

went about to draw men from the true worship of God. quia voluit abstrahere
te, says Deuteronomy. 13.
Moses speaking to the people, a domino deo tuo. and because he sought to
persuade men to serve idols and false gods, saying, eamus, and sequamur deos
alienos. let us go and follow other gods. the 2. Cor. 6.
apostle does teach us, that there is no consent betwixt the church of God and
idols* qui-consensus says he, templo dei cum idolis. if it be the church of
God, then it admits no idols; if idols be erected in any place, then that
is not the church of God. 1. Cor. 10.
he says also, that Christians cannot both drink the Lords cup, and the cup
of devils, and by the cup of devils he understands the cup consecrated in
honor of idols. The prophet David therefore speaking of idolaters professes
like a good king, that Psalm. 16.
he would not offer their offerings of blood, nor make mention of their names
within his lips. 2. King. 18.
Hezekias overthrow the high places, brake down the images, out down the
groves, and removed away all monuments of idolatry. Josias did likewise, and
executed to death, such as had burned incense to Baal. 1. King. 18.
Helias enflamed with zeal, would not suffer one of Baals prophets to escape.
contrariwise God does show himself highly displeased with such, as wink at
idolaters. the spirit of God speaking to the bishop of Pergamus: Apoc. 2.
habeo says he, aduersus te pauca, quia habes illic tenentes doctrinam Balaam,
qui docebat Balac mittere scandalum coram filijs Israel, edere, and fornicari.
likewise he reprooueth the bishop of Thyatira sharply for permitting
idolaters, and false seducing teachers, I have against thee Apoc. 2.
says he, some few things, because thou do permit the woman Iezabel to
teach and to seduce my servants, to commit fornication, and to eat of things
sacrificed to idols. finally no man can call himself a Christian, that can be
content to see either Gods commandment openly broken in worshipping of idols,
or else secretly frustrated by secret practices and subtle euasions of Baals
priests. and as idolaters shall be punished in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone; so shall they not escape grievous punishments, that either
maintain them, or wink at them. let no man therefore blame her Majesty and
the State, that cannot endure these idolatrous slaves of antichrist, and wicked
mass priests of Baals order.

Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius L. omnes. Cod. de haeret.
put all heretics to silence. omnes vetitae legibus diuinis, and imperialibus
constitutionibus, say they, perpetuo quiescant. Valentinian and Martian L.
quicunque ibidem.
decreed, that false teachers should be put to death. Vltimo supplicio
afficiantur say they, qui illicita docere tentauerint. Constantine did
grievously punish such, as kept or concealed any books of heretics, as is
testified by Sozomen, lib. 1. hist. cap. 20. Saint Augustine does greatly
commend the emperors laws made against the Donatistes. and Hierom writing upon
the fifth to the Galathians, seems much to mislike the remissness of diverse
in their proceedings against the heretic Arius. as for private men they are to
follow the apostles counsel 2. Tim. 4. and to avoid these heretics. saint
Epist. 2.
John would not have Christians so much as once to bid them God speed. nolite
iugum ducere says the apostle 2. Corinthians. 6. cum infidelibus. be not yoked
with infidels. for what conjunction is there betwixt justice and iniquity? it
is a hard matter to touch pitch, and not to be defiled. and heretical books
and companions seduce simple souls, that are not able to judge. finally if
reason persuade not blind papists; yet the judgments of God denounced against
idolaters may persuade every man, that is studious of his salvation, to beware
of their entisements, and not to frequent their company. Solomon though a wise
prince, was seduced by his idolatrous wives, and Iosaphat hardly escaped
danger, accompanying and assisting the idolatrous king Achab.



In ancient time treason was accounted the greatest crime that could be
committed in matters of state, and most severely and extraordinarily was the
same punished. at this day neither will the Spaniard nor French, nor the
Italian princes endure any subject, that shall either deny his authority or
adhere to foreign enemies; albeit they pretend religion never so much naturally
every man is bound to defend himself. but the prince is not only bound by the
laws of nature to look to his own safety, but also by the laws of state,
for that many men's safety and estates do depend upon him. as for those that
fear, or defer to take a course with traitors, they are either stupide, or
else pusillanimous.

The Jesuits and their adherents will, I know, deny themselves to be traitors.
so they will also deny the Sun to shine pro bono societatis, as they term
it, and for their cacolicke cause, but I have by arguments convinced them to be
traitors: and if they answer not categorically, and directly, and without all
equivocations, they will by their own silence prove themselves to be
traitors. and for the manifestation of their lewd disposition, I would pray
Robert Parsons, or his scholar Garnet, or Philip woodward, that is so busy,
or any of the combination of the archipresbiteriall congregation of traitors to
answer me directly to these questions ensuing.

First whether they believe, the pope by his sentence proceeding without error
against the Queen, and declaring her to be deposed, that they are still to
acknowledge her to be lawful Queen, or no, and to obey her notwithstanding
the popes commandment.

Secondly whether in that case the Pope commanding them to take arms against
her Majesty, they ought not to do it, and are excommunicate and damned like
dogs, if the pope command them to do it upon pain of his curse, and they
refuse it.

Thirdly whether in that case, they will not persuade all papists to take arms
against her Majesty, and whether themselves will not concur with them, if
the pope excommunicate all that refuse.

4 Whether they do not believe, that the pope has power to take her Majesty's
crown from her head.

5 Whether he has power to dispense with the subjects oaths of allegiance, and
to command them to rebel.

6 Whether they think her Majesty can be deposed without violence offered to
her Majesty's person and life.

7 Whether the pope commanding them, they would not deliver her into the hands
of her enemies, or kill her, as Allen in his traitorous exhortation to the
nobility and people of England and Ireland, went about to persuade them.

8 Whether they think it not lawful so to do.

9 Whether the Spaniards, or other foreign enemies coming to execute the popes
sentence against the Queen, they would fight against them displaying the Popes
banner, and publishing the popes lawful sentence (as they suppose) against the
Queen, or take part with them.

10 Whether all are not excommunicate, that disobey the popes sentence, or
contumaciously stand against him, it being not known, but that he has
proceeded justly, nor they having power to dispute of his doings, or to
determine against him.

11 Whether they will allow the fact of the earls of Westmerland and
Northumberland, that rebelled in England, of Sanders and the Earl of Desmond,
that rebelled in Ireland, and such like rebels, or not.

12 Whether they believe, that Allen, Sanders, Bristow, Parsons, and such as
allow such facts of treasons, be not traitors, and have published treacherous
doctrine.

13 Whether they do take themselves bound in conscience to follow the popes
sentences and decrees in deposing of princes, and bestowing of kingdoms upon
strangers, when he shall command them upon pain of his curse.

14 Whether they purpose not to maintain the Infantaes title, if the pope do
so command them, or other prince, that he shall set up against her Majesty.

15 Whether they have not received the popes breeues, and enterteined
intelligence with him, and his agents. and whether they have not received
pensions and money out of Spain, and think it lawful so to do. and whether
they have not taken an oath for the Spanish Infantaes title, nor brought any
notes of their faction out of Spain and Italy, as for example, medalles,
grains, relics, agnus Dei, pictures, crosses, faculties, and such like.

16 Whether hereafter they do not mean to enterteine intelligence with the
Pope and Spaniard, and their agents, and to acknowledge the pope for their
superior. All which, if they answer not, they must needs confess themselves
worthy to be expulsed out of this land, and sent back to the Pope and
Spaniard, if no worse. for thereby they declare themselves friends to them, and
enemies to their country.

Si quis. ff. quod quisque iuris, etc. then have the Romanists no reason to
require any favor at the hands of our superiors. They put true Christians to
death without all remission, if they renounce not the true Christian faith: and
those, that are said to deal most mercifully with them, as some popish princes
and prelates in Germany, yet do they banish all such, as they suspect not to
hold popish religion. Why then do not papists acknowledge the great favor
showed to them by the state, when such notorious idolaters and heretics are
not served, as they serve others? and why do these seditious malcontents
exclaim against her Majesty's late proclamation, and the state, that gives
such traitors and le^d practisers so fair warning to be packing?

They pardon none, that commit treason in Rome or Spain. Why then should it be
more lawful for Jesuits and factious mass priests to commit treason in
England? is not our country as dear to us, as Rome or Spain to them?

They account it a matter very absurd for any to dispute, whether the Italian
or Spanish laws concerning treason, be just or no, and whether they be to be
executed or not; and such prisoners as should except against laws abroad,
would be laughed to scorn. Why then should Parsons, and Allen, and their
traitorous consorts be suffered to raise against the laws of England, and this
state, as they have done in their railing libels entitled Aduersus persecutores
Anglos; Andreas Philopater; Sanders de schismate, and diverse other of that
nature? or why should any be suffered in corners to whisper against so lawful
and godly proceedings?

The papists will not yield to us sufficient safeconduct and liberty to
dispute in Milan, Paris, Collen, and Salamanca. Why then do they brag, as if
they were desirous to dispute and try their cause in Cambridge and Oxford? and
what a ridiculous point is it to desire that for papists, which themselves will
not yield to us?

They will not suffer any books of ours to be published in Rome, or other
places, where popery is professed, if they contain matter of religion; and
most severely do they punish such, as either sell such books, or read them,
or keep them without license. Why then should not papists confess, that we
have great reason to take a more strict course than hitherto we have done with
all their books, and pamphlets, and with all that have them, especially now,
seeing that few of them come forth, but they are fraught with slanders against
the state, lies and impostures against religion, and doctrine tending to
sedition and corruption of manners?

Rob. Parsons, and his disciple Owlyglasse, and their damnable consorts deuoid
of all conscience. for conscience is grounded only upon the laws of God, and
is nothing, but the inward judgment of every man of his own actions,
according to the knowledge which he has of Gods law and his word. And this is
gathered out of the apostles words, Romans 1. where he says, that the Gentiles
do show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing
them witness, and their thoughts either accusing them, or excusing them. S.
James 4.
James he also shows us, that we have one lawgiuer and judge, which is able
to save and destroy. S. In exposit. proposit ex epist. ad Romans
Augustine expounding the words of the apostle, Romans 1. shows, that
conscience is nothing, but the judgment of every man's soul of his own
actions. Si cor nostrum nos reprehenderit, says he, rehearsing the words of
John 1. epist. c. 3. mayor est Deus conscientia nostra. But the papists ground
their conscience upon the decrees of the pope, upon the customs of the Romish
church, upon the vain opinions of every louzy canonist, upon the wicked and
treasonable conceits of Parsons, and Allen, in their resolutions of cases of
conscience for the English nation, upon the damnable commandments of their
superiors, breaking their necks and running headlong into hell, as soon as
they are commanded: and that blindly and wilfully for other private men's
pleasures. and this appears first by Martin Aspilcuetaes enchiridion of cases
of conscience, by the compendium of the Jesuit Alagona, and all the doctrine of
Casuistes, which as the adversaries cannot deny, is grounded as well upon the
popes decretales and customs, and upon the laws, traditions, and customs of
the Romish church, and opinions of canonists, as upon the law of God. nay there
are far more cases that concern the popes law, then that concern Gods law.

Secondly Lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans c. 15. and seq.
Bellarmine teaches, that the pope has power to make laws, that bind in
conscience. semper creditum est says he, episcopos in suis dioecesibus and
Romanum Pontificem in tota ecclesia esse veros principes ecclesiasticos, qui
possint sua authoritate, etiam sine plebis consensu, vel presbyterorum consilio
leges far, quae in conscientia obligent. hereof it follows also, that all
papists are bound in conscience to believe the popes decretales concerning
faith, and to observe his rules concerning manners, and that for conscience
sake, and I think no papist will deny it.

Thirdly, Allen and Parsons in their most wicked resolutions teach their
traitorous scholars, first to wear long hair, secondly, not only to change
their names but also to deny their names; thirdly to deny their country and
parentage; Resolut. cas. nation. Anglic. cap. 1. cas. 1.
fourthly to deny her Majesty to be lawful Queen, and her officers to have
power over mass priests* for that is also taught in the resolution, albeit not
propounded in the case. Ibid. cap. 3. cas. 5.
finally to forswear themselves, and to dissemble and practice all manner of
treachery* they also show, how they may eat flesh on fasting days, and come in
company with men of our religion, and neglect the popes laws also in case of
danger* in sum their resolutions tend to no other end, but to show how mass
priests with a good conscience well wrought and suppled by Robert Parsons, may
by help of a good Romish conscience betray their country to the Spaniard, and
cut their countrimens throats.

Fourthly the Rhemistes in their expositions of the new Testament, writing upon
the 23. of the Acts teach their disciples how to forswear themselves, and
resolve, that upon pain of damnation they must break their oaths* are these
fellows then Christians trow you, that handling the most sacred word of God,
do by their wicked expositions teach men to violate their oaths, and to abuse
the holy name of God?

Finally the Jesuits hold, that the inferior being enioined by the pope, or the
general of that wicked race of Iebusiticall impostors and traitors, to do any
act, or to believe any thing, is not to dispute of the matter, but resolutely
to execute, what they are commanded. and this they call obedientiam caecam. If
then the pope, or the general of the Jesuits command Parsons or Garnet to kill
the Queen, or any principal man of England, or their own mother, by this
doctrine it follows; that they are bound to do it. is it not strange then,
that any Christian state can suffer such traitors and parricides or their
adherents to live among them?

catholics, and would so be called* but I have declared them to be in a gross
error by very plain evidence* to them therefore I say, that if they desire to
be made members of Christ's true church, they must come out of the Synagogue of
Rome, and forsake the whore of Babylon, and drink no more of her cup full of
all abominations. Secondly if that religion, which is sprung up of late time,
and long after the times of Christ, and his apostles, cannot be true; then the
Romish doctrine must needs be false and counterfeit. Thirdly if papists desire
to be true catholics; then must they renounce the particular religion of
Romanists, that has not either of all christians been known, or at all times
generally been received. Fourthly if no heretics deserve the name of
Christians; then must they forsake the heretical opinions of the popes and
their proctors, if they will be accounted Christians and true believers. Fifthly
if idolaters shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, let them beware of
the notorious idolatries maintained by the doctrine and practice of popish
religion. finally if the Jesuits and massepriests be a faction adhering to the
pope, and foreign enemies; then had they need to take heed how they receive
them, aid them, join with them, or have any dealing with them.

Finally I observe, that popish religion is nothing else but a pack of lies
and impostures, and cannot stand without falsification, fraud, and violence. I
have already verified the same by many particulers. and every man shall hereby
discern, that I have said truth, for that neither Parsons, nor any of his
consorts will undertake from point to point to answer my challenge, and to
justify both all such allegations, as I have said to be falsified, and also
all such narrations, as I have challenged to be lies and false reports. I do
rather look for such a bald ribald like railing libell, as this was, and such
pamphlets, as Parsons uses to set forth under counterfect names.

All you therefore of the Romish religion beware of the abominations of
Babylon, and of the falsehood and fraud of that whore, which sits upon the 7.
hills. I have, as you may perceive touched but few particulars in comparison of
those, which I could have objected, if time and laisure would have served* but
if Parsons come forth again, you shall have the rest. I will also add the
notorious forgeries lies and calumniations of Posseuin, Gregory de Valentia,
Professores quinti euangelij.
Andreas Iurgiuits Vilnensis, that denies us to believe the articles of the
apostles creed, and other such villenous companions, not forgetting Alan Copus
alias Harpesfield nor Stapleton, nor any notorious stickler of that wicked crew.

In the mean while mark, I pray you, how the pope with his Italians and
Spaniards laugh and enjoy their ease, while a number of English youths are
drawn into danger both of body and soul, running headlong of a blind and
furious zeal into treason, and seeking how to maintain the popes tyranny, and
to teach his errors and heresies. God for his mercy sake, if it be his holy
will open their eyes, that they may see their own gross errors, and forsake
these pernicious courses, and in the end join themselves with the rest of
their friends, kinsmen and countrymen in a firm resolution not only for the
maintenance of the honor of their prince, country, and nation, against all
foreign enemies, but also for the defense of true religion, against the
attempts and assaults of antichrist, and false doctrine of all idolaters and
heretics, the only vpholders of the kingdom of antichrist.


