A BRIEF EXAMINATION, OF A CERTAIN PEREMPTORY MENACING AND DISLEAL PETITION
PRESENTED, AS IS PRETENDED, TO THE Kings most excellent Majesty, By certain
Lay Papists, calling themselves, The Lay Catholics of England, and now
lately Printed, and diuulged by a busy compagnion, called JOHN LECEY.

Epist. Jude, verse 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their
own lusts, whose mouths speak proud things, having men's persons in
admiration, because of advantage.



AT LONDON, Printed for William Cotton, and are to be sold at his shop,
adjoining to Ludgate. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, TOBIE, BY GODS GRACE Bishop of Duresme,
his special good Lord.
THE last Session of the Parliament, my good Lord, I answered a certain
petition then diuulged and printed by the Masters and teachers of Popish
religion: and this, I had well hoped, would have satisfied their disciples and
folowers, seeing their learned leaders so silent and unable to reply. But I
perceive that the common saying now proves true, That many scholars Cicer.
Epist. famil lib. 9. ad varronem.
pass their Masters. For if they had not excelled their teachers in immodesty,
they would not have rubbed over that rustie stuff, which their betters are
ashamed to bring again upon the stage: and if they had not passed them in
boldness and importunity, they would have forborne to importune his Majesty
and the state further, in matters formerlie, for such grave and important
considerations, most worthily rejected. And yet I speak not this, to the
intent to clear their masters. For beside that this seems a devise of their
Masters the Massepriestes and Iebusites, that make others to solicit their
forelorne cause, Chrysostom homil. 43. op. imperf. in Math. tells us, that
the impiety of the scholars is to be imputed to the masters.

The argument of both petitions is one in effect, and therefore much more
needs not to be said now then that which is formerly answered to the
Massepriests. Yet because all have not seen the former petition and answer,
nor understood their gunpowder, and rebellious practices; and these Lay, or
rather lame Roman Catholics, seem to stand more upon their loyalty, then
the other; I thought it not amiss, after this late discovery of their most
horrible treasons, particulerly to examine this discourse also, and with
marginall Glosses to point to the fooleries of their text, which
notwithstanding I would not have all simple papists take, as spoken to
themselves. for my meaning was to touch only these Petitioners, and such as
subscribe this factious Petition.

Much ado we have about toleration of popish religion, but we may say, as
Saluianus lib. 7. de prouidentia said sometime in another case: vtinam hoc
remedium malorum, and non diuturna toleratio. I would this toleration, which
they desire, were a remedy of their pretended evils, and not rather a long
continued toleration of mischiefs, and that both in the Church and state. For
why, I beseech you, may we not so say, seeing nothing can be granted, that is
either more derogatorie to Gods honor, or more prejudicial to the Kings
majesty and state, as has in part appeared by this late attempt, and as God
willing it shall at large, with most invincible arguments, be demonstrated?

This my discourse, most reverend Father, I present to your Honor, as a pledge
of my love, and an acknowledgment of your Lordships favors toward me: and the
rather, that both your Lordship and al true Christians truly zealous for the
cause of true piety, and studious of the safety of their country, may thereby
understand, how much it imports them all to concur in repressing such
notorious insolency, and factious courses. These men, they are like the
heretics, of whom Irenaeus lib. 5. aduers: haeres. speaks, which being blind
in matters of truth, did contradict their own salvation. Caecutientes circa
veritatem, says he, suae contradicunt saluti. But pious governors will
neither neglect the safety of religion and the state, nor of these conte^tious
gainesayers of truth, if they do not wilfully shut their ears to the truth,
and their eyes to the light, and carelessly neglecte the restraint of the
underminers both of the Parliament house, and whole State. Wherefore referring
these matters next to Gods providence, to the zealous care of our superiors, I
commend this work and my self to your Lordship, and your Lordships prosperous
estate, to the favor of the almighty. London, this first of January, Anno.
1605.

Your Lordshippes, in all pious affection, MATTHEW: SVTCLIFFE.

To the Christian Reader.
I DO not believe, gentle reader, that many lay papists will subscribe this
petition, albeit pretended to be framed and exhibited by all of them to the
King. It were a matter too saucy, for wise, and civil men to challenge the
king of breach of promise, as they do page 8: and too presumptuous to rail on
religion publicly professed, and the professors thereof, to the Kings face,
as they do in diverse places. Neither do I think, that all are so foolish, as to
make themselves pledges and hostages for their Massepriests, suffering such
slippery co^panio^s to dominere in their houses, to confer with their wives and
daughters, to wast their estate, while they have no Counterbond from them,
either for the others good behavior, or their own security. This I am well
assured, that what soever is pretended, this petition never came Originally
from the heads of lay papists. For neither may such men without license,
read Caluines Institutions, nor Luthers books, nor other discourses written
by men of our side: nor may they take upon them to discourse of Religion, as
the Authors of this petition do.

I would therefore pray the simpler sort of plain meaning Papists, not to take
what soever is sharply spoken against the Mass Priests masked under the name
of lay papists, and the sole deuisers of this petition, and their abherents,
the Authors of many treasons and mischiefs, as spoken or meant against
themselves, and all seduced simple souls. And against such as so violently run
a course against truth, and seek to blow up the King and State: I doubt not,
but all indifferent men will esteem my speech moderate, and this kind of
dealing most fitting and convenient. What? shall uncircumcised Philistims rail
at the people of God, and seek our destruction; and shall not true Christians
be permitted liberty to repress their insolency, to countermine their
undermining treasons, and freely to defend the truth?

When themselves do publish their petitions, they may not refuse to have them
publicly examined; and no reason have they to complain of wrong, seeing
themselves thus handled, when notwithstanding their wicked intentions, they put
forth their Apologyes, requests, and discourses into other men's hands, as if
they were most loyal and honest men.

Hitherto they have abused the world with a false pretense of antiquity, and
falselie challenged to themselves the name and title of Catholics. They do
also before such, as are ignorant of matters of state, stand upon terms of
loyalty, and love of their Prince and country. But now that we are so far
urged, we shall God willing, make it appear, that their Popish devises are
nothing but a pack of novelties lately brought into the Romish church, and
that their Religion is full of heresies, impieties and blasphemies: and lastly
that diverse of their practices are full of Salt peter, and most dangerous to
the state: and that their importunate desires are repugnant both to reasons of
religion and state, and also to modest and civil carriage.

My sole request to thee shall be, that thou would be please to compare our
answer with the lay papists petition, and to judge according to proofs, We
seek for truth, we defend the Kings prerogative and state. Let no man
therefore shut his eyes against that light, by which we may see truth, nor be
careless in matters so nerelye touching the safety of the King and state,
neither let any papist be offended with us, while we seek his salvation. Non
ideo vobis displiceamus, says Saint Augustine to certain Donatists, epist.
204. ad Donatum, quia reuocamus erra^tes, and quaerimus perditos. and so we
say also to the simple, and abused papists, Let us not displease you, because
we seek to call you from your errors, and to gain that which is lost, We do
not hate you, as our Countrymen, but we detest your errors, being humorously
affected to foreign superstition. In speaking also for common peace and safety
we seek your peace. The petitioners say, they are resolved and pretend reason
of their resolution. But nothing is more fantastical or foolish, then to
resolve upon false suppositions, and to build without firm foundation. neither
is any thing more sottish then to seek that, which being granted, would turn
to their dishonor and hurt, if not destruction.

To confirm the weak, and to recall those which go astray we have done our
best endeavor: we have also defended the honor of religion, his majesty, and
the state, as became us. The rest we refer to gods grace; beseeching him, so
to enlighten all christian men's hearts with the knowledge of his eternal
truth, that not only the professors of religion may stand firm against the
glozing persuasions of seducing and seditions Iebusites and Mass Priests: but
also such, as incline too much to error and superstition, and now seem
malcontented, may be gathered into the true Church, and show themselves true
subjects, embracing truth and perseuering therein to their lives end.

A BRIEF EXAMINATION, OF The Lay Papists late petition, directed to his
royal Majesty. Anno. 1604.
Chapter 1. The resolution of the petition apologeticall of the Lay papists,
together with a sum of the answer, made unto it.
COmmonly we see by experience, that excuses going before accusations, do
argue a secret confession of the faults of guilty consciences. Jf nothing else
did show it; yet this, and diverse other petitions, and Apologies directed by
diverse Mass priests, and Papists unto his royal majesty, who neither
charge them, nor proceeds against them for those matters, which they go
about to cover and excuse, do prove it sufficiently. For what reason have they
to make so many defenses and excuses, if they did not know in their
consciences, that there are certain matters, wherewith they deserve to be
charged? do the defendants use to make their answers before the accusers
exhibit their bills, or articles?

But suppose their consciences were clear: yet their words do argue plainly,
that neither for their faith toward god, nor for their fidelity to his
majesty, they stand upright in the common reputation of their countrymen. For
if they did, what should they need to publish such Apologies, wherein they
pretend to give his Majesty an account of their belief and religion, and a
full and ample security and satisfaction of their fidelities and submission?
again, if their cause were so clear, why do not Massepriests come forth,
and show themselves? and why should the lay Papists be so sparing in giving the
King his prerogative, and so lavish in ascribing his right to the Pope? Lastly
what meant Percie and his companions, to attempt so bloody an execution, and
all papites to pray for the good success of matters designed? To forbear to
speak of the quality of their cause, which we shall have more occasion to do
hereafter, first we are to understand, what their intention is, in this their
Apologeticall Epistle, and next what form they keep in their proceedings.
Their request is first, that penal laws made heretofore against
Massepriestes, recusantes, and their abettors, may be either reuersed or
suspended. And next, that Popish religion and the teachers thereof, may be
tolerated upon a certain form of submission. And lastly, that his majesty
would be pleased to account Papists for his good subjects, and to suspect the
rest. Matters all of very hard disgestion, and very difficult to be proved,
or granted.

Yet what dare they not attempt, to obtain a toleration of their wicked
abuses? first they threaten the King, Chapter 3: with an intimation of their
numbers, forces and intelligences both at home and abroad: not forgetting to
brag of their qualities and merits. Next they allege certain reasons of
their resolution in popish religion. Thirdly, which to us seems very
admirable, considering their manifold rebellions and treasons against their
princes and countries both in England and elsewhere, and the late horrible
treason then in brewing, they stand upon high terms of their loyal carriage
and fidelity. Fourthly, albeit the same be without the compass of their
apologeticall petition, yet they run out into a long accusation of the
professors of true religion, therein inuoluing his majesty and the governors of
the state, and as it were ridiculously making them to answer, that must be
their judges. Lastly they offer a form of submissio^, and pretend to give us
sufficient security for the Kings life, and for the preservation of the state
of which the first declares their obedience to be very bare and only
voluntary, the second argues their pride to be insupportable, which
undertake to capitulate with the King, and think their word and bond
sufficient for the security of such a king and state. But we must
understand, that now they were conceiting their horrible treasons, and that
they meant to burn their bonds, and the parties to whom they stood obliged,
This is the substance of their pleading. For the better garnishing whereof they
propose reasons, first of their former silence, and next of the breach of
their silence in this petition apologeticall: albeit we have just cause to
wonder, how they can well speak of silence, when so many of their consorts,
have never ceased their babbling and scribbling about this object and how they
dare pretend reasons of this petition, that is so deuoid of weight, reason, and
wisdom, Beside these reasons John Lecey comes in, with a prologue in
commendation of the actours in this Pageant and certain banished Masse-Prestes
stand in the rereward with an epilogue to the Lords of his majesty's counsel,
accusing them of injustice and hard dealing, which some confess in part to be
true. for if they had been iustlye dealt with all; then had they been exequuted
for their treacherous practices, and felonies, for which diverse of them stood by
law condemned, and not sent away to rail upon such, as showed mercy and
favor to them. And this is the corpse, the deua^t, derrier, and all the
co^te^ts of this lame petition apologetical, framed, as is said, by lay
Papists, or rather in their names by certain Mass Priests. For answer whereof,
although no further answer needs, then that, which already has been made
to their good masters, urging the same things in diverse of their libels,
discourses and petitions, we purpose by Gods grace to hold this course, First
it shall be declared, that toleration of false religions is repugnant to rules
of religion and holy scripture, and next that it is contrary to al Christian
policy and reason. Thirdly that the Papists themselves in places where they
command, deny all toleration of other Religions then that which they profess
themselves. Furthermore least the Papists might except, that these
allegations do nothing concern their cause, it shall be further proved, that
popery is a false, idolatrous, heretical, new, and blasphemous religion, and
not only enemy to kings and princes, but also grievous to all Christians.
Finally, least any of these petitioners should swell with pride and think,
that with his great eloquence he were able either to justify the cause of
popish Religion, or to make good his reasons for toleration thereof; we have
thought good, not only to gloss the text, but also to examine the prologues,
reasons, epilogues, defenses, accusations and whole pleadings of our
adversaries throughout their whole apologeticall petition, Tu leno haeresis
Arrianae says Lucifer in his apology for Athanasius, cunctos fieri cupis
consacrilegos tuos. So we may say of these petitioners, that while, like
bawdes they set forth the whore of Babylon, and her whorish religion, they seek
to make us partakers with them of their sacrilege and impietye. It may be
they will complain, that this is no friendly dealing. But as Saint Ambrose
epist. 27 said of one, non ille tuus hostis, sed tu illius; so we may say of
papists, we are not their enemies, but they are ours. Noli accusare, says
Hierome to Ruffinus apolog. 2. and ego cessabo defendere: So say I to these
petitioners, forbear to charge us, and we shall willingly forbear to make our
defenses. Again let them cease to tell us of their Resolution in their
profession, and loyalty toward his majesty, and we shall have less cause to
detect either their gross ignorance, and foul impieties, abominations, and
abuses of their religion, or their undermining treasons and rebellions. In the
mean while let them attend, and have patience, while we briefly discover unto
them the mysteries of their wicked religion, which so obstinately they will
needs profess: and the holownesse and defects of their loyaltye, which so
boldly they pretend.

Chapter 2. That the toleration of any false, heretical, or idolatrous
religion, is repugnante to reasons of religion, and holy scriptures.
THE Church and city of God, being built upon the foundations of the Apostles
and Prophets, and their doctrine: it is matter sufficient for Christians, that
are members of Gods church, and citisens of the city of god, to refuse and
reject any Religion, if the same be not founded upon holy scriptures, nor
taught by the Apostles and Prophets inspired by gods spirit. But if the same
prove not only diverse and strange, but also contrary to apostolical and
prophetical doctrine, and contain not only false and heretical opinions, but
also positions and fancies tending to idolatry, and plain impiety; then
ought all Christians to abhor and fly from such a wicked religion, and by no
means to tolerate those, that either teach it; or profess it, or favor it.

The law of god, Deuteronom. 13. is very direct and peremptory against false
teachers and seducers, that endeavor to draw men to idolatry, or any false
religion whatsoever. That prophet says Moses, or that dreamer of dreams
shall be slain because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your
god. In this case he does not permit either the brother to favor his brother,
or the father his son or daughter, or the husband his wife, or one friend
another. And Deuteron. 29. there shall not be amongst you says he, man nor
woman, nor familye, nor tribe, which shall turn his heart this day from the
lord our god, to go and serve the gods of these nations. So it appears,
that both the idolatrous seducers, and such as adhere unto them, and are
seduced by them, are to be expelled out of the land, if we mean to insist in
the ways of gods commandments, and to avoid his heavy wrath and judgments.
Elias 1. Kings 18. condemns such, as stood indifferent betwixt two religions.
How long says he, do you halt betwixt two? if god be god, follow him: if
Baalbe god, follow him. Now what else do they, that are content to wink at the
idolatrous mass, and worshipp of angels, Saints, and dumb images, but join
god and Baal together?

The Prophet David Psalm. 16. shows, what detestation all the children of god
ought to have, not only of idolatry, but also of all idolaters and false
worshippers. Their offerings of blood says he, will I not offer, neither make
mention of their names with my lips.

Zephanie 1. the Lord threatens to punish such, as together with gods worship,
tolerate an other religion. I will stretche out mine hand says he, upon them
that worship and swear by the lord, and swear by Malcham.

Our Savior Christ, Matthew. 18, commands such to be reputed and holden as
Heathen men and Publicanes, that stubbernlye refuse to hear the church, and
shall we harbor them, and repute them good christians, that shall profess a
religion unheard of in the apostolic and ancient Church? likewise Matthew,
7. He exhorts his disciples to beware of false prophets, that come unto them
in sheps clothing: and Matthew 16, to take heed and beware of the leven of the
pharisees and Sadduces Do they not then plainly neglect the exhortations, and
commandments of our Lord and savior Christ, that without punishmente
suffer such, as bring in the leven of Poperye, or tolerate the exercise of any
false religion? Saint Paul Galat 5: does wish them cut of, which did disquiet
the church, and Apocalypse. 2. the bishop of Ephesus is commended, For that he
could not bear with them that were evil, and because he hated the works of the
Nicolaitans. Contrariwise the Bishops of Pergamus, and Thyatyra are
reprehe^ded, the first for suffering them, which taught the doctrine of Balaam,
the second for suffering the woman Iesabel to peaehe, and to deceine gods
servants. Do we then think, that god will hold them guiltless, that suffer
his church to be disquieted with false teachers, and wink at the Priests of
Baal, and their heretical adherents, that abuse Gods servants, with their
heretical docttrines?

The scriptures also teach us, that as god prospered their endeavors, which
with seruent zeal sought to remove all monuments and relics of idolatry: so
nothing succeeded to those, that showed themselves either favorers of false
religion, or negligent and cold in maintaining the purity of his service. The
angel of the lord Judges 2, threatened the Jsraelits, that they should not
prevail, because they had made a league with the Cananites: and do we think,
that contractes made with seditious heretics can be either successful, or of
long continuance?

Salomons seat was established so long, as he sought the lord with his whole
heart: but giving him self to women, and suffering by their means idolatrous
worshippes to creep into his kingdom, his glory began to decline, and his
troubles to increase.

Asah prospered so long, as he put away the Sodomites, and his fathers idols.
but when he sought to the Assyrians for help, gods help and favor began to
fail him.

Hezekiah was highly fauorued of god, because he took away the high places,
and brake down the images. and Josiah, as he was greatly loved of god, so was
he much commended by men for that he put away the idols, and killed the
idolatrous priests that were the maintainers of false Religion.

Contrariwise, Ierobvam, Rehoboam, Abiah, Amaziah, Manasseh, and other kings of
Judah and Israel, for permitting idolatry were forsaken of god, and continually
vexed by their enemies,

It is a dangerous thing to favor such, as divide themselves from gods Church,
and to company with idolaters, and impious perions. Hardly shall a man touch
pitch, and not be defiled. Therefore Moses Numbers 16. speaking of Corah,
Dathan and Abiram and their company, exhorts gods people, to depart from the
tents of those wicked men, least they should perish in all their fiunes.
Josuah Chapter 23. threatens the Israelites: if they shall cleave unto the
nations, and make marriages with them, that they shall be a snare and
destruction unto them, and a whippe on their sides, and thorns in their
eyes. Such are the scandales, that arise of tolerating and consorting with
wicked compagnions. Jehosophat hardly escaped with his life joining in
societye, and giving aid to the wicked King Ahab, and was sharply reproved
for it.

The 2. Corinthians. 6. teaches Christians not to company with idolaters or
profane persons: what communion says he, has light with darkness? and what
concord has Christ with Belial? and what part has the believer with the
infidel? and what agreemente has the temple of god with idols?

Saint John in his second Epistle forbids us to communicate with such as
bring not Apostolic doctrine, or to salute them, and his reason is very
important, He that bids such a one god speed, says he, is partaker of his
evil deeds. Seeing then holy scriptures are the canon of faith, we may not
think that toleration of false religion can well stand with the rules of faith
and religion, being so repugnant to holy scriptures.

Chapter 3. That conniuence and toleration of false religion and heresy, and of
the professors thereof, is reproved by the authority both of the Fathers of the
Church, and of ancient Christian Emperors.
WITH the doctrine of scriptures, both the Canons of counsels, and writings of
the fathers of the Church do also well agree. And with them all the laws of
godly Christian emperors do concur. the Canons of the Apostles, c. 11. do
pronounce him excommunicate, that prays or talks with an excommunicate
person. c. 45. they forbid clergy men to communicate with heretics. The
council of Laodicea c. 31.32. and 33. does directlye condemn communion with
heretics, either in marriage or prayer.

The fourth council of Carthage c. 70. forbids clergy men all feasting and
fellowship with heretics and schismatikes.

So zealous likewise have the fathers showed themselves against false teachers,
that they have both shunned their company, and disallowed all participation
with them, and their followers. Tertullian in Scorpiaco would have such
compelled, and not prayed, to do their duty.

Athanasius de Synodis writing of heretics, spreading their erroneous doctrine,
How I pray you (says he) are they not woorthye of all punishments, when they
write such things?

When impiety begins to show it self openly, says Gregory Nazianzen,
in orat. pro pace, we ought to resist it as much as we may by sword, fire, or
by any other means, least we be partakers of evil leven, or consent unto such
as he infected with pernicious doctrine. And again, in homil. in dict. euangel.
Cut off says he, the Arian impiety, cut off the pernicious error of
Sabellius. This I speak to lay men; this I speak to the clergy; and this I
speak to the Magistrates. My words fighting for the holy trinitye shall not
have so much efficacye, as thy edict shall, if thou will repress such as are
infected with pernicious opinions.

Hierome in cap. 5. epist. ad Galat. shows, that as soon as the sparks of
heresy appear, they must presently be extinguished, and that Arrius in
Alexandria was but one little spark, yet because he was not presently
oppressed, that the flame arising thereof consumed the whole world.

Saint Augustine epist. 48. ad Vincentium, proves, that Christian men are to
be forced to embrace truth, both by the example of Paul, that by violent
compulsion was converted to Christ, and by these words of the Gospel, compel
all that you find to come in. The same father, Epist. 50, ad Bonifacium says,
that Kings then serve god, when they forbid, and punish with religious severity
those things, which are done against the commandments of god. The like sayings
and arguments he has, lib. 2. contra Gaudentij epist. c. 17. and lib. 4.
contr. Crescon grammatic. c. 2. and contr. lit. Petil. lib. 2. c. 83.

To these fathers we may also add the testimonies of Ambrose epist. 32. ad
Valentin. imperat. and in orat. ad Auxentium de Basilicis non tradendis, and in
Luc. c. 10. of Chrysostom homil. de auaritia, and of. Optate of Mileuis contra
Parmenian. lib. 3. and of diverse others. But what need many proofs in matters
so apparent?

Irenaeus aduers. haeres. lib. 3. c. 3. shows, how Saint John the Evangelist
fled out of the bath, wherein the heretic Cerinthus was, least it should fall
upon him. There he shows also, how the ancient fathers refused to
communicate so much, as in speech with such, as adulterated the truth:
Eusebius lib. 7. hist. c. 6. by the authority of Dionysius and Heraclas
proves, that such as converse with heretics are excommunicate.

The pious Christian Emperors did likewise establish that by law, which the
fathers by their doctrine and practice taught. Constantin the great was no
sooner settled in his state, but he forbad idolatrous sacrifices, and caused
idols to be defaced and demolished, as is testified by Eusebius in diverse
places of his books de vita Constantini. Augustine lib 1. contr, Parmen. c. 7.
and contra Petil. lib. 2. c. 92. testifies, that he disabled heretics tomake
any testaments. Eusebius de vita Constantini lib. 3. c. 62. and 63. declares,
that he prohibited the exercise of all heretical religions, and held heretics
and sectaries to be no better, then traitors to himself, and enemies to truth.

The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius l. 1. Cod de sum. trinit.
and fid, Cath. command all their people to embrace one religion, the sum
whereof they do set down in form of a law. and in the law omne^s. C. de
haereticis. they command all heresies to keep silence. omnes vetitae legibus
diuinis and imperialibus constitutionibus haereses, say they, perpetuo
quiescant.

Arcadius and Honorius, as appears by the law. Cuncti. C. de haeret. and
Manich. took away all churches from heretics, least they should teach or do
the exercises of their false religion in them.

Theodosius the younger and Valentinian his consort, made diverse laws against
heretics, as we may read in Codice Theodosiano. The like course was held by
Martianus and Justinian, as is euidentlye declared by their laws yet extante
in the Code and nouells.

Finally, if at any time Christian Emperors grew cold, either in setting forth
the true faith, or in punishing or suppressing errors; then we find that the
ancient fathers failed not both to admonish them of their duty, and to
reprehend them for their slacknesse.

Chapter 4. That to admit the exercise of false religions formerlie
forbidden, is contrary both to christian policy, and reason.
THE gentiles by the light of reason perceived, that religion was not lightly to
be changed and god does therein tax his people by his prophet, that they were
more easily induced to change the everliving god, then the Heathen nations were
to change their gods. They considered, that there was but one truth, and
constantly believed, that their religion was true. This was the reason why the
Romans did so violently persecute the primitive christians, and refused the
superstitious rites of Bacchanalia, which privily began to creep in among the
people.

But Christians proceed upon better grounds of policy in prohibiting the
exercise of all false religions. For first they consider, that the wrath of
god is reueiled from heaven against such, as with-holde the truth in
unrighteousness. But who do herein offend more grievously then they, which
either grant liberty to false teachers, or wink at the exercises of a wicked
and false Religion? do not they manifestly give way to errors and stop the
course of truth?

Secondly they know, well that god despises those, which despise him, as we
read, 1. Samuel. 2. and that he casts such out of his favor, as are
neither hot nor cold. Jf then such as regard not to see god rightly served,
rest despised, and lukewarm professors are rejected: how will it go with
such, as are cold in setting forth true Religion, and care not what false
doctrines are stirring abroad in the world?

Thirdly they understand the grievous threatenings of the law against all
idolatrous and false worship of god. I am a jealous god says the Lord, and
will visit the sin of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth
generation of those, that hate me.

Fourthly as there is but one god, so they know, that there is but one true
religion. Christian policy therefore may teach them to admit no religion, but
that, which is founded upon the writings of the Apostles and Prophets, and
which they are resolved is most true.

Fifthly diversities of religions breed distractions of men's minds and diverse
seditious stirs, and tumultes, as the leagues of France, and practices of the
popes agentes in France, Flanders, England, Scotland, Germany and other
countries do declare. of late the Papists seeking to replant their
superstition in England, went about to set the land on a flame, and to drown
true religion in blood. But wise politics are by all means to root out these
seeds of Civil dissension.

Sixthly all changes in matters of state are dangerous. But admit a false and
erroneous religion, where nothing but the true faith has been professed. and
then no doubt but the change will be great.

Finally nothing is more absurd, then to change laws with out cause, and to
admit a religion condemned by laws, and to restore such as are condemned by
the state. For that is rather a subversion, then an alteration both of laws
and state. If then we respected nothing but the danger of state in the mutation
of religion; yet would all pollitick and wise men be well advised how they
admitted a new and false religion contrary to that which has formerly been
received by the state.

Chap. 5. That toleration of diners religions is contrary to the doctrine and
practice of Papists.
BUT where the Pope and his adherents may fit as judges, little reasoning may
serve, to persuade the^ to dislike of toleration of diverse religions. For not
only their doctrine, but also their long continued practice condemns it. in
the Chapter ad abolendam de haereticis, They adiudge them Heretics that
dissent from the Romish church in the doctrine of the sacraments, and such
both by ecclesiastical, and by civil laws they persecute to the death. Nay
oftentimes without form and color of law, they massacre them, empoyso^ the^,
and by all means seek to root out the race and memory of them out of the earth.
Their goods they confiscat, their livings they take away, their bodies they
burn, and although malice does oftentimes end with death, yet such as are of a
contrary religion, and all those that favor them, they persecute both alive
and dead, killing those whom they can overcome, and cursing whom they cannot
kill. In France they massacred many thousa^ds without form of law, and gladly
would they have massacred us in England, if their treasons had not been
discovered.

Bellarmine lib. de laicis, C. 18. determines, that it is not lawful for any
magistrate or prince to grant liberty of conscience, or toleration of religion
to his subjects. He says further, that he ought to defend one only
religion with all his force. Non licet vlli magistratu^ vel principi says he,
conscie^tiae libertatem, seu pace^ religionis subditis suis concedere, sed vnam
tantum religione^ sum ma vi defendere tenetur.

Posseuin his consort lib. 1 select biblioth, 2.6, does not only deliver the
fame doctrine, but also shows reasons, why two religions may not in one state
be tolerated. First he says it is a devilish invention. 2. that it is
contrary to gods ordinance. 3 that it repugneth against the law of nature. 4.
it is contrary to the substance and property of the christian faith. 5. that it
takes away the truth and certainty of christian religion. 6. that it takes
away the certainty of gods deuire worship and of the Church: 7, that it takes
away christian discipline. 8. that it cutteth asunder the unit ye of the
church. 9. that it is contrary to the word of god. 10. that it is repugnant to
the practice of the Primitive church, the authority of fathers, and laws of
christian Emperors. and finally that it provoke the wrath of God against
the Authors of it.

Neither need we to make any question of the practice of Papists in this
behalf, if we look anto the actions of the pope and his bloody
Jnquisitories. In Italy they tolerate no religion contrary to Popery. in Spain
they persecute such christians with fire and sword, as are contrary to their
faction.

Jn the Low countries the cause of troubles proceeded principally from hence,
for that the people would not admit the bloody inquisition of Spain, that
was thought to be the fittest means to rooote out all religions but one.

Although then papists now think it no inconvenience in England to tolerate
diverse Religions, and to admit another religion then that, which is already
received, and stick not in plain terms to say so yet it is apparent, that
they speak against their conscience, and that they contradicte their own
docttrine and practice.

Chapter. 6. That Popery is a false, and erroneous religion.
I Might, if J list, enlarge the former discourse, with diverse other reasons
against toleration of diverse religions. but what should further demonstrations
need to prove that, which no papist will, as I think, deny? let us therefore
show, because these apologeticall petitioners stand much upon the truth and
honesty of their religion, that beside the former general reasons, there are
diverse other particular matters to be objected against popish religion, every
one sufficient to cross their desires. For first it is a false and erroneous
religion. Next the same is superstitious and idolatrous. Thirdly it is,
composed of diverse heretical positions. Fourthly it is a pack of novelties.
Fiftlie it conteyneth diverse doctrines full of Blasphemies. Sixthly it is enemy
to kings, and grievous to their subjects. Lastly it co^teyneth many points of
doctrine condemned by the adversaries themselves: and allows diverse practices
disliked by all nations.

That Popery is a religion false and erroneous, we prove first by the
falsehood of the grounds thereof, and next by the erroneous positions and
doctrines, whereof it is composed. Stapleton in his book entitled, principia
doctrinalia, does deliver unto us. 7. grounds or principles of popish religion.
The first is the church of Rome, the second is The Pope. the third the means
used by the Pope in judgment, the 4. the Popes infallible indgement in causes
of controversy. the fist his power in taxing or consiguing the canon of holy
scriptures. the sixth his certain interpretation, when he expounds scriptures.
the seventh the churches or popes power, in delivering doctrine not written.
The which grounds, as they are defective, not me^tioning the cano^ of
scripturs, as a ground of faith, nor reputing the decrees of councels, and
writings of Fathers to be any matter of moment deserving to be placed among the
principles of our adversaries faith: so they are most absurd and false. For
first how can the church of Rome be a principle or foundation to it self? and
again why should the Church of Rome, where Peter taught be more a foundation
or principle, then the Church of Jerusalem, where our savior Christ himself
taught and suffered? the apostle Romans 11. does threaten the Romans, and
signify that the Roman church was a branch, that might be cut of. And Saint
John Appocalyps. 17. shows, that the whore of Babylon, which was a figure of
Antichrist, should have her seat in Rome.

Secondly the Popes doctrine is notoriously declared to be erroneous, and that
in many material points, as for example in the questions about the law, the
sacraments, transubstantiation, the government of the Church, and diverse
other important points. But were it not a matter already known and resolved;
that the Pope cannot be supreme judge in matters of religion; yet the papists
have no reason to think, that a blind man can judge of colors, or an ignorant
man of Arts. Furthermore the pope has no greater privilege, then the high
priest of the law, Yet he erred in condemning Christ and his doctrine. Lastly
both the fathers show, that diverse bishops of Rome have been Herreticks, as
Liberius and Honorius: and Adrian the. 6. in his book de sacrament. c. de
confirmat. confesses, that the pope may determine falselie by his decretall.

Thirdly it is ridiculous to trust to the popes means in judgment, when he
understands neither councels, nor uses any good means to know the truth.
Nay we know, whatsoever means are pretended, that the pope either runs
upon his own head, or follows a few carnal cardinals, or contentious friars.

Fourthly it is a blockish thing, to distinguish the Pope from his judgment.
For so the pope should be found to be without judgment, and judgment without
the pope. That this iudgmente is not infallible, we gather infallibly out of
his manifold erroneous doctrine and judgment. The same appears also by his
false decretalls, and the variation of the popes judgment.

Fifthly the scriptures being consigned by god, and delivered to the church by
the prophets and Apostles, need no new consignation, nor taxation of the pope.
Nay very absurd it were, if laws receiving their strength from the governors,
the scriptures should not be authentical without the approbation of the pope,
who for the most part understands no scriptures, nor has skill to read
them in their original tongs.

Sixthly the Pope is for the most part ignorante both of the sense of
scriptures, and of the principal points of religion, having studied neither.
And very ridiculous it is, after plain words of scriptures, and exposition of
counsels and fathers, to run to the pope for resolution.

Finally the resolution of matters of faith depends not upon the
determination of the pope, or his adherentes, who are departed from the faith,
but upon the word of god, that in matters of salvation is plain, and better
expounded by the learned, and by ancient fathers, then by partial Popes and
their adherentes. Stapletones grounds therefore are false and erroneous.
Neither are the principles delivered by others more certain.

The conuenticle of Trent sess. 4. does seem to found the faith of the Church
partly upon scriptures, and partly upon unwritten traditions. But first the
same allows no scriptures authentical, but such as are found in the old
latin of the bible which in many points digresseth from the original books,
and is much inferior unto them.

Secondly they allow no interpretations of scriptures, but such as are
consonante to the doctrine of the church of Rome. which in matters of
controversy are most perverse, erroneous and absurd, as may appear by diverse
particulers in the survey of popery.

Thirdly they make the books of Tobiah, Judith, Ecclesiastieus, Wisdom and
Machabies, together with certain fragments not found in the original books of
the old testament, equal to other scriptures always reputed canonical; the
which is reproved by the common consent of ancient fathers, and seems
repugnant to reason.

Fourthly under color of traditions they thrust upon the Church, not only
diverse Fables, and superstitious toys, but also a great part of the errors of
the church of Rome. Finally they talk of Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
traditions, and yet can not certainly derive them, either from the Apostles,
or from the Ancient catholic Church. These foundations, therefore are ruinous,
and rather serve to prove the erroncous doctrine of Antichrist, then the faith
of Christ Jesus.

Canus in his book de locis theolog. among his principal grounds and proofs
of christian religion, reckons, not only the acts of Councels and writings of
the fathers, but also the authority of schoolmen and canonists of profane
writers, and of humane reason, yea of the popes, and modern church of Rome.
Now what I beseech you, is more uncertain, then to rely upon the uncertain
acts of councels, and connterfact writings set out under the name of fathers?

Again what is is more unreasonable, then to bring forth the pope and his
accomplices for witnesses or judges in their own cause? Lex dei says
Athanasius, Apolog 2. inimicum, ne que teste^ ne que iudicem esse vult. the
law of God admits not our enemies to be either judges or witnesses.

Finally natural reason is blind in the cause of true religion. and profane
men write profanely. These grounds therefore, as they are faulty, cannot serve
for immovable grounds of the christian faith.

Commonly all papists do build their faith, not so much upon holy scriptures,
as upon unwritten traditions, popish decretals, lying miracles, feyned visions,
and the Romish churches Practice. But their miracles and revelations have for
the most part no better authority, then from the forged and lying legendes
of saints. the falshhood of their Decretalls and traditions is declared by the
writings of ancient fathers. the practice of the modern Church, is contrary
to the apostolic and catholic church of old time. For in that Church we
neither find any universal pope with triple crown and guard of Swizzars, nor
any Romish mass, nor popish indulgences or purgatory, or such like trash.

Upon these false and erroneous grounds it is no marvel, if they have framed
to themselves a most false and erroneous religion, as may appear by these
particulars. Concerning scriptures they teach, that they are no perfect canon
of our faith. and next that they are not authentical to us, unless they be
consigned and delivered to us by the Pope, and his adherents. Thirdly they say
that the Latin translation is authentical, which they do not affirm of the
original books. Fourthly they say, they are obscure and hurtful.

Lastly they permit them not to be read publicly in tongues understood of
the multitude. But the Apostle 2. Tim. 3. says, They are able to make the man
of God perfect, and none but heretics, as we may read in Ireneus, ever accused
them of insufficiency. Secondly as laws, so scriptures have received their
strength from the author of them, that is from the holy ghost. And those are
very absurd, that do believe the Pope speaking in his decretalls, and will not
believe God speaking in holy scriptures. Thirdly all the fathers prefer the
original books of scripture before the translations. Fourthly the word of god
in scriptures, is called light, and the food of the soul. Who then that is not
led by the spirit of Satan, can repute them obscure or hurtful? Lastly never
was it taught or heard in ancient times, that scriptures were publicly red
in tongues not understood.

Secondly they give to Christ in the sacrament a body, neither felt nor seen,
nor any way like to our bodies. For what man J beseech you, ever had a body,
that was in many places at once, and yet fills no place? they hold also that
being in his mothers womb, he was vir perfectus, that is a grown man; and that,
as man, he was omniscient and knew all things. His office of mediatorship they
communicate unto the virgin Marie and other saints, and to Angels, and sometime
stick not to call saints their redeemers, as Bellarmine in his first book de
iudulgentijs confesses. To make a treasure of indulgences they mix the merits
of Christ and his saints together, as if Christ's merits were insufficient.
Their Massepriests, as they say, are after the order of Melchisedech. Finally,
they make them mediators for Christ's body, as these words of the Mass declare,
suscipe hanc oblationem etc. and again, supra quae propitio and sereno vultu
respicere digneris. That is, receive this oblation, viz. of Christ's body and
blood. And again, Look upon it with a fanourable and serene countenance, Of
which doctrines no one is true, and diverse are blasphemous and impious.

Thirdly they say, the Pope is saint Peter's successor, and Christ's Vicar,
albeit he neither teach the gospel, nor administer the Sacraments, nor
resemble them almost in any thing. Him also they make the head spouse and
foundation of the universal church, albeit he can show grant for none of
these prerogatives. They teach further, that he is above general councels, and
has power to depose kings, and that his laws bind men's consciences. but such
doctrines are not only erroneous but also absurd.

Fourthly they cast out of the catholic church all, that profess not their
faith, although elect to life, and contrariwise, make reprobate persons,
heretics, and wiched men professing the Romish faith, and communicating with
the Romish church true members of christ's body: they hold also that the
catholic church is always so visible, that every man may see it and discern
it. Finally they shut the catholic church within the limits of the Romish
church. Matters repugnaunte to holy scriptures, and no way agreeing with the
nature of the true, catholic and apostolic church, nor very well with reason.

Fifthly most falsely they teach, that the Pope only has power to confirm
general counsels, and that no man else ought to summon them, and praeside in
them. They hold also, that the conuenticles of Laterane, Constance, Florence
and Trent, are comparable to the four first general counsels.

Sixthly they make their followers believe, that the modern church of Rome
differs not from the aunciente Roman Church, and that the same is guided by
gods spirit, and cannot err. But their erroneous doctrine different from that
which S. Paul taught the Romans declares the contrary.

7. Commonly they take to themselves the name of Catholics yet their doctrine
of the mass, of their half communions, adoration of the sacrament, merits of
congruity and condignity, of Popish indulgences, worship of images, and such
like was never received of the Christians of all times and places.

8. Parsons in his book of 3. conuersions, gives out, that Saint Peter and
Eleutherus did teach the modern Roman faith, to the aunciente Britones, and
Austen the monk to aunciente Saxons. But he fails in his proofs, and with
a hard and bare face tells nothing, but bare and improbable lies.

9. They teach their followers to worship saints, and to say Masses in their
honor, and to go on pilgrimage, and to offer to them, and confirm the same
with false and counterfeit tales of Saint George, Christina, Catherin, Margaret,
Dorothey, and such like legendes; confirming false doctrines with false tales.

10. Their doctrine of 7. Sacraments is most false. For no where can they show
where Christ instituted either the form or matter of all these sacraments, or
promised grace and justification to all these sacraments.

11. Falsely and dishonorably they teach, that brute beasts eating the
sacrament, eat also Christ's body.

12. Christ said take and eat, they say to their priests in effect, lift and
offer, and to the people, gape and gaze.

13. They teach their folowers to make graven images, and to worship them. yet
god in his law expressly forbad the worshipp of them.

14. God commanded his people to swear by his name. they teach their
disciples to swear by Saints and other creatures.

15. Falsely they teach subjects to rebel against their Princes excommunicate
by the Pope, and that the Pope has power to assoile them from their
allegiance, a doctrine false and seditious.

16. They teach, that concupiscence in the regeneras, is no sin, and that the
virgin Mary was not conceived in sin. Which holy scriptures condemn as
crroneous.

17. The state of perfection they place in the vows of monks and friars, as
if their rules contained more perfection, then the gospel.

18. Their justification they place partly in charity, partly in their own
works, and hope thereby to merit heaven. but the law pronounces them accursed,
that abide not in all the words of the law to do them.

19. Charity, they say, is the form of faith; and nothing else but the grace of
God. But this utterly destroys grace.

20. They doubt not, but that they are able to satisfy for all sins committed
after baptism. but true christians believe, that by Christ's stripes they are
healed.

Finally all those doctrines, which the papists teach contrary to the faith of
the church of England, are false and erroneous: as is demonstrated in diverse
ample treatises published against them.

Chapter 7. That Popery is an heathenish and idolatrous religion.
IF we had no other exception against popery; yet this one is sufficient to
exclude it out of all Christian Churches and common wealths, that it is a
religion blotted with most gross and heathenish idolatry. A matter displeasing
to god, offensive to true Christians, and most repugnant to the christian
faith, God in his law Exodus 20. denounces grievous punishments against this
sin. Tertullian in lib. de idololatria calls it a principal crime, and the
whole cause of gods judgment. Idololatria says he, principale crimen geueris
humani, summus seculi reatus, tota causaiudicij. If then the Mass priests and
their followers be guilty of this sin; how will they be able to answer,
either before god, or man? But of this crime we doubt not, but plainly, to
convince them. For first in the canon of the Mass both the priest and people
are taught to bow themselves, and to give divine worship to the sacrament
Alan. de sacrifie. Eucharist. c. 41. and Bristow in his 26. motive and other
papists do call the sacrament their Lord and god. but to give gods honor to
any thing but god, is plain idolatry Either therefore must they prove, that the
sacrament is god, by hypostaticall vnio^, as Allen confesses very impiously
and falselie, or it will be an easy matter to prove them idolaters.

2 Secondly the papists confess, that Latria. or the honor properly due to
god is due also to the cross, and crucifix, and images of the trinity. This is
the doctrine of Thomas Aquuinas, and all his folowers. But it leaves these
idolaters without excuse. For how can they defend their doctrine, unless they
will deny these crosses, crucifixes and images to be creatures? 3 Thirdly they
make vows to saints and angels, and in their public liturgies call upon the^.
They do also swear by the^, and publicly confess their sins unto them,
joining them in rank with god almighty. But to communicate these honors to
creatures is nothing else, but to make them gods, and themselves idolaters.
Bellarmine lib. 1. de cultu sanctorum. c. 9. blusheth not, to make them gods by
participation. But herein he does participate with the idolatrous gentiles.

4 Fourthly they make an idol of the Pope, giving unto him the honors and
titles, that are properly due unto Christ, and making him the head spouse, and
foundation of the catholic Church: In the chapter satis did. 96. He is
expressly called God, and that he is rightly so called Augustine Steuchus in
his defense of the pretended donation of Constantine does acknowledge. Jn the
gloss in. c. cum inter, extr. Joan. 22 de verbor signif. He is impiously
called Lord and god. Baldus in l. vlt. c sent. rescind. and. Felin in c. ego N.
de iure iurando. do give him the name of a god on the earth. Finally his
followers fall down before him, and worship him, as god. Now what is
idolatry else, but to advance a creature above his rank, and to give him divine
titles and honors?

5. Fifthly it is idolatry to make graven images, and to worship them. For that
is apparent by the words of the second commandment, that is specially
directed against idolatry. But the papists make graven images and worship
them. Nay they worship them no otherwise, then the gentiles did their idols.
Both gentiles and papists pray before them, both offer incense unto them, both
do think to honor the memory of the dead in erecting images to them, why
then should not this be reputed idolatry, as well in the papists, as in the
gentiles? verily if we do rightly esteem of matters, we shall find, that papists
do more slauishly serve their idols, the^ the He then did their idols, going
in pilgrimage to them, kissing them and crouching unto the^, and setting up
lights before them.

6. They make the images of god the father, and god the holy ghost and of the
trinity, and give the^ divine honor. But to worship false images as these are,
the papists themselves confess to be idolatrous. It is manifest idolatry also
to give gods honor or latria to creatures.

7. Every day of the week the papists make new gods of the altar, and often
they make new crucifixes. The Pope also canonizeth at his pleasure new saints.
But god by his prophet psalm. 81 forbids the having of new and strange gods,
as idolatrous. they deny percase, that they esteem the^ as Gods. But what can
vain prete^ces avail, when we see they communicate gods honuor to these
creatures?

8. The holy scriptures Amos 5. and act. 7. condomn the^ for idolaters, that
worshipped and served the host of heaven. But papists worship angels and
saints, and the court and host of heaven; and serve them religiously. Nay they
are so far from acknowledging their error herein, that they contend, that
dulia, or service is due unto them.

9 The gentiles are condemned as idolaters psalm. 114. for that they worshipped
images of silver and gold, and the work of men's hands. What excuse then can
the Papists allege for themselves. that they pass not the condemnation,
worshipping gods both of metal and stone, and falling down before the works
of their own hands?

10 The apostle 1, Cor. 10. says the gentiles offered sacrifices to devils, and
the reason is, for that they offered them in honor of men, and without
warrante, translating gods honor to creatures. are not the papists then
ashamed of their masses, that are no better, then sacrifices to devils being
offered in honor of men, and to the dishonor of Christ, and christian
Religion?

11 The Prophet Hieremie. c. 7, taxes them as idolaters, that builte high
places in the honor of god, being never commanded by god so to do. there
also the idolatry of those is reproved, that made vows to the Queen of
heaven, and served her. This reproof therefore is much rather deserved by the
Papists, which build high places and altars to men, and without warrant serve
our Lady, whom they call the Queen of heaven, making more prayers and vows
to her, then to God.

12 Jn the Book of Baruch, c. 6. the Babylonians are reputed idolaters, for
that they carried their Gods of gold, filuer and stone upon their shoulders:
and adorned them with costly apparel, and worshipped them. Why then should
the Romanists deny them selves to be idolaters, that carry their idols in
procession, and adorn them with costly apparel and jewels, and kiss them, as
their delites?

13 The idolatrous Jews are noted Hierem. 2 for saying to a stock thou art my
father. and to a stone, thou have begotten me. and yet the senseless papists
say to stocks and stones, Pater noster, and to a wodden crucifix thou have
redeemed me, as Bellarmine lib. 2, de cult. sanct. c, 23. confesses.

14, S. John 1, epist. 5, where he warns Christians, to keep them selves a
simulacris, that is from images or similitudes set up to be worshipped, does
signify, that papists worshipping such images decline to the customs of the
gentiles.

15. The Israelites confess their sin, Judges 10. in worshipping Baalim, or
the images of god. Happy were the Papists, if they would likewise acknowledge
their sin in worshipping moulten and graven images, both of god, and of
creaturs. their idolatry is no less grievous, then that of the Israelits.

16. The worship of angels by the council of Laodicea c. 35 is termed
idolatrous, and by Hierome in epist ad Riparium, and by other fathers in
express terms has bin condemned. The same is also flatly forbidden coloss.
2, and Apocalypse. 22. do not the papists then worshipping angels, fall within
the compass of this prohibition, and of the crime of idolatry?

17 The Jews 2. paral. 30: ar taxed for offering ince^se to idols, and, 2 King.
18. to the brazen serpent, and Marcellina noted as an idolatrous heretic for
burning ince^se to images. neither did the Heathen Emperors require more at the
hands of Christians, the^ sacrifice to incense before the statues. And yet the
papists when they have offered incense to their images, wipe their mouths,
and suppose they have committed no idolatrye. But they are as blind as the
images, which they worship.

18. To sacrifice in honor of creatures is idolatry, for that is an honor due
to God only, as the papists themselves confess. But Papists do offer
sacrifice in honor of Saints, as the prayers of the Mass do declare. They
give them also the sacrifice of prayers. are they not then gross idolaters?

19. Tertullian lib. de idololatr, does show us, that the worship of images
and similitudes is idolatry. Omnis forma aut formula idolum se dici exposcit,
inde idololatria omnis circa omne idolum famulatus and seruitus. Every form or
small image says he, ought to be called an idol. and thence it comes to
pass, that idolatry is the worship or service bestowed upon every idol, Again
speaking to idolaters: qui seruitis lapidibus, says he, and qui imagines
facitis aureas and argenteas, and ligne as and lapideas. You which serve
stones, and which make images of gold and silver, of wood and stone.

20. S. Ambrose de obit. Theodosij says, that Helene finding the cross of the
Lord did adore her King, and not the wood. Forasmuch as that was the error of
the gentiles. The papists therefore worshipping wooden crosses, run into the
error of the idolatrous gentiles.

21. Epiphanius haeres. 79. affirms, that the diabolical invention of images
has adulterated the service of god, and brought in spiritual fornications.
The same father did also tear a vail, wherein either Christ or some saint was
painted, and thought it no fit thing to hang in the church. does he not then
overthrow and condemn the common practice of papists?

22. The fathers of the council of Francforde under Charles the great say, that
the cause why they refused to worship and adore images was, least they should
prove idols. which argues that images worshipped are nothing else but idols.

23. Tertullia^ de praescript. aduers. haeret. and Hierome in Abacuc c. 2.
teach us, that heresy is a kind of idolatry. Who then ca^ deny but that
papists maintaining so many heresies, are also guilty of gross idolatry?

24. Reason does also convince the Papists to be idolaters. For what more
reasonable, then that such as worship idols should be reputed idolaters?
further, idolatry is nothing else, but the translation of gods honor to
creatures. Thirdly an image worshipped religiously is nothing, but an idol.
Tertullian lib. de idololat. defines an rdole to be nothing else, buta little
form or image. Finally why should not they be coudemned to be idolaters, that
do the same things, for which the gentiles were condemned as idolaters? But the
papists by worshipping images make them idols. They translate gods honor to
the sacrament, to crosses, to the Virgin Marie, to the images of the Trinity.
They deny not, that they worship images for religion sake. they carry about
their images, kiss them, pray before them burn incense to them, as did the
gentiles.

25. Finally the papists by their own confession are proved idolaters.
Bellarmine lib. 2. de imag inib. c. 5. says, that an idol is a false
similitude, and represents that, which is not. But Papists do worship the
false similitudes of God the Father, God the holy ghost, and of the Trinity.
Likewise they worship the images of Saint George, that killed the dragon, of
Dunstane, that took the devil by the nose, of Catherin, Christopher, and
diverse saints that either never were in the world, or are falsely represented,
and belyed.

They confess also, that it is idolatry to give latrian, or divine honor to
creatures But this honor they give to the Crucifix, to the images of the
trinity, and to the sacrament. As is showed before.

Furthermore their consciences inwardly accusing them of idolatry, they have
blotted out the 2. commandment against the worship of graven images and other
similitudes out of their primers, and short Catechismes: and very slenderly do
their divines touch the sore of idolatry. Many exceptions, I confess they
make, and excuse themselves, as well as they can, of this heinous crime. But
their excuses are insufficient, and for the most part, common to the Heathen
idolaters with them. They say first, they put no trust in images. But such as
offered incense to statues were reputed idolaters, albeit they trusted not in
them. Beside that they speak most untruly. For never did the gentiles trust so
much in the images of Jupiter, Apollo, Aesculapius, Juno. Diana, and other
Heathen Gods, as the Papists do in the images of our lady of Loreto, of
Monserrat, of Sichem of Saint James of Compostella, of the Crucifix of Burgos
in Spain and Mantua in Italy. but did they not trust in images; the hethen
could answer so also.

Bellarmine lib. de imaginibus teaches his disciples, that images are not
worshipped with latria per se and proprie, that is, for themselves, and
properly. But what says he, that the gentiles could not as well allege for
themselves, as the papists?

Finally they answer, that they do not worship images, as Gods. But the same
pretense was also brought in time past, by the Heathen idolaters, as we may
read in Lactantius lib. 2. instit. divine. c. 2. and in the commentaries upon
the Psalms set out under the name of S. Augustine in Psalm. 113.

Should then Christians admit a religion, that is corrupted with so gross
idolatry? nay rather we are by all means to repress the exercise of it, least
Gods wrath fall upon us being careless of his dishonor, and negligent in
performing his true service.

Chapter 8. That Popery is are ligion, composed of old and new heresies.
THat which our savior Christ said of the Scribes and Phariseyes Matthew. 23.
with far better reason may be said of the Pope and his accomplices. For while
they are still quarreling with Christians, which will not yield to their
Pharisaicall traditions, they err themselves in more weighty points of
Christian doctrine, and receive diverse olld and new heresies for sound doctrine,
and seeming to strain a gnat, swallow down camels.

1. With the Pharisees they glory in the law, and seek to be justified by the
works thereof, although the Apostle Romans 2. and Galat. 2. do teach contrary. 2.
The Pharisees made void the law of God by their own traditions, as our
Savior charge them. Marc. 7. and do not the Pope and his accomplices
likewise, making and worshipping graven images, dispensing with oaths, killing
innocent christians without form of justice, maintaining public stews, and
diverse (...) excesses? 3. Epiphanius haeres. 16. ante Christum reputeth the
Pharisees heretics, for that they were separated from others, and received a
voluntarye and superfluous religion. How then can monks and friars being herin
culpable, clear themselves from heresy. 4. The Scribes are enrolled among
heretics by Epiphanius, haeres. 15. ante Christum, for their supersophisticall
exposition of the law, and their often washings, and affectate holiness. But
the Popes factours and Friars do far pass them in all these things. 5. The
Hemerobaptists by Epiphanius haeres. 15. ante Christum are reputed heretics
for their often washings. Why then not the papists, that daily and sometimes
hourly wash themselves with holy water. 6. The Dositheans spared not their
bodies. But for this, and for affecting praise for their virginity, they were
reputed heretics by Epiphanius. should not then the Iebusites and others, that
whip themselves and affect virginity, be kalendred in the same order? 7. With
the Capernaits the Massepriests expound Christ's words of eating his flesh and
drinking his blood carnally. are they not then both to be ranged among
heretics? 8. With Simon Magus the Pope and his folowers think it no sin to
buy and sell the graces of the holy ghost, and other spiritual things. the
folowers both of Simon Magus and of the pope worship images, and use common
women. 9. Jrenaeus lib, 1. aduers. haeres. c. 23, rangeth the Basilidians among
heretics, for that they used images, inchauntmentes, and diverse,
exorcizations. and yet they could not conjure bread and wine out of the
sacrament, as the papists suppose they do by their enchantments, the Papists
do also exorcize water, salt, and spirits as they say. 10 Carpocrates for the
worship of images is reputed an heretic by Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers. haeres.
c. 24. and Marcellina for burning incense to images, and adoring them, as Saint
Augustine testifies de haeres. c. 7. the papists therefore dong the same things
cannot escape the like censure. 11. The Carpocratians and Basilidians were
accounted heretics for concealing and hiding the Mysteries of their religion,
least holy things should be cast to dogs, as is testified by Irenaeus lib.
1. aduers. haeres. c. 23 and Epiphanius haeres. 24. and. 27. they are then
simple, that repute the papists catholics, doing the same things, and using
the same reasons with these heriticks. 12 The Marcosians did baptize in a
strange language, as Epiphanius testifies haeres. 34. Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers.
haeres. c. 18. shows, that they greased such as they baptized, and that they
used to give their followers dying, extreme unction, Epiphanius says that
Marcus brought in (...) or transubstantiation in the Eucharist, and that his
followers accounted themselves perfect. how then can we account the papists
catholics, that have borrowed from Marcus and his folowers so many branches of
their heresies? 13. The Nazarites stand condemned as heretics for mingling
Jewish Ceremonies with Christian religion, as we read in in Augustine de
haeres. c. 9. and Epiphanius haeres. 29. It is an easy matter therefore to judge
in what terms the papists stand, that consecrate paschall lambs, and in
their sacrifice use so many Jewish obseruances. 14. The Heracleonites gave
their folowers extreme unction, as we may read in Augustine de haeres. 16. and
Epiphanius hae. res. 36. it appears also, that in this ceremony they used a
strange language, and for proof brought the words of Saint James the 5. where
he speaks of annoyting the sick. who then sees not, that popish extreme
unction does savor of this he resy? 15. From the followers gf Helzai and the
Heretics called Osseni the papists have learned to swear by bread and Salt,
and to worship spittle and rags, and to pray in a strange language for this
was not done by catholics, but by these heretics, as we way read in
Epiphanius haeres. 19. ante Christum, 16. With the Marcionists the Papists
separate marriages for religion, and teach, that Christ fetched souls out of
hell. For that was doctrine first taught by the Marcionistes, as Epiphanius
signifies haeres. 42. 17 Both papists and Messalians believe, that baptism
cutteth away only former sins, and in their prayers hope to be heard for
their much babbling. 18 The Angelicks were condemned for worshipping Angels,
and praying to them, as we read in the commentaries of Theodoret in Coloss. 3.
and in Augustine de haeres. c. 39. Epiphanius haeres. 38. does conde^n the
Casa^s for inuocating both good and bad angels. Tertullian also in his book de
prascript. aduers, haeret condemns them that serve angelt. do the papists
then think it catholic religion, to worship and serve Angels, and to call upon
them? 19 As the papists do prove their religion by forged miracles and lies,
so did the Seuerians, which therefore were ranged among heretics by Saiut
Augustine de haeresib. c. 24. 20 The Papists c. proposuists. did. 82. call
marriage fleshly pollutions, and say, that married folks live in the flesh, and
and cannot please god. But for the like doctrine the Tatians and Encratites
were adjudged heretics. 21 As the Manicheys condemned marriage in their priests
caled electi, and absteined from the cup in the Eucharist, and gave to christ a
body extended to diverse places, and not solid, so do papists. 22 Montanus
first brought in laws of fasting, and extolled unwritten traditions, and was
author of oblations for the dead. The first is proved by the testimony of
Apollonius in Eusebius his history. The last two points are made evident by
Tertullian following Montanus his heresy, and deriuing them from his Paracletus
in his book de corona militis. Why then should not papists offending in the
same points be reputed Montanists? 23 Further I have showed in my late survey
of Popery chap. 8. that as the pepuzians, honored Pepuza, so the Papists honor
Rome, that with the Catharists they hold, that a man may perform the law
perfectly, and brag of their purity and perfection, that with the I acobites
and Armenia^s they make the images of God the father and the holy ghost, that
with the Staurolatrians and Chazinzarians they worship the cross, that with
the Collyridians they worship the virgin Mary and offer consecrated hosts in
her honor, that with the Circumcellions they murder such, as are opposite to
their faction, that which the Priscillianists they periure themselves, and
teach aequiuocating perjury, that with the Eutychianistes they give Christ a
body without just dimensions, or circumscription, that with the Pelagians they
extol the force of free will, and diminish the praise of gods grace, that with
the here ticks mentioned by Jrenaeus they accuse scriptures, and to make short,
that they have embraced many other old condemned herefies.
As for the master of Se^tences, Innocent the third, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus,
Albert, Durand, Steuchus, Harding, Stapleton, Alle^, Bellarmine, Baronius and
other particular agents of the Romish Church we are able to charge them with
infinite heretical opinions. But because our's duersaries do not take
themselves bound to defend every private man's doctrines and opinions, J will
reserve the proof hereof to some other place.

Finally if all doctrins brought into the church since the Apostles times savor
of heresies, as Tertullian affirms; the^ we need not to doubt, but that al
those popish doctrins concerning unwritten traditions, apocryphal scriptures,
the reading of scriptures in tongus not understood, the being of Christ's body
within the accidents of bread and wine in the Eucharist, tra^substantiatio^,
the sacrifice of the mass, half co^munions, the adoration of the sacrament,
the popes universal monarchy, the popish worship of saints, relics and
images, the 7. sacraments, the merits of works, and such like novelties, as
are brought into the Church by the pope and his accomplices, are mere heresies.

Chapter 9. That popish religion is new, and not as the Papists call it, the
old religion.
ANtiquity in matter of religion cartieth no small weight with it in the
reputation of Christians. Saint John. 1. epist. 1. says he declares unto us,
that which was from the beginning. and Ephesians. 2. we read that the church is
founded upon the prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner
stone. Jf then popish religion was not from the beginning, nor can be justified
to have proceeded from christ, or his apostles or the holy prophets; then is it
for the novelty thereof to be rejected. But that is so apparent, as he that
will deny it, must needs speak against his own conscience and knowledge,
if he have either conscience or learning.

1. The mass is a principal matter, which papists contend for. Yet is the
same a plain corruption of Christ's institution of the Eucharist, and wholly
repugnant to the apostles doctrine. Christ taking bread said, this is my body.
but the mass priests deny, that any bread remains in the sacrament after
the words of the institution spoken. He said, take and eat. The Massepriests
say to the people, gape and gaze, and in the mean while eat and drink all
themselves. He said do this in remembrance of me. they offer up Christ in
honor of saints. He commanded all to drink, that received the other kind.
They exclude all but the Priest from the cup. He ordained the sacrament to be
received of the communica^tes. they receive it not, but oftentimes hang it up,
carry it about, and adore it. The Apostle 1. Cor. 11. shows, that the
sacrament was instituted to declare the Lords death. but these celebrate the
mass in tongues not understood, insomuch that few papists understand what is
done in the celebration of the mass. 2. Christ certes, never instituted the
Popes monarchy. Nay, where the Apostle Ephesians. 4. speaks of the ministers of
the church, this great monarch is not once named. True it is, that Christ said
to Peter, feed mysheepe, and promised. that to him he would give the keys. But
what is that to the Pope, that is no Apostle, nor in any thing like to Peter?
further Peter had no monarchical power given by these words. For equally were
the Apostles called, and authorized. Much less therefore are we to imagine,
that any bishop had this universal monarchy bestowed on him. 3. Further it is
mere madness to affirm, that either Christ or his Apostles taught the worship
of the Cross, or of images, or of Saints, or their relics, or that they
delivered to their disciples and folowers the popish doctrine of the 7.
sacraments, or of Purgatory and indulgences, or of the merits of congruitie,
or of the foundations and other points of Popish Religion. 4. In our survey
of Popery we have showed, that those points of popery, which the Church of
England refuses, are repugnant both to ancient counsels, and the ancient
fathers of the Church. The ancient fathers of the Church, and Bishops of
Rome never thought, that any one bishop had authority above a general
council. The sift canon of Nice forbids to receive any, that were
excommunicated by other Bishops. The 6. Canon of that council equalleth other
Bishops to the bishop of Rome. in that council, it was decreed, that Priests
should not be separated from their wives. The council of Eliberis condemns
the superstitious lighting of candles in churchyards, and pictures in churches.
The council of Gangra taxes such, as disprayse marriage, or despise the
oblation of married priests, or refuse to eat flesh, or condemn such as wear
common apparel. The council of Laodicea condemns the worship of angels.
Neither is there any abuse in Popery, that is of any antiquity, but lightly the
same is taxed in some ancient council. The popish worship of angels, images,
crosses, and such like, half communions, strange and unknown tongues, and
other abuses of popish religion likewise are either not known, or generally
condemned by the fathers. 5. The ancient Christian religion came from
Jerusalem. but the popish worship of images and saints, the doctrine of the
carnal eating of Christ's body, transubstantiation, half communions,
indulgences, the popish doctrine of purgatory, and the popes monarchy came never
from thence. 6, Finally we find when and where the principail points of popish
doctrine, which the church of England refuses, were established by the
synagogue of Rome. the worship of images was first received and established in
the idolatrous second council of Nice under Irene.
Gregory the 7. first took on him the use of both swords, and began with sorce
to depose Emperors, and to translate kingdoms from one to another,

Innocent the third first brought in transubstantiation, and auricular
confession in the council of Lateran.

The conuenticle of Constance first decreed, that accidents in the Eucharist
subsist without a subject, and that all Christians beside the priest were to
content themselves with one kind in the sacrament.

Eugenius the fourth, in the conuenticle of Florence, as is said, settled the
doctrine of purgatory and the popes supremacy. then also was delivered the
doctrine of the 7. sacraments, and established first by authority.

The rest of those popish doctrines concerning the sacrifice of the Mass,
indulgences, and such like devises, which we refuse, were lately confirmed in
the conuenticle of Trent. From thence the papists derive the authority of the
missalls, breuiaries, and other rituall books. If any thing be taught by them
more then this contrary to the sound form of faith delivered by the Apostles,
the same has bin received either from old heretics, or else from later Popes
of Rome.

That religion therefore, which papists teach over and above the christian
faith, is newly devised, and not to be derived from the Apostles, or prophets
or ancient fathers of the church.

Chap. 10. That Popish religion, is impious and blasphemous.
THE people of God under the law were so zealous of Gods glory, that they used
to rend their cloths, if they did hear any man utter any thing sou^ding like
blasphemy. Nay for the word that signifies blaspheming, the Hebrews use the
word of blessing, which shows, that all our actions should tend to the
praise of god, and none to his dishonor. Is it not then strange, that
Christians, which should excel all others in zeal and love toward God,
should either profess or suffer popish religion, that is so full of impieties
and blasphemies against god? This they think to wipe away with one impudent
denial. But this name of blasphemy is too deep graven in the forehead of the
whore of Babylon, to be defaced with any denial.

For first the Pope challenges to himself the name and honor of God, as is
evident by the chap. satis. did. 96. and c. inter corporalia. de translat.
pral. and the Canonists give unto him that name and honor, as is to be seen
in the gloss in c. cum inter. extr. Joan. 22. de verb. signif. and in the
commentaries of Felin in c. ego N. de iureiur ando. and Baldus in l. vlt. Cod.
sententiae rescindendae. Stapleto^ in his epist. to Gregory the 13. before his
doctrinale principles does call the pope supremum numen in terris: that is, the
sovereign god of the earth.

2. Secondly blasphemously the papists translate the honor of Christ to the
Pope. they call him the head, foundation, and spouse of the Church, as
appears by the disputes of Bellarmine lib. 2 de pontif. Romans c. 31. and by
the glosses of the Canonists. Abb as Panormitanus says, that Christ and the
Pope have but one consistory. This honor also the Pope is content to take to
him, as by the Chap. quoniam. de imunitate. in. 6. and diverse other decretales
it appears. In the book of Ceremonies he applies to himself these words,
which Christ utters of himself, all power is given to me in heaven and earth.

3. Thirdly they give the name and titles of God to creatures. Biel lect. 48.
super can. missae, says the priest is the creator of his own creator. the
same blasphemy is also found in Innocentius de mysterijs missae, and in Stella
Clericorum, and was uttered by Bonner to certain Priests in the beginning of
Queen Mary's days.

4. Fourthly they confess their sins to angels and saints, as well as to
God; as is evidently proved by their common confession in tfieir missalls,
Horatius Tursellinus in his Epistle to Peter Aldobrandini before his history of
our Lady of Loreto, says, that god does at our Ladies pleasure govern the
earth, and bestow at her beck heavenly gifts upon men. Commonly they give the
office of mediation, to our Lady, to saints and angels.

5. They teach, that the Massepriests are constituted priests after the order
of Melchisedech. Nay they make the priests mediators for christ's body, as it
appears by these words of the mass, supra quae propit to ac secreno vuliu
respicere digneris etc.

6. They are not ashamed to affirm, that a dog, or hog, or mouse eating a
consecrated host does eat christ's true body, as we may see in Thomas
Aquinas 3. p. q. 83. art. 6. and in. 4. sent. did. 13, and in Biel, in 4.
sent. did, 12. in Alexander Hales, and diverse other schoolmen.

7. Nicholas the 2. in the chap. Ego Berengarius. did. 2. de consecrat. makes
Berengarius to confess, that Christ's glorified body is torue with teethe, and
sensibly handled by the Priest.

8. Clemens the 6. in the chap. vnigenitus. extr. de paenit. et remiss. does
make Christ like to the sinful people of the Jews, in whom, as we read
Isay. c, 1. from the head to the foot there was nothing sound.

9. Faber in his book against the anatomy of the mass compares christ to
dru^ken Silenus, annon says he, mirificus Silenus suit christus: in another
place he calls him an enchanter.

10. Bellarmine lib. 1. de cult. sanct. c. 13. alleging a place out of Iustine
Martyr, but most fasly, places angels before the holy ghost, and would have
them worshipped together with the holy trinity.

11. Julius the third called for his Peacock in despite of god, and nothing is
more common among papists, then blasphemies and imprecations, as is confessed
by themselves in the Romish catechism.

12. In the Romish breuiary the blessed virgin is called dulcis amica dei, that
is, the sweet friend of god, and the happy gate of heaven. They give unto her
also power over her son, and say, iure matris impera redemptori, that is, by
thy motherly power command the Redeemer of the world.

13. Bellarmine lib. 1. de cultu sanctorum c. 23. aloweth these speches of
friars speaking to a woode^ crucifix, thou have redeemed us, thou have
reconciled us to thy father. he confesses also in his 1. book de
iudulgentijs, that saints may be called redeemers. Thomas Waldensis in his
prologue ad Martinum quintum applies these words of the Apostle; Lord save
us, we perish, to the pope.

14. Bonauenture or rather some falsary under his name applies those divine
praises, which the prophet in the Psalms gives to god, to the virgin Mary.

15. Of the scriptures most commonly they speak most blasphemously, sometime
calling them a nose of wax, sometime a dead letter, sometime a killing
letter, sometime comparing them to Aesops fables. Kellison in his survey. p.
158. says the devil does wrap himself from top to toe in scriptures, as if
the word of god were the habit of the devil.

He that list to see diverse other blasphemous doctrines and sayings of the
pope and his accomplices, let him read the two books de antichristo et eius
ecclesia, lately set out by Master Powel a young man learned, zealous and
paineful, that has at large handled this argument. in the mean while we may
see, that such as profess christian religion and true piety have noe reason to
like that religion, in which Christ is notoriously blasphemed, and so many
impieties contained.

Chap. 11. That toleration of popery, is contrary to reasons of state.
FVrthermore with small labor it may be showed, that popery is a religion full
of contradictions, absurdities and fooleries, and so contrary to holy
scriptures, and the catholic faith of christians, as darkness to light.
falsehood to truth, and black to white. But this short answer will not admit
any such large discourse. beside that all these points are at large proved in
the survey of popery, published in answer to Kellisons inuectiue Survey. Now
therefore it shall be sufficient to show, that as popery is contrary to the
rules of Christian religion, so it si no less repugnant to reasons of state,
and derogatory both to the Authority of Kings, and to the liberty of
Christians.

That popish religion is contrary to reasons of state and politic govern
meant, it apeareth first, for that the same is idolatrous, wicked, false, and
contrary to gods true service. now what state can long continue, that either
receives such a wicked religion, or else is careless for the establishment of
gods service? Them that honor me says the Lord. 1. Samuel. 2. I will honor,
and they that despise me shall be despised. The Apostle also Romans 1. shows,
that the wrath of god is reueiled from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withold the truth in unrighteousness.

Secondly it is always dangerous to change laws, and to reuerse matters
heretofore orderly passed. But if popish religion were tolerated, then should
all those laws cease, that concern the articles of religion, the book of
common prayer, the form of administration of sacraments, the kings royal
authority in ecclesiastical causes, the ministers of gods word and
sacraments, and the postessions of the church. Finally many things now well
ordered, would then be called in question. if then laws be the bands, that
contain the commonwealth in order, who sees not, that a great dislolution of
state would follow if Popish religion were tolerated?

Thirdly the pope claims power to dispose of kingdoms, and to depose kings.
and all his true disciples do maintain his Claim. Js it then possible, that
any state should either live under such a tyranny, or tolerate such professed
enemies of state?

Fourthly the same man pretends right to give laws to the state especially
in ecclesiastical causes, and to dispose of the livings of the church, But I
think noe state will give this power to strangers, and enemies, that has
liberty to refuse it.

Fifthly we read. that pope Paul the third in his bulle of excommunication
against King Henry the eighte, King of Engla^nd, commanded his subjects to take
arms against him, gave away his true subjects as slaves to those that could
take them, dissolved all bonds, wherein any stood bound to him or his
subjects, as is evidently aparent in the words of his bulle recorded in Sanders
de schismate, and the collector of his Bulls. and this authority all pops
claim, and al papists must defend. But it is strange, that any state should
endure such indignities offered to princes and their subjects.

Sixthly no man can serve the pope and his prince and country, especially
being in opposition with the pope. how then can the state admit such as
depend upon the pope, and are ready to exequute his commandementes and take
them selves bound to do it upon paiue of damnation? Nay Percie and other
papists of late without his commandment as they say, were in a fair way to
overthrow the state.

7. To restore banished men, to acquit condemned persons, and to let prisoners
loose, that are in custody by order of law, is the most extreme condition that
lost common wealths may be drawn unto, as Tully says lib. 5. in Verrem.
perditae civitates says he, desperatis omnibus rebus hos solent exitus
exitiales habere, vt damnati in integrum restituantur, vinctisoluantur, exules
redusa^tur. But toleration of popery does bring all these incommodities with
it. should we then basely subject our selves to enemies, and traitoures, and
take that course, which no state ever yielded unto, vnlessethe same were
brought to extreme and desperate terms?

8. No state can admit such as depend upon foreign enemies and intertaine
intelligence with them. For that were to embrace within our bosoms the enemies
of state. But that is the case of the archpreest, of the Iebusites,
Massepreests, gunpouder traitors and all their adherents.

9. No state can be well governed by two governors, and two diverse laws. For
as there is but one principal gouernemente In a state, so ought there to be
but one authority, and one law. but if papists be tolerated, then the pope
must as well be obeyed as the king, and the popes laws be joined with the kings
laws. furthermore the common wealth will prove a monster, not only with
two heads, but also with two souls and two diverse kinds of proceedings.

10. The bonds of state are laws, and the bonds, that tie subjects to their
princes, are oaths of allegiance, and loyal affection toward them. But
papists being dispensed with all by the pope respect neither laws of state,
nor oaths of allegiance, nor love due to princes. How then can any state
tolerate such fellows, as respect nether bonds of state, nor duty, nor
obligation toward their lawful princes?

11. Laws punish such as contriue the murder of private persons, and much
more such, as are ready upon every occasion, to stir sedition. should then
then the state tolerate such, as upon the Popes commandment, and warrant, nay
upon the word of a seditious Massepriest, shall think it lawful and
meritorious to murder and empoyson any, that shall be opposite to their faction,
or that shall be ready to exequute any mischievous enterprise against the state?
the papists will deny themselves to be in this case. But what should any man
trust denials, that remembers Percies and Catesbyes and Garnets late treasons?

12. If we believe not rules of state, yet let us consider in what danger
states stand, that have in their bowels many Iebusites, Massepriests, and their
accomplices, ready to execute the popes will, by examples and precedents of
former times. And first let us remember how many enterprises were made by them
in the late Queens days of famous and blessed memory, to bring their country
under the command of strangers. Next, what attemptes they made against that
innocent princes life. Thirdly, what libells they set out to the disgrace of
the principal governors of the state. Fourthly let us consider, what stirrs
and rebellions they raised in the days of King Henry the 8. King Edward, and
Queen Elizabeth. Fifthly it may not be forgotten, how they made a league in
France against the king, and cruelly murdered King Henry the third, and
empoysoned diverse, that stood in their way. Sixthly the massacres of France,
and cruel executions in Flanders show, what they will do here, if once they
think themselves strong enough. Seventhly. if we forget all the rest, yet may
we not forget Percies late treason, who in the ruins of the Parliament house,
meant to bury both King and state, and to massacre all Christians, opposite to
the popish faction. Lastly, if of nature papists were quiet; yet will the Pope
never suffer them to rest, until he have his will.

Our last reason of state against Popery is, for that the same is both enemy to
princes, and most grecuous to christian subjects; which remains now in
particular chapters to be handled.

Chap. 12. That popish religion is enemy to kings.
THat popish religion is enemy to all kings professing a contrary religion, J
think, the papists themselves will not deny. For experience shows, that they
persecute such, both with arms, and laws, and censures Neither do they only
make open wars upon them, but also by privy murdrers, and empoysoners seek to
destroy them, as may be proved by many particulars. And now if any man reply
and say, that neither Clement the 8. nor this pope now raiguing, took this
course against his Majesty and other christian kings professing true religion;
we answer first, that it is uncertain how far the pope was engaged in Percies
late treason, and what secret practices popes both have, and do continually set
forward. And secondly, that want of occasion and means has rather hindered
their violent and furious courses, then any change or alteration of their
former resolution in oppugning their opposites.

But suppose his majesty and the state were not of a contrary religion to the
pope; yet it shall be proved, that popery is adverse to Kings, that like well
enough of that religion. For first all kings living under the popes obedience,
are the popes subjects. Boniface the 8. declares it in the chapter vnam
sanctam. ext. de mayor and obed. where he says, it is necessary to salnation
for all men to be subject to the Pope. Now what greater indignity, then to
make kings the popes vassalls and subjects?

Secondly, Bellarmine lib. 5. de pontif. Romans c. 6. says, that the pope has
power to take away kingdoms from some, and to bestow them on others. The same
doctrine is also maintained by Robert Parsons in his seditious book of titles.
He does also traitorously affirm, that the people may sometime lawfully
proceed against princes. William Rosse in his book de iustareip supra reges
impios and haereticos authorit. c. 2. affirms impudently, that the right of
all the kings and kingdoms of Europe, is laid upon this foundation, that the
state or people may depose their kings. But grant this; and then are kings
tenants at the popes, and peoples will. For what is more easy, then to impute
grievous crimes to princes, if the pope or seditious mutins lift to quartell
with them?

Thirdly, Bellarmine lib. 5. de pontif. Romans c. 6. determines, that it is not
lawful for Christians to tolerate a king, that is an infidel, or an heretic,
if he go about to draw his subjects to his religion. The papists therefore, as
we see, are taught to make it a matter of conscience, to depose their kings,
and the massepriests set them on to rebellion. Pius the fifth, excommunicated
all such as would not take arms against Queen Elizabeth. and Clerk and
Watson first, and lately Percie and Catesbie, and their accomplices attempted
the Kings destruction, albeit, they say, he is not declared excommunicated. Nay
admit a Prince were not adverse to the pope in religion; yet if the Pope
pretend any matter of quarrel unto him, his subjects are stirred against him
and he is excommunicated, as may appear in the Duke of Ferraraes case,
excommunicated by Clement the 8. because he would not deliver up into the popes
hands, his dukedom of Ferrara.

Fourthly, suppose a king keep good correspondence with the Pope; yet he is
not within his kingdom, as papists teach, to make ecclesiastical laws. nor
may refuse to obey the popes ecclesiastical laws. But he is no soueraign
king, that either receives laws of other, or has no power to make laws for
his subjects in matters of external Church government.

Fifthly where popish religion reigns, there the clergy is exempt from the
kings courts and government. Bellarmiue in his treatise de exempt. Cleric.
sets down these propositions, first that Clerks in ecclesiastical causes
are freed from the command of secular princes by the law of god. Next, that
Clerks are not to be judged of secular judges, though they transgress
temporal laws. and lastly, that princes in respect of Clerks, are not
souesaigne princes. E^eanuel Sae in his first edition of Aphorisms for
confessaries says, that the rebellion of a Clerk against his King is not
treason, because he is not the kings subject. His words are these, Clerici
rebellio in regem non est crimen laesaema iestatis, quia non est subditus
regis. So we see, that the doctrine of popery makes kings but half kings, and
depriueth them of a great part of their subjects.

Sixthly the Pope in c. quia nonnulli. de immunitate ecclesiae. exempteth the
goods and possessions of Clergy men from toll and custom Does it not appear
then, that Popish religion depriving the King of half his revenues, does also
weaken his estate, and make him oftentimes unable to defray his ordinary
charges?

7. In all states where popery is professed, a great part of the kings
revenues is taken from him, and bestowed upon the pope, and his kingdom is
thereby much impouerished.

Finally did the King neither respect his Royal authority, nor his enemies;
yet if he mean to secure himself from the hads of Cuttorotes, and privy
empoisoners, he may not endure the king-killing Iebusites, nor the popes
proctors, that stir up wars against princes, that are enemies to the Pope,
and by all means seek to persuade men to take away their lives. These fellows
caused Henry the 3. of France anno 1589. to be most cruelly murdered by a
Dominican Friar, and the like they attempted against king Henry the 4. now
reigning. Jf God had not watched for the safety of our King and state,
Catesbie, Percie, and Faux had by fire and gunpowder destroyed the King, the
Queen, the Prince, and all the Lords, Judges, and commons assembled in
parliament. How many they have lately empoysoned, we refer to Gods secret
judgment. That the pope does entend the destruction of all Christian princes,
whom he excommunicateth, it is not to be doubted, seeing he armeth their
subjects against them, and promises, not only remission of sins, but also
rewards to such, as lay hold upon them.

Whosoever therefore means to reign securely, and to maintain his regal
authority, must diligently provide, that his subjects profess not popish
religion, that is so opposite both to his authority, and security.

Chapter 13. That popish religion is grievous both to true christians and to
papists themselves.
THat popish religion is grievous to al true Christians, it cannot well be
denied. For who is not vexed, especially, if his heart be enflamed with true
zeal, seeing the holy scriptures abused and accused of imperfection,
insufficiency, and flexibility, and popish traditions either aequalled or
preferred before them? what true christian can endure to see Christ's honor
and office emparted to angels and saints, and idols worshipped more fre
quently and devoutly, then the true and ever living god? What zealous Christian
does not burn with indignation to see the man of sin to dominere in Christ's
Church, and to call himself Christ's vicar, the head and spouse of the
church, and to exalt himself above all that is called god? Finally who would not
grieve to see gods holy name and truth blasphemed, as it is by the teachers of
popery?

Furthermore, as Christ was grieved to see the house of god made a den of
thieves, so it cannot choose but grieve his disciples, to see the house of god
possessed by Antichrist, and al true teachers chased away, oppressed, and
murdered in places, where his accomplices can prevail. there also scriptures in
to^gs understood of the multitude are suppressed, and the Popes hests followed
more diligently, then the laws of God.

Thirdly what can be devised more grievous to a christian soul, then to see
gods true worship suppressed, and idolatry and superstition publikelye
maintained, and of ignorant people so grossly abused?

Fourthly as nothing is more pleasing to true Christians, the^ freedom of
conscience, and liberty of true catholic religion: so can there be no greater
vexation of conscience, then to see the institution of Christ in his holy
sacraments and worship violated, and men's consciences forced to embrace errors,
and true professors cruelly persecuted.

Finally it is no small vexation of spirit for free Christians, to see princes
made the Popes vassals, and his exequutioners to murder such, as profess the
truth; for free me^ to endure the Popes exactions and pillages, to hear the
untruth and calumniations of his agents defaming innocent christians with notes
of heresy, schism, and other most grievous crimes.

Nay so heavy is the yoke of the popes tyranny, that the^ papists themselves
are forced to complain thereof, and would noe doubt cry outlouder, if they
durst. Petrus de Alliaco in his book de reformat. ecclesiae complains of the
principal abuses, which were most grievous and burdensome. The first was the
multitude of the popes laws, the second was the frequent use of
excommunications and other censures of the Church. The third was the heaviness
of the popish prelates exactions. beside these three, he shows, that the
multitude of religious orders, and begging friars was a heavy and intolerable
burden in the church.

The Germans not long sense collected a hundred matters of grecuance offered
them by the pope, and his Clergy and officers, and presented them to the pope,
desiring redress. The special points are set down in their petition entitled
centum grauamina Germaniae, etc.

So many abuses reigned in the Church of Rome some hundred years agone, that
the bishop of Chems writing thereof a special treatise called it, onus
Ecclesiae, the burden of the Church.

Aluarus Pelagius also that lived some time before Martin Luther, began to
discover the errors and abuses of the church of Rome, and does most grievously
complain of them, intituling his book de planctu ecclesiae, that is, the
lamentation of the Church.

And this has been the complainte of diverse Christians, as we may perceive, by
some Epistles of Petrarch, and other writings of Arnold de villa nona, of
Nicholas Orem, Thomas Bradwardine, and many others.

The papists themselves feel the greef of auriculer consessions, the
fraudulent practices of the friars in their absolutions, and enioyning of
satisfactions.

The multitude of the popes laws, and the burden thereof lies heavy -- upon
their consciences, for their friars teach them, that they bind the conscience.

The vow of single life in many youngme^ and women does work desperate effects.
When they see the^ selves haltred, they run into a great dissolution of
manners, and grow careless, what sins they commit.

The massepriests live in great subjection to their prelates, and the rules of
mo^kish life ar grievous to al, that profess those forged religions. And
therefore few observe the rules of their profession, none long do well content
them selves to live under them.

Jn Italy and Spaiue they mure up their Nuns, and yet neither walls nor
laws can keep them in order.

The taxes imposed both upon the clergy and laity are many and grievous. No act
of religion almost is done without paying. of these payments the pope rayseth
great treasures.

If any transgress the popes laws, out fly suspensions, excommunications and
interdictions, and no release is granted with out grievous compositions,
especially if matters concern the popes prerogative.

Finally if any spurn either against the popes authority, or against any
point of his erroneous religion, then he passes through the hands of the
inquisitors, and to the rack, if not to the fire he goes. if a man be
suspected, he is a long time imprisoned. if he be convicted, then is he to
pass to the fire, and his goods are seysed, and his wife and children utterly
empouerished. And of these cruel exequutions kings and princes are the
ministers. Neither does the father respect the child, nor the wife the
husband, if the pope do accurse him. nay oftentimes without form of law,
either they cause such as they suspect to be empoysonned, or massacred. and
under this government do papists live. Is it not then strange, that free men
should endure this slavery, and that Christians should not seek remedy for so
grievous oppressions?

Chap. 14. That the petition of papists for a toleration of popish religion, is
void of reason.
John Lecey in his preface does vant, that the petition of his co^sortes for
toleration of popery is conformable to reason. But little does he seem to
understand, what is reason, that requires things so contrary to truth, law,
and reason. For first what reason can he pretend to desire the practice of a
religion rebellious, seditious, falls, erroneous, foolish, absurd, new, strange,
idolatrous, blasphemous, and full of diverse other most gross abuses? either
therefore the papists must clear their religion from these crimes, or else
confess they have small reason to demand a toleration for it. We have
justified our charge in diverse treatises both in latin and English, and yet
they answer nothing particulerly.

Secondly little show of reason have they to desire his majesty to admit a
religion, which depriueth him of half his authority, half his subjects, half
his revenues, and makes him subject to the pope.

Thirdly they do without all reason demand the free exercise of a religion,
that brings men's consciences into thraldom. their persons into danger, and
their lands and goods into the hands of tyrants.

Fourthly the pope and massepriestes make merchandise of men's souls, and make
little conscience to buy and sell churches, altars, dignityes, heaven, grace
and all spiritual things. They spoil the poor, the widdowe and fatherless,
and for maynteinaunce of their own estates, make havoc of Christian men's
estates. Have they then reason, to sue for such a bargayning and spoiling
religion?

5. They show themselves deuoid of reason, that admit mass priests into their
houses, that like owls fly the light and sight of the magistrate, that
intertaine intelligence with foreign enemies, that devour their substance,
that like impure lechours abuse the wives, daughters, and maids of such, as
give them intertainement, and pretending to make them Catholic do indeed make
them Cuckoldlike.

Sixthly we find by proof, that Masse-preests and Jebusites have combined
themselves with foreign enemies, and have sought the destruction of the ire
sovereign princes, and the thraldom of their native country to strangers. Jf
any man doubted of this before, the horrible treason and rebellion of Percy,
Catesby and their followers, and their wicked deseignements may resolve him.
And therefore if reason may rule them, none of the kings true subjects can seek
the advancement of this treache rous religion.

Finally papists have no reason to ask that of us in England, which themselves
deny to us and our brethren in Spain and Italy. There they will not cease
their butcherly proceedings, nor put down their houses of Inquisition. Neither
will they be induced to suspend their penal laws made against true
Christians. What face and forehead then have papists, to ask that in England
of us, which they will not yield to us and our brethren in other countries? is
it not reason, that they should do to others, as they would have others to do
to themselves? and does not the law quod quisque ff. quod quisque iuris.
contain great reason, determining, that every man should be judged according to
the law, which himself uses?

But if papists will needs, urge things unreasonable, then must they understand,
that true Christians have reason to reject their treacherous, false, erroneous,
new, absurd, ido latrous and blasphemous religion.

And next, that his Majesty has just cause to abhor the practice of that
religion, that (as has bin foreshewed) makes him the Popes vassal, and
takes away half his authority, half his subjects, half his revenues, and
brings the rest into question. Now his Majesty is in no danger by the grace
of God. if he can suppress the growing faction of Antichrist. Sixtus Quintus
in his declaratory Bull, anno. D. 1588. against our late gracious Queen
confesses, that he had no means to proceed against her, as he had in
countries professing popery, to deal with other princes. But let Massepriests
gather their bands of seditious persons together and then both prince, and
state shall incur great hazard.

Thirdly, the preachers of the Catholic faith have good occasion to oppose
themselves against these wolves, that seek to enter upon Christ's flock. They
seek to alter both religion and state, and will not rest before they have
deprived al true pastors both of their livings and life. will not then true
pnstors awake and vigorously resist them?

Fourthly, Wise politikes may not admit a religion, that will cause dinision,
and trouble the peace of the state. Neither may they tolerate such as depend on
strangers, and concur with forain enemies.

5. The disciples of Christ may have no felowshipp either with the priests of
Baal, or the caniball Massepriests, that say they eat Christ's flesh with their
mouths and teeth, and swallow his blud into their bellies, or with the
disciples of Antichrist, that seek to suppress the true catholic faith.

6. No true lover of his country can endure rinegued Iebusites and
Massepriests, that are combined with foreign enemies, and seek to bring their
countrymen under the command of strangers, and to murder all, that are
studious of the peace and honor of their nation, as Walleyes, and others
Jesuits actions of late have plainly declared.

7. Charitable Christians may not tolerate either a race of sturdy begging
friars, or a pack of lazy Monks, or a swarm of caniball Massepriestes, which
say they eat up Christ's body really and corporally, but indeed and really
devour the poor, the widow and the fatherless.

8. Men of honest minds and disposition are enemies to all lecherous and
fodomiticall Friars, Monks, and Massepriests. neither will they salute them,
hear them, or converse with them, least they be partakers of their sins, and
consequently of their plagues.

9. Christians maintain their Christian liberty, and have reason to detest the
doctrine of Antichrist, that enthralleth both their persons and consciences.
Further as it pilleth their goods, so it destroys utterly the souls of them
and theyrs.

Finally, seeing they cut our brethrens throats abroad; no Christian man has
reason to suffer them to harbor here, purposing to cut our throats at home.
Faux, Percie, and Catesbie, have left a race of cutthrotes and gunpowder
fellows behind them. should then reasonable men so far forget reason, as to
harken to a petition so unreasonable?

Chap. 15. That popish religion may not be tolerated, if we respect the
grounds of christian religion and policy confessed by the papists themselves.
THat diverse religions are not to be suffered in a christian common wealth, we
have before demonstrated by the confession of papists themselves. It rests
therefore now, that we prove by general pofitions holden and confessed by the
papists, that popish religion may not be tolerated by princes and states,
either professing true religion, or else holding the true rules of policy.

1. First it is confessed by our adversaries themselves, that no idolatrous
religion is to be tolerated in any state. But it is clearly demonstrated,
heretofore Chap. 7. that popish religion in diverse points is idolatrous. 2.
Neither will they yield to permit any sects, or heresies but it is apperant,
that monks, friars and Massepriests are divided into sects. and manifestly have
we proved Chap. 8. that popish religion is a mass of old, and new heresies.
3. Further they confess, that all impious and blasphemous opinions are to be
severely punished, and neither by public grant to be authorized, nor by
conniuence to be passed over. But hardly shall the papists be able to clear
themselves of the impieties and blasphemies, wherewith formerly they stand
charged. 4. Fourthly that cannot be true religion, that contains either
falsehood, or foolery, or error. Nor do papists deny, that such false religions
are to be repressed, and by laws exterminated out of the commonwealth. But in
our survey of Popery we have showed, that diverse positions of popery are not
only erroneous, and false, but also foolish and ridiculous. 5. Kings that are
subject to the Pope will not suffer any religion, if they can choose, that is
either prejudicial to their dignity, or dangerous in respect of their safety.
But many arguments and examples do show, that popish religion is of that
nature, as formerly has bin declared. 6. The Popes themselves, albeit
usurpers, will not suffer any of their subjects to bind themselves by oath to
foreign princes in enmity with them, or to entertain intelligence with them.
Why then should such as are sworn to the enemies of the state, and entertain
intelligence with them, and practice against the state, be suffered in England?
7. In Italy no man is permitted to harbor any priest or friar, that denies
the Popes usurped supremacy. Why then, should the Massepriests and their
adhaerents be tolerated among us that deny his Majesty's supreme authority in
the government of the church of England, that is due to him both hy the laws
of god and man? 8. Finally the papists, as much as they dare, resist the popes
pillages, and cry out upon his exactions. Should true Christians then that are
now released and freed from these burdens, admit a religion, which teaches
and urges these manifold exactions and oppressions?
Chapter 16. An answer to the title of the petition of lay lapists, and the
preface of John Lecey.
NOw least any ignorant papists should be abused by glozing reports of their
consortes, as if they were able, either to clear these doubts, or to allege
just causes of their boulde request for a toleration of popish religion, we
have thought it not amiss to examine the several chapters, and parts of this
apologeticall petition, adding our answers to their titles, prefaces, demandes,
accusations, letters and idle discourses. The title and front of their
petition follows, to gether with John Leceys preface.

A PETITION APOLOGETICAL, It is not credible, that papists would either
present, or sign and allow such baggage stuff.
PRESENTED TO the Kings most excellent Majesty, by the Lay Heretics and
idolaters deserve not the name of Catholics.
Catholics of England, in Iulie last.
In eo quod detractant de vobis tanquam de malefactoribus, ex bonis operibus
vos considerantes, glorificent Deum in die visitationis.

In that Here wants the beginning of the sentence, viz. have your
conuersation-honest. can we then repute them honest, that cut of honest
conversation?
wherein they misreport of you, as of malefactors, by the good works
considering you, they may glorify God in the day of visitation.

1. Pet. 2. v. 12.
Printed at DOWAY by JOHN MOGAR, at the figne of the To show, that they sail
not alvvay without co^pas.
Compass. 1604.

THE PREFACE.
Reverend Sir. add John, and then it will stand thus, reverend Sir John.
There came to my hands by the way of That is, by the nearest way about.
Bruxels, on the xxviij. day of this month, a certain Petition or Apology of
the lay Catholics of England (as I stand His best ground, you see, is false
information.
informed) presented to his Highness about the later end of the Parliament:
which semeeth so Or rather confrontable to reason.
conformable to reason; so How absolute, when it is made with conditions and
limitations, as appears afterward?
absolute in form of their submission, and so True. For every politic
Christian may vvoonder at their presumption and folly, that suppose that a king,
or state will rest assured upon the oaths or promises of massepriests, and
their namelesse consorts.
admirable for the assurance by them offered for their Priests of Baal, ordered
by Antichrist to sacrifice for quick and dead, and not true priests or pastors.
Priests and Pastors: that the publishing thereof cannot but give contentmente
(in mine Not vvorth an onyon.
opinion] to al sorts of men, that desire both to be clearelye informed of the
true state of things, and that justice and equity should take place, according
to men's comportments and deserts, and not according to the preiudicate opinions
of such, This had been truly spoken, if it had heen applied to the inquisitors
of Spain and Italy. And with the great auda ciousnesse, and soly of these
petitioners.
whom nothing but the blood and utter beggering of Catholics can satisfy.
And therefore I thought good, in more public manner then it was before, to
make the world acquainted therewith.

Reasons of publishing this treatise.
THE publishing of this Apology cannot but tend much to his Js it honorable for
the king to submit himself to enemies, and to receive conditions of lewd
subjects, as these petitioners would persuade him?
Majesty's honor, His Majesty's honor and service.
and more to his satisfaction and A goodly security, when a kings life and
state shall depend upon a single thread of popish fellows promises. And a
most simple satisfaction, where nothing is performed, but only promised.
security; for so much as the Catholics affectionate Services supposed and
obligations broken.
services and obligations therein contained, must needs be arguments of some
supereminent virtue and goodness in his sacred personage, that could draw from
them at all times such extraordinary effects of Such as appeared in the
tumultuous stirs of papists in Scotland against the king, and in the
practices of Brook, Watson, and Clerk executed at Winchester for conspiring the
destruction of his Majesty. And lastly in Percie and Garnet.
love and devotion: and the more manifest the What? vvil resusats now turn
protestants? it should seem so. But we are to understand it no further, the^ a
laxatiue purgatio^ retcheth.
protestations of their purgations shall appear to the world, the more
manifold shall be their bonds and obligations of performance, and perseverance
therein.

The Protestant They have no reason to like either their murmuring petitio^s,
or their bald pleadings.
Prelates cannot with reason disalow thereof, The Protestant Prelates.
because herein is nothing required A goodly proceeding, when fugitives and
malcontents call forth true subjects to answer.
at their hands, but a reasonable conference, and satisfaction in points of
their mission and vocation: And when they shall make it evident out of the
written word, that they are the true Sheepheards and Pastors sent from God to
have charge of souls they make profer without delay to follow them, and with
all conformity to obey them, and hear their voices: which when they shall
prove, the controversy is charitably composed, and though they fail of their
proofs, yet they remain as they do with their wealth, their These two words
are evil placed together. But if talking of massepriests, he had joined their
whores and pleasures he had spoken properly.
wives, their pleasures, and palaces: the poor Catholics desiring only a
secret and silent permission of such Of wolves rather. for who made them
pastors, or is so simple, as to commit Christ's sheep to them?
Pastors, as shall show to them and the whole world, sufficient Can they prove
the Popes authority, and the function of priests offering and devouring
Christ's body and blood with their mouth? they shall then work wonders.
evidence and approbation for the charge of souls they undertake. The They
laugh at this pild prologue, that would threape kindness upon them.
Puritans herewith cannot be offended, if they peaceably, The Puritans.
and precisely seek after contentment, and not contention: because they shall
find diverse of their maxims zealously, or rather odiously conceived by them
against Catholics, ouerthrown and Soon may John Lazy euacuate hu brain. but
the principles of popish practices he shall neither euacuate, nor answer.
euacuated by most evident demonstration and instances in matters of fact,
practice, and experience: especially in that point of conditional subjects,
which is so much urged by the Ministry.

The They shall soon trusse your schoolboy mass priests.
flourishing and learned Academiks of Oxford and Camoridge may perceive hereby
that Catholics know their Priests And to requite their kindness, the
massepriests know their followers, and their vvines and daughters intus and
ad cutem.
intus and in cute, Academikes of Oxford and Cambridge.
and take them neither for ignorant in divinity, nor Their pitiful ignorance
both in divinity and humanity is too too appare^t.
dunces in humanity; neither for Catalines toward their Senate, nor for
Absolons toward their David, that dare adventure life, and living for their
virtues and loyalties. And I imagine that if your Ministers were put to the
like plunges, they would hardly find the like pledges: wherefore I could wish
that your Ministers would endeavor rather to excel and surpass them in their
Godly qualities, then in their pamphlets and pulpits to urge the State to
suppress them with severe exilements and edicts, which are nothing but
arguments of their fear, and VVhetstones for lying they deserve. Their faces
also are as hard as vvhetstones.
whetstones of the others fortitude.

The godly and zealous They are sorry they attend not on the massepriests to
Tiburn, as they were wont.
Artizans and Prentises of London, and other places, The Artisans and Prentises
may learn hereby to moderate themselves a little in their outrageous alarms
of Stop the Traitor, when they see an innocent Priest pass the streets: for by
reading hereof they may be rightly and truly informed and instructed, how far
the poor Innocent men are from treasons, and all treasonable purposes.

The Catholics at home must needs hereby be comforted, and animated in well
doing, and faithful serving, The Catholics of England.
and obeying their Viz. The Pope, for to papists the king is not soueraign
Soueraign in pace and gaudio, if they may be permitted, and if not that, yet
in suffering with alacrity what shall be imposed upon them for their religion
when by his Apology they shall be disburdned of those former clogs and
imputations of disloialty, and treason.

The Catholics not only here in Flanders, but in the whole Christian world
besides must needs be hereby much edified, and excited to the sincere practice,
The Catholics abroad.
and profession of zeal and piety toward That is, toward their god on the
earth.
God: of fidelity and obedience toward their Were the leaguers of France, and
ebells that rose against king Henry the 8. and his children, obedient to
princes?
Princes: and of a reverent respect, and regard toward their Priests and
Pastors, when they find in this present Apology, so rare and remarkable an
example of English Catholics constancy in the one, and conformity in the
other: and such confidence for the third, that sithence the Apostles time, and
the days of the primitive Church of England, never the like President, either
in the time of peace, or persecution has been heard or read of; that the sheep
should engage themselves for their shepherds, and make voluntary profer to be
bound body for They are not so mad I trow
body, and life for life for their fidelity except that famous He died for
Christ, and not for the cause of Antichrist, as the Popes martyrs do.
Protomartir of England, S. Albane, who was to them herein a patron and
president: the end of whose blessed conversation, our English Catholics
beholding, do imitate his faith and fortitude, and do succeed him in a
reuerentiall love and devotion toward their Pastors. Which heroical mind and
resolution of our said English Catholics must needs be as famous to posterity,
a it is repugnant to all worldly wisdom and policy; and must also needs be
accompanied with as much honor and merit in the sight of God, and all good men,
as it cannot but be incombred with dangers and difficulties in the sight of
flesh and blood, and of all those quorum Deus venture est, whose This is
properly said of the Popes cardinals, and their adherents.
God is only their belly, profit, and pleasure in this world.

Of this Apology two copies were sent over, the one to France, and the other
to Flanders: all one in sense and substance, but it seems that the copy sent
to Flanders, was taken verbatim out of the first fountain and original: And
that the other which came to Paris, was not altogether so Quod dissonat verum
non est, says Hierome.
ample and complete. Therefore I have thought good to advertise you, that I
have followed and set forth that copy, which I found, or at least presumed to
be most consonant to the good minds and affections of them, whom it most
concerned.

And thus willing you to make your profit spiritual of these my endeavors, and
of the sequent Apology, desiring God that it may serve to mollify the hearts
of our heavy No way so heavy, as the spanish inquisitors.
adversaries, and fortify and corroborate the Saints and servants of God in
well doing, and patiently suffering, and carrying the Cross of christ, and
crown of thorns, which prick to the quick on every side, I wish you the two
most precious jewels that can happen to a christian sovle: Gratiam Papists
study as much for the Popes grace, as for gods grace.
in hac vita, and gloriam in futura.

From my study in Doway, this That is, 12. days before the receipt of the book
which was the 28. of this month.
16. of October 1604.

Your very loving Son and servant in Christo Dommo. IO. LECEY.

The answer to both.
HOw little our adversaries respect true and sincere dealing, we may in part
conjecture by the untruths of the title and preface praefixed before this
petition. For first they give the title of Catholics to papists. whose
religion is proved seditious, false, erroneous, heretical, idolatrous and
blasphemous, and in no sort catholic, or professed of true catholics; and
secondly they pretend, that it was made by the lay papists of England, whereof
J do no suppose them to be so unwise, as that they will auowe, what soever is
said in this petition, or so presumptuous, as to charge the King with
disgraceful breach of promise, or to defame him with suspicion of heresy, as
these men do. Further the authors hereof page 19. do cite Calvin, Knoxe,
Luther and Goodman, whose books lay papists may not read, and whose
testimonies they have no reason to allege, unless they have read them. Leceys
praeface concerning the conformity, and perfection of this petition, and the
contentement to be received of all sorts of men thereby, is nothing but a pack
of foolish and untrue surmises, as we shall declare hereafter: alleging the
words of, Saint Peter. 1, Epist. 2. they leave out the beginning of the
sentence, upon which the words by them cited do depend. Have your conversation
honest among the gentiles says saint Peter, that wherein they detract from you
as malefactors considering good works, they may glorify god in the day of
visitatio^. those words, have your conversation honest, being guilty in their
consciences of dishonesty, they leave out, and translate by the good works
considering you, for considering your good works.

Further, their title, and testimony is not more destitute of truth, the^ of
reason. For neither is a petition, an apology, nor an apology a Petition, that
they should call their discouse a petition apologeticall. Nor had they reason
to allege saint Peter's words concerning the good works of Chrstians, who
notwithstanding were reputed malefactors. For little do they fit the cause of
papists, whose good works are gheason and whose practices of treason and
rebellion in so many records do convince them to be truly malefactors. The
secular priests also confess, that the exequutions done upon Masse-priestes
and their adherentes were just, and necessary.

The preface of John Lecey, or rather lazy John, is nothing else but an idle
declamation in praise of this pseudaposticall petition, and the authors
thereof, wherein this scraping fellow endeavors to tickel the galled backs
of his own compagnions with his forged commendations. But let them beware they
trust him not to far, least he draw them within the compass of his own
disloyalty, and bring them where Percy and Catesby left them.

The Lazy fellow directs his speech to some odd and namelesse sacrificer.
for he calls him reverend Sirre. but if the Masselouers were not blinded
with affection, they might thereby see howsoever this gear is thrust forth
under the name of lay papists, that all the advantage proceeding thereof,
comes to the polshorne preests of Baal.

In the entrance of his matter he makes great bragges, telling his friend,
that this petition, or apology (he knows not whether to call it) is so
conformable to reason, so absolute in form of the petitioners submission, and
so admirable for the assurance by them offered for their priests and
pastorus, that the publishing thereof cannot but give contentment, in his
opinion, to all sorts of men. But his performance is nothing correspondent to
his great countenance. For first we have already showed, that this request
for a toleration of popery is not only contrary to reason, but also to
religion, and all Christian policy.

Secondly the submission, that they make, is very defective considering their
denial of the Kings authority in Ecclesiast icall causes, and their de
pendance upon the Pope, that claims a superiority over the king. But did they
submit themselves wholly to his majesty, yet should they do nothing but that
which is required of all good subjects.

Thirdly their admirable assurance is most admirably ridiculous: For who does
not wonder and laugh, to hear assurance offered for the life of so great a
King, and so potent a state, by a few thridbare fellows, we know not, who they
are? the parliament house had been blown up, who should have sued their
bonds? who should have brought them into the Starchamber for periurye? Again
when the Pope so easily dispenses with oaths and dissolueth contracts, what
reason has any Christian to depend either upon him, or his adherents. for
either oath, promise or bond?

Besides all this, our prologue, where he thinks himself horribly eloquent,
speaks plain contradictions, and fooleries. For first if the petitioners
had such reason, as he pretends, what should they need to make a submission,
as having committed some great crime? again what submission can a subject
make, to his souereine, that it is not required of him by duty? thirdly such as
make such absolute submissions, as he talks of, need nor to put in bonds, or
pledges. Finally it is foolery to think either that papists are true
catholics, or that such, as ar truly informed of the continual practices of
the fierye Iebusites and massepriestes, against the state, will like of their
unreasonable requests, and no man can take them to be wise, that charge their
judges with praeiudice before hearing, but to say or signify, that nothing can
satisfy the state, but the blood and utter beggary of Catholics. or rather
papists, is plain villainy, and not to be proved against any governor of this
state, No, they desire their reformation, and not their destruction or
hinderance, and much it were to be wished, that Percy and other papists had
been no more maliciously affected to us, the^ we to them. Alleging reasons for
the publishing of this treatise, he disputes like a wild man, running far
beyond his wit and reason. first he says that the publishing of this
Apology cannot but tend much to his majesty's honor, and more to his
satisfaction and security: as if those did honor him, that charge him with
breach of promise, and note him with the stain of heresy and hatred to
catholic religion, as the petitioners do. Further what security and
satisfaction can those yield his majesty, that esteem neither oaths nor
bonds, when the pope contremandeth them? but did they mean to keep both; yet
prinate men's bonds are no security for such a king and kingdom. They talk J
confess, of love and devotion to the king. But it appeared but little, by the
practice of Brook, Clerk, and Watson first, and les lately by the treason of
Percy, Catesbie and Faux, who of mere love sought to blow up the king and the
whole parliament. to omit to speak of their secret combinations and practices,
it is no good sign, that they seek to satisfy the King, and to serve him
devoutly, when they seek to set up a religion displeasing to God, disgraceful
and hurtful to the King, and most praeiudiciall to his subjects.

Secondly He supposes the Prelates of the Church of England cannot with reason
disallowe this petition, seeing nothing is required at their hands, but a
reasonable conference, and satisfaction in points of their mission and
vocation. But it seems he means to give them but little satisfaction; that
refuses to give them their due titles, and tells them of, I know not what
wealth, pleasures and palaces pretended to be enjoyed by them. He is also
very ignorant. that imagines, that the teachers of the truecatholike faith,
can abide a false wicked, idolatrous, heretical, and blasphemous religion, or
true subjects treason and rebellion, and very impudent to call true Bishops in
question for their vocation and mission, having no color of defense either
for the mission and vocation of Mass Priests, to sacrifice for quick and
dead, as for the Pope to rule the whole Church, or for the Cardinals to
practice the troubles of Christendom. Further he was not wise to talk of
Bishops winess being allowed by saint Paul, seeing the perjured Romish
preistes forswearing marriage and swearing continency, do notwithstanding keep
concubines, whoors, and Bardassaes. As for the calling of our prelates, and
ministers, it has been often and sufficiently justified already, and shall be
again, when the intrusion of the pope, and his poleshorne crewe, of
sacrificing preeests into the Church shall not by any means be maintained, or
colored.

Thirdly he seems very careful, not to offend the Puritanes, as he calls
them. But it is offense enough, to give the names of faction to true
Christians. Furthermore, if the papists be no better able to plead for
themselves and their religion, then these petitioners have done; not only
such, as they call Puritanes, but also all other good Christians will condemn
them to be neither half subjects, nor condicionall subjects, nor subjects at
all. As for their religion it grows every day more odious and execrable then
other.

Fourthly the scholars of Cambridge and Oxford of all men rest worst satisfied
with this petition, being void both of learning and reason. as for the conceit
which ignorant creatures have of mass preests, they regard it not, knowing
the^ to be but shallowe fellows in divine matters, though very profound in
rebellions and treacherous practices. miserable are they, that follow such
guides, and trust such false fugitive compagnions.

Fifthly the Artizans and prentizes of London would make a wiser speak, then
this petition. so seely defenses are therein made for the popish preests, that
how so ever they thought on them before, they cannot choose now, but both cry
out against them and stop them, as false fugitives, seditious traitors and
professed enemies to their prince and country. In the mean while the mass
preests have little cause to tha^k John Lazy, that makes them plead their
cause before artizans and prentises, who generally detest them and their
abominable doctrine and practices, and hope to see the^ shortly hold up their
hands at the bar for treason.

Finally the papists at home and abroad will be very sorry to see their cause
so nakedly handled, and so weakly defended; and, if they be wise, will curse
him, that published so bare a discourse giving us occasion to discover their
treacherous, heretical, and wicked doctrines, and other mysteries of the
popish faction. As for the example of Saint Alba^ and of his teacher, it
fitteth the papists in no sort. Those two knew no one point of that wicked
doctrine of papists, which the Church of England condemns, neither was Albane
martyred for the popes quarrel, or the doctrine now contained in the
decretales, but for the faith and doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, being as
loyal to his governors as the Jebusites and their accomplices, are perverse and
disloyal. And therefore at unawares, where the prologue would use the example of
the primitive church of England, he printeth privative church, showing himself
to be a member rather of the popes privative church of England, that is
deprived and would deprive Christians of all true faith in verity of
religion, and sincerity in conversation, then of the true primitive Church
founded by Christ, and governed by the Apostels and their true successors.

But what should J need to stand longer about the examination of this poor speak
of this rude and Lazy prologue, who so far forgot himself in his dates of his
discourse, that he publishes in print the 16. of octobre, this apology, that
as he says in the beginning of the prologue, came to his hands the 28. of
that month. which if he be able to make good, then he has sent us rather a
prophesy, then a preface, telling us what the lay papists pleaded, some 12
days before their pleading came to his hands,

Chap. 17. An answer to the two first chapters of the petition, containing
causes both of the petitioners long silence, and of their breach of silence.
IF the two first Chapters of these lay men's petition had been spared, it
might percase have been imputed for wisdom unto them. For then neither
their ingratitude in not acknowledging his majesty's rare favors toward them
graciously pardoning their offenses, nor their presumption in accusing him for
breach of promise, nor their untruth in charging his majesty, the parliamente
and state, with rigorous and cruel dealing against them, nor their vain brags
in pretending that they were so forward in maintening the Kings title, and the
principal mean, that placed him in his royal throne, would so clearly have
appeared. But seeing they would needs acquaint us with the reason of their
present speech, and former silence, let us hear them, what they can say.

A PETITION APOLOGETICAL, PRESENTED TO the Kings most excellent Majesty, by the
Lay Catholics of England, in Iulie last.
Chapter 1. The cause of our silence.
MOST His grace you abuse, his souerainty you deny, his might you hinder.
Mighty and gracious Soueraign. Many are the reasons that have caused us to
expect with perpetual patience, and profound silence, your Majesty's most
gracious resolution for some benign remedy, and redress of our most grievous
You vvrong his Majesty, charging him to be a persecutor, and your cause
shevving your selves unthankful for his favor.
calamities and afflictions: as the confidence of a good cause: the testimony
of an incorrrupte conscience: the memory of our constant and continual
affection to the undoubted right and Title, in remaynder of your renowned
Catholic Mother, to the Crown of England: the imputations, Crosses, and
afflictions, we suffered many If your plots had taken, you had marred all.
years therefore: the public and grateful acknowledgment that your said
glorious Mother made thereof, at the time of her Arrainement and execution, in
the presence of the Lords there assembled for her conviction, uttering these
words: Her bludis shed, and yet remains peace and authority to work them
redemption of her so desired.
VVo is me for the poor Catholics, and the miseries I foresee they are like
to endure for their irremoueable affection to me and miue: If I were as free
as mine estate and innocence requires, I would gladly redeem their vexations
with my dearest blood.

The same zeal and promptitude after her decease, we showed in your Majesty's
right, and His Majesty's right is but pretention to these lay papist.
pretention to the Crown of England, the oppositions were Parsons did indeed
oppose against the Kings right, in his book of titles, and so did al his
folovvers
made by us and our Catholic brethren and friends abroad and at home,
leaving nothing in our power undone, that might lawful advance your Majesty's
rightful Title, as Heir apparent to the Crown of England, against all practices
or proiects to the contrary.

The L. Monteagle M. Fran. Tresha^ Sir Lewis Tresham, in the Tower of London.
Our When there was no remedy.
forewardnes in proclayming your Majesty without any further warrant then the
right, and justice of your Title, and the loyalty and affection of our hearts.

Sir Thomas Tresham at North-hampton.
The Was it dangerous to proclaim the king?
dangers and difficulties that some amongst us passed in performing thereof, in
times so green and doubtful.

The Vicount Montague largely casting money among the people.
The general Rather greef, sorrow, and anger.
joy and applause showed by us, with remarkable signs of infinite
contentemente at your Highness entrance into the Realm, with dutiful offices of
joy and readiness to proclaim and receive your Majesty, were performed by
Catholics, with such alacrity in most places of the Realm, and those in such
None of these I hope, will either subscribe this petition, or confess the Pope
to be supreme head of the church.
The Lord Winsor, the L. Mordent.
distance one from the other, that they cold have no intelligence one with
another, how they should behave themselves in that occasion: which makes it
evident, that so general a consent, in so sudden and important an affair,
of persons so by places divided, could not proceed from any other fountain,
but from an universal and settled devotion to your Majesty's undoubted Title.

All which offices of our love and loyalty, we assure our selves, are as well
known to your Majesty, as your Majesty's Ca^dor and Clemency is known unto
us, and by us blazed throughout the Christian world: And not by our tongues
and pens only are these your heroical virtues made so notorious, as they are
by the often public and Will you say the King has broken promise?
gracious promises also, and protestations, which your Majesty (out of the
infinite bounty and magnanimity of your mind) has made as well to Princes
abroad, as to private Men at home: as well before as after the Queens death,
as well before as after your entrance to the Realm; both in private and in
public; both in Palace, and Parliament, that you vvoulde have no blood for
Religion. that you would hane no sale money for conscience contrary to the word
of God, that you would review the laws made against Catholics and give order
for clearing of them by reason, in case they baue been in times past farther,
or more rigorously executed by the judges then the meaning of the law was.

The intended performance of which your most gracious promises received a
memorable commencement in July last past, some few days before your Royal
coronation, when by special order of your Highness, without any suite or motion
of Catholics, certain Recusa^ts of the best quality and ability, out of diverse
parts of the Realm, were sent for to Hampton Court by the Lords of your
Majesty's privy Council, and were by them very respectively and courteously
used, and also assured by the said Lords, that your Majesty's Royal pleasure
and Clemency was to exonerate the Catholics of this realm from henceforth of
that pecuniarie mulcte. of xx. pound a month for recusancy, The xx pound a
Month for Recusancy released by the Kings voluntary promise in July, 1603.
which your Majesty's grace and relaxation the said Lords signified that they
should so long enjoy as they kept themselves vprighte in all civil and true
carriage to wards your Majesty and the State, without contempt: whereunto
reply was made, that recusancy might be held for an act of contempt: It was
auswered by the Lords of the Council, that your Majesty vvoulde not account
Can men refuse to concur in gods worship, and yet be guiltless?
recusancie for a contempt: And this your Majesty's gracious order and pleasure
the said gentlemen recusants, were willed to signify to all other Catholics.

Which grace proceeding from your Majesty's mere clemency and voluntary good
will, in that most dangerous time of the discovery of the conspiracy of the
Lord But contrived by Watson and Clerk, two Romish traitorous martyrs.
Gray and Cobham, seemed to us so inviolable and so little subject to change or
alteration, that comparing these bountiful effects with the repose and trust,
which your Majesty (in your Printed book to your Peerles son) seems to put
in them that were faithful and resolutely affected to your Mother, and with
the speech your Highness made the first day of the Parliament tending to some
more Bevvare least your presumptuous challenges and treasons alter not the
kings course.
temperate course in matter of Religion then was of late used. we had great
reason to abstain from farther importuning What then meant you by your
importune petitions?
your Majesty, either by friends or petition, but to exspect with silence,
patience and all humble submission, how your Majesty should please to dispose
of us, without any diffidence or distrust, either in our own If merits were
respected, what can you claim?
merits, or your mercy.

Chapter 2. The reasons that have driven us to Better it is to be silent, then
to speak foolishly.
breaech of silence, and to a necessary and just defense.
BUT Alas ( Dread The Popes vassalls dread him not, nor count him supreme.
Sovereign) we see our filence modesty, and simplicity so abused by some They
should be indeed very indiscreet, if they cold not discern your false religion
from catholic doctrine.
indiscreet Ministers, who in their Books and Sermons make it evident, they
think no abuse or indignity offered us, sufficient to satisfy their Remember
your bloody persecution and rigor in queen Mary's cruel reign, you massacrers
of Christians.
rigorous minds, or supresse our righteous cause, that we are driven thereby
to break our determinate course of filence, urged and enforced thereto by
these sequent occasions.

First, The first reason.
that we see our selves, as superstitious persons, excluded Not for
superstition, but either for refusing to acknovvledge the kings supremacy, or
for other your demeries.
from that supreme Court of Parliament, that was first founded by and for
Catholic These Catholic men never knevv your Caeolike doctrine of Trent, nor
your late treacherous practices.
men, was furnished with Catholic Prelates, Peers, and Personages, and was
endowed with those Goodly Priueleges and prerogatives by Catholic princes and
so These selovvs belike, do know what Parliaments were called in King Lucius
his time.
continued from the first conversion of our Nation from Paganism for so many
hundred years without alteration, till the times of Edward Do they mean to
exclude Children and women from the crown?
the VI, a Child, and, Queen Elizabeth a Woman: and by the laws made by
Catholics in those Parliaments, the honor, peace, and wealth of this realm
has been, and is By this reckoning papists are no Catholics. For they made
the king and country subject to strangers, and suffered the Pope to make a
spoil of the kingdom.
maintained, and your Majesty's right and succession to the crown, mightily
(against all your adversaries) fortified VVeakly do they support the kings
right, that make him tributary to the Pope, and utterly do they overthrow hu
succession, that give the Pope power to dispose of kingdoms.
and supported.

We see daily, The 2. reason.
bills and The parliament is no place where books are exhibited.
books exhibited against us in Parliament and elsewhere, You are not taxed
with names, but for crimes and that most justly.
taxing us very unjustly, with most odious names of heret kes, sectaries,
superstitious persons, and idolaters.

We hear that your Majesty is often By vvho^ are you not ashamed to belly his
Majesty?
solicited to extirpate the very root, The 3. reason.
race, and memory of us, out of your Dominions, and rather to admit A
slanderous imputation both to his Majesty, and the state, as if they meant to
allow miscreants.
Miscreants and Jews then Catholics.

We hear a new motion is made for the reviving of the Only against such as
commit capital crimes
former capital laws and pecuniarye paimentes, and other penalties, The 4.
reason.
rather chargeing us with a heavier hand, then easing us of our former burdens:
we hear that men are to pay for their wives recusancie, which in the hardest
and heauiest times never was admitted: that the having and keeping of a school
master [not allowed by the Diocesan) is to be punished with xl. shillings a
day: that all such as go over to study in foreign parts without special
license, are to be disabled of al inheritance, Lands, Legacies, or other goods,
chattels or possessions whatsoever. These instances duly considered, cause us
greatly to fear, that your majesty may in time, by the None so clamorous and
importunate, as these petititioners.
importunat and daily clamors and calumniations of our adversaries, be incensed
and incited against us your most faithful How are they the kings subjects,
that subject themselves to the Pope, or faithful, that so often oppugn their
kings?
subjects, woe living in certain security of their own innocence, and your
Majesty's mercy and bounty, labor not by unquiet oppositions to contradicte
the false informations of our aduers part, but only rely upon the providence of
God almighties protection, and your Majesty's, who tanquam Pater patriae is and
ever has been, the certain sanctuary, and common support of all just and
innocent men. And since the discharge of our mind, can in our poor opinion
bring no other inconvenience, then light to your resolutions in such things, as
your Highness is now to determine of in this present Parliament, being the
fittest time for your Majesty to hear the desires and requests of your
people, and we having no other means to make them known, but by this our
dutiful Petition, we are the bolder to present unto your Majesty's view this
our simple and sincere Apology: least God should be offended with us for our
silence in matter of How do they honor god, that serve saints and idols?
his honor, least the Christian world should condemn us of negligence in
defense of our No marvel if the cause of antichrist be poor and distressed, in
the eyes of Christians.
poor distressed cause: least our Children and posterity should argue us of
carelessness and pusillanimity in a cause concerning their lives, estates, and
their very souls Do you hope to be saved by serving saints, indulgences,
popish reconciliations, and such trash?
salvation: finally least our adversaries should insult over us and repute us
tanquam confitentes reos, if after so many blows given, we should not hold up
the Buckler hand to save our heads, from utter confusion and destruction, and
leave some monument to our posteritye of our zeal and devotion Do lay men take
on them charge of souls, or care for souls, that pin their souls on the
Pope, chair?
in negotio animarum, and our duty and affection, A goodly worship of priuces,
when you make them the Popes slaves.
in cultu principum.

Yet so desirous we are to give your Majesty all possible contentment and
satisfaction, so loath not only to commit, but to conceive any thing that might
justly offend your grace, that being by the reasons aforesaid pressed to put
pen to paper, and to have recourse to your Highness by way of intercession, we
seek not for all that to importunate your Majesty with concourse of
multitudes, nor with the subscriptions of thousands of your lay Catholic
subjects hands As the Millenary ministers lately did.
as some others have Others faults are no cover for your seditious courses.
done, in alio genere] for the furtherance of their affairs: but some few of
us only in the name of the Catholics of All degrees know you to be
falsaries, exhibiting a false libil in the name of al degrees.
all degrees [who every way join with us in our submission and purgation) do
present this our sincere Apology and humble Petition, wherein if we seem more
tedious for the diverse important points we must necessarily handle by this
occasion, then is conueniente for men that deal with so mighty a Monarche;
busied so extremely with the waightye affairs of so many kingdoms: pardon
[O noble Prince] this our indecorum, for that we are driven to touch somewhat
in this our discourse, which in parliament we should have said, if we thither
had been admitted: that which to our aduersarye we would utter if they had
the patience to hear us: and that which we should answer to their sinister
suggestions, if we might have that access to your royal person, as the
extremity of our cause requires, and the true and That appears well by
Watso^, Clerk, Brook, Percy Garnet and their confederates.
hearty affection we bear to your Majesty and the commonwealth of your Potent
Monarchy deserves. It is not our meaning (most mighty Monarch) being merely
lay men, that make no profession of lettres, to examine They think to slubber
matter, over with out examination.
curiously and contentiously all that our adversaries have thundered of late
against us, or to dispute with them in mood and figure, which combat we leave
to the divines of both parts, when your Majesty shall think good thereof: but
with due respect to give your Grace an accounte and reason of our belief and
religion, and a full and ample security and satisfaction: of our fidelities
and submission,

The answer to the first and second Chapter.
THus we see the causes of their silence, and of their speakeinge. but we
cannot see that they are either true, or sufficient. the first reasons
pretended for their silence are these, as they tell us. the confidence of a good
cause, the testimony of an incorrupt conscience, the memory of their co^sta^t
and continual affection to the undoubted right and title in remainder of the
king to the crown of England, their zeal and promptitude showed in his
majesty's right and pretention (as they call it) to the crown of England,
their forwardness in proclaiming his majesty King of England, and their
general joy and applause at his majesty's entrance into the realm, and for
these reasons they say, they have in profound silence expected for some benign
remedy and redress of their most grievous calamities and afflictions. But
first what absurd fellows are these to talk of silence, having of late time
published so many discourses, libells, rimes and pamphlets both in defense of
themselves, and in disgrace of others, and presented so many petitions both to
his majesty, and to all, that could help them, or were likely to favor them?

Secondly if the Massepreestes, and their associates, had a conscience so
incorrupte, as they pretend, and such confidence in their cause, as they boast;
why do they fly the light and hide themselves in corners? again why do they
not make the goodness of their cause appear, and particulerly clear themselves
of those heretical and treacherous doctrins wherewith they stand charged? they
show themselves most shameless, when they defend the popes claim in deposing
kings, and translating kingdoms, and adhere unto him as his sclaues and
maynteine gross idolatries, and absurd nouel ties to talk either of a good
cause, or of a good conscience.

Thirdly if they indeed had favored the kings undoubted right, then would
they not have called it pretention, nor put him in remainder, as here they
do. Nor would so many of them have favored Parsons and Coluill, that have
oppugned the kings title in books published to the world, nor have received
pensions, and interteined intelligence with other clay mers and pretenders.

Fourthly those, which favored the Iebusites and spaniardes, and pope did not
then much applaude, when either his majesty was proclaimed king of England, or
first entered into the realm. But when they saw the states forwardnes; then
whatsoever heaviness lay at their hearts, they were forced to set on the best
face they cold, and to do as others did though with small alacrity, as the
dejected countenances, heavy sighs and sobre cheer of diverse of them did
declare Knowing the king to be of a religion adverse to the Pope, by the rules
of the Popes decretales, which they regard as much, as the holy scriptures,
they might not favor him, nor consort with him, if they had been able to
resist.

Lastly most unjustly they charge the state, as oppressing the papists with
gre^uous calamities and afflictions, whereas their consorts in Spain and Italy
with all cruelty spoil and murder our brethren, and the state does only punish
recusancy with pecuniary mulctes, and very rarely, and of few and of late time
has begun to exact them.

But had these fellows so good a cause, and conscience as they pretend, yet
should the same rather move the^ to speak, then to keep silence. For, who is
not bolld to speak in a good cause? to mention the kings mother, or the
conspiracy of Gray and Cob ham (they should say of Clerk and Watson the
principal contriuers of that plot) they had no reason, being the causes of her
destruction, drawing her indirectly into their intricate practices, most
dangerous to her person and that conspiracy proceeding only from the invention
and practice of Papists.

The next causes of their silence were, as they say, the promises made by his
majesty both in public and private, the courteous usage of certain recusants
at Hampton court, and his majesty's speech the first day of the parliament:
But these are matter, that rather might move them to open their mouths, and
to give thanks to his Majesty for his undeserved favors, then either to
suppress his praises in silence, or to mutinously to mutter, and to utter
words of coffeehouse, as if they had been dealt withal hardly and
unjustly. Furthermore they do bewray their ungracious and crooked nature, that
seem to charge the king with breach of promise, and alteration of his courses,
who promised more then they deserved, and performed all that he promised, and
altered not his course of Clemency, though forced thereto necessarily by
alteration of their lewd course and their agents importunity. For his promises
at Hampton court, which are principally urged, this I answer, that in that
place, neither was any toleration of religion demanded nor any such matter
promised. nay the cause of the repair of diverse recusants thither was the
suspicion conceived of them, as if they were guilty of the preests treason, and
not any new motion for toleration. Thereuppon they prayed his majesty to have a
good opinion of them, being guilty of no other crime, as they said, the^
recusa^cy. And he like a most gracious king and father of his people answered,
that the same should be no conviction, if other wise they d emeaned themselves
loyally. Had they been as dutiful, as his majesty was benign and gracious,
they would not have entered into those plots, and rebellions, which some did
afterward. That his majesty did never promise any toleration of popery at any
other time, a noble Counselor did assure all that were present, when Digby
upon occasion did mention and urge the same at his arreignement. His Majesty
said he as well before his coming to the crown as at the very time, and
always sense, was so far from making a promise, or giving hope of
toleration, that he professed, he should not endure the very motion there of
by any whatsoever. For his clement courses, against recusa^ts, and evil
deserving papists, I need not say much, the same being notorious to the world
only J wish that this generation would not abuse his cleme^ cy, but seek to be
tha^kful for his former favors the^ provoke his justice by their continued il
carriage misdemenors, and secret plottings

The reasons which they allege for the making and exhibiting this petition,
are these. first they tell us that they are excluded as superstitious persons
from that supreme court of Parliament, that was first founded by, and for
catholic men. Next that daily bills and Books ar exhibited in Parliament
against them, taxing them with odious names of haereticks, sectaries,
superstitions persons, idolaters. Thirdly that his Majesty is often solicited
to extirpate the race and memory of papists out of his dominions, and rather to
admit miscreants and Jews then Papists. And lastly that a new motion has
been made for the reviving of former capital laws, and pecuniary payments,
and other penalties. For these causes, they say they have emboldned themselves
to present to his maiestyes view this apology, and that first, Least god
should be offended with their silence in matter of his honor, and next least
the Christian world should condemn them of negligence in defense of their
distressed estate, and thirdly least their children and posterity should
argue them of carelessness and pusillanimity in a cause concerning their
lives, estates, and souls salvation. and lastly least their adversaries
should insult over them, and repute them tanquam confitentes reos. But first
we answer, that diverse matters here alleged are false and some wicked and.
slanderous, next that their reasons are impertinent and not concludent. That
papists are excluded out of parlia meant it may be proved false by the example
of diverse particulers, which I could name if I list. Thisis most certain, that
no Papisticall burgess, or knight is refused in the lower house, unless he
refuse to acknowledge his majesty's supreme anthority: which if he do, he is
not only to be excluded out of the house, but out of the la^d, if he have his
right. It is also an old trick of falsity to affirm papists to be catholics
they must show that they hold Apostolic and Catholic doctrine, or else
renounce the name of catholics.

Thirdly they err grossly if they suppose, that Parliaments were founded by
papists professing the puddle doctrine of the popish sect, flowing out of the
sink of the conuenticle of Trent, or that they were made for such as impugn
the Kings authority, and adhere to foreign enemies.

Fourthly they show themselves not only to be spreaders of false tales, but
also ignorant of Parliament causes, that say that books were exhibited against
the^ in parliament for that sacred senate is no place, where to exhibit books.
But if in parliament time any Books were published abroad. it was to answer
their iangling supplications, and discourses, which thought to be heard for
their much babbling.

Fiftlie ridiculously in the superlatiue degree they call themselves the kings
most faithful subjects. The falsity thereof appears by the proceedings at
Winchester against George Brook a lay and lame papist and subject, and his
accomplices, but much more is the same made evident by the flagitious treason of
Percie, Catesbie, Faux, Owen Baldwine, and their consorts, and the rebellion,
which thereupon ensued, wherein they expected, and the Jesuits and
massepreests promised the aid and concurrence of all the papists in England. and
many no question, would have joined with them, but that they were taken before
their time, and choked in the birth of their dangerous destinies.

Sixthly wickedly they slander the state if they suppose that any therein do
desire, that either Jews, or other miscrea^ts may be admitted, and wrong his
majesty, if they say, he gives ear to such motions. Nay he desires rather
the conversion, then the destruction of papists, albeit they are the only
miscreants, that are to be feared in this land.

Finally it is no new matter, to make motions for restraining the insolency of
the massepriestes and their adherents. For if these petitioners be not old,
such motions were made before they were borne. King Henry the 8. at the motion
of his subjects repressed such. as should attempt to maintain the popes
authority, which is a main ground of popery. And long before his time were
laws of provisions, and praemunire made, to stop the popes encrochements and
daily do recusants give occasion to make new laws against them. But admit
inassepriests and their adherents and the Popes truly devoted creatures had
been excluded out of parliaments, and that in bills and books they had been
charged as sectaries, superstitious persons, heretics and idolaters; and
further, that his Majesty had bin moved to take a course with them, and the
parliament, to aggrauate their penaltyes. and to provide for the execution of
laws against them; yet have these lame witted lay papists no cause, either to
make these outcries, or to publish these slanderous libells, not only to the
disgrace of our late gracious Queen, and King Edward that excellent spirit,
but also against his majesty, as if he meant to give intertainment to
miscreants, and knew not how to keep measure in punishing papists and other
sectaries and heretics. For first the Parliament is no place for such as love
strangers, better then their own princes, and depend upon forrayners, rather
then their countrymen. Secondly papists are no catholics, nor were parliaments
founded either by such as believed the filthy doctrine of popery pomped out of
the popes breast in the conuenticle of Trent, nor for such caitiffs and
miscreants as believe that doctrine.

Thirdly if such as in England adhere to the Pope, and positiuely hold his
doctrine, be called heretics, sectaries, superstitious persons and idolaters,
they are not wronged. For the same is clearly demonstrated in diverse treatises,
and partly in this answer. And little are these lame petitioners able to say for
themselves to the contrary. Nay they have favor, considering their intelligence
and practices of late with the pope and his agents, that they are not called
far worse.

Lastly they have no reason to complain of penal laws made against
lay-papists. for the penalties are only pecuniary, and very remissely pursued.
but the bloody inquisitors, and the popes adherents murdre and massacre all,
that profess true religion, in places where they command, and this had Percie
and his compagnions done in England, if they had prevailed. Further, themselves
will not deny, but that idolaters, heretics and sectaries may lawfully be
punished. And if they should deny it; yet would the examples and practice both
of Hezekiah, Josiah, and other godly kings before Christ's time, and of
Constantine, Theodosius, and other christian emperors since christianity began
to be professed, plainly prove it. But it has been and shall always be
plainly proved, that papists are sectaries, superstitious persons, heretics,
and idolaters.

Their fear therefore, least God wold-be offended with them for their silence
in this cause, is superstitious and very foolish. For god is rather displeased
with such, as seek to erect open idolatry, and to maintain gross
superstition and heresy, as these ignorant lay papists, or rather lame
Massepriestes seek to do; then with such, as keep themselves within the lists
of their ignorance, and hold their peace.

Secondly true it is, as they say, that their cause is poor, and more porely
defended. And therefore great simplicity have they showed in prating of things
above their capacity, and for this cause they stand condemned by all true
Christians, which would have liked much better their sober silence, then their
violent and foolish libells.

Thirdly their Children, whom these petitioners, that divide themselves from
gods church, do divide from the Christian world, as being no part of it, shall
in time to come have just cause to curse such parents as bring them up in
ignorance of true religion, and open idolatry. And if they have grace, will
wish their babbling parents had never meddled in this desperate cause.

Fourthly so far are they from making any just defense against their
adversaries, that they give both them, and others just cause to insult and
triumph, seeing that the wits of lay papists and their teachers being sommed
and pressed togegether, no drop of reason or piety has proceeded from them, to
season their unsavory religion.

Finally they confess, that they observe no decorum, and yet profess, that
they will not examine curiously, that which by their adversaries has been
thundered out against them, nor dispute in mood and figure with them. And yet
they pretend to be desirous to give his majesty all possible contentment, and
an account of their belief and religion, and a full and ample security and
satisfaction, But if they observe no decorum, it is not like they will content
his Majesty; and hardly will they give satisraction to so learned and wise a
prince without curious examination of matters objected. They must also dispute,
if not in mood and figure, yet in some better form, then now they do, if they
will either prove unto us their disfigured and evil qualified religion, or else
justify unto his Majesty the reasons of their rude request, that is not only
subscribed, as approved by subscriptions of a thousand hands, (as that was of
the Millenary ministers, of which these lay papists talk idelly) but also with
the terror of many thousands of the popish faction, as it were obtruded to his
Majesty.

So we may see, that these petitioners are able to bring neither truth, nor
reason for the justification of their cause keeping silence, when they should
have spoken, and speaking nothing to purpose, when they resolved to break
silence. But if we please to examine the true cause both of their former
silence, and this present petition; we shall find, that their silence proceeded
partly from their great occasions being busied in diverse practices against the
state, as these horrible treasons lately discovered do declare, and partly from
the lewdness of their cause, that by far better orators, then these laymen,
cannot be defended. Contrariwise the occasion of their petition is not any
wrong offered by us, but rather a wrong intended by them, and that both to his
majesty and to the state, while bragging of the numbers, forces and
corresponde^ce with strangers, they endeavor to strike a terror into his
majesty, and buzzing these foolish tales into the ears of the multitude, desire
to trouble the peace of the state. But the state of things being well known,
neither shall his majesty have cause to fear their threats, nor the people
reason to believe their foolish tales. For as they feed themselves, (like as
all fugitives and malcontents do) with a fond conceit of their own strength
without grounds of reason, so they feed their readers with words, and shows,
without any sound demonstration of any point of their erroneous religion. God
grant, that the simple seduced papist may as well apprehend it, as we shall
prove it; and then will they hereafter be more wary, how they venture their
state and souls upon the mass priests warrant, who upon the hazard and loss
of others, do reap no small advantage now, and seek to bring all into
adventure hereafter.

Chap. 18. Of the quality, number, and forces of English papists, and of their
assurance, and resolution, which they praetend in their religion.
IT were much to be wished, that thepapists of England did either well know
them selves, and their own qualities, numbres, and forces, or else had
learned, for what religion they contend. For then neither would they, stand so
much upon their merits, qualities, numbers and forces, nor yet once offer to
talk of the assurance of their religion, for which they have no ground; and
this every other man does acknowledge, seeing their merits, if we respect
favor, to be slender, their good qualityes to be few, their forces to be
nothing in regard of his majesty's numbers of true subjects, and considering
that the^ doctrine of popery may not be examined by lay papists, and wholly
rests on the Popes pleasure, Their pleading is most simple, as the two
chapters following do declare.

Chapter. 3. The estate and quality of your Majesty's Catholic Subjects.
FOR the clear understanding of which two points, may it please your Grace
to consider; first what is the state and condition of your faithfulll and
Catholic subjects for They would terrify his Majesty with show of
numbers, and reproach him as ungrateful, not regarding their deserts.
number, quality, and desert; next what Their religion is declared to be a
hochpot of heresies, impieties, and novelties. Their grounds are uncertain
traditions, and the popes decretaline fancies.
Religion it is they profess, and upon what grounds: lastly what they are of
your Majesty's subjects of their Rank, that for former of future services, and
submission in all civil and temporal causes, against all both domestical and
foreign enemies, have and will go farther, or venture more willingly their
lives and livings for the honor and defense of your person, greatness, and
posterity, then they, and their friends both have, and will do.

In delivery of which points, we hope your Majesty will expect no farther art,
or eloquence then may be required of men plunged, and perplexed with the The
Pope belike has given his clients a purgation, that are thus troubled with
fluxes and refluxes. But for vexations they have no reason to complain here in
England, considering their wealth and case at home, and the cruelty of their
consorts abroad, and their deserts at home and abroad.
flux and reflux of perpetual vexations, which is truth that craves If you
cry for justice, what needs mercy? we find your pleadings so absurd and
destitute of truth, that neither your crocodiles tears can excuse you, nor
justice acquit you.
justice, and tears that cry for mercy.

It is evident (Dread sovereign) that the subjects of your Majesty's Realms
of England and Ireland consist of Catholics, Protestants, They put themselves
before his Majesty's loyal subjects, and rail at the state, as bearing with
sectaries. They do also leave the Scots out of the number of the kings
subjects. Judge then whether it be possible to find more proud beggars, or
insolent malcontents, or railing hypocrites.
Puritanes, and other sectaries: the Catholics and Catholikely affected in
this Realm, notwithstanding the long persecutions in the late queens days,
were at the entrance of your Majesty to this Realm, God forhid the x. part of
the people should be the Popes marked slaves.
esteemed to be as many, as any other of the said professions of Religion: and
as for Ireland, few there are of that nation, that are of any account or
freehold, An Irishman a protestant is rara auis in terris.
but are They observe only certain external rites for want of better
teaching, but understand scarce any point of popish sophistical religion.
professed Catholics besides those that are Catholikely affected.

And as for the Catholics of this Realm, it is well known that their Some of
your ancestors were also pagans or heretics
Ancestors have deserved well of this commonwealth both in war, and peace,
both at home and abroad, and for their fidelities, and laudable services have
bin advanced by your Majesty's progenitors, under whom they lived and served,
from whom we hope that in no point we In infinite, as may be specified by the
bastardly doctrine of Trent, and of other late co^uenticles, of popes,
schoolmen, and such like teachers of popery.
degenerate only that which in them was esteemed the Your polestar is not
Catholic religion, but the Popes chair.
polestar of all their virtues (to wit) the Catholic Religion, is in us Not
Catholic faith, but seditious practices and doctrines covered under this mask
are punished in England.
punished for wickedness and impiety.

This did our Catholic Parents, dignified by your Majesty's catholic
progenitors, leave us to succeed them in their Religion toward God: their
fidelity toward You succeed them in neither being neither sound in religion,
nor affecton to your princes.
our Princes, and their native freedom in this your Realm of England, which
we have So malefactors loose their liberty.
lost of late years under the Reign of our late Queen, for no other crime or
offense, then for that we endeavored to serve God as our Catholic forefathers
have done before us, ever since the conuorsion of our Not only Christians, but
also Pagans may be ashamed thus to ly. For not only the service of Saints, and
Idols used in the Church of Rome, but also the Popish Mass, and all those
doctrines of popery, which we refuse have been brought into the Church long
after this conversion which they talk of.
Country from Paganism; and to save our souls, which are more precious in his
sight, then all the kingdoms in the world: and although we were debarred from
all offices and dignities, and lived as it were in perpetual banishment and
confinement: yet was it never heard that any one of our number of such
suffering recusants, ever Did not the rebels in the North, Anno. 1560. and in
Ireland An. 1599. and at other times lift up their fingars and hands against
the Queen? and are not the Papists in all places ready to rise against Princes
excommunicate by the Pope?
lifted up a finger to the least damage, or detriment in the world of our
Prince or country. And thus by these few lines your Majesty may see the
multitudes condition, and disposition of your Catholic subjects; who humbly
prostrate at your Majesty's feet crave to be restored to their former and
ancient freedom.

What we have here spoken, or shall hereafter speak of our See the ingratitude
of recusants, and what Princes receive for sparing them.
hard usage in our late Queens days, we are driven thereto by necessity, for
moving your Majesty to commiseration, by comparing in your wisdom the
grieuousnes of our punishment, with the quality of our deserts, that thereupon
you may temper the Compare it with the proceedings of the bloody inquisitors
of Spain, and compare our Kings with Popish princes, and then the world may
as well see the moderation of Christians, as the cruelly of papists.
asperity of the former proceedings against us, which our late Soueraign her
self in her later days began to do, giving the world to understand by the
last proclamation that ever she made in that kind, that she began to She did
alvvayes distinguish aright betwixt the articles of religion and treason. But
papists hold it a point of religion to execute the Popes bulls against their
lavvfull princes, which true Christians account to be treason.
distinguish between Religion and Treason, and as well therein, as in diverse
other books and proclamations tending to that purpose, before published upon
any notorious execution upon Catholics, she diverse times, and by her
Ambassadors to diverse Princes abroad did promise and protest, that her will and
intention was not to punish her subjects for their Our late Queen ever made
profession that she meant never to punish for Religion.
Religion and conscience, whereby we conceived some hope, and found some effect
a little before her Majesty's death, and in this mind and disposition God did
take her, and your Majesty found us: which considered, we hope your Majesty
having no occasion to hate us, and we many old and new occasions to love you,
that you will rather imitate your predecessor in her first best, and Of her
nature she was alvvaies iuclined to mildness. But it had been better for her
and the state, if she had permitted her judges to execute her laws.
last disposition tending to mildnes mercy, and moderation, then in her other
hard and sharp courses: sithence the fruits and effects of the one, were The
fruits of a sweet and mild course.
joy, peace, Or rather discomfort, rebellion, penury.
abundance, and universal union, and combination of minds and affections, both
at home and abroad (which your Majesty seems most to desire) and the
harbingers and handmaids of the other, have been The handmaids of blud and
persecution.
wars, Or rather victories against our enemies, and coffeehouse and hurt to
none, but malcontents and traitors.
dissensions, discontentments, blood, and beggary; (which your Grace cannot so
well digest.) And that appears most evidently by the first twelve years of
the late Queens Reign, which as they were free from blood and persecution, so
were they stawght with all kind of worldly prosperity, no Prince was for that
space better beloved at home, or more honored or respected abroad, no subjects
ever lived with greater Then were the papists most wicked and ungrateful,
that living thus securely and contentedly practiced against her, and sought her
blood, being set on by Pius Quintus.
security or contentment: never was the Realm more Why then did the Papists
anno 1569. take arms against their Queen, and seek to alter this opulent
state?
opulent or abundant; never was both in Court and Country such a general time
of triumph, joy, and exultation: but no sooner did she begin to alter She
altered no course but only repressed unquiet spirits, which sought to alter
the state.
her course, and to enter into blood, but all was Only the malcontent faction
of papists was so filled.
filled with fears and suspicions at home, with Shame come to the Pope and his
adherents, that occafinned them. The loss has lighted upon them already.
wars and divisions abroad, and with continual frights and allarmes of strange
attempts, either against Look who these attempters were: and you shall find
them to have been either papists, or Atheists set on by papists.
her person or state: and in fine when her treasure was This may be truly of
firmed of her Majesty's enemies and their states. But not of England, as, I
hope his Majesty will witness. But were we hurt by the wars, yet should
not this cause us to love papists. that mingled heaven and earth, and stirred
the world against us to vvin their purpose.
exhausted, her subjects and kingdoms extremely impouerished, and all the
kingdoms almost about us disgusted, and in open terms of jealousy and Much
to their own loss and pain, as the sequel had declared, if the king had
not given them peace.
hostility with her, she began again to think of her former fortunate days,
and to incline to a It is rather madness then mildness to spare either
professed enemies or secret traitors.
milder course, as the only means to setle her and her Realm in peace,
security, and former prosperity: which times compared together, do demonstrate
that the severity of laws made against Catholics, were the Laws made
against papists are the only bands, that hold the flate together, and the best
means we can use to contrecarre the mischiefs in ^eded by them.
forerunners of infinite mischiefs and miseries, And least your Majesty
beholding such bloody and strange laws made against us, with their They were
alvvaies most slovvly executed.
rigorous execution by the space of so many years in so long a Reign, as was
that of our late Queen; might thereby conjecture that such new and never heard
of decrees, could not without urgent or notorious occasions have been
invented, constituted, and so severely executed; least this apprehension of
these former proceedings might make the like impression in your mind, and
auersion from us: we humbly crave your Majesty's gracious ears and attention:
And when you shall reuiew, and consider deeply the laws made against us, and
compare them with the objected crimes, that then some ouerture may be proposed
to the present Parliament, for clearing the laws by reason, which is the soul
of the law to them, that distinction may be made by justice between the
innocent and guilty persons: for howsoever the late The reason that might move
the late Queen to make laws against Catholics.
Queen might have pretention to make them, both by reason of her A shameless
slander. It was only a devise of the popish faction.
illegitimation by her own Father in public Parliament notoriously diuulged,
and the jealousy she ever stood in of the Queen your gracious Mother, both for
the back and alliance she had with France, and the right she seemed to have by
the The Pope is the Church to these men, and by the same reason his close
stool may be their chapel. But if they give the Pope power to excommunicate
princes, and to depose them, these popes churchmen are but mean subjects.
sentence of the Church, pronounced against the divorce of her Father; and the
diverse censures and Very wickedly and saucily, and treacherously aliovved by
papists.
excommunications promulgated against her: Yet your Majesty [of whose rightful
succession and most lawful, and legitimate possession of this Crown, Then is
Parsons and his followers more diabolically disposed toward the king, then
Satan himself For they have long impugned and denied the kings title to the
crown of England.
Satan himself being put to his shifts can make no doubt or difficulty;
against whom no We report us for disproofe of this to certain discourses set
out by Parsons and Coluil.
Co^petitor either has, or had purpose or power to contend, Vide D. Giffords
commission, and Mo^sieur de Be thunes letters.
whom the This Sea of Rome is a sea of abominations and mischiefs. And
therefore it is not much material, what is regorged out of such a guise of
impieties. But that the Pope has not excommunicated the King, it has
proceeded rather from fear, then love, or any indeauor of Gifford, or Bethune.
His predecessorr got nothing by excommunicating Queen Elizabeth, and less
would the Pope now vvin by censuring his Majesty.
Sea of Rome is so far from censuring, that she has, What the whore of
Babylon does, his Majesty has no cause to like. This is certain, the Pope
nener censured Clerk, nor Watso^ nor Percy, nor Digby, nor Garnet, and the
rest, that sought the subversion of the state.
already censured all those that shall any way seek to give you any disturbance
or molestation, and with whom all the Princes in Christendom are in perfect
peace and amity; and whom Catholics have as yet no way Has the king no reason
to be offended with the tumults and practices of papists in Scotland and
England? why then was Watso^ hanged and order taken to persecute the Scottish
rebels? why was the law executed against Faux, and Digby, and other
traitorous papists?
offended, but by all means endeavored to serve, satisfy, and content.] His
Majesty has no such reason to continue the laws against Catholics, as the
late Queen had to inact them.
Your Majesty [we say] for these respects, has no such apparent cause to
continue those laws, as the late Queen had to inact them, the reasons and
foundations of those laws, being by this happy mutation of state, time, and
persons utterly Never as long as the king professes true religion: or refuses
to become the popes vassal.
removed.

If then [Dread Soueraign] we have been, are, and will be [as we have and will
demonstrate] as loyal, As the leaguers were to Henry the 3. of France, whose
throat they cut, Or as Percy and Catesby of late were to our King.
faithful, and affectionate to your Majesty, your predecessors and posterity,
and even to those Princes that dealt most hardly with us, and to the good and
peaceable estate of our Country, as any sort of your Majesty's subjects within
the Realm of our Rank whatsoever: we see not how by authority we can be
driven to forsake our Catholic Your faith is proved neither to be Catholic,
nor your fathers faith.
Fathers faith and belief, unless authority can by reason Authority is one
thing reason another. These iumble both together.
convince us that our faith is infidelity, our Religion superstitron, and the
service we use Idolatry, or the This is proved, and all your brabling
objections ansvvered. Contrariwise you prove naught against us, and yet force
us to embrace your wicked opinions.
Doctrine we receive heresy. These are points first to be decided and
determined amongst Deuines and learned men of both parts, and therefore that
Magistrates should proceed against us, as men convicted of those crimes,
before our cause be heard and determined, by them that are by God They will
only have the pope to be judge.
appointed to handle those high and important points of divinity: we hope your
Majesty's clemency and piety will not permit: But judgment Never with you in
any lavvfull general council.
being past on our side already, in so many general Counsels abroad, and
Prove your popes mitre and massing sacrifice by conuocations and Parliaments,
if you can.
conuocations and Parliaments at home, commending and approving the faith we
profess, what reason can give life to that law, that does reuerse a sentence
so authentically given, without the full form of justice and process therein
required?

Chapter 4. The reasons why we are so resolute in our Religion.
Reasons of Religion.
THE first reason that we give of our faith and Religion [Sacred Soueraigne] and
why we ought not to suffer therefore as delinquents is, that neither The Turks
and any other heretics are able to say so much as these do, albeit they prove
nothing.
obstinate pride, nor presumptuous pertinacy, The 1. reason.
nor dislike of order or Discipline, nor contempt of authority, nor curiosity,
affectation of nouelty, or coffeehouse in our private humors makes us so
constant and resolute in the profession thereof: but our consciences merely so
informed and enforced in manner, by the Prove this grace, and exhibit this holy
word, and then you say something.
instinct of Gods grace, and revelation of his holy word and will: but our
understanding captiuated in obsequium fidei by most evident In no Religion but
the Catholic only do all these Testimonies concur.
Testimony of holy Write, of Unity, Universality, Succession, Antiquity, and
Fevv lay papists understand scripturs in strange tongues, and in vulgar
tongues they may not read them. How then come they to know, that scriptures
make for them? do they believe the pope and his emissaries, that gives them
black for white?
authority of Scriptures, With vhose works you are but little acquainted.
Fathers, Saints, Doctors, Counsels, Parliaments, Virgins, and Martyrs, which
all concur only, and jointly in the What is that to those that profess the
popes particular doctrine?
Catholic Religion, and in no other profession whatsoever: which
considerations accompanied with the fear of Gods judgments, the danger of You
fear purgatory fire. Hell fire you fear not that runn with your holy father
headlong into hell, and with rebels into treason.
Hell fire, and the desire of eternal Salvation, command us by the rules of
reason, in the practice and profession of that Religion, to obey the law of God
Why then do you prefer the popes laws before the letter of gods laws?
before the law of Man.

It is an instance and maxim that suffers no exception, that never any
general or universal What is that to us?
innovation, The 2 reason
or alteration in matters of Faith or Religion from bad to better, has been
heard of, either in the whole world, or in any particular nation, be it either
from Iudaisme, Gentilisme, Paganism, Atheism, or Idolatry, but that the
commission and vocation of the messengers have been authorized Domino
cooperante and sermonem confirmante sequentibus signis: Mar. 16.
our Lord working with all, and confirming the word with signs that followed:
which sithence our new messengers and reformers, as yet, have not duly, nor
clearly showed [pretending as they do, to purge Christendom of superstition
and idolatry] how can they in reason crave at our hands credit, or conformity
to the new laws made on that behalf? God is ipsa vita, lux, and veritas. God
that is the life, light, The 3. reason.
and truth it self cannot give commission, credit, and authority, to death,
darkness, and falsehood; but it is most evident and cannot be doubted of or
denied, that the first Apostles and Conuertors of this our nations of England,
Scotland, Ireland, France, and Germany, were sent from the Church of Rome, and
delivered us the same Roman faith we That is the question. We prove the
contrary by particular instances, and evident demonstrations.
now profess; All was not of your religion. The Greek church at this day
renounceth your erros.
the same Mass, and the same Sacraments; and preached the self same Doctrine,
Domino cooperante and sermonem confirmante sequentibus signis: our Lord working
with all, and confirming the word with signs that followed. Reason then
concludes thus, that either God in this case has given testimony to falsehood,
or else the doctrine confirmed by the testimony of God is true and auowable, and
not to be forsaken for fear of any humane laws, till we have like testimony
from Heaven to the contrary; and when our adversaries shall duly reprove ours
herein, and make their own We have proved it clearly. But the caniball mass.
priests stick alvvaies in this brake.
mission as manifest by the word of God, then if we do not conform our selves
to the new laws imposed upon us, worthily we are to endure these late
inflicted penalties for matter of recusancy.

To convince us then, that either we have not the true Scriptures, The 4.
reason.
or interpret them not as we ought, or that we dishonor God in honoring his
Saints, or err in the number, or nature of our Sacraments, as that our
doctrine is false and defective, and to condemn us, and punish us therefore as
Heretics and Idolaters, requires As if ordinary pastors were not to reprove
errors according to the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles, without
extraordinary authority.
in all reason an absolute commission from God: the which when it shall be
produced, willingly we will obey.

If they allege Scriptures, the Scriptures are common to us both, The 5.
reason.
yet more likely in reason to be ours then theirs: because that if the Church
of Rome had not conserved them, and communicated the same unto us, our
adversaries had been at this day If Rome had sunk many years since, yet had
the scriptures been preserved.
Scripturelesse: the very original Bible, the self same numer^ which S.
Gregory sent in with our Apostle S. Augustine, being as yet Where? further
what makes that for you?
reserved by Gods especial providence as a Testimony, We received the
Scriptures from the Church of Rome.
that what Scriptures we have, we had As if we had in England no Bibles, but
Gregory's Bible: or as if Gregory were the author of the Bible.
them from Rome, and have nothing of our reformers, but that we have not so
many books of Scriptures We discanonise no book of canonical scriptures, but
papists place apocriphall scriptures among the canonical books.
discanonised and rejected, because they be express Testimonies against their
new and negative Religion.

If they stand upon the sense and true interpretation, we stand on that point
more confidently then they, they having no further warrant then their The
papists properly stand upon the private judgment of the pope. we follow no man's
private spirit.
private spirit, and we relying on the assistance of the holy Ghost therein
promised to his But not to the Pope, or his adhaerents.
Church for the instruction of all truth; which is Columna and firmamentum
veritatis, the pillar and foundation of truth. If they fly to the Fathers, for
one place evil understood and sometime falsified, sometime mutilated, and
sometime wholly corrupted, we produce a thousand, not by patches nor mammocks as
they do, but whole pages, whole chapters, whole books; and the uniform consent
of all the ancient fathers and Catholic Church.

If they press us with their passed Parliaments and Princes, for one of theirs
we have an hundred, and for a Child King, and a Better a woman Queen, then a
woman Pope.
Woman Queen, we have for us so many, so Wise, so learned, so religious, so
Victorious Princes, as our Histories without the^ would be very barren, our
Names obscure, our clergy miserable. our Bishops beggarly, our Parliaments
confused, our Laws intricated, our Universities without Colleges, our
Colleges without Scholars, our Scholars without maintenance. Reason then the
life of the law, requires to our understanding more ample and These suppose
the Popes decretalls more authentical then scriptures
authentical evidence: before we be cendemned by law, as superstitious or
irreligious. The faith we profess, is that It is no more like it, then false
doctrine to faith.
faith and religion which Saint Paul to the Romans so highly commends, The 6
reason. Romans chap. 1.
which therefore is called Catholic and Roman, because The church of Rome
ever was and is the Mother Church.
all the Churches in the world either did in their beginnings. or do for the
present agree uniformly with the sea of Rome in union and communion of faith,
doctrine, and fellowship; having recourse thereto as to the The old church of
Rome was the Mother Church. But what is this to new Rome?
Mother Church. From the Pastors and Prelates of this Church, to wit, from S.
Gregory the Pope, S. Auhustine the Monk.
S. That will hardly be proved further what makes this for such as subvert
the state, pervert Christians, convert none?
Gregory the Pope, and S. Augustine the Monk, we received the benefit of our
conversion and regeneration; from them we received the This self same untruth
we have refuted at large in our answer to Parsons his treatise concerning 3.
supposed conuersions of England.
self same Doctrine, Discipline, Service, Sacraments, Feasts, and laudable
Ceremonies, which are by us held, practiced, professed, and defended with the
Note how they say they defend holidays, greasings, holivvater, and such
ceremonies with their blood.
effusion of our bloudes at this very day, and this we find You corrupt
histories as much as you can, and yet they show, how much you are degenerated
from true Christians.
verified by the Histories of S. Bead, Cambden, Stowe, Hollenshed, and Sauell.
S. Bead, Cambden, Hollenshed, Stovve, and that Tripartite History set out by
Master Sauell.

From this Curch of Rome we received our Bible our Gospel, our Creed, our
Canons; The 7 reason
which are the same through the whole Christian world among Catholics both
for the translation, sense and interpretation.

This Church is by your Majesty and by the learned sort of the Protestants,
Not this later Rome, that is figured by the whore of Babylon, but the ancient
Church of Rome, that was praised by S. Paul.
The 8. reason.
acknowledged to be the Mother Church, we hope then we are excuseable, So the
Gospel of Papists depends on the pope.
that reverence and love our dearest Mother, from whose breast our forefathers
and we have received the sweet milk of our souls.

There was ueuer yet since the Incarnation of christ any heresy that crept
into the Church of God, The 9. reason.
but we find the names of the Name the authors of the Angelicks, Nudipedals,
Col^yridians, Messelians.
authors of such heresies: we find by the Church of Rome Counsels called to
condemn them, and Doctors employed to confute them: there is not the least
Ceremony or circumstance that has been added, for the greater For mere scorn
and foolery. Further you have devised new doctrines and new worships of god,
and not only new ceremonies.
Majesty and solemnity in Gods divine service, but the year is known when,
and the Pope by whom it was ordained.

If matters then of so small moment pass not without recording, reason would
that the laws that must condemn our Mother church of Idolatry and
superstitions, should tell us the authors that first corrupted her integrity:
but if the first inuentors and institutors of the Mass, of Purgatory, of
prayer to Saints, and the like supposed errors, cannot be produced, doubtless
we must attribute them, as we do indeed to Christ and his Apostles: and as
derived from such infallible authority, we are bound in all equity to follow
them.

But if by the fruits your Majesty will give judgment of the tree, The 10.
reason.
the fruits of our Or rather sedition, wars, massacres, empoyso^ments, stevvs,
ribaldry, heresy
Religion at Love, Unity, Concord, Piety, acts of Charity, and Devotion: as
Fasting, Prayer, Alms, building of Monasteries, erecting of universities,
founding of Hospitals, co^uerting of Nations, calling of Councels confuting of
Heresies, obedience to our Princes, though they be Pagans and Infidells, and
that for conscience sake: Calu. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 4. lib. 4. cap. 10.6.5.
Whereas both practisers and professors of the Religion which we are so pressed
to embrace, do far differ from us in those points, These fellows teach their
tongues to speak untruth.
teaching under color of the liberty of the Gospel, Knox in his exhortation
to England printed at Geneua. 1559.
contempt of power and authority Luther in his book, de potestate seculari:
and in his comment upon the 1. of S. Peter. cap. 2
neglect of laws, Goodma^ in his book of obedience: all which teach contempt
of authority, and neglect of laws in the places cited.
and obedience. The examples are to late, and lamentable in your Majesty's
Realm of Scotland, and in the persons of your gracious Mother, and
Grandmother, Father, and Grandfather, to pass with silence the tragedies by
such like, played in sundry other Can these me^ justly blame our brethren, that
resisted, and would not suffer the popes age^ts to cut their throtes?
Countries. Reason then the life of the law will acquit us, if we prefer a
Faith that has taken so deep root, whose goodly fruits we daily see and
taste, before Not so sle^der and slight, as the papists are sle^der, slight
and green Christians.
a slender slight, green, and far less fruitful plant.

About twenty four years now past, when a certain conference was held in the
Tower between Master Campion, and Master Shervvin Catholic Or rather the
seditious priests of Baal, that came to stir rebellion in England as appeared
by Parso^s and Ca^pio^s faculties.
Priests, and some of the selected learned Protestant divines, there were then
in prison in the Fleet, diverse Catholics both of honorable and worshipful
degree, for Testimony of their conscience only; as the Lord Vaux Master Thomas
Somerset brother to the Earl of Worcester, Sir Thomas Thresham, Sir William
Catesby, and others: who offered the warden of the Fleet (to procure them
license of the privy Council, to be present at the conference, and to have
that question of repairing to the Protestant Church discussed and decided) one
hundred They tell lies by hundreds.
French Crowns for every day that this question should remain thus under
examination: but their request could not then be Diverse yet living can testify
the contrary.
admitted, albeit the said warden did undertake the suite, and confidently
promised to effect it, and seriously labored it as well by his honorable
friends in Court, as by all other means he could possibly.

The same offer of conformity, and desire to be satisfied in this point which
we made then, we in humble wise make now, and that with so much the more
greater efficacy, as your Majesty has a most full and ample possession of our
How can the heart be divided betwixt the king and the Pope?
hearts and affections, for manifold important respects, both for the love your
gracious Mother did bear us, and the cause for which we suffer: as also for
the often (to us most comfortable) protestations your Majesty has made, and
that in public and in private, that you have a mind free from persecution, or
thravvling your subjects in matters of conscience: that you would not increase
our burdens with The King is here compared to an insolent and wicked young man.
Roboam; to which adding your Clemency of which we have tasted, and your
gracious promises wherewith we live in hope, and your daily discourses
springing from your native bounty and beniguity, make us Jf you strain your
self through a colendar. yet nothing comes from you but vain promises.
strain our selves to the uttermost, to give your Grace satisfaction. And
therefore if we may obtain this favor at your Graces hands, to be assured in
conscience, by the decision of the learned Let your Divines or rather
sophistical priests, prove what they can in vvriting, and they shall be
ansvvered.
Deuines of both sides, that the act of going to the Protestants sermons and
service, is not a damnable sin: then if after such A most ha^ble and
reasonable request A Council, conference or disputation.
dispute, decision, and information, we shall refuse to conform our selves to
your Majesty's will and example, we think then there is reason to give life
and reestablishment to the laws made against us. And this may suffice (we
hope) for discharge of the dutiful respect we bear to your Majesty, and desire
we have to give your Grace all All the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves,
as the Prophet says. Psalm. 94. and so do these also. But their cracks are
vain, proud and foolish.
possible satisfaction in matter our belief and Religion.

The answer to the 3 and 4. chapter of the petition.
HItherto these petttioners have well dissembled their violent humors,
pretending only humility submission; and offering in terms to give
satisfaction and co^tentment to his majesty. But now before they come to the
cause of their religion, they tell his majesty of their nu^bres both in England
and Jreland, secretly intimating, that if they may not have their petition by
fair means they have power to take other courses. they do also signify, that
some of their consorts have holden the popes hands from censuring the king,
and entreated him, to censure those that should offer the king any disturbance,
in the first plainly threatening the state, in the second adua^cing the pope
making the King beholding to him for his crown. Many other particulers there
are in these two chapters worthy to be censured. First they go about to
persuade his majesty, that as many of his subjects in England and Jreland are
papists as professors of true religion. they would percase say the same of
Scotland but that their consciience told them contrary. But first they must
show, that Papists houlding with the pope are true subjects, before they place
them in the number of the Kings true subjects. next they must bring forth the
rolls of the ministers of papists, and name them, or else no man will believe
them. For in Ireland, howsoever the common fort reteineth some popish
ceremonies the number of that znuerstand the principal grounds and doctrines
of popery is very slander, In England except certain, stage plaiers, old women
adicted to superstition, sely husbands ouerruled by their wives and certain
Mal-contentes, and frequenters. of ordinaries, that despair to obteiue
preferment in this state, and and only hope for honor and dignity in a new
world, there are but few papists, and all their numbers and forces, if we
respect the multitude of true Christians, amounts to nothing.

Secondly they talk very idly of the dignity of English papists. But they
name no one man of that sort, that either for his great service in wars, or
peace deserves any singular commendation. Therefore they run out into a long
rehersall of matters forepast, and talk of their ancestors saying, that they
have deserved well of this commonwealth. But as well might the Modern Romans
allege the great services and noble acts of Scipio, Paulus Aemilius, Sylla,
Marius, Catulus, Caesar, Cicero, Cato and others, or of the ancient Troyans,
from whom they pretend to be descended. they commend their auncesters also for
their love and fidelity unto their princes. But what is that to justify the
Practices of late papists both against his maiestyes predecessors king Edward
and Queen Elizabeth, and also against himself both in Scotland, and sense
his coming in England? Beside that, if they claym to be descended from those
rebels that oppugned king John, and king Henry the 8, and sought to bring them
under the Popes most grievous yoke, and to deprive them of their crowns, it
shall not procure them any great honor with the people, or grace from the
king. They say they are not degenerated in any point from their ancesters, and
that they have endcuoured to serve god, as their forefathers have done, ever
since our countries conversion from paganism, and Lastly that no suffering
recusant ever lifted up a finger to the least damage or detriment of his
prinee or country. But their sayings are convinced to be most untrue both by
public records and common experience. for if we respect matter of religion
we find, that they hold diverse points of doctrine confirmed in the late
conuenticles of Lateran, Constance Florence and Trent, which were not known,
nor heard of when this land was converted from paganism, nor long after.
Likewise both their missals, and breuiarics, and their masses and forms of
gods service are new, and not known of the ancient Britons and English. If we
consider matters of state, we find, that popish recusants and papists have
been principal actors in most of those rebellions and treasons that have
been practiced and intended against king Henry the 8. king Edward the sixth,
Queen Elizabeth, and his majesty. And J hope they will not deny, that Brook,
Markham, Watson and their accomplices were popish recusants, or that the attempt
of the Spaniards anno 1588, was against their country, and set forward by
papists. Lastly it is notorious, that Percy, Catesby, Digby, and all their
consortes were desperate recusants, and that they lifted up not only their
fingars, but also their whole arms and bodies against the king. yet should a
man be very strangely conceited, if he thought they meant no harm to their
prince and country.

Thirdly they run out into a large discourse of their hard usage in the late
Queens time, as they call it, and of the Queens proceeding against them, and
of the effects thereof ensuing, and pray the king to follow her rather in her,
disposition to mildness, then in her other hard and sharp courses. But first
all this discourse is from the purpose, and the intent propounded in the 3.
chapter. for therein they should declare unto us the estate and qualities of
Papists, and not the proceedings of our late Queen of blessed memory. Secondly
the sameis most slanderous charging that most gracious and clement Queen with
hard sharp and bloody courses. But this is all that Christian princes are to
look for at these men's hands, or penns. Let them use all mildnes and
remissness in proceeding against papists, yet unless they suffer rebels and
traitors to practice the overthrow of the state and saucily attempt against
their persons, they shall be charged with sharpness and cruelty. she indeed
distinguished between religion and treason: and so do others also. But the
papists did not so cunningly distinguish, but that seeking to set up their
wicked religion, and to bring into the country the popes tyranny, they fell also
in to diverse practices and cases of treason.

Thirdly they falsely co^me^d her mild courses. and show that troubles ensued of
the exe quution of laws against papists, whereas in truth her resolute course a
gaynste the^ secured her, and her slow exequutio^ or rather suspe^fio^ of penal
laws against papists caused troubles, rebelio^s, treacherous practices and
heaped sorrows both upon her, and her true friends, and, I fear brought her to
her end. Finally they co^fes their own lewd disposition, that being not
troubled the first 12 years of the Queens raygne, did not withstanding
procure the Popes Bulle against her, rebelled in the north anno. 1569. and
sought to deposeher and murder her, and now rail against her beingded let al
christian princes therefore bewar, what favors they shewto such vipers, and how
they heap benefits on such vngratful persons.

Fournhly them ention diverse excommunications and censures of popes passed
against queen Elizabeth: and talk of Giffords commission and Bethunes letters
in favor of the king, as it seems, and of the pope, that has not censured
the king, as yet. But all these matters are also from the purpose-futher they
bewraye the disloyal humors of papists, that make kings the popes vassals,
and blush not to signify that the pope might in justice censure the king, if
he would. Lastly they do therein bewray the weakness of the pope, and the
fading force of antichrists kingdom. For now the pope does not hold his hands
from excommunicating the king at the request of Bethune, or Gifford, or any
such base fellow, but because he fears his railing and cursing would either
take no effect against the king, or else overthrow the credit of Antichrists
thunderbolts.

Finally they conclude, if they have been, ar, and will be loyal to his
Majesty, that they may not by authority be driuento forsake their fathers
Catholic faith unless their faith beproued infidelity their religion
superstition, thire service idolatry their, doctrine here sy. they do pretend
also, that the faitq professed by them is confirmed by judgment passed on their
side in many general councels abroad, and in connocations and parliamens at
home This they conclude. But their conclusion is grounded upon false
premises, their exceptions are disproued, their assertions notoriously false
and rediculous. For what their carriage has been, it appears by the
practices first of Watson, Clerk, Brook, next of Percy and his mates,
thirdlye of the Lord, of Fentry and their accomplices against the king, the
same is also made evident by there bellions and treasons of papists against
Henry the 8. King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth of pious memory. How loyal
they are and will be, we may imagine, seeing their dependence on the pope and
foreine enemies, and treacherous doctrines concerning deposing of kings by the
pope, and the assoyling of subjects from their obedience to princes, their
religion and service has been and shall alwais be declared to superstitions,
idolatrous, wicked and heretical. Neither are they or their teachers able to
maintain it, or to answer our objections against it. We have also proved, that
both ancient fathers and councels make against popish doctrine. and that the
doctrine of Trent was never received either by ancient fathers, or by the
parliaments or conuocations in England, or known to papists before the year
1564. themselves must needs confess, unless they be both blindly foolish
and desperately obstinate. We may therefore conclude upon their own confession
against the^ that if papists neither have been nor can be loyal to princes, or
loving to their country desiring to bring both under the pope, and if their
service be idolatrous, and their doctrine heretical, and their practice
superstitions as is formerly demo^ strated, howso ever idleheads prate of
toleratio^ of popery, that neither their religion, nor their audacious boldness
and sawcines is any longer to betolerated. we may also conclude that the
reasons alleged by this resolution in religion are either false, or not
coneludent.

First they say they have their understanding captiuated in obsequium fidei
(scilicet papisticae) by most evident testimony of holy writ, of unity,
universality, succession, antiquity and authority of fathers, saints. doctors,
councils Parliame^ts virgins and martyrs and these they say co^curre in popish
religion and in no other, But of holy writ these lay papists have little reso^
to make va^ts, seeing lay me^ are little skilled in to^gs and sta^nd prohibited
to read them in vulgar tongs with out license. furthermore these fellows art
not so far traveled, as to know what is contained in scriptures, fathers,
councils and ancient writers concerning matters in co^trouersy. and if they
resolve themselves by relation of the massepreests and friars, the^ar they most
simple idiots to believe matters upon heresay, and to found themselves upon the
reports of such lying compagnions.

Lastly they seem to have their brains distempred, that are made to believe,
that the popish sacrifice of the mass for quick and dead, their carnal
eating of Christ's flesh with the mouths of men, nay with the mouth of bruit
beasts, their transubstantiation, half communions, and idolatrous worship of
the sacrament, the popes universal and plenary power contained in decretales,
their 7. sacraments, and doctrine of justification by orders, marriage and
extreme unction, their worship of saints, relics, and images, and all the
rest of their abominable doctrine may be proved by authority of scriptures,
fathers, saints, doctors, councels, Parliamentes, and that the same is
confirmed die unity, universality, succession, and. antiquity, beside the
testimony of virgins and Martyrs, This we may affirm of the Apostles creed,
and the Catholic faith taught and published in ancient Councels, but by no
means of the faith of the modern sinagogue of Rome. Nay in our abridgemente,
or survey of Popery we have plainly demonstrated that the same is contrary to
scriptures, fathers, councels, ancient writers, and is deuoyde of the
testimonies of martyrs virgins, and decrees of Parliaments, and all other
authentical proofs.

Secondly they allege, that never any universal innovation in matters of
religion has been made, but that the commission and vocation of the messengers
has been authorized by signs and wonders. But this allegation, as it
concearneth us nothing, so it utterly overthrows the petitioners cause. For
we have made no universal innonatio^. Nay we do not alter or abrogate-any one
article of the Christian faith, but as in Spain true teachers in former times
caused Arianisme to cease and true religion to be received, and as the
Christians in the land of Palestine some 400. years sense for a time caused
the impieties of Mahomet to be suppressed, and Christian religion to be taught
and practiced, so do we only abolish the corruptions, false doctrines,
heresies, and impieties of popery, and retain every article of the Ancient
christian faith. But the massepreests, friars and monks adhering to the Pope
have made an universal alteration in the worship of God, bringing in the
idolatrous worship of saints, of images, of the sacrament, and receiving many
old condemned heresies, and new devised school doctrines and decretaline
devises, and yet neither show signs nor wonders, unless a man list to believe
the wondrous lies of their legends and breuiaries.

Thirdly they take it as a matter most evident, and that cannot be denied, that
the first apostles and conuerters of England Scotland, Ireland, France, and
Germany were sent from the Church of Rome, and delivered us the same faith
which the Papists now profess. But they take boldly and affirm impudently
that, which no man either gives them, or yields to be true. Parsons has
spent much idle talk in this argument, and proves nothing. Coleton is as
mute, as if he were turned into a Codfish, and replieth nothing to that which
is answered to the petition of Masseprecstes the last session of parliament,
and their discourse touching this point. As for these petitioners, they show
themselves ignorant of learning, that believe, that the doctrine of Romish
traditions of the Popes authority, of the mass, of the 7. sacraments, of
Purgatory and indulgences, and such like matters was known to the ancient
Bishops of Rome. but suppose old Rome had sent true preachers abroad, to
convert nations to the Christian faith, what is that to new Rome, that sends
out false apostles, to corrupt the true faith, and assassins and Cutthroates to
murder such, as favor the truth? this false doctrine and cut throat practice
certes was never confirmed with true signs and wonders.

Fourthlie they require us to show a Commission from God, if we mean to
convince the papists, that they have not true scriptures, or interpret them not
right, or that they are idolaters, or heretics: a devise likely to proceed
from such idle heads. For neither did those fathers, that convinced the
Marcionists, Arrians, Manichees, Angelicks and other heretics either of
corrupting, or misconstruing the scriptures, or any other point of false
doctrine, show a commission immediately from god, neither do the mass preests,
that dispute now against Turks, Arrians, and Anabaptists show forth any such
commission. All Christians and not only public teachers have commission,
sufficient, to descry and to take heed of false Prophets, that come unto them
in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. What needs then this
extraordinary authority?

Fifthly they tellvs, that we had our scriptures from Rome, and had been
scripturelesse, if we had not received them from thence He says also, that the
same bible, which Angustine brought into England, is yet. reserved by gods
especial providence. But first it is not material, from whence Christians
receive holy scriptures. The Romans received them from the Jews and yet I
trow Parsons and Coletou, as they are turned Romanists, will not turn Jews.
Secondly that the Britous received the scriptures from the Romans, it is not
likely, they being, as the common report goes, converted by Joseph of
Arimathaea. Neither do these petitioners show, where the Bible is to be foud,
that was brought in by Austen the Monk, nor do they make proof, that this
which they show, is the the same Bible, which Austen brought in. Jf it be the
old vulgar translation, it is not likely, that Gregory sent it. For he does not
always follow that translation. Here also they tell us, that we have rejected
and discanonized diverse books of scripture, because they be express
testimonies against our religion, which it pleases them to call new and
negative. But neither do we reject any book of canonical scripture, nor can
any argument be drawn from the books apocryphal added in the vulgarlatin
translation to the old testament, that does hurt us. Furthermore if we do
only deny the heresies of the papists, then do we not frame any new religion
unto ourselves. and if the papists affirm matters not known to fathers, then
is their religion new and positive, if not wicked in the superlatiue. For the
sense of, scripture they tell us that we have only the warrant of our private
spirit, and they the assistance of gods holy spirit promised to his Church. But
absurdly they talk of the interpretation of scriptures following therein the
private sense of a senseless pope, and neither the interpretation consonant to
the meaning of gods holy spirit speaking in scriptures, nor to the judgment of
fathers upon whom they brag most fondly. Lastly they tell us again of
parliaments and princes and say, that for one of ours, they have an hundred,
but they show themselves shame less, to speak untruth without any show of
proof. For if they look into all histories, they shall not find either
parliament or prince within this realm, that allowed the wicked decrees of the
conuenticle of Trent. Neither did the clergy or the universities of England
ever approve the^. Here again they they tell us of a child King, and, woman
Queen, as if they had Queens, that were no women, or disallowed of the
succession of children to their fathers. So their fifth reason is very childish.

Their sixth reason had been more allowable, if they could have proved their
antecedent. For if their faith, had been that, which Saint. Paul so highly
commends, and which was first taught the English by Gregory; then should we
not much contend with them about matters of faith. But helas poret souls,
these laypapistes read not S. Paul's Epistles, nor can they tell, what he
taught. and as for their Masters, they shall prove themselves desperate
fellows, if they take upon them to prove their transubstantiation, and massing
sacrifice, and other points of popery out of S. Paul. they should also but
abuse their readers, if they should undertake to prove, that popery is
Catholic doctrine, as has been often showed. Finally if Gregory the first
were judge, yet should they neither prove the popish worship of images, nor the
universal headship of the pope, nor the inuisibility and impalpability of
Christ's body in the sacrament. the contrary rather, out of Gregoryes doctrine
may be concluded.

The 7. reason is nothing else but a repetition of matters formerly denied. They
say we have received our Bible, our gospel, and the canons from the Church of
Rome. The truth is, that all true Christians have received both the Bible and
the Gospel from Christ, and his Apostles-likewise we have received ancient
canons from ancient general councels, and from the same the Church of Rome
has received both laws and canons. But the doctrine of the modern church of
Rome concerning the 7. sacraments, half communions the carnal eating of
Christ's body with the mouth, and such like Mysteries of the mass they are
contrary both to scriptures, and acts of councels, and were never known to
the ancient church of Rome.

In their 8. reason they affirm, that the Romish Church is our Mother Church.
But then is she a cruel mother, that persecuteth and murthreth her children.
Of the old Roman Church diverse nations received the faith, and therefore to
them she might be reputed the Mother church, and so his majesty meant, when he
spoke of the old church of Rome. But this later Romish church is rather a
stepmother, then a mother, and rather the mother of fornications. as Saint John
calls her, or the mother of errors, as Francis Petrarch calls her, then the
mother of Christians. nay we haueby diverse reasons demonstrated, that she is
neither the mother church, nor Christ's church, but the whore of Babylon, and
Synagogue of Antichriste.

Their ninth reason is drawn from the manner of the firste^ arising, and
condemnation of heresies. For if there never yet arose any heresy, but both the
names of the authors, and of the counsels that condemned them, were well
known: then if neither the authors of the mass, or of Purgatory, or of prayers
to saints can be named, nor any council found out that condemned them, then
they suppose, that these points came from Christ, and the apostles. But by the
same reason he might prove that the heresy of the Angelikes, Collyridians,
Messalians, Nudipedalls, Nazarites, Apostolikes, and diverse of that sort came
from Christ and the Apostles. For neither is Coleton able to name the first
authors of these heresies, nor except it be the Angelikes condemned in the
council of Laodicea, can he show, that any of these heretics were condemned
by councels. Further we show, who were the first deuisers of the mass, and
these lay papists confess, that the author of every little ceremony and the
time thereof is known. we knowalso, that purgatory for satisfaction for
temporal pains after that the guilt of sin is remitted, and prayers to saints
was first devised by schoolmen among christians, and by idolaters among Heathen
men.

Their last reason is derived from the fruits of true religion, which, as they
say are love, unity, concord, piety, acts of charity, and devotion, as fasting
prayer, alms, building of monasteryes, erecting of universities, founding of
Hospitals, converting of Nations, and such like. But first the erection of
monasteries, and such like dens of superstitious persons, and Sodomites, is
neither a work of Charity, nor devotion. Secondly these fruits of religion,
that are here mentioned, never proceeded from the modern superstition of Rome.
And that is most apparent, not only by common experience, but also by the
testimony and confession of papists themselves. In Jtaly and other countries,
where popery most reigns there is little true love, no unity, nor concord
either among the teachers, or among their followers, no step of christian
piety, no acts of Christian charity, nor sign of sincere and internal
devotion. their prayers are directed to saints and angels for the most part,
and little understood of the vulgar sort, being in strange la^guages. Their
fasts ar superstitious their alms ar pharisaical, and for the most part evil
bestowed. The popes and their co^plices massacre and murdre true christians,
and with deadly, hatred prosequute on another, Their enemies they empoyso^ and
murdre, and such as they cannot kill, they curse and hate. They make banks of
usury, and set up bordell houses for maintenance of whoredom and baudry. they
have empouerished christians, and occasioned the progress and success of
Turks. and as for new Rome it has confuted no heresies, nor called any
lawful councels, nor erected any universities, nor taught any obedience to
princes. nay contrariwise, the popes of Rome have dissolved the bands of
obedience, and with preferring men unworthy, and fostering Iebusites have
overthrown universities. Finally; teaching that the pope is above councels,
they have taken away al authority from councels, and teaching the idolatrous
worship of saints, images, and the sacrament, and setting for ward their
traditions they have destroyed all religion. and this in the abridgement or
survey of popery is proved both by testimonies and examples: against us certes
they shall never be able to prove any such matters. They charge Master Calvin,
Knox, Luther and Godma^ with teaching co^te^pt of power and authority, and
neglect of laws and obedience, and that under the color of liberty of the
gospel. But this is a common practice of papists, when they are at a stop, to
father lies upon Luther Calvin and other godly men. How sincerely they deal,
it is apparent, when they allege such authors, as lay papists under pain of
exco^mu nication may not read, and affirm that to be taught by them, which
those godly teachers utterly dislike and condemn. Absurdly also, where they
undertake to defend themselves, they run out into an accusation of others,
sailing as it were without compass, albeit they pretend, that their petition
was printed at the sign of the compass.

If then the papists upon pretense of these absurd allegations desire
conference or disputation, then is their case desperate, and their hopes
frutelesse. For as casily shall we answer by word, as we answer now by
writing, of the disputatio^s in the tower betwixt some of ourlerned men, and
Campion and his mates they have no reason to make any vants neither had either
the Lord Vaux, or Tresham or Catesbie any great judgment to offer money to be
praesent at the conference. for that poyso^ did they taste there that has
ruined both Treshams, and Catesbyes progeny, and Campion was put down with a
word of Greek, and found unable to mayntein his own pamphlet, and much more to
uphold the ruinous cause of papists. This certes we hardly believe, that either
they offered such great so^mes of money to be present at the conference, or. that
their suit was denied. For we are not hardly entreated to dispute, nor loath to
be heard, and now if these suppliantes or their teachers think they can do any
masteryes, let them propose their arguments to the view of the world in
writing, that all men may know the cause, and we assure them, they shalnot
want answer by tongue and pen. and if that will not serve, then let them
procure us the like security and liberty in Spain and Italy, that they desire
in England and, then they shall not be refused.

In the mean while I would pray these suppliants either by themselves or their
teachers to justify this petition, and to take away this our answer, and that
they would be pleased to answer all the particular points either of our
challenge which are passed ouerby Walpoole. or of our survey of popery where
for one reason they bring for popery, they shall have a hundred of more
strength against it.

Chap. 19. The examen of lay papists fidelity, of which they endeavor to make
proof chap. 5. of their petition.
THE question is not here only concerning the faithful and loyal carriage
of the lay forte of Papists, of which I do think better then of the rest, but
principally of the fidelity of the massepreestes their teachers, for whom
especially the lay papists make request, and very large offers. Who then does
not perceive, that these petitioners do fail in a necessary ground of their
defense, and in their consciences confess, that their teachers are guilty of
treacherous dealing? the scribe also in the proofs of the lay papists fidelity
does rather make proof of his own impudency in affirming matters notoriously
false and denying matters evidently true, and of his singular folly in ripping
open the wounds of his own broken cause, then of any matter in question
betwixt us, and intended to be proved by him, as may better appear, the whole
discourse being reported, as they conceived it, and as we thus find it in the
petition.

Chapter. 5. The proofs of the lay papists fidelity.
ANd now we come to the matter of our loyalty and obedience ( Gracious
Sovereign) in the defense whereof we are driven by the necessity of our
affayrs and If in this number you include all, that make laws against
Papists, you have the king and Parliament for party.
im portunity of our oppugners, to insist more particulerly, Reasons of loyalty.
then otherwise were convenient in respect of our own modesty, or your
Highness bounty and magnanimity; who never yet omitted to recompense and pay suo
loco and tempore, love with love, How can you deserve the Kings protection,
that yield to his enemies subjection?
subjection with protection, and virtue with honor.

For the full and final clearing therefore of that point of disobe dience, and
disloyalty, wherewith we are so often charged rather in hatred of Religion,
then of any ground or substance that ever cold Were Brook Clark, Warso^, Persy,
Catesby and their accomplices charged unjustly?
justly be showed: may it please your highness to consider that there be Three
ways of trial.
three ways for a prudent and circumspect Master, to try out the honesty, and
fidelity of his servant accused of treachery. And all insufficient, and
foolish.


The first, Former behavior.
by making inquisition of his former life and behavior, what You serve the
Pope as your Master, can you then serve the king too?
Master he served before, in what estate, and for how long time, and with what
success and trustines.

The second, Present carriage.
to look narrowly into his present quality and For your evil qnalified
dispute, if you were carried in a clokebag, you might lie the drier.
carriage, and to be assured how he is and has been affected to him, his
forefathers, friends and dependers.

The last, to compare his actions and comportments, as well past as present,
with those that traduce him; and to see what caution he can give (to stop his
enemies suggestions) for his future fidelity.

Comparison between the Catholics and new Clergies comportments.
To this form or trial (Dread Soneraigne) we submit our selves, our lives and
actions, and will endeavor to give you full satisfaction in all the a foresaid
points of our carriage: Vt obstruatur os loquentium iniqua, to the end that the
mouth of him that speaks wicked things may be stopped, that you may
(notwithstanding what exclamations soever to the contrary) serve your self of
our poor Pore forces and pore services is the king to expect at the hands of
the popes vassalls.
forces, lives and habilities, in all your fortunes and emploiments against all
your foes and enemies whosoever.

To begin then where we left, when your Majesty made your happy entrance into
this Realm, and to put you in mind by what degrees, and for what deserts we
were brought into that miserable estate your Highness found us in. It is well
known that before our imprisonment and restraint, upon the statute of
recusancy, for the only Testimony of our consciences, some of us did bear
offices in the common wealth, and were The more were you to blame, that did
dishonor, and seek to destroy her, that did dignifie you.
dignified by the late Queen: in which charges and negotiations (without vaunt
be it said) our For want of good neighbors you are driven to praise your
selves.
cariages were Catholic behauiors before their restraint and disgrace for
recusancy.
civil, laudable, and loyal: and some of us lived without charge, yet not
without credit and estimation, of worshipful and honest men, and were as well
By none but malcontents and enemies of the state.
accepted and reputed in the Countries and Provinces where we dwelt, and had
commandment in, as were any other of our neighbors of the like calling and
degrees.

After our restraint our Their demeanure after their restraint
behauionr was such as became Catholic Christian subjects toward Christian
Magistrates, with all humility, respect, modesty, and subjection, ever either
readily doing what they enjoined, or patiently suffering what they imposed.

The long time of our Active and not passive.
persecutions: the number of them that were afflicted: the diversity of their
ranks and qualities, and of their humors and dispositions: the perpetuity and
variety of temptations and tribulations: the infinite in dignities we passed
through for so many years, if they had fallen out among any other
constitutions of men then catholic, they might have wroung (very probably) out
of men well mortified and patient, some action of dislike, or All the perilous
practices, that have long troubled the state, have proceeded from you.
perilous practice of coffeehouse, when such multitudes of all degrees were
so assailed; especially of people so resolute in that supreamest degree of
fortitude: which is as Behold lay men well studied in Aristotle.
Aristotle defines it, Tristia pro virtute Lay men's Latin.
tolerare, to endure heavy things for virtues sake, a point very daugerous, and
whereof there want not plenty of Do you not see how they threaten calamilies to
the state, if they may not have their vvilles?
lamentable events, rising from cases of desperate necessity: which Abner the
general of Saul's army objected to Ioab David's Liueteuant in these words:
Exclamauit Abner ad Ioab and ait: number vsque ad internecionem tuus mucre
desaeuiet? an ignor as quod Desperatio periculosa.
periculosa est desperatio? Reg. 2, cap. 2.
vsquequo non dicis populo vt omittat perse qui fratres suos? And Abner cried
out to Ioab, shall thy sword be cruel even to the death Know thou not that
desperation is perilous? Why do thou not command the people that they cease
to persecute their brethren?

But this may we glory in, (Redoubted Soueraign) that in all this time no
diligence of our Adversaries, no Malice, no Policy, no Curiosity, no Argus
eyes (of which there was great store, greedily prying into all our doings)
could Then vvanted they eyes. For who did not see, that the rebellions of
Jreland and of the North, were raised by papists.
ever epsy the least shadow of disloialtie, in any one action of the public
weals professors and most sufferers in the cause, notwithstanding the long and
perpetual course of their seruitudes and vexations.

The true reason whereof is, the Doctrine we are taught by the Religion which
we profess; which tells us, that we must obey our princes: Non propter iram;
sed propter conscientiam: not for any indignation, but for conscience sake: and
that to resist them, is to resist Gods ordinance; and this is the bitte and
bridle that every true Catholic carries in his mouth, to restrain him from
that, by grace and fear of Gods judgments, which slesh and blood otherwise
with the lively sense and feeling of insupportable miseries and afflictions;
might drive him unto.

In this case of our The lay Catholics fidelity to the late Queen.
dutiful behavior in the late Queens days, fiant inimici nostri iudices, let
our enemies be our judges therein: let the Roles, Registers, and Records
speak, sithence the great penalties imposed upon us for recusancy what has
been our Innocence, our Integrity; our vnimpeacheable carriage and demeanor:
how free we have been from the least suspicion of treason and practice, as it
pleased the Lords of the late privy council to tell us, Catholics justified by
the Lords of the Council.
that the reason of our imprisonment was not in respect of any doubt made of
our loyalties: but only to prevent the Spaniards hopes of our assistance in
their pretended invasions.

In the year The carriage of catholics the year 88.
Eighty eight, when the Spanish Armado came with intention to invade this
Realm, our offers at Eely to the Lord North (then Lord lieutenant in those
parts) in the presence of the Deane of Eely, and many others else of
worshipful calling there present at that time, for the hasting away of the
forces of those countries to Tilbery-camp, were these: we beseeched, and
instantly importuned, that we might be employed in those services, in the
defense of our Prince and country, and not endure that dishonor, that the
whole Realm should be endangered, and we no unworthy members thereof and no
mean freeholders, should be exempted from that so behoofefull and honorable
service: we with voluntary adventure of our lives and worldly fortunes Their
offer of service in person.
offered How durst you serve against your god on the earth?
to serve in person with our Sons, Servants, and Tennants, at out own
charges; as desirous most joyfully to embrace that opportunity, to make manifest
our loyalties in our Prince and countries cause: we desired to be placed in the
first front of the battle: we offered to serve in the places of the hottest
and most dangerous service: and if we might not obtain that favor of trust
and service, for greater security, and lively demonstration of our true English
hearts, we did offer, and implore to be placed They offer to be placed unarmed
in the forefront of the battle.
unarmed This was to run avvoy, without question.
in our shirts, before the foremost ranks of our battles, to receive in our
bodies the first volly of our enemies shot, to leave an undoubted Testimony by
that our death to stop the mouths of the serpentine maligners of our This is
unspeakable impudency. For the cheese procurers of this invasion were papists.
unspotted integrity, and true English loyalties.

But if none of these instant requests would be granted us, yet those hands
which should have valoronsly been used against the enemy, should be zealously
lifted up to God for the delivery of our prince and Country, and to obtain
renowned glorious victory against the Inuador; wherein we failed not,
answerable to the duty of loyalest English Subjects, all which was offered by
us to be performed notwithstanding the late Queen was twife They play the
parts of good subjects notwithstanding al exco^munications.
excommunicated. And this is a demonstrable and undoubted argument, that we are
not conditional Either conditional subjects or no true papists, which are
bound to execute the Popes censures against their kings being excommunicated.
Subjects, a calumny so frequent in the mouths of the Ministry, and by them
endlesly objected against us.

The like offer to that the Catholics at Eely made, the The like offer made
the Lord Vanx.
Lord Vaux (then prisoner likewise, for Testimony of his conscience, under the
charge of the Arch bishop of Canterbury) offered, and in like sort would have
done all the Catholics in England, upon like occasion and opportunity.

When the Spanish Armado was dispersed, and their forces defeated the Vice
Chancellor of Cambridge associated with the Deane of Eely sent to Eely to the
Catholic recusants there imprisoned, from the Lords of Queen Elizabeth's
privy Council, with A form of submission sent down to the Catholics from the
Council.
a form of protestation of their duty and allegiance, penned by the said
Queens learned Council, with direction and commission to take the said
recusants subscriptions thereunto, being altogether unexpected of them, they
being close prisoners, and having no intelligence at all of any Commissioners
repairing to them: So soon as these Commissioners had read some part of their
commission to the Catholics there, they forth with were severally divided,
and in close prison restrained. And notwithstanding the said formal original
sent purposely for them to subscribe unto: yet the Commissioners (as it seemed
for a more trial or for a more advantage taking against the Catholics there)
taxed every of them to set down immediately the protestation of their
allegiance and duty, to like purpose as was set forth in the original seat
to them from the Lords of the Council, which the Catholic Gentlemen were
permitted to have but one only time read unto them. This several form of
submission in such strict order exacted by the Commissioners, was in that The
catholics exhibit a form of submission-far more complete the^ that which was
sent them.
ample They had some dispensation to do what they did and yet they did no
great matter.
manner performed by the said recusants, that the said Commissioners
(singularly extolling and greatly preferring the same, before the said
original) accepted thereof, and required not at all the Catholics to
subscribe to the said original so penned by the said Queens learned Counccil,
and addresled by the Lords of the privy Council: to whom the said
prorestations being sent, and by them perused, they received such a full
approbation, that after that time never any odious imputation or calumniations
against the fidelity of the Catholics, prevailed.

The like was the valor, The fidelity of Irish Catholics.
fidelity, and laudable service of the Irish Catholic recusants at Kinsale in
Ireland, anno. 1600. who joining their forces with the late Quens against the
Spanish power, and against then own Countrymen and Kinsmen, expelled with
their assistance, the Spaniard; and were These bastardly English do rob their
own countrymen of their honor in the battle by Kinsalo an. 1600. and give all
to the Irish. Gods glory like rebels to God they suppress.
special means to keep Ireland in obedience to the Crown of England: which
otherwise (in the opinions of the commanders of the English forces then there)
had been utterly lost. And none of judgment there doubted, but that it was in
the power of those Irish Of these goodly Catholics, there were 4. rebels at
the least, for one true subject in the Queens army.
Catholic Earls, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, and their followers, to have
betrayed then that Realm of Ireland, to the hands of the Spaniards; if either
zeal of extirping the Protestant religion thence, and firm establishing of
the Catholic religion, could have prevailed with them; or dread of
Excommunication hindered not the Irish Catholics to do the duties of good
subjects.
excommnnication, or threatening of the powerful inuader, proclayming by sound
of Trumpet, and deuulging proclamations that his sword should no more spare a
Catholic recuss^t disobeying that excommunication, then it should do a
protestant resisting in arms. And this singular act of loyalty, so shortly
after seconding and confirming the like of the English catholics in Eighty
eight, without all gainsaying, conuinceth that the English and Irish Catholic
recusantes, are not English and Itish Catholics no conditional subjects.
conditional subjects, but most true loyal and To the Pope rather then to the
king.
faithull subjects to their Prince, and to the Crown of England; therein
giving place to no subjects of those two Realms whosoever, or of what degree
soever and whose proof and trial herein, far excels all other the
subjects of those Realms; if pre-eminence should in that behalf be attributed
to any profession of Religion in the said Kingdoms.

This argument of our sormer behavior, and of our obedience under the Shame
you not to charge so merciful a Princess with severity, when your selves
both by color of law and by lavvlesse massacres most or uelly murder quiet
Christians?
severity of the late Queen, may in all reason assure your majesty, that in
matter of our loyal^e we are like pure Gold, fined and refined in the fire of
many years probation, and therein not to be any way stained.

The second trial of our fidelities consists in matter likewise of fact
Catholics behavior toward his Majesty's Pre-
toward your Majesty's Predecessors, your Title in them, and in your self,
and the effect of our love and affection performed in all occasions, that might
give contentment to your Majesty, both before and since your entrance into this
your Kingdom of Ergland; which we will endeavor to touch as briefly as we can.

It cannot be denied then in the first rank of these our comportements, but
that we our selves in our times, and our Catholic Parents before us at all
times of opportunity offered, have declared our deuouted affections to your As
may appear by Parso^s his book of Titles, by Coluils libells, and by the
subscriptions and allovvances of them by diverse papists.
said Highness Catholics always affected to the Kings Title to England.
right to this crown, the testemonies whereof are in printed books and public
facts so manifest to the world, that we need not long dwell on that point:
vouchsafe therefore patience we beseech you (Dear Sovereign) to hear some
instances of the Blessings and benefits his Majesty has received by catholics.
blessings and the benefits your Majesty has received by But not by papists
believing the doctrine of Trent, and the kingkilling positions maintained by the
popish faction.
catholics, and by our services and fidelities.

King Henry the 7. and his eldest Daughter (from whom your Majesty has
received lineally and directly your birth, right, and natural succession to
this crown) were most zealous and religious Catholics and for that singular
affection he did bear to the Henry the 7 prefers the Scottish King before
the French.
Scottish nation, principally for their great zeal at all times to the
catholic religion, preferred the same before France, bestowing his said eldest
Daughter on your Highness great Grandfather, and the younger upon the King Henry
the 7. was dead before the match made with his daughter.
French King, by which happy marriage came that lineall and rightful descent of
blood, that made your Majesty's renowned Mother Heyr apparent to this crown of
England, who also was the undoubted His Majesty's Mother lineall heir to K.
Edward the Confessor.
lineall Heir to King Edward the Confessor, by his sister Margaret, Queen
and Saint; and consequently your Majesty from your Catholic Mother, and her
Catholic Predecessors, has not only received the hereditary succession of
the kingdom of Scotland, but also a double right to the Crown of England, as
His Majesty true heir both to the Saxo^ and Norman Princes.
heir to the Saxon lineall line by a holy Saint and Catholic Queen, and heir
to the Norman line by a most worthy Catholic Prince, and a blessed Martyr, and
all them united in her, and now duly descended to your Majesty.

It was the pious and virtuous Queen Mary and her Catholic subjects, Queen
Mary.
who Do not the papists profess themselves falsaries cancelling the
authentical wills of kings?
cancelled the forged will of her Father King Henry the eight, exceeding
prejudicial to your right in this Crown, that disproued itin Parliament, and
deposed the Protestant usurping Queen Jane Queen Ianc set up by Protestants,
deposed by Catholics.
More papists then true Christians concurred in that action.
set up then by the Protestants to the disinheriting of Henry the eight his
daughters Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, and his eldest sisters issue, who
was your Majesty's great Grand Mother, and whose issue were in all right to
have been preferred before her younger sister, Grandmother to the usurping
Protestant Queen Jane; who so deposed by that renowned pious Catholic Queen
Mary, the crown (by her royal providence) was reserved to the righful, and
lawful heirs thereof, consequently descended now to your Majesty, conformable
to the law of God, Nature, and Nations.

The serpentine inuectiue made by Hales and other Protestants, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, directly against Not so, but rather against such as
pretended a right before Queen Elizabeth.
your majesty's Title, thereby intending Hales inuectiue against the Title of
Scotland.
the aduancemente of a pretender, potently in those days possessed in the
breasts of no mean multitudes, was upon the setting forth thereof in the time
of Queen Elizabeth indelayedlie undertaken, fully answered, and learnedlie
confuted by Hales answered by Justice Brown and Master Ployden both Catholics.
Neither be, nor Ployden durst speak directly. Neither can it he shevved, that
they acknowledged the Popes supremacy.
Sir Anthony Brown then one of the Justices of the common Pleas, and lately
before in Queen Mary's reign had been chief Justice of the same Court, and
M. Edmund Ployden famous Lawyers, with the assent of other Catholic Divines,
civil Lawiers, and Gentlemen of good worth, judgment, and experience.

How many Hawards, Persies, Pagets, Vaux, Treshams, Throgmortons, Salisburies,
Abington
families of Catholics have endured great damages and detrimentes in renown
and state, for desire they had to maintain the right of your most blessed
Mothers Title They cared not a straw for her Title furthen they thought the
same a good pretense, and color for their sedicious courses, as appeared
afterward plainly, when they went to others, and oppugned the kings Title.
in remainder, and By their adventures they brought her to her end without all
peradventure.
adventures made to relieve her, and deliver the afflicted Princess out of her
captivity; with much abundant love, tears, and affection, your sacred Mother
testified publicly at the end of her life.

Since your Mothers death, we remained ever Catholics behavior after the
martyr dome of his Majesty's Mother.
constant to your Majesty's right to the succession of this Crown, not ebbing
and slowing in our affections, but resolute ever to live or die with your
Majesty in that most just pretense: but if any particular person in foreign
countries has spoken or written to the contrary, for his private and
particular pretentions, he As if none concurred with him, that were to answer
also as well as he for oppugning the kings Title.
is to answer for himself, and his own fact, for therein we disclaim: which
party (as we are credibly informed) has both before and sithence the Queens
death, done great diligence to give your majesty Viz. if words and leasings
were payment.
satisfaction. And your Majesty is not ignorant, (we are assured) what has bin
the carriage, opinion, and opposition of us and our friends even in that
particular in the favor and defense of your Majesty's right, both within and
without the Realm: what The dangers, damages, and disgraces, which M. Charles
Paget, Cap. Tresham, M. John Stoner of Stonor, and diverse others suffered
therefore, are notorious.
dangers we have passed at home, and what slanders and damages very many of our
catholic brethren have suffered So it appears his Majesty's Title was
oppugned abroad.
abroad for showing themselves Scottish in faction (as we were termed, that
Scottish in faction what.
is firmly, and immoueably affected to your Majesty's right of succession to
this crown,) your Majesty have heard, and we have felt and shall feel, our
honors and estates thereby being extremely diminished and eclipsed whiles we
live, unless your Majesty's pious and royal heart vouchsafe to repair and
relieve the same.

Neither did your Majesty's His majesty's zeal in the Protestants Religion did
nothing diminish the Catholics forwardness toward his right and justice.
zeal in the Protestant Nickname not true religion you professors of
antichristian religion.
religion, any way alter or Then are ye no papists. For such may not tolerate
any professing our religion, if they dravv others to it, by Bellarmines doctrine.
diminish the just conceit, and dutiful consideration we carried to that
justice and right, which God and nature had prepared for you from your cradell.

If then our carriage and affection to your Majesty was such, when your Religion
was to ours so different your Person to us unknown, your fortune doubtful, the
factions diverse, the oppositions in all likely hoode very great, and the event
of your affairs very uncertain: what may your Majesty presume of us now? or
rather what may you not promise, and Just nothing. For the pope takes on him
to dissolve bonds of allegiance.
assure to your self of our fidelities, in this time of your Majesty's present
prosperity, and fruition of this crown, having proved our selves so faithful
to your Majesty in times of your expectations?

And to conclude, such is the The confidence catholics have in his Majesty's
royal dealing with them.
confidence we have in your Majesty's Abused by papists, that infringe his
laws and maintain intelligence with traitors and enemies abroad.
clemency, and so far we rely upon the bounty of your nature and royal
proceeding with us, that whereas the not payment of twenty pounds a month for
recusancie into the Exchequor, (at the terms by law prescribed) puteth us
absolutely into your Majesty's hands and mercy, for two parts of all our
lands and revenues during our lives, and makes us a pray to the discretion of
our enemies and promotors, disabling us to sell our goods, to let or set our
lands for our relief, to make iointures for the mainteinance of our If this
petition were made by maspriests, then they account the vviues of lay papists
to be their own vviues, and their children to be their bastards.
wives, or estate of lands to our children, albeit by not payment of the said
sums at the terms asoresaid we fell within the lapses of the Laws in such
extreamitie of danger, that our case was not to be relieved but by special
act of Parliament: yet such of us, as at Wilton in November last past had
recourse to the Lords of your Majesty's most honorable privy Council, to be
secured from the said forfeiture; which otherwise we were to incur in default
of payment, as is before said, they were (far besides their expectation)
axed by the Lords of akinde of diffidence, or chalenging your Majesty with
breach In this libell you have charged the king with breach of promise.
of promise for the easing us of the said mulcte-mony, in sortt as it was
delivered us in Iulie precedent at Hampton Court, whereupon we resolved
absolutely to put our whole Estate into your Maiestyes hands, that your Majesty
may see, how we prefer the credit and confidence we have in your Majesty's
justice, equity, conscience, and mercy, before our own security, our lands,
goods and livings; and so do we still remain in the same Note how lay
Papists are put by these libellers in predicaments.
predicament: where if every penny had been a pound, and every of our
mole-hilles mountains, we would (upon such urging of our diffidence) have
prostrated all the same at your most Royal Majesty's This cannot be done, as
long as you kis the Popes feet.
feet.

The answer to the fifth chapter of the petition.
IN July an D. 1604. this Chapter which co^teineth surmises, or as themselves
say, proofs of the lay papists fidelity, carried a far better show. then now
it does. but sense the treason of Catesby, Pearcy, and their compagnions
began to be known abroad, it seems superfluous to speak of things
supposed, and for lay papists fidelity, we are to write of the Papists lame
(and halting) Fidelity. For as many proofs else do convince them, to have
carried evil minds to their prince and country of a long time, so hardly shall
they clear themselves of the blot of this late conspiracy. not that many were
acquaynted with the particulers of the pouderplot, but because most were
acquainted with a general deseignement for the reestablishment of popish
religion: a matter proved by diverse arguments. First at that time papists, in
all places flocked together, and began to lift up their heads.

Secondly the matter was much talked of in foreign countries. and reported to
be already exequuted. Thirdly both in England, and elsewhere, papists said
pater nosters, and Auemariaes for the good success of their consorts this
parliament. Fourthly a rebellion cold not be raised, nor succeed without the
help of many. Fifthly the masseprests gave out, that their numbers were great.
Lastly in a book printed a little before the time deseigned for the exequution
of this plot, called 7. sparks of an enkindled soul: and containing prayers
common for all papists, this horrible treason seems to be described psalm. 2.
Confirm your hearts say they, for your redemption is not far of. The year of
visitation draws to an end. and iubilation is at hand. and afterward: But the
memory of novelties shall perish with a crack, as a ruinous house falling to
the ground. and again, he will come as a flame that bursteth out beyond the
furnace, his enemies shall be as stubble in his way. His fury shall fly forth
as thunder. Thus is the gunpowder clap described. The king is is also compared
there to Pharo, that by plagues was forced to let the Jsraelites depart. Little
therefore need we to speak much of the lame fidelity of papists made so
notorious to the world. Notwithstanding seeing this chapter comes among the
rest, let us speak of this lame papists fidelity also.

Now we come, say the petitioners, to the matter of our loyalty, but that this
is an argument, that hitherto they have not atteined to it. they tell us also of
the matter of their loyalty. But neither do they bring any thing material, nor
do their words agree with their doctrine. For in terms they call his majesty
gracious sovereign, and yet make him subject to the pope their souerain Lord
and god, and accuse him diversely for following the late Queen in her hard and
sharp courses, as they call them.

Three ways they assign for a prudent master to try out the honesty and
fidelity of his servant accused of treachery. and yet never a one sufficient.
For neither is it sufficient to make inquisition of his former life and
behavior, nor to look into his present carriage and quality, nor to compare
his actions and comportments with those that traduce him: which are the only
means of trial, which these petitio^ers could devise. But the governors of
state must further look to the treacherous opinions which they defend, and to
the intelligences they have both at home and abroad. further they must look
not only to their own demeanor, but also to the attestations of others.
again little does it make for the clearing of traitors or felons, to show that
their adversaries ar faulty, and no man esteems of a man by outward carriage
and complementes. Finally without sense and feling of true religion and of a
good conscience no man can be truly obedient. as long then as the Papists are
delighted with the vain allurements of the mother of fornications, and trade
with the mass preests and other merchants of Babylon, their loyallty will be
doubtful and their fair looks suspicious, But did we respect no more then
these three points here offered to be considered; yet would it go hard with
the massepreests, and most of the recusants in his majesty's dominions. For the
mass priests have all of them the beasts mark, and are all the slaves of the
pope, and depend wholly upon him: and the recusants and adherents of this
generaton are not clear of suspicion. For first we find, that sense the
year of our Lord 1568, diverse of them have borne arms against their
sovereign; as the lay rebels of the north, and of Ireland, all sworn papists.
Likewise did the rebels in king Henry the 8, his days, that rose about the
suppressing of abbeys, and the rebels of Cornwall and Deuonshiere in King
Edwardes days, that found themselves grieved for want of greasing, crossing,
censing and holy water, and such like ceremonies. Secondly diverse of them have
abandoned their prince and country, and fled to foreign enemies, as the
multitude of wandering English spies and malecontentes through Spain, Italy, and
Flanders does declare. Thirdly it is apparent, that the principal motives to
stir up forrayne princes against the state, have been recusants. the same is
testified in the declaration of Sixtus Quintus against our virtuous and
religious Queen Elizabeth, in the feditious libell of Parsons and Allen to the
nobility and people of England and Ireland, in Sanders his factious book de
schismate, and proved by diverse letters and Negotiatio^s of Englefield, Norton,
Parsons, and others. Fourthly some of this sort came with the Spanish armada
an. D. 1588. and others were to follow. Likewise did they follow the Adelantado
in the enterprise by sea. an. 1598. and of D. Iuan d' Aquila into Jreland.
1600. and much did the foreign enemy depend upon the intelligence and forces of
recusants, as is made evident by the Adelantadoes proclamation. Fifily I hope
the recusa^ts will not deny, but that they have depended in time past, and
purpose still to depend upon the pope, and must be forward in exequuting his
bulls. 6. no small number of Papists have served foreign enemies, and received
pensions from the^: which is no good argument of loyal carriage. 7. the
archpreests faction has long stood for the infa^taes title, against his
majesty, and no doubt retain the same humor still, but that the kings strength
does keep them in tempre. 8: Sa^mier the Iebusite coming disguised into
England, about the year of our Lord 1585. did plot so with diverse principal
recusants in England, as is testisied by the Jesuits catechism, that he
brought his majesty's Mother, and diverse others to their destruction. 9. we
find, that the principal men, that in King Edward the 6. his days hindered the
vnio^ of England and Scotland, and the advancement of the state of late time,
were papists, and that the quarrel about religion has been the chief stay
thereof. 10. every man knows, that the principal contriuers of that treason,
for which Watson, Clerk and Brook were exequuted were preests and reculants.
So likewise were Pearcy, Catesbie, Digby, Tresham and their consorts, that by
fire and gunpowderment to make an end of the King and his Royal progeny. They
were, I say, most refolute, and principal popish recusants, and thought by
fire and gunpowder to make good their Romish faith. And shall any man so far
exceed all duty and modesty to make such fellows loyal? Finally seeing al
papists profess to serve the Pope devoutly, they cannot serve the king
faithfully, that is so contrary to him in religion. For no man can serve two
contrary masters.

To let former practices pass, every papist now is so combined with the Pope,
that he is bound to follow him, and to exequute his censures. Neither if they
were asked the question, would they either condemn former rebellions for
popish religion, being warra^ted by the Pope, or resist the popes forces
inuading us, or stand with the king being excommunicated. But howsoever they
would promise, their doctrine is such, as no loyal subject can hold it. For
their masters teach, that the king is subject to the pope, that the Pope has
power to depose kings and to assoyle subjects from their obedience unto them:
that the king is not to make Ecclesiastical laws, nor to meddle with the
government of the church, but as an exequutioner of the popes laws, that
Ecclesiastical persons and their goods are exempt from the kings government,
and diverse others such dis^oy all points.

Lastly, if we compare popish recusants either with ancient, or modern true
Christians; we shall easily perceive a mayn difference betwixt them. For
neither do we read, that ancient or later Christians did murder their kings,
that were Heathen, nor that they thought it lawful to do such an act, as the
leaguers of France did, nor that they allowed either the breach of oaths, or
the rebellions of subjects against their kings, nor that they believed those
treacherous points of doctrine, which papists of late both believe, and teach.

Now then let us proceed on with our discourse, and consider, whether these lay
papists have either answered these objections, or brought any matter
sufficient to clear them selves, and their consorts from the just imputations
of infidelity, and disloyalty toward their princes. Both which points may be
resolved by examination of the particular points of this fifth chapter, wherein
they tell first, that before their restrainte for recusancy some of them bare
offices in the common wealth, and were dignified by the Queen, and that others
had there putation, of worshipful and honest men. But if they me^t to have
justified their former carriage as they pretended and promised; then should they
have told us of their loyal affection to their prince, and of their good
services performed for their country. They should also as well have mentioned
the cause of populer recusants, as of the gentlemen. But herein they altogether
failed. For neither do they clear themselves nor their co^sorts of those
treacherous practices and doctrines formerly noted, nor are they able to bring
proof of either good affection or good action and service performed for their
prince and country. But where they talk of the diguifiing of many recusants by
the Queen; instead of discharging themselves they charge themselves with great
unthankfulness and disloyalty, that always hated and persequuted her, which
ceased not to dignify and honor them.

Secondly they say their behanior after their restraint was such as became
Catholic Christians toward christian magistrates with all humility, respect,
modesty and subjection. But this would, rather have beseemed some others to
speak, then the lay papists: who for want of good neighbors ruune out into an
high commendation of themselves. Further more neither are prisoners much to be
commended for carrying themselves modestly and respectively, seeing prisons at
no places for men to exceed, and grow proud and rebellious, nor did the papists
(here falsely called Catholics) keep themselves in so good temper, and order,
but that they were to be charged with diverse intelligences, correspondences,
and practices with the enemies of the state. as appears in the records
concerning Throckmorton, Arden, Someruille, Babington, Abington, Parry, Brook,
and others. And although for want of means and occasions they broke not forth
always into open action, yet their modesty and subjection did never so far
restrein the^, but they thought it lawful to kill and murder, and depose princes
excommunicated by the pope, and unlawful to obey such without dispe^satio^,
especialiy in ecclesiastical causes. that therefore which they talk of obeying
princes not for anger but for conscience sake, and of their carriage without
shadow of disloyalty, and of their integrity and vnimpeachable demeanor, is
nothing else, but a vain brag without color or shadow of modesty. For their
conscience is ruled by the popes will, and their practices, treasons, and
rebellions are recorded both in story, and in the Crown office. Furthermore
their treacherous doctrine against the authority of Kings is published in
their own books, and cannot be denied by themselves.

Thirdly they tell his majesty, what offers were made by certain recusantes in
the i will of of Ely, and by the lord Vaux anno 1588. when the Spanish and the
popes forces came against their country. but many things are often offered,
that are slenderly performed and such no doubt, would the service have been
that is or was offered by them, who seared more the Popes thunderboltes, then
the princes double cannons, and only desired to free themselves out of prison,
that they might after take part with the stronger. to desire to be placed in
the forefront of the battle in their shirts, they had no reason, unless they
had meante after they had put of their arms and clothes, to run away more
ligtly. My Lord Vaux was so good a man of war, that I would wish no greater
benefit to England, then that all our enemies were such. But suppose some few
recusants did offer to serve the Queen; yet neither had she reason to trust
them, nor we to believe, that all the rest of the recusants meant to serve her
faithfully, being sworn vassals to the pope her sworn enemy. Unhappy had this
land been, if their prayers and vows had been performed. Foralbeit some
papists then did acknowledge the Queens; authority, notwithstanding the popes
excommunications; yet that was, for that the excommunication did not bind them
until such time, as the Popes bulle might be put in exequntion, as appears
by the faculties granted to Parsons and Campian.

Fourthly out of England they run into Ireland to tell us of the fidelity of
Irish papists. But it appears those men never came there to try it. they
show so great ignorance of the Irish, and of the affairs of Ireland. For in
the battle at Kiusale they cannot name 10. Jrish, that did any great
service. At other times the most part always abandoned and betrayed those that
relied upon them, and ever for one Irish man, that truly served the Queen,
there might be reckened 10. that willingly served the rebels, And this should
the king find at their hands, J fear, if he had occasion to try them If
then these petitioners have no better arguments to prove the fidelity of
recusants then such as these, they will not prove refined gold, nor good
copper, but rather Cork guilt over like gold, or some such other light and
slight stuff good for nothing.

Fifthly they tell his majesty of the affection and behavior of papists toward
his predecessors, himself and his title, neither forgetting King Henry the 7.
nor King Edward the confessor. But all the question being concerning the
modern papists, and their loyalty to princes of contrary religion; who sees
not, how far their discourse runs out, and is transcendent above their
purpose? the welshmen of our time may with better reason allege the noble acts
of Hector and Aeneas, of Troy, or of king Brute, King Arthur, or some ancient
famous man of Britayne, How much they favored the King it appears by diverse
attempts against him in Scotland. and by the treason of Clerk, Watson, Copley,
Brook, Markham, and now lately of Percy, Catesby and others, sense his coming
into England. Parsons and Coluill directly oppugned the Kings title, in books
in print, and to that book, which Parsons set out as is said, in diverse
languages, the Iebusitical faction yielded a great applause. Many of them also
as the seculer priests charged them, subscribed unto it.

Jf then now they pretend to favor the kings title, it is because it were
bootelesse and dangerous now to oppugn it. likewise the papists, that
heretofore wrote and spoke in defense of his Majesty's Mother, and of the
Kings title, respected nothing else, but their own particular, thinking by
their glosing words, either to bring in Popery, or to advance their own
private pretenses. Finally they show, they have great Confidence in his
Majesty's clemency, that, they have refused to pay the twenty pound a month due
for recusancy, albeit the penalty be great.

But here they should rather allege cause to move the King to trust them,
then to show, that they may assuredly trust the Kings mercy, whose Clemency is
so exceeding, and word so assured. Further this rather argues their
disobediente, and repugning humor, then justifies their sober disposition and
desire to be loyal. Lastly they show a great difference betwixt the gentle
proceeding of true christians, that with light penaltyes seek to win men,
and are slow in exacting them, and the rigor and cruelty of papists that
confiscate all the Lands and goods of true Christians, and most barbarously
torment and massacre their persons without pity or mercy. Jf then our lay
papists have no better defenses nor prete^ces for their fidelity, then they
have formerly alleged, their own words will rather convince them, then
clear them, and such, as had no evil opinion of recusants before, will take
occasion to suspect, that this stubble of theirs is nothing, but a cover for
the seed of much hartburning, coffeehouse and disloyalty, as their billetts.
and fagots of late were laid to cover their barrels of gunpowder couched under
the higher house of Parliament.

Chap. 20. An answer to the petitioners calumniations agayust the professors
of the Gospel set down in the 6. chapter of their popish apologetical,
petition.
IT were a most simple defense for a prisoner standing at the Bar of justice,
and answering for his life before his judges, to allege for his defense, that
his behavior is as honest and loyal, as that of his accusers. Yet this is the
best defense, which these Massepriests under the mask of lay papists make in
this place, supposing very absurdly the accusation of their adversaries to be a
justification and defense of their own actions. Nay where they pretend to deal
against their accusers, they mistake the matter utterly, and speak against
such, as are long since departed this life, and never either accused them, or
knew them, and inueigh against the ministers of the Church of England, which
are not parties against them, leaving the kings sergeants and attorney to speak
what they list, and aunswering nothing to their informations, accusations, and
enditements, which principally touch them. But will you hear their wooden and
weak accusation against us, as it follows?

Chapter 6. The carriage and behavior of our Accusers.
IT rests now lastly to consider what has been the behavior of some of our
Your accusers are your own consciences, and the kings Attorney, and other
officers. The Ministers accuse you not, but answer your sooleries.
accusers (the Ministers we mean, The carriage of our Antagonists.
and some hot spirits of their adherents and followers) from time to time in
your majesty's affairs (that has so cherished, dignified and advanced them)
and to other their lawful Princes, that have not so fully concurred with them
in matter of religion as your Majesty does, vt contraria iuxta se posita magis
elucescant, that contraries compared together may the more clearly appear.

If you demand what they were that accounted it a matter treasonable to retain
any book or paper in favor of your Majesty's Title, and that in public books
called your Mothers right to this Crown a pretended Title. Agendum est
chsignatis tabulis: and we must needs tell you that it was a A goodly denise,
all the professors of religion must answer for a student in Lions Inn.
Student of Lions Inn a Lawyer by profession, and a Protestant in Religion,
that in a book printed Anno 1584. and entitled ( A discovery of treasons
against the Queens Majesty by Frances Throgmorton) amongst other his treasons,
he reckons this for one in these words. There were also sound among other
his papers 12. petegrees of the descent of the Crown of England printed and
published by the Bishop of He oppugned Queen Elizabeth's right.
Rosse in the defense of the pretended Title of the Scottish Queen his
Mistrisse. What could be more unjust and injurious to that blessed Lady and all
her posterity, then in a book printed in defense of an execution of justice,
to call her Title false pretended and unjust, and account the cuidences and
records thereof as treason in the highest degree?

If inquiry be made who they were that in prejudice of your But first of Queen
Mary's and Queen Elizabeth's right.
Majesty's right to this Crown did set up the usurping Queen Ianc, descended
from the younger sister of your Majesty's great Grandmother, that was the eldest
daughter to King Henry the vij. Our histories tell us that they were The Duke
of Northumb. the Dukes of Somerset, Suffolk, and other Protestants, and all the
Protest. Bishops, Clergy and Council, of K. Edward and principally the
clergy.
enemies Then it appears, that papists were enemies to the catholic faith
For they were principal actors therein.
to the Catholic faith which we profess, and the first aduancers of the new
Religion in this Country.

If we call to mind the complotters and compassers of the murder committed on
the Person of your Highness His Majesty's Father and Grandfather slain.
Father and Grandfather, and the barbarous butchering of your Mothers Secretary
in her Royal presence, and the miraculous escape of your Graces person by Gods
singular protection, when a His Majesty pursued in his Mothers womb, and
miraculously preserved.
charged pistol put to your Mothers womb by one of the traytorous race of the
Govvries, to have destroyed you both at one blow, could not give fire; we find
by the printed monumentes of Scottish Annals that the actors, authors, and
inuentors of those tragedies were not of the Catholic religion.

If we demand who they were that took The Ministers and Presbitery authors of
these tumults.
arms against your Majesty's gracious Mother, that overthrew her in the field,
that laid violent hands upon her sacred Person, and imprisoned her in
Lavvgbleuen that deprived her of her Crown, and expelled her out of her
Kingdom, and procured afterward her captivity in this Realm: no man is
ignoraunte that the The Earl or Moray, Knox the catalin of Scotland
Bastard of Scotland with the Presbitery and that runnegate Friar John Knox,
mortal enemies to all order, rule, and authority, were the Architects of
these detestable actions.

How zealous Bothvvel and Govvry, two pillars of the Presbiterie.
Bothvvell and Govvry were against pore Catholics; and what pillars and
patrons they were of the Presbiterie, the world knows, but your Majesty by
experience can best restifie what perilous, turbulent, and seditious members
they were of the common wealth, and how often your sacred Person was endangered
by them, and others of their profession

Moreover, we hope that we may without offense to any, confidently affirm,
that they were not Catholics that caused your Mothers untimely death: the
memory of which times, for many respects we had forborne to touch, but only
to remove the odious and unjust imputations, diuulged in the time of this
present session of Parliament against us in a certain libell, or rather a
clamorous calumnious inuectiue, published in this present session of
Parliament, against a most modest, learned, and submissiue supplication
dedicated to your Majesty in March last: where the Libeller calls Catholics
to the Bar, and would have them indighted, and pasle their trial for that
matter: But justified by proof, and testimony of a man of more credit, then
Colebranded Coleton, or any of these libellers.
Sutcliffes own words in the 8. chapter of his said libel
Which done (says he) his majesty may easily perceive that they are to be
hated, and abhorred as causers and contriuers of all his mothers troubles and
calamities, his proofs are the author of the Jesuits Catechism The author of
that catechism an inueterate enemy of that order, and therefore more credulous
the^ convenient in matter of their dishonor.
written in disgrace of that order, which book is of as great credit (with But
these tender consciences make no scruple to rebel against princes
excommunicated by the Pope and to say, that he has power to depose kings and
to translate kingdoms.
men of tender consciences, and upright carriage in matter of truth and equity)
as Lucians Dialogues, Will you deny the testimony of a popish martyr, and a
conspirator against the king?
VVatsons Quodlibets, or Esopes fables, and what this Catechiste wrote of
private passion, without any authentical warrant, this Libeller does urge
with the like perturbation. And here (Dread Sovereign) we might as readily, as
lively, produce a world of inuinceable proofs in reproof of this You that are
libellers in print have no reason to charge others with your own falts, and
yet to answer nothing.
Libeller, by proving the actors of that complotment and tragical proceeding
not to have been any one of them Catholics, or their welwillers, but (we
carefully shunning to charge any with bloody imbrumems in that lamentable fact
of Englands agony,) and only to free our selves from that most odious,
impudent, and false calumniation, we soly resort to matter of highest record,
daily extant to be seen of all men in public printed statutes, being the
forerunners of that strange execution of your blessed and most glorious
Mother. Whereby it is most evident and well known ( Are papists blear eyed, and
pollers of crowns? true Christians certes know no such matters.
etiam lippis and tonsoribus) to blind men and barbers, that they were not How
prove you they were not papists?
Catholics that made and enacted those statutes of the thirteenth of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, for the 13. Elizabeth Limitation of the right of the Crown.
limitation of the right of the Crown, to the disposition of the Lords and
Parliament from the free right and course of blud and descent. That made it
treason in the same Parliament, to Treason to say that the persons Titles and
possibilities of all pretenders to the Crown be not subject to the acts made in
Parliament.
hold or say that the common laws of England, and statures to be made in
Parliament, are not of sufficient validity to govern the persons, and to bind
and limit the Titles of any that has any possibilitye to the Crown.

They were not Catholics that made it treason in the same Parliament,
Reconciliation, treason.
to absolve from sin and reconcile, or to be so absolved or reconciled. Agnus
Dei Beads, or Crosses praemunire.
A praemunire to bring in any tokens called Agnus Dei, or Crosses, Pictures, or
hallowed Beads, or to have or receive them.

They were not Catholics that the 23. of Queen Elizibeths Reign made it
treason 23. Elizabeth treason to persuade men to the1 Catholic religion.
to persuade men to the Popery makes many of her professors rather
cuckoldlike, then Catholic.
Catholic religion, and the loss of 200. marks to hear 200 marks for saing,
100 marks for hearing a maasse.
Mass, or to pay xx. pound monthly so: xx. pound a month for recusancy.
refusing to go to the Protestants service: or the forfeites of x. pound
monthly for such as should keep any x. pound a month for keeping a
schoolmaster.
Schoolmaster not allowed by the Bishop of the Dioces, and refusing to go to
Church.

They were not Catholics who made an act 27. of the said Queen by virtue
whereof your gracious 27. Eliz. the act was made which caused the death of his
Majesty's Mother.
Mother lost her life; and in the same Parliament it was made treason for all
In the same year it was made treason to be a Priest and com in or remain in the
land, and felony to receive or relieve them.
Priests or Religious men that had taken orders by any These orders taken from
the Pope and his adherents, marking priests in the crown, were the marks of
Antichrist.
foraigne authority, to remain or come into this Kingdom, and felony to
relieve or entertain them.

It was made treason to be brought up in the Seminaries, praemunire to send
thither any relief.

In the 28. of the said Queen, it was enacted that the two parts of the lands
and leases of such recusants, as should fail to pay the xx. pound a month in
the Exchequor at the terms prefixed, should be seized into the Queens hands.

In the 35. it was enacted that every 25. Elizab. certain recusants were by an
act then made to abjure the Realm.
recusant, above the age of sixteen years, being not worth twenty Marks
(exceeding his confined limittes) should abjure the Realm, and if he refused
to abjure or returned after abjuration, to be accounted a fellon.

Item that the party should pay ten pound a month that Ten pound a month
for keeping a recusant in the house.
keeps any recusant in his house after warning.

In the same Parliament, recusants are The same year was the statute of
confinements enacted.
restrained to their certain usual, and common places of abode, and are not
to remove above five miles thence without license of the Bishop and two
Justices, upon pain of forfaiting of all their goods, and all their free and
coppyhold lands, and annuities during life: and all such recusants that had not
lands of twenty marks value by year, or goods of forty pound, if they
conformed not themselves, or repaired not to their places of limitation, shall
abjure the Realm. By the course and contriuing of such capital and cruel laws
at the same time, and in the same sessions, as well against Catholics, as
against your gracious Mother; it seems by all probability (to persons
esteemed of judgment and great experience, in the insighte of worldly drifts
both in this Realm, and in foreign Regions) that the principal mark which
was aimed at in those times, was at the self same season by severity and
shadow of the same laws an instance to ruinate and overthrow the The person of
his Majesty's Mother, her right and Title and the Catholics cause, all shot at
by the same laws, and at the same time.
person of your gracious Mother and her right, and the professors of the
Catholic religion; supposing that those three must either stand or fall
together of necessity: but non est consilium contra Dominum: there is no
council against God: her right and posterity has (God be thanked) prevailed,
and the poor Catholics from that time to this, the more they have bin
oppressed, the more they have increased, which cannot fall out otherwise,
unless it prove false which God has said by the mouth of his Saints and
servants: Preciosa in conspectu Domini mors Sanctorum eius, precious in the
sight of our Lord is the death of his Saints. Et sanguis These fellows know
not what belongs to martyrs, that write martirum, and put Traitors in the
catalogue of martyrs.
Martirum semen Ecclesiae, the blood of Martyrs, the seed of the Church. We
accuse no man in particular in this case, and could have been content: vlcus
hoc intactum leuiter pertransire, to have slightly past over this boch
untouched, but that this respondent would needs deal with us, as Putifars The
libeller like Joseph his Mistrisse, and Susannaes judges.
wife did with holy Joseph, or the carnal judges with the chaste Susanna,
(viz.) put us to our plunges, and purgations for such crimes, as were proper
and peculiar unto themselves.

Never was it heard of that in England or Scotland any Minister or Ministers
ever suffered any thing for that gracious Lady, or your majesty's Title, but
infinite are the In Scotland, Setons, Gordens, Simples, Maxuelles.
families of the catholics that have suffered for them both. As the Seatons,
the Gordens, the Simples, the Maxuells in Scotland: the In England, Hawards,
Persies, Pagets, Treshams, Throgmortons, Salisburies, Abington, Winsor.
Havvards, Persies, Vauxes, Pagets, Treshams, Throgmortons, VVinsors,
Sclisburie, Abington, and diverse other worthy Gentlemen in this Land, the
shipwracks of whose opulent abundant states and fortunes, are invincible
testimonies of the Libellers falsehood and folly in this his objection, and of
the constant fidelity of Catholics to your Majesty and al your race and
predecessors, in all their fortunes whatsoever.

And thus your Majesty does see the comparison of our former times, and our
precedent behauiours, with our present affection and future assurance: If then
we be not rewarded, and respected as all others are of other professions that
have done their duties, as we did, in advancing your Majesty's affairs, and
acknowledging your rightful Authority: yet at the least we hope that it will
not be thought reasonable, that we should be left in the same As long as you
believe in the mass, that is a mass of superstition, idolatry and foolery,
you must needs be subject to a mass of misery.
mass of misery, which your majesty found us in at your entrance.

Make us then (Sweet Soueraign) as able as we are willing to serve you, not by
new dignities and authorities, but by restoring us to our In Spain and Italy
our brethren, that proses true christian religion, neither enjoy honors, nor
goods nor lands nor liberty, nor life
pristine honors, and honest reputations, and to our birthright freedom, and
liberty by your only Peerles justice, clemency, and benignity; permitting us
to live in peace, and come dear buccellam nostram sine dolor, to put a bit of
meat into our mouths without sorrow, without flights, without flights, and
without circumuentions of our Adversaries: our wounds are so deep and
dangerous in matters of our honors, states, and liberties, that no Physician
can cure us but your self with the sovereign balm of your renowned
clemencye. What pleasure or profit can redownd to your Majesty's person or
estate, if we your approved and assured servants and subjects Many hane been
satted in prison, fevv have rotted in prison, though committed for treason, and
not religion.
lot in prison, die in banishment, and live in penury and disgrace; for no
other crime or offense, but for the constante profession of that Religion,
which in conscience we are persuaded to be the only true worship of God, and
salvation of our souls? Of which our faith and belief, we have rendered so You
have only told false reports, and fabulous conccits of your own brains dennyd
of reason.
sufficient reason, that we hope, it will fully satisfy and content, so wise,
learned, politic, and discreet a Prince, as your Majesty has showed your
self to be in all occasions presented to make trial thereof, which makes us
the more confident in our just and reasonable defense,, because we sue to a
most wise, just and learned Monarch.

And albeit more then this can hardly be required of men whose fidelities are
so sufficiently tried and testified (as appears by the whole substance and
tenor of this our Apology,) yet pro abundantiore cautela we humbly lay down at
your Majesty's feet in form of submission, and security following, in behalf
of our Precsts and pastors.

The answer to the 6. Chapter.
THJS is the sum of this quarrelsome accusation, flender in comparison of the
matters objected, and witless in respect of the handling of it, as the sequel
will declare. First they accuse a student of Lions Inn, a lawyer by
profession. as they call him. But what is this to us? Nay what is that to the
Ministers they speak of? Further they sold know, that there is some
difference betwixt students of Lions Inn and lawyers: betwixt the Innes of
court and chancery, but that they lack law and experience. This lawyer by
profession, as they, say in a discourse of treasons against the Queens Majesty
by Francis Throckmorton, tells how there were found among other his papers,
12 pedegrees of the descent of the Crown of England printed and published by
the Bishop of Rosse in the defense of the pretended title of the Scottish
Queen his Mistress, But whether they say true or no god knows. Neither need
we to examine it, the matter concerning us nothing. And yet if these men in
those times should have discredited Queen Elizabeth's title, and preferred
another before her, they would hardly have answered the matter, if they had
been called to Tiburne for it, Neither if this students offense be so great,
which only tells matter of fact, will they be able to clear Parsons and many
recusants in England, that have heertofore allowed that traytorous book of
titles which infringeth the kings title, that now reigns in despite of all
his oppugners.

Next they mention the attempt of the duke of Northumberland for setting up the
Lady Jane against Queen Mary, and thereto add a commemoration of the execrable
murder of the Kings father and gra^dfather, with the^ also they conioyn David
the Queens Secretary, as they call him. Lastly they run out into a large
discourse of James the base brother of the late Queen of Scotts, of Bothwel,
Gowry and others, that in time past made some attemptes against the King and
his mother. But what makes all this, J pray you, to the ministers of England,
against whom they pretend to frame their odious accusation? did not the duke
of Northumberland, as they say, dye a papist? and was he not assisted and
followed by more papists then true Christians? Furthermore did not the Earl
Gowry bring with him the seeds of popery, witchcraft, co^iuration, yea and of
Atheism out of Jtaly? and was not Bothwell an hypocrite at least in religion
as well as? a traitor in his rebellion? but had they done wickedly, we are not
to justify their particular actions, neither can these accusers justify their
absurd discourse, joining to gether matters so unlike, and so far from the
purpose, and in some points making against them selves. David was no man fit
to be joined with kings. James the Queens brother was wickedly murthred by a
practice of papists. that the Kings grandfather was murthred, we cannot learn.
they were none of our religion certes, that laid hands either upon his
majesty's father, or gra^dfather-likewise his majesty's mother was brought into
trouble by the practice of Sa^mier a wicked Iebusite, as is testified by him
that wrote the Iebusites Catechism, a papist and a man of more credit and
learning, the^ these libelling lay papists, and therefore not so easily to be
shaken of. But if they will not believe him, nor Watson a Martyr of their
Church, yet I hope they will believe pius Qnintus his letters extant in his
life written by Hierome Catena, and showing that she was animated in those
courses by the pope and his faction, of which any man may gather, what were the
causes of her calamity. the same also may be proved by histories, and all the
proceedings in that cause, which J forbear to relate, least I should offend,
as these libellers do, without all respect of persons refreshing the kings
grief, and speaking of matters, which he most graciously has forgotten.

Lastly they mention certain statutes made partly for the settling of the
title of the Crown, and partly to meet with the seditions and conning
practices of papists, which with reconciling men to the pope and by diverse
notes of faction, as agnus deies, beads, graynes and such like sought to unite
their consorts to stir up tumults, and to make a side to depose Queen
Elizabeth. But all this rehersall of laws, as it shows the great or rather
necessary occasions given to the state to make laws against factions preests
and their adherents, so it makes nothing for the cause in hand, seeing the
peace of the land was thereby confirmed, and the Kings right no way
prejudiced. But if the Masseprestes and the Popes agents had been left at
liberty to found the popes kingdom within England; then if the King had not
found geate trouble at his entrance, yet should he have felt half his
authority and kingdom shared by the pope,

This discourse therefore proceeding from men adverse to the state, and
favorable to foreign enemies, and dealers for the Jnfantaes title, as is
recorded in diverse books, and proved by diverse witnesses, and known by good
experience, does plainly declare the authors thereof to want shame, modesty,
reason and wit. For if they had not wanted shame; then would they have blushed
to charge others with disloyalty, themselves being unable to discharge
themselves. if they had not wanted modesty, they would have contented
themselves with present favors being such as they afforde not to our brotheren
in other countries, and not sought audaciously to have dignity, honor and
further liberty, Jf they had not wanted reason, they would not have said,
that they have yielded sufficient reason for their religion. and finally if
they had not wanted wit, they would no have undertaken to accuse innocents,
themselves being guilty, nor would they have compleyned of wounds deep and
dangerous in their honors, being honored above their desert, nor would they
have called the King Sweet Sovereign, or once mentioned Souereinty,
considering that they over throw the kings Souereinty, and make him the popes
subject by their doctrine. but yet that passes all the rest of their
fooleries, that not being able to clear themselves nor having spoken one word
in defense of their sacrificing preests, and Iebusites; now in the conclusion
of their request, they speak for them also. for mass preests, I say which
contrived the kings destruction, by the practice of Clerck, and Watson, and
lately absolved Percy, Catesby, Tressam, and their accomplices, which went about
to blow up the King, Queen, Prince, and high Court of Parliament with
gunpowder, to massacre true Christians, to alter laws and to over throw the
state.

Chap. 21. The insufficiency and foolery of the submission promised by lay
papists to the king, is examined and refuted.
THere is no chapter, nor almost clause of this petition of lay papists,
whereto we may not take just exception. But yet if we do put them altogether
and compare them with the 7. Chapter wherein they offer to be bound for the
King and his Kingdom, and to tender a submission to his majesty, for his
satisfaction; this will pass all the rest in fooolery and absurdity. listen
therefore, I pray you and hear what they say for their massepreestes, and how
they secure the kings person and Crown from the treachery of their shaven
Crowned treacherous mass priests.

Chap. 7. The form of the Catholics submission.
IF we may be permitted to enjoy some quiet, grave, The lay Catholics
submission.
and virtuous Clergy men for the comfort of our souls, we doubt not but to
give your Majesty a far greater security for the few hundreds of our Priests,
then was given for the many thousands of Queen Mary's Priests, and Prelates in
the late queen Elizabeth's days; against whom, albeit above Abate nine
thousand.
10000. Clergy men left their livings, rather then they would leave their
religion.
ten thousand of them, did abandon their Ecclesiastical Livings, rather then
they would conform themselves to the times (especially the All Queen Mary
Bishops forsook their Prelatures, rather then they would forsake their chief
Pastor.
holy Senate of Bishops no one excepted) yet in the time of the said Queen, for
the space of thirty years extreme and restless You are extremely ungrateful,
that suffer not our late gracious Queen to rest, that alvvayes favored you to
her own hurt.
persecution, no capital laws were made or executed. And in the The book in
tituled execution for treson, and not for religion, made by the late Lord
Burleigh.
book entitled Execution for treason and not for Religion, composed and set
forth by the late L. Burleigh then high Treasurer of England, on whom for his
great wisdom and policy, the menaging of the Commonwealth of this Realm
(under the Queen principally depended) Anno. 1583. and Anno Regni Eliz. 26. it
is in express words set down what favor these Priests found, in terms as
follows. And though there are many subjects known in the Realm that differ
in some opinions of Religion from the Church of England, and yet do also not
for hear to profess the saeme; yet in that they do all profess loyalty and
obedience to her Majesty, and offer readily in her defense to oppugn and
resist any foreign force, though it should come or be procured from the Pope
himself, None of Q. Mary's priests or Prelates persecuted for religion.
none of these sort are for their contrary opinions in Religion persecuted, or
charged with any crimes or pains of treason, not yet willingly searched in
their consciences for their contrary opinions that savor not of treason. After
which Narration, he reckons up great numbers, as D. Heath, Archbishop of
York.
D. Heath, Archbishop of York, B. Poole. B. Tunstall, B. White, B. Oglethrop,
B. Thurlby, B. Watson, B. Turberuill: none of all these were pressed with
any capital pain, though they maintained the Popes authority, against the
laws of the Realm: he recounteth Abbot Feenam.
one Abbot and diverse Deanes, whom he commends for learning, modesty and
knowledge, and concludes that none None of all these held or punished as
traitors, though they maintained the Popes authority against the laws of the
Realm.
of these, nor yet diverse others of the like moral, and indifferent carriage,
were ever called to any capital, or bloody question upon matter of Religion;
nor were not deprived of any of their goods, or proper liuelihoods: of the like
indulgence and lenity mention is made in the same book, used toward the
layety in wonderful pleasing words as follows.

There are great numbers of others being lay men and of good possessions in
Lands, and men of credit in their countries, that do enjoy their estates,
though they houlde contrary opinions in Religion for the Popes authority, and
yet none of them have been sought hitherto to be impeached in any point or
quarrel of treason, or loss of life, member, or inheritance: So that it may
plainly appear, it is not, nor has not been for contrary opinions in
Religion; or for the Popes authority alone (as the Adversaries do boldly and
falselie publish) that every person has suffered death since her Majesty's
Reign: yet some of this sort are well known to hold opinion, that the Pope
ought by authority of Gods word, to be supreme and only head of the
Catholic Church throughout the whole world, and that the Queens Majesty ought
not to be To deny the Queen to be supreme gouernesse over Ecclesiastical
persons not persecuted with charge of treason.
gouernesse over any her subjects in her Realms, being persons
Ecclesiastical: yet for none of these points has any person been persecuted
with the charge of treason or in danger of life.

If then this were the case of Queen Mary's priests, and other quiet and
faithful subjects in the late Queens days, we hope that our Priests (being
as well qualified in all respects to our Princes good liking and satisfaction,
as they were; both for quiet behavior, civil life, and sincere affection to
your Majesty's service) may for our comfort obtain as much grace now, as they
The case is unlike, they never turned Italienated devils, nor held intelligence
with foreign enemies
did then, without any such assurance as our Priests shall put in. And to make
the case yet more clear and uncontrollable; we add further, that since No
religion can consist without Priests and Pastors.
no Religion ever did or could consiste without Your Priests are no Pastors,
neither had the ancient christian Church any such sacrificing shaven, and
greasy Mass Priests.
Priests, Pastors, and men to whom the disposition of divine mysteries did
belong, we hope that our desire to have the benefit of such Clergy men, as
may stand with the safety of our Prince and country, is conformable to reason,
as commanded by the rules of conscience, charity, and Christianity.

And that it may be more apparent to the world, that this our lowly Christian
desire, and humble demand, shall not any ways be prejudicial to your
Majesty's Royal person or estate, we None but plain ideotes will make this
offer.
offer to answer person for person, and life for life, for every such Priest
The Catholics offer for their Priests.
as we shall make election of and be permitted to have in our several houses,
for their fidelity to your Majesty and to the state; by which means your
Majesty may be assured both of our number, and carriage of all such Priests as
shall remain within the Realm, for whom (it is not credible) that we would
so deeply engage our selves without full knowledge of their dispositions: their
being here by this means shall be public, the places of their abode certain,
their conversation and carriage subject to the eyes of the Bishops, Ministers,
and Justices of peace in every province and place where they shall live: by
which occasion, there may probably arise a kind of virtuous, and not altogether
unprofitable emulation between our Priests and your Ministers, who shall
exceed and excel the other in virtuous living, and exemplarity of life, and
other acts and exercises of piety and devotion, which must needs turn to the
edification of the people, and extirpation of vice; and we shall be so much the
more circumspect and careful of the comportments of our said Priests, as our
estate and security does more directly depend upon their honesties and
fidelities.

To conclude, we do and ever will (Redoubted Prince) acknowledge your Majesty
our lawful King and Soueraign Lord, and will Catholics opposition against all
pretenders.
defend and maintain your Maiestis Heirs and your Successors possession, right,
and Title, with life and lively hoode against all But such as are invested by
the Pope in the right of any crown, are not taken for pretenders.
pretendants to the contrary.

Furthermore, we will As you have done hitherto declaring the kings secrets to
foreign enemies; and as the Mass Priests did in Percies treason.
Their profer to reveal and withstand all treasonable attempts.
reveal, and to our powers withstand and prevent any conspiracy, or intended
treason against the person of your Majesty, your Heyrs and Successors, and we
will to our power defend your Realms and Dominions against all invasions, or
foreign enemies, upon what pretense soever.

We do, and will acknowledge due unto your Majesty from us, whatsoever is due
for a subject unto his Prince and Sovereign, either by the law of nature, or
by the word of God, or has been used by any Catholic subject toward your
Highness Catholic Progenitors; and this we will perform by protestation. The
Pope can dispense with both, as they believe.
The catho likes oath, and protestation.
oath, or in such other manner, as shall seem best to your Majesty.

And this same oath and protestation, our Priests so permitted, But what if
they break their oaths? then are they perjured, and the state without remedy.
What goodly satisfaction is this?
shall take before they be admitted into our houses, otherwise they shall not
have relief of us.

In this sort (we doubt not) but that your Majesty may both in honor and
security, take protection of our persons, mitigate our former afflictions, and
be assured of our future loyalties, loves, and affections, if you but please to
rake the view (which your majesty may do in this our Apology) of the rules of
our These rules declare you to be the Popes slaves, and the kings enemies.
Doctrine and Religion, in those cases of the experience of our former actions,
and of the Or rather absurd, and full of foolish complements.
absolute complete form of this our submission and allegiance: which Bands as
they are most voluntary on our parts, so are they far Voluntary submission far
to be preferred before counterfeit conformity.
more honorable, profitable, and durable for your Highness security, then all
the laws and rigours in the world.

And to say the truth, what greater glory or triumph can so magnanimious a
Monarch as your Majesty is, have in this world, then to see and behold so many
I hope many douzins will not subscribe this absurd and disleall petition
thousands of your faithful Citizens and subjects, manumitted from servitude,
resuscitated (as it were) from their sepulchers, recalled from banishment,
delivered from prisons, rendered to their wives and children, and restored to
their pristine honors, and honest reputations, by your Majesty's only peerles
Clemency and benignity; and to march before your A pore triumph he is like to
receive by these men's services. Persie meant to send him with fire and
gunpovvder to heaven.
triumphall chariot, with all insignes of liberty, love, freedom, joy, and
estimation? of whose affections your Majesty can be no less assured, then a
merciful Father of dutiful children. Quos genuit in visceribus charitatis and
pietatis suae: whom he has begotten in the bowels of his charity and piety.

And if that renowned Roman was wont to say, that he had rather More glory in
saving one Citizen, then in va^quishing a camp of enemies.
save the life of one Citizen, then overcome a whole camp of his enemies, what
now shall your Majesty gain in giving life and liberty to so many thousands
(who are sick of the late Queens evil) whom no physic can cure, but the
sacred hands of our anointed King, and are like to the Cicero the praetor and
patron of Sicily.
Sicilians, whom none but Cicero, or the Flaminius restored the Grecians to
their ancient liberties.
Grecians Graeci semper mendaces so are these fellows in the tales of greeks
and Sicilians, and of their legends.
whom none but Flaminius could deliver from the heavy yoke, and insupportable
servitude, which the Pretors and Princes their predecessors had imposed upon
them.

We are but half men, if men at all, whom in these later days and times no
man durst defend, countenance, conuetse with, or employ, and (as your Majesty
has well said) we are in deed but half subjects, not that our bodies, minds,
wills, wits, understandings, senses, memories, judgments, intentions; or our
breaths, bloods, or lives are divided, or deuouted to the supreme honor or
service of any terrene Is the pope a terrene creture if he be how can you say,
that you are not devoted to his supreme service?
creature, other then your Majesty only but that the In what sense the
Catholics may be called half subjects.
better-halfe of our livings, goods, friends, and fortunes, wherewith we should
be the better able, and have greater courage to serve your Majesty, are taken
from us, and yet your Majesty's coffers little the better therefore.

Our desire then is (most gracious Prince) to become your Majesty's whole
Hitherto then you are not come to be subjects.
subjects, and your Majesty may so make us in the twinkling of your eye, or
stamp of your foot, wherewith you are able to raise up more Not one true
papist may serve the king, if the Pope excommunicate him But to omit this case,
if papists can raise vparmies so easily in England, it is time to look to
them. Let us remember Persies late treason.
armies, then ever Pompey the great could do (from whom the metaphor is
borrowed) in all his pomp and presumptuous pride.

Vouchsafe then (Dread Sovereign) to make us as others your subjects are of
all professions, The conclusion, with an Apostrophe to his majesty
entire and absolute You must be founded in another mould then popery, if you
will become true Euglishmen
Englishmen; for nothing (by Gods holy assistance) can or ever shall divide us
from our subjection and dutiful affection to your Majesty, but death which is
vltima linea rerum, the last period of all things: for all other deuisions we
renounce, from all other services Will you leave to serve Saints, images, and
the pope? you may not without renouncing popery.
we disclaim, but that only which is due to God in the supernatural course
of our salvation, which being governed by secret influences, and supernatural
concurrences of his grace, we alot to God without disparagement to your
Majesty, assuring our selves that your Majesty (so conversant in all good
writers, and perfect Theology) is well assured, that there is no division so
honorable for a Prince, as that which was attributed long sithence to Caesar,
and now is not improperly applied to your Majesty.

Jupiter in coelu, Caesar regit omnia terris
Diuisum imperium cum This is a profane speech, and repugneth to the words of
scripture. Further it cannot well stand with the words of decretales.
Jove Caesar habet.
Whiles this Apology or Petition was a printing, there came to my hands the
copy of a Letter written by the late banished Priests, to the Lords of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Council; which for the coherence of the
argument, I thought good to annexe hereunto.

The examination of the 7. chapter.
THE matter handled in this chap. is of more consequence then all the rest. For
therein they crave an immunitye or toleration for their massing Priests, to
which no man, that is truly religious can be enduced to yield, although he
could be content to yield any lawful favor to the rest. For albeit seduced
souls ar to be pitied, and may percase be reclaimed from their haggarrd popish
superstition; yet no man has reason to tolerate seducers and gross idolaters,
especially when they depend upon foreign enemies, and are gresed and marked
for the popes slaves, and have heretofore been blotted both wiith treacherous
doctrines, and treasonable practices. The treason first of Watson, and Clerk,
and lately of Garnet, Hall, Hamond and others that consorted with Percy and his
accomplices does demonstrate this to be true. But yet no part of the petition is
more loosely or foolishly handled. For first in this conclusion they inuolue a
request for their masseprests, having spoken nothing of them before which is
alone, as if they should conclude without premises.

Secondly they require some quiet, grave, and virtuous clergy men for the
comfort of their souls. But this is spoken against the polshorne Prestes of
Antichrist. For they are not quiet, but turbulent and seditious, they are not
grave, but light and giddy headed, ready to run up the gallows for the Popes
service. They are not virtuous, but base, filthy and lecherous fellows. and
this is proved by diverse particulers. Finally the confort of Christian men's
souls confisteth not in faculties, indulgences, popish absolutions and such
antichristian trash as they bring, but in Christ's sweet promises, and in
apostolic doctrine, and comfortable words of true preachers and to such if
they would open their ears, they should have both quiet, grave and virtuous
clergy men, and true and godly pastors also.

Thirdly they tell us, what favors were done to Queen Maryes Preests,, and
other lay men affected to popery, especially in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign. But they could not do us a greater favor, or themselves
greter dishonor, the^ to mention these matters. For first they testify against
themselves Queen Elizabeth's great Cleme^cy, that spared the^, who had dealt so
rigorously her self and others, and did not proced against the papists, before
they began to practice and attempt against her Secondly we seeheerin, that al
favor done to papists is lost, as bestowed upon vngratful persons, and enemies
irreconciliable. We may deal mercifully with the^, and give the^ life, that
otherwise would perish. But if they have once the sword in their hands, they
satiffy the^ selves with nothing but the death and destruction of such, as
profess the truth. But to let this pass, little does the example of Queen
Maryes preests relieve the^. For they were made preests at home, these by
foreign enemies. they acknowledged the princes supreme authority, these defend
the authority of the Pope. They depe^ded on the princes grace and favor: these
depend on the popes grace, and withal their forces defend his authority they
offended of ignorance notknowing the truth, these of malice running out of
their country, and oppugning a truth once known. They professed a plain kind
of popery, and were not factiously disposed. these are factious compagnions,
and profess a more desperate kind of doctrine newly forged in the conue^ticle
of Trent. Finally they acknowledged the Queens mercy: these bark at her being
dead, and never ceased to work against her being alive. For proof of the
conformity of their petition to reason, they add in the fourth place, that no
religion did or cold ever consist without priests and pastors. But what is
that to these preests of Baal, that at no true Prcests succeeding the Apostles
in teching and administering sacraments according to christ's institution, but
idolatrous sacrificers ordained by Antichrist to offer for quick and ded? again
what is that to these murdrers bloudsuckers, that are no pastors, but rather
gunpowder traitors, sheepbiters, and destroyers of Christ his flock? Lastly if
they seek for true pastors indeed, why do they forsake the bishops and preests
of the Church of England, which indeed have both the calling,, and exequute the
function of true Bishops and pastors, and run after these wolves, murdrers
and deuourers of Christ's sheep?

Fifthly they offer to answer person for person, and life for life for the
fidelity of their preests to his majesty, and the state. But what if the
preests absolve traitors, and persuade them to rebellion? where shall the state
seecke either for the parties or sureties? And what shall it avail to sue the
bonds? Again what a ridiculous conceit is this to think that the bonds of
every two or three base compagnions will be sufficient to secure either the
life of so great a king, or the peace and state of so great a kingdom
against men already found perfidious? Thirdly it will be a question, whether if
such a matter were to be performed, every pild crowned priest could procure
such hostages and bonds as are offered. it may be some good old Ladies and
recusant Cuckowes would offer any bond for their darlinges. But the wiser sort,
J think, would never put their lives in hazard upon the massepreests
promises, who if the pope command them to do an exployt for their holy mother
the mother of fornications, regard neither promise, nor oath.

Finally it may be a question, whether any such bonds are good in law, and
percase these good fellows knowing them to be naught, are the bolder to offer
them, thinking to gull the world with their great offers.

Fifthly coming to the point of their pretended submission they plainly refuse
to submit themselves offering rather articles of a capitulation betwixt the
King and them, then any form of true subjection or submission, for first they
say, they will acknowledge his majesty to be their lawful King and souerein
Lord, and will defend his majesty's heirs and successors right. And for this
his majesty is much beholding to them. But we must understand, how this offer
is made upon condition, if they may have their mass and their Mass preests.
if they may not have their requests, then they neither submit themselves, nor
offer any thing. Further they acknowledge more then by the doctrine of popery
they can make good. For by the chapter v. nam sanctam. extr. de mayor. and
obed. all kings are declared to be subject to the pope. They do also deny the
kings authority in Ecclesiastical causes, and offer many preiudices to the
Kings right, both over the Clergy and others, and acknowledge him no further
to be their lawful king, then it shall please the Pope, who has power to
excommunicate him and depose him, as they say. Lastly where they speak of the
Kings successors right, they forget to mention the kings right. But what
should we stand upon future conjectures, when the treasons of Watson, Clerk,
Garnet, Hamond and the rest have plainly declared them to be the kings
enemies?

Secondly they promise to reveal, and to their powers to withstand and
prevent any conspiracy, or treason against the King and his heirs, and to
defend the realm against foreign invasions. But miserable were the King and
state, if they should depend upon their revelations, and withstandings of
treasonable attempts and invasions, that are sworn to the pope and depend upon
foreign enemies. Former practices and experience shows, that their words and
promises are but snares to catch such as trust them, of late they smothered the
treason of Percy and Catesby as much as they could, and sought by all means
to have their country set on a flame. They acknowledge to his majesty, what is
due by the word of god, or has been used by any of their sect. but of the word
of god they make the Pope supreme judge, and use to deny obedience to Kings
excommunicate by him, nay to Kings not excommunicate, in ecclesiastical
causes, what they mean to perform it appears by Watsons and Percies
treasons.

Lastly they say they will perform this, by protestation, or oath, and offer
the like for their priests. But what are oaths and promises, when they say
the pope can dispense with oaths, and teach that faith is not to be performed
to heretics, in which rank these superstitious ministers of antichriste place
all true Christians? Furthermore it may be doubted whether these felllowes can
bring the stiff necked massepreests to take these oaths. if they ca^, yet shall
they never make them to keep them. does it not then appear, that these
conning fellows go about to ensnare plain dealing men with their false oaths
and feigned protestations? the examples of John Husse, and of the professors of
religion in France and Flanders, that have been often massacred, when they
relied upon the oaths and promises of the Popes adherents do assure us of it,
and Garnets treasons may be a caveat for us. Wherefor seeing these proud
suppliants confess themselves but half subjects. and are much less then
half when the pope commands them, whose they are body and soul, and seeing
they always cut away half the kings authority, and sometimes all, and
endeavor to bring upon his majesty and his subjects, not only a false,
idolatrous, heretical and impious religion, but also a most grievous yoke of
the popes tyrannical government, from which this land has by the grace of
god, and prowess of his maiestyes noble ancesters been most happily freed and
delivered, and seeing they have alleged nothing, which might either justify
their abusiue and false religion, or clear themselves from the common
imputations of the disloyalty of the popes adherents, or assure the king and
state against the treacherous plots and practices of rinegued English
sacrificers, Iebusites, and other their associates ever suspected, and now
lately plainly detected in Percies treason to be sworn slaves of Antichrist,
and professed enemies to the king: I doubt not but his majesty and the state
will take a course with these bold and importune petitioners, and assure the
church and realm both against their corruptions in doctrine, and attempts in
the affairs of Policy, and that in the mean while as all Christians abhor
their antichristian doctrine and dangerous practices, so they will concur in
repressing and extinguishing the causes of them. This al christians ought to
perform, and these especially, that have eminent places both in church and
common wealth. What then should I need to exhort them, to perform that, which
belongs to their duty, as they do well know, and which both god requires,
and all true christians expect at their hands?

Chap. 22. A censure upon certain letters of the banished mass preests, sent
back to the lords of his majesty's council anno 1604, and annexed to the
former petition.
IT is an old saying, all is lost, that is bestowed on men ungrateful, and may
well be verified by the fact of certain massepreests, who having well deserved
death if the laws of the land. had been exequuted against them; were
graeiously pardoned by his majesty, and only exiled, for that the state cold
not otherwise be well secured against their plots and practices, and yet are so
far from rendering thanks for any favor, that they expostulate with his
maiestyes council, as doing them wrong, and in effect protest, they will not
submit themselves to his maiestyes order. Nay it is apparent that they
resolved to return to continue their former treasons, as may be collected by
the examinations of the actors in Percyes treason and rebellion.

THE COPY OF THE BANISHED Priests Letter, to the Lords of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
To the right Why is this petitio directed to the Lords? is the king no body
with these me^?
Honorable our very good Lords, the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable
privy Council.
RIGHT Honorable. As we have suffered for Not so, but for Antichrist, and his
damned practices and pretenses.
Christ his sake, and the profession of the true Catholic religion, (which he
Men plant with hands and not with blood but these priests of Baal tread upon
Christ's blud, and root up the Church by him planted.
planted with his precious blood) many years imprisonment and Those that lived
at Wisbich in prison, fared like Lords, and fatted themselves like proks. other
massepriests abroad were either cha^berlaines to their hostesses, or
Maggiordo^s to their hosts, wanting nothing, that they could vvish. And this
against the Iebusitical faction may be proved out of Watso^s quodlibets.
deprivation of all worldly comforts and commodities: so do we with the like
patience and humility endure this hard and heavy For those that by laws
deserve death, this is extraordinary favor.
sentence of exile, which is a certain kind of civil death, or rather a
languishing and continual dying, especially to them that have the honor and
safety of their prince and Country, in that recommendation, as we The^ never
have they had their prince and country in reco^mendation, seeking to make both
subject to the pope, and his abominable heresy: nay to destroy both, as
appeared by the late gunpovvder treason.
ever both have had, and have. Notwithstanding least it might be imputed unto
us here after, that this banishment was rather an extraordinary favor and
grace, then an undeserved This thanks the Lords ar to look for at the hands of
the priests of Baal.
punishment or penalty: we thought it our duty to let your Honors understand,
that as we are Why then do ye murmr
content with patience and humility to suffer, and support whatsoever you
should impose upon us for our For your treacherous practices, and combinations.
Religion: so are we bound with all, to make protestation of our innocence,
according to that of S. Peter: But you suffer contrary to these words of
Peter. for railing, libelling, practifing against the state.
Nemo vestrum patiatur vt sur, ant latro, ant maledicus, aut alienorum
appetitor: si autem vt Christianus, non erubescat, glorificet autem Deum in
isto nomine. May it please your Lordships therefore to understand, that the
quality and condition of those that are comprehended under the self same
sentence of banishment, is very different and considerable, both in honor and
What do these base conscienceles svvads talk of honor and conscience, that hane
no other foundation of their actions but the popes vvil?
conscience: among the which some there are that came voluntarily into prison,
upon a proclamation set out by your Lordships in the late Queens days and
name, with assurance of favor upon such their submission: some came neither
voluntarily into the prison, nor into the Realm, and therefore not subject to
any censure: and all of them have bin ever most Such faithful servants and
vvelvvillers were Clerk, Watson and Brook, executed not lo^gsince at
Winchester and Digbie, Grant, Faux, and others executed in Paul's Churchyard and
at Westminster, but nether for their faithful service, nor their affection to
his Maiesly.
faithful servants and affectionate well-willers of his Majesty, and have to
show under the great Seal of England his Majesty's gracious general pardon,
by which they are restored unto the peace of his Majesty, and place of This
shows that their conscience accused them of treachery, and disloially before.
true subjects: since which time they have committed nothing against his
Majesty's quiet Crown and dignity; as being ever since in As if prisoners might
not be disleall, and treacherous.
captivity: and therefore in the rigor and extremities of those laws (which in
their best sense and nature were ever held, both Most gentle, if they be
compared with the laws of the Spanish inquisition, or the popes bloody
decretales.
extreme and rigorous) cannot be punished by any form or course of law, with
so severe a correction, as aqua and igne interdici, to be deprived of the
benefit of the common Air and elements of our most natural and dear When you
sold it to foreign enemies, you made it dear both to them, and your selves.
country. Yet sithence it is your Lordships pleasure we should be transported,
we are This is the patience of Lombards, and not of saints.
content (in sign of obedience and co^formity to that we see is your order)
for this time to forbear the Realm for a while, and to absent our selves;
reputing our selves notwithstanding, as men free from all danger or penalty of
laws: and neither by this fact of banishment, nor by any other act of our
necessary return into If this be your country, why did you abandon it, and
take your self to the service of Italians and Spaniards?
our country hereafter in worse estate, then your Lordships found us in the
prison, when your Lordships warrant came for the carrying us out of the Realm.
And so hoping your Honors will conceive of us, as of men that have the fear
and grace of God before our eyes, and the sincere love of our For pure love
they and their consorts an. 1588. sought to cut their countrimens throats, and
to bring their prince and country into the hands of strangers, and for like
causes sought Percy to blovv up the parliament house.
Prince and country in our hearts, and dutiful reverence and respect to your
Lordshippes in all actions: we humbly beseech your honors, that if we happen
for want of health, or other helps necessary for our relief, to Having bin
in Italy they should know the penally of banishedme^ returning with out pardon
or license
return hereafter into the Realm, this banishment may not any way aggrauate
our case, or make us les capable of favor and grace, then we were the xxj. of
September when your Lordships order came to remove us from post to You should
have bin left at Tiburn post, and never have bin suffered to return to the pope
and Cardinals, which you count pillars, but that you have encou^tred with
merciful me^.
pillar, from prison to exile: and so desiring God to enspire your lordships
(upon whose resolutions depends the repose of the Realm, and the You save none,
destroy al, that receive not the beasts mark and your pestilent doctrine
salvation or perdition of many thousand souls) with his holy grace and
assistance in all your most grave and weighty determinatio^s, in most humble
and dutiful manner we take our leave, from Many of your felovvs an. 1588. that
came a against their country ly in the boto^ of the sea, from whence they send
no libelling letters. your hap is better, your cause equal.
the Seaside this 24. of Sept. 1604.

His Majesty's true As true as the Irish rebels, or as Watson, Clerk, and
Brook, Percy, Catesby, Faux, Digby, and the rest of that crew, that were as
true papists, as the rest of these massepriests.
and loy all subjects, and your honors most humble servants, The late banished
Priests.

The censure.
THE Lords, no doubt, looked for thanks for their gentle and mild course
taken with these massepreests. if they looked for none, yet his majesty
deserved at their hands both thanks and praises, that gave them life, who had
so well deserved death, and though he sent them out of England; yet did send
them into no place but whether they had fled before voluntarily of themselves.
But see the malicious disposition, I pray you, of this viperous generation. For
thanks to the Lords they send reprofes and expostulations, and direct their
letters to the lords, as thinking the king to be no king, nor worthy to be
written unto by such glorious creatures of antichrist, as they take themselves
to be.

They suppose, that they have written wisely and pithily. But of that me^ may
the better esteem by these particulers. First they say they have suffered for
christ his sake and the profession of the true catholic religion, which he
planted with his precious blood. But this is a gross slander to the state, and
to his majesty principally, who is here charged with persequuting Christ, and
the true catholic religion. Further the same is a most impudent and untrue
assertion. For neither did Christ plant nor water the mass, nor the worship of
saints and images, nor the popes triple crown with his blood, nor is popery
Catholic religion, nor did these fellows suffer for their superstitious and
false opinion, unless the same drew them into practice of treason, and made
them to fetch their greasy ordination from foreign enemies, and to depend upon
them, and to ioyn with them in seeking to blow up the state.

Secondly they pretend to have been deprived of all worldly comforts and
commodityes. But the author of the quodlibers says no, and the world knows,
how they have domineered in the places of their resiance, and lived with all
plenty, ease and contentment in prison. Gerrard and Garnet are fat and well
liking, and never did men enjoy more worldly delights.

3 They call the sentence of exile hard and heavy. But in Spayn and Italy our
brethren would thank god for such a favor. so would they also, considering
they have deserved death, but that they are graceless and unthankful.

4. They blush not to affirm that they have the honor and safety of their
prince in recommendation, when their doctrine makes their prince and country
subject to the pope and his censures, and their practices tend to bring in
strangers, and to dishonor and overthrow both prince and state, as before is
declared, and as appeared by Percies treason.

5. They say their banishment is an undeserved penalty. But the laws of
England say they deserved death: and their treasons prove it. are not then
favors well bestowed on these treacherous and murmuring fellows?

6. They allege the words of saint Peter, Nemo vestrum patiatur vt fur, vt
latro, aut maledicus, aut alienorum appetitor, si aute^ vt Christianus etc. But
they are no followers of S. Peter, or of his doctrine, suffering for treacherous
combinations with foreign enemies, and domestical Gunpowder men, and having
long railed against the state, and sought the spoil thereof, diverse of the^
dividing bishoprics and benefices in England in conceipte, and being inducted
into them at Tiburn or Wisbich, and none of them suffering for any point of
Christian faith.

7. They tell us of the diverse qualityes of the Massepreestes banished. But
what is that to the purpose, seeing none would reuounce intelligences with
foreign enemies, nor acknowledge the kings supreme authority? Further they
cannot prove, that they have any good qualities, being so far engaged in
Percyes conspiracy, and other practices.

8. They signify, that they purpose again to return into their country. But how
agrees this with their former protestation of suffering with patience and
humility? again why should they intrude themselves, where no man sends for
the^? why should they thrust themselves in among true pastors, being ordained by
Antichrist to sacrifice for quick and dead? and why should wolves be suffered to
enter within Christ's fold, heretics among Christians, treacherous compagnions
among the kings loyal subjects?

9. They pray their honors to conceive of them, as of men, that have the fear
and grace of god before their eyes, and the sincere love of their prince and
country in their hearts. But their doctrines, actions and practices do utterly
remove this conceit both out of the minds of the council and of others. Some
particulers of their doings we have touched before. the treason of Catesby and
Percy touches them at the very heart.

Finally they call them selves his majesty's true and loyal subjects. But how
true, it appeared first in the practices of Clerk and Watson, hanged at
Winchester not long sense, and next in the attempt of Percy and his accomplices,
diverse of the^ being absolved and resolved by massepreests in their wicked
purposes, and generally in the doctrine of massepreests against the authority
of Kings before mentioned, and in their combinations and intelligences with the
pope and other traitors and foreign enemies, as Parsons, and the popish
cardinals and such like. What then remains, but that such as find them
selves agreeued with the sentence of banishment, should have the sentence of
the law, and that such as love the Pope and Jtaly better then the King and
their own country, should be forced to live with their holy father in their
Italian Babylon? god grant that neither Prince nor country receive harm by
their return, or by any of their associates or companions. Amen.

FINIS.
The contents of every chapter of the Book precedent.
Chap. 1. THE resolution of the petition apologeticall of the lay papists,
together with a some of the answer made unto it. Chap. 2. That the toleration of
any false, heretical or idolatrous religion, is repugnant to reasons of
religion, and holy scripture. Chap. 3. That conuinence and toleration of false
religion and heresy, and of the professors thereof, is reproved by the
authority both of ancient fathers of the church, and of ancient christian
Princes. Chap. 4. That to admit the exercise of false religions formerly
forbidden, is contrary both to christian policy and reason. Chap. 5. That
toleration of diverse religions is contrary to the doctrine and practice of
papists. Chap. 6. That popery is a false and erroneous religion. Chap. 7. That
popish religion is heathenish and idolatrous. Chap. 8. That popery is a
religion composed of old and new heresies. Chap. 9. That popish religion is
new, and not, as the papists call it, the old religion. Chap. 10. That popery
is a religion impious and blasphemous. Chap. 11. That toleration of popery is
contrary to reasons of state. Chap. 12. That popish religion is enemy to
kings. Chap. 13. That the same is burdensome to christians. Chap. 14. That the
petition of such, as desire a toleration of popery, is void of reason. Chap.
15. That the same is repugnant to grounds of religion, and policy practiced by
papists themselves. Chap. 16. An answer to the title of the petition of lay
papists, and the preface of John Lecey. Chap. 17. An answer to the two first
chapters of the petition containing causes both of the petitioners long
silence, and of their breach of silence. Chap. 18. Of the quality, number, and
forces of English papists, and of their assurance, and resolution, which they
praetend in their religion. Chap. 19. The examination of lay papists fidelity,
of which they endeavor to make proof in the fifth chapter of their petition.
Chap. 20. An answer to the petitioners calumniations against the professors of
the Gospel, set down in the 6. chapter of their popish apologeticall
petition. Chap. 21. The insufficiency and foolery of the submission promised by
lay papists for themselves, and their priests is examined. Chap. 22. A censure
upon certain letters of the banished massepreests, sent back to the Lords of
his Majesty's council, anno 1604. and annexed to the former petition.
Escapes correct thus.
Page 8. line 18. read: the apostle 2. Corinthians. 6. p. 14. l. vl. vlli
magistratui. p. 26. lin. 28. Hierem. 2. p. 31. l, 23. Basilidians. l. 25.
exorcizations. p. 34. l. 5. with the priscillianists. p. 48. l. 7. and ignorant
people. p. ead. l. antepenul. three principal. p. 60 l. 9. whereas I do not
suppose. p. 62. l. 6. if the parliament house, p. 73. lin. 26, are matters. p.
ead. l. or so mutinously. p. 74. l. 26. but rather seek. p. 76. l. 12.
dangerous deseins. p. 91. l. 22. numbres of papists. p. 94. l. 15. fourthly
they mention. p. 95. l. 31. for their resolution. p. 99. l. 33. Helas pore
souls. Literal faults and transpositions of titles pardon.


