Metallica. OR The Treatise of Metallica.

Briefly comprehending the Doctrine of diverse new Metallicall Inventions, but
especially, how to neale, melt, and work all kind of mettle-oares, Irons and
Steeles with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewell.

Also a Transcript of his Majesty's Letters Pattents of Privilege, granted
unto Simon Sturteuant for the said Metallicall businesses, for one and thirty
years.

Published in Print before the last day of this present Easter Term, as the
said Simon Sturteuant was by his Highness enjoined.

Imprinted at London by George Eld.

Cum priuilegio.

Anno. 1612. May. 22.

The Preface to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I am not ignorant, how they that are willing to apprehend and
assist new businesses, are desirous to be satisfied in these points. First
concerning the perfect and exact knowledge of that Invention wherein they are
to deal and negotiate, for as the common Proverb says; Ignoti nulla cupido.
The second is, touching the worth and goodness of the business, and how the
benefit thereof may be raised. The third is the habillity of the Inuentioner,
to effect and perform his project propounded. The fourth is concerning the
manner of contracting or bargaining; In all which, I will endeavor to give the
best satisfaction that I may, out of the praecepts and grounds of this present
Treatise of Metallica. And therefore concerning the first point. The Transcript
of his Majesty's most gracious grant and privilege does evidently show and
inform the Reader, that amongst many other inventions granted for one and
thirty years, my Self, my Executors, Deputies and Assigns, may only make,
practice, and put in use, within any of his Majesty's Realms and Dominions,
the working, melting, and effecting of Iron, Steel, and other Mettles with
Sea-coale, or Pit-coale. The principal end of which invention is, that the
Woods and Timber of our country might be saved, maintained and preserved from
the great consumption and waste of our common Furnaces and Iron-Milnes, which
as they are now ordinarily built and framed, can burn, spend, and consume no
other fuel but Char coal. The which devise if it may be effected
accordingly (as I make no doubt but by Gods blessing I shall) will prove to
be the best and most profitable business and Invention that ever was known
or invented in England these many years.

For (to speak nothing of the great benefit, and profit which may be raised
and made by twenty other Inventions comprised and comprehended under the
Pattent) the yearly vallew of this mettle-businesse alone, will amount unto
330. thousand pounds, per annu^, after the second or third year, as appears
by this calculation.

A Calculation showing how the Mettle Invention or Art, which makes all kind
of Mettles or Metalique substance, with Pit-coale or Sea-coale, will be worth
per annum. 330. thousand pounds, immediately after the two first years, which
are the allotted times for Trials and Conformities, without any charges,
(except the charges of Trials) to the Pattentees, Partners, Assistants, and
Dealers.
THere are planted already in England and Wales, eight hundred Milnes for the
making of Iron, for there are four hundred Milnes in Surry, Kent, and Sussex,
as the townsmen of Haslemore have testified and numbered unto me, there are
also 200. Milnes in Wales, and 20. in Nottinghamshire, as the Author has been
credibly informed.

Now we may well suppose, that all England, Scotland and Ireland (besides the
forenamed shires) will make up the number of 180. Milnes more, being in all
800. Milnes.

Moreover one Milne alone spends yearly in Charcoale 500. pound and more, as
diverse Clerks and workmen in Iron business, have credibly testified, which
in pit-coale will be done with the charges of 30. or 40. pounds, after the
Inuentioners manner and invention, or at the most with 50. pound, where
carriage is far and chargeable.

So that this new Invention in the 800. Iron milnes, will save and gain de
claro the owners of those milnes 320. thousand pounds yearly, over and above
their ordinary and annual gains, as it appears by this proportion.

One Milne alone saves yearly 400. li. Ergo, 800. Milnes save yearly 320.
thousand pounds.

Again the said Metalique invention, being put and converted to Lead, Tin,
Copper, Brass, and Glasse-mettle, in all the several Mineralls of England,
Scotland, Ireland and Wales, will questionless clear yearly, by means of
Fuel, above ten thousand pounds more; over and besides the ordinary gains in
the said business. So that the yearly Iron revenues, added unto these other
Metalique revenues, do amount unto 330. thousand pounds, as was said before.

Now out of these Metalique gains of 330. thousand pounds yearly, the owners
of the Milnes, Hearths, and Furnaces, may have and receive liberal rates and
proportions allowed and allotted unto them, over and besides their ordinary
gains, only in lieu of conforming their Furnaces, Fineries and Chafferies to
this Invention of Pitt-coale and Earth-coale. And also the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Prince his Highness, the Duke of York, the Lord Vicount
Rotchester, and other parties interressed in the Pattent, may by their
Composition and agreement with the said Owners and Iron-Maisters, yearly
receive, by way of rents and licenses, the residew of that gains which
remains over and above that which was allotted and allowed to the
Iron-Maisters, for applying of this Invention to their ordinary way of making
of Iron, as more fully shall be specified, showed, and proved in the Apendix
of this Treatise, which I am now preparing for the Printer and the Press with
all convenient speed.

This may suffice therefore, to give the Reader satisfaction, concerning the
two first points, for the knowledge and the worth of the businesses, and
concerning the manner how certain yearly annuities may be raised to the
dealers and assistants.

Now to persuade the third point, that the Author is able to effect the work
undertaken, in as ample manner as he propounds; we plead and allege as
follows.

First the Inuentioner by his study, industry, and practice, has already
brought to pass and published diverse proiects and new devises, as well
Litterall as Mechannicall, very beneficial to the commonwealth. His Literare
Inventions do appear and are known partly by his Printed Treatise of Dibere
Adam, which is a Scholasticall engine Aucomaton, and partly in diverse other
Manuscripts which he has to show. His new Mechanics already performed, are to
be seen in the Inventions which he calls by the names of Pressewares,
Wood-pleits, Balance, Engine, Baramyha, and Hubla, of all which in private
speech he is ready more largely to confer, and to manifest their truth and
goodness at his Workehouses at Islington and Highbury. To conclude, 1. Sam.
17.34. Thus David reasons from the Bear and Lion to Golyah the Giant.
therefore he doubts not but (by Gods blessing and assistance, semblably with
success) to effect his Invention of Iron-works, as also al his other
Metallique devises and Inventions, here contained in the Patent, or Privilege
of Metallica.

Secondly the consideration of things in the like nature with it, are good
inducements to persuade us well of this project, for Brickmaking, Brewing,
Dying, Casting of Brasseworkes, etc. were (not many years since) done
altogether with the fuel of wood and Charcoale; in stead whereof Sea-coale is
now used as effectually and to as good use and purpose. Again (that which is
somewhat nearer the mark) the Blacksmith long agone forged all his Iron with
Char-coale (as in some places where they are cheap they continue this course
still) but these many years small Sea-coale has, and does serve the turn, as
well and sufficiently. Add hereunto, that very lately by a wind-Furnace,
green glass, for windows, is made as well with Pit-coale at Winchester house
in Southwarke as it is done in other places with much wast and consuming of
infinite store of Billetts and other Woodfuell.

Thirdly the Invention has already experimented and made trial of the chief
particular means and Instruments of diverse cheap ways of making of Irons in
real and substantial moddles to himself (though in small things, according
as his means would give him leave.) And this of his credit and honesty he
avouches and protests: wherefore he more confidently presumes to work the
same effects in grander Instruments and means of trial, after that he has
received allowance of the dealers and assistants for it.

Fourthly there can be no doubt of performing the matter propounded, if the
Inuentioner can but make, or cause Sea-coale to become as serviceable for
Metallique purposes as wood and Char-coale is: The art and skill whereof
consists chiefly in three points: The first is to bring Earth-coale to that
equallity of heat that Wood or Char-coale has; That is to say, that it make
neither hotter nor coulder fire then the Wood or Char-coale does: The second
means, is so to order and prepare Pit-coale, that all malignant proprieties,
which are aversse from the nature of Metallique substances, may be extracted
from it, or at least destroyed in it: The third means is, the addition and
infusion of those deficient proprieties, which as they are in Char-coale, so
ought they to be found in Pit-coale.

Now this threefold mystery and secret, the Author can certainly perform and
atchieue, by the powerful efficacy and means of his dexterous prerogative
instruments, devised for this purpose; as more at large is showed, both in this
Treatise, and in the Apendix, which very shortly shall come forth, and also
shall be further confirmed and justified by his daily experiments and trials,
which he will be ready to show to them whom they shall any ways touch or
concern, or to them who are otherwise desirous to assist and deal for the
experimenting and accomplishing of these so worthy good businesses. And then
also they shall know my purpose for Contracting and bargaining by word of
mouth, as it is best fitting for private dealings and negotiatings.

And thus (having briefly touched these four premised points) I conclude and
shut up this Preface of Metallica. Humbly and unfeignedly beseeching the Lord,
who by his holy spirit inspired * Bezaleel, Exodus 31.1.2.
Aholiab and * Hiram, with the light of Mechannicall Inventions, 2. Cro. 2.7.14.
and in all manner of workmanship, for his effectual blessings in these our
enterprises, Nisi dom. aedificauerit. Psalm. 127
that that which was begun in his fear, may be prosecuted and fully
accomplished and built by his heavenly and helpful hands, to the glory of his
name, and for the good welfare and emolument of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Church and the Political estate wherein we live. Amen.

Simon Sturteuant.

To the Reader, concerning the Errata.
TO pretermit the correction of the lesser literare faults, read and place, I
pray you, the four first lines. page 73. immediately before the 61. question,
for they are misplaced.

Errata.
Page 17. l. 12. 31. parts, for 33. parts. page 45. l. 11. Ignimetallica, for
In-ignimetallica. pa. 56. l. 17. Instruments for Emporeuticks. ibid. l. 21.
Instrument, for Emporeutick. pa. 73. l. 13 consists, for consisting. pa. 76.
l. 7. diverse means for diverse things. page 77. l. 11. be incroached, for be
not incroached. pa. 93. l. 26. edge, for edge-toole. pa. 94. l. 3. fire,
coloring, for fier-colouring. pa. 108. l. 10. alter-slagge, for after-slagge.

In the Epistle to the Reader, in some copies, page 1. of A. l. 11. Dibere for
Dibre. l. 12. Aucomaton, for Automaton. l. 18. Hubla, for Lubla.

Metallica.
CAPVT. 1. The Transcript of his Majesty's Indenture.
Reader.

AS I understand, you have promised and couenanted in your Pattent more fully
and evidently to express and enlarge in a Printed treatise, to be called
Metallica, every point and part of your privileged business, to the intent
that the Reader might the better conceive and judge of the Inventions
propounded, and might the sooner also be induced to assist, and set forward,
so good and worthy works: First therefore I demand of you by what name and
appellation you entitle that general head, under the which you reduce and
comprehend all the several Arts and Inventions of your Pattent.

Author. The general, that comprehends all the other particular Inventions,
is called Metallica, which is a word derived and deduced from the Greek and
Latin words Metallon, and Metallum, which signify, in English, Mettles, which
properly are Mineral substances, dug and taken out of the earth, of which
sort, are Iron, Lead, Tin, Copper, Brass, Gold, and Silver, etc.

R. 2. Does your Pattent of Metallica, only contain the making of mettles by
the means of Sea-coale and Pit-coale, and with your other Metallicall
instruments which you have devised for that purpose.

A. His Majesty's gracious grant is very large and ample, for it does not only
comprehend and privilege the making of all kind of mettles, after the manner
prescribed, but also equally authorizeth and licenseth any other Mechanic
inventions comprehended under the general definition of Metallica which is
mentioned in the Schedules or Manuscript treatise annexed to the Pattent, which
Schedules have the same force and validity as his Majesty's Indenture it self.

R. 3. Then that I may certainly know and understand the extent of your
privilege, repeat, I pray you, word by word, the definition of Metallica, as
it is written in the said Schedules, annexed to your Pattent.

A. Metallica mentioned in the petition, is thus defined. Metallica is an Art
or Invention, showing how diverse things and Materials, now made and atteined
unto, in a very chargeable sort, after the ordinary way, may be made and
atteined to after a more cheaper manner, and as with the help of common
instruments: so more especially by diverse new devised Metallicall instruments
and means.

From these Metallicall instruments, the Art is generally called Metallica.

R. 4. This summary definition gives me some general light and understanding
into your businesses, but that I may be the more fully satisfied, I pray you
rehearse also the tenor of his Majesty's grant, as it is under the broad seal
of England.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

James R.

THIS Indenture made, the xxix. day of February, in the years of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord James, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. of England, France and Ireland
the ninth, and of Scotland the xlv. Between our said Sovereign Lord, of the
one party, and Simon Sturteuant Gentleman of the other party. WHEREAS the said
Simon Sturteuant, by long his study and great charge, has atteined unto
diverse new exact Mechanic Arts, Mysteries, Ways and Secrets of his own
Invention, whereby all kind of mettles, works, and other things and materials,
as namely Irons, Steeles, Leads, Tins, Coppers, Brasses, and such like.
Secondly all kind of Metalique concoctions, as Sand-mettles, Ash-mettles,
Ammels, and such like. Thirdly, all kind of Burnt-earths, as Tiles,
Pauing-stones, Bricks, and such like. Fourthly all kind of Pres-wares, as
Prest-tiles, Prest-bricks, Prest-monions, Prest-stones and such like, with
diverse other things and materials now made after the ordinary course, with
Wood-fewell and Char-coale, may be as well made, wrought, and effected, as the
said Simon Sturteuant affirms, with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale, and
Brush-fewell, whereby the Woods now generally wasted, in all the chief
wood-land countries of this realm of England by Iron milnes, and such other
Metallicall Furnaces and hearths, may be preserved from the great consumption
thereof, and saved from like inconvenience in other his Majesty's dominions,
all which premises, so by this new Invention to be made, the said Simon
Sturteuant has undertaken, shall be in substance and for use as sufficient and
as good as the other like Materials now made and wrought with the chargeable
and excessive waste of Wood and Char-cole. AND whereas also the said Simon
Sturteuant, for the better making, working, effecting, beating, burning,
melting and effecting, the said metals, works, things, and Materials, by and
with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, has by his said
Invention and skill, invented diverse Furnaces, hearths, tests, tools, engines,
milnes, and other instruments and means, new, and of his own Invention, never
heretofore used or put in practice by any other. And has also by his said
Inventions and skill, attained to the knowledge how to use and employ diverse
other common instruments, to the making, working, and effecting the said
mettles, works, materials, and things, which other common instruments have
bin heretofore, and are used in other arts, sciences, and manuell occupations,
but were not, nor have bin as yet converted, used, or employed, to, for, or
about the making, working, effecting, and producing the said mettels, works,
materials and things: which said skill and Inuentio^s of the said S. Sturteuant,
and the said mettles, works, things, and other Materials, and the means and
instruments whereby to work and effect the same, are in some measure mentioned
and expressed in the Schedule or Schedules, to these presents annexed, and
shall be more fully, amply, and perticularly demonstrated, specified,
described, and contained in a large treatise, which the said Simon Sturteuant
has already conceived, and shall be put in Print, and so published before the
last day of Easter term next ensuing the date hereof, which Treatise so to be
Printed, shall be entitled, A Treatise of Metallica: which said Inventions of
the said Simon, may and will prove beneficial to the commonwealth, both in
regard of the abundant plenty of the said things and materials which it daily
will bring forth, as also because it saves and preserves abundance of Timber,
Char-coale, Wood-fewell, and other things and commodities wastefully consumed
and spent, the general want whereof already is felt. AND, for as much as our
said Sovereign Lord is given to understand, that this art, skill, industry
and inventions of the said Simon Sturteuant, of making, casting, founding,
working, and acquiring of the aforesaid mettles, works of Iron, materials, and
things by Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewell, and all and
every, or any of them, and also the making of the said new devised engines,
hearths, furnaces, and other means and instruments, and the employing of the
said instruments, used in other sciences and Arts, to the making, working,
effecting, and producing the said Mettales and other works, materials and
things, is a thing not yet practiced nor brought into any trade, occupation or
mystery, within any of his kingdoms, but is an Invention in substance new,
and which shall not prejudice or cross any from privilege or grant by his
Majesty heretofore made or granted under the great seal of England, for the
using and making of any former Invention, and therefore fit to be privileged
for a certain time, the rather for that his Highness conceiueth, that the said
inventions and skils, may and will become profitable and good for the
commonwealth of these realms, and also augment his customs and impost, in
regard it brings forth great and abundant store of the aforesaid Materials
and things, not only for the use of his Highness realms and dominions here
at home, but also for traffic and Merchandise into foreign Contries abroad,
which are customeable. In regard whereof and also for, and in consideration of
the good, faithful and acceptable services heertofore done and performed unto
his said Majesty, by the said Simon Sturteuant, As also to the end that the
said Simon Sturteuant may receive some convenient recompense, benefit and
profit for his said services, as also for his studies, labors and charges in
perfecting these Inventions, to the Common good, which may ensue hereby to his
Highness Realms and Dominions. THIS INDENTVRE WITNESSES that our said
sovereign Lord the King, of his especial grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, and of his prerogative royal, has given and granted, and by these
presents for him, his heirs and successors does give and grant, unto the said
Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators and assigns, and his, and
their Deputy and Deputies the sole, full, absolute and free power, liberty and
authority, to make, work, produce, accquire and bring forth, all kind of the
aforesaid mettles, and other the materials, and things, by, and with Sea-coale,
Pitt-coale, Earth-coale, Brush-fewell, and all, every, or any of them, in all
parts and places of his Majesty's realms of England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Wales, and also within all the same places and dominions, to make, frame,
erect, acquire, and provide, or cause to be made, framed, erected, acquired,
and provided, all necessary Instruments and means. As namely, all
Worke-houses, Furnaces, Hearths, Milnes, Structures, Engines, Vesels, Tests,
Tools, Instruments, Devises, or things of Iron, or other stuff or substance
whatsoever, which are already in use, in any other trade, mystery, art, or
occupation, and as yet not exercised or used, in, or about the making, working,
casting, founding, acquiring, and producing of the said mettles and other
materials and things, for, and to the end and purpose aforesaid, viz. to make,
work and effect the said mettles, and other materials, and things, by, and
with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewel, and all, every, or any
of them. And also in all the said places and dominions, to make, frame and
erect, use, and employ, or cause to be framed and erected all the said new
Furnaces, hearths, devises, instruments and means, which are merely of the
new Invention of the said Simon Sturteuant, to, for, in, or about the making,
working, casting, founding, acquiring, and producing of the said mettles, and
other the said Materials and things, and to all or any other purpose or
purposes use or uses, whatsoever, in as ample sort and manner as they or any of
them are described, expressed, or mentioned in the Schedule to these presents
annexed, or shall be more fully demonstrated, specified, or mentioned in the
Treatise of Metallica, which shall be as aforesaid Printed, before the last
day of Easter Term next ensuing. AND our said Sovereign Lord does further by
these presents, for him, his heirs, and successors, assign, appoint, ordain,
constitute, license and authorize the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors,
administrators, and assigns, to have the sole power, liberty, and authority,
by and with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, and all,
every, or any of them, and by his said Inventions, arts, and skills invented
and devised for the making of all kinds of the said mettles, and other the
Materials and things, and also for the making, framing, and erecting of all
such Instruments and means, as Worke-houses, Furnaces, Milnes, Quernes,
Structures, Engines, Vessels, Tools, Instruments, Devises, and things
heretofore used in any other Arts or Sciences, to be employed or used in or
about the making, working or producing the said metals, things, and materials,
or any of them, as aforesaid, and also to have the sole power, liberty, and
authority, for the making, framing, erecting, or producing of all the said new
devises, instruments, and means Metallicall, as aforesaid, in what sort, or
about what thing soever the same or any of them shall be used or employed: and
that the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, assigns, and
his and their deputy and deputies, and none other, without his, or their
special license or tolleration, shall or may make any kind, or kinds of the
said metles, and other the materials and things, by, or with sea-coale,
pit-coale, earth-coale, and brushfewel, or al, some, or any of them, by means
of, or by using and employing the said Inventions of the said Simo^, or any
part or parcel of the^, or any of the^, or make, frame and erect, any the said
workhouses, furnaces, hearths, milnes, structures, engines, tests, vessels,
tools, instruments, devises and things heretofore used, in any other arts, or
sciences, which by the said inventions of the said Simon, shall be transferred or
converted, or turned to be used, exercised and employed, in, or about the
making, casting, fou^ding, working, acquiring and producing of the said mettles
or materials, things and devises, by, or with Sea-coale, earth-coale,
pit-coale, and brush-fewell, or all, some, or any of them, or to make, frame,
or erect, any of the said new devised instruments and means of the said Simon,
either to the making, casting, working, or effecting, all or any the said
works, metles, or materials, by or with sea-coale, earth-coale, and
brush-fewell, or all, some, or any of them, or to any other end or purpose
whatsoever. TO have and to hold, use, exercise and enjoy, the sole making,
casting, founding, working, tempering, acquiring, and producing of all and
every the said mettles, and other the said premises, in manner and form
aforsaid, and to the end and purposes aforesaid, unto the said S. Sturteuant,
his executors, administrators and assigns, and by his and their deputy and
deputies, for and during the time and term of 31. years, now next coming,
immediately from and after the date of these presents. Yielding, rendering and
paying therefore, yearly and every year immediately, from, and after the date
hereof, for, and during the said term of 31. years, to our said Sovereign
Lord, his heirs and successors, at the receipt of his Highness Exchequer at
Westmin. always in the term of S. Michael, ten parts of such sum or sums of
money, and other clear yearly profits, in 33. parts to be divided, as he the
said Simon Sturtenant, his executors, administrators, or assigns, shall
yearly have or receive, during the said term of one and thirty years, by way
of composition or otherwise, for, or by making, framing, or erecting, casting,
founding, and acquiring, or otherwise, for licensing or authorizing any person
or persons whatsoever, to make, frame, cast, erect, found, or acquire, any of
the said Materials, Workehouses, Furnaces, Hearths, Milnes, Stuctures, Engines,
Vessels, Tests, Tools, Instruments, devises, and things aforesaid, The charges
and expenses in and about the same, and every of them, expended out of the said
thirty three parts, always deducted and allowed to the said Simon Sturteuant,
his executors, administrators and assigns, And likewise yielding, rendering,
and paying, unto the most excellent Prince Henry, eldest son of our said
Sovereign Lord, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and
his executors or administrators, yearly and every year, during the said term
of one and thirty years, in the same terms of Saint Michaell five parts of
the said sum and sums of money, and other clear profits in thirty three
parts to be divided, to be always paid and delivered to such person or
persons as the said most excellent Prince shall appoint to receive the same, at
his highness Palace of Saint James in the County of Middlesex. And also
yielding, rendering, and paying unto the most high and mighty Prince Charles
Duke of York; second Son of our said Sovereign Lord, unto his executors and
administrators during the said term of thirty one years in the same terms
of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, two parts of the said sum and sums of
money and other clear profits before said in 31 parts to be divided to be
always paid and delivered, at the said Palace of Saint James, to such person
or persons as our said Sovereign Lord the King, during the Mynority of the said
Duke of York, and after his full age he the said Duke shall appoint to
receive the same: And moreover yielding, rendering, and paying unto Robert
Vicount Rochester Baron of Wainick his executors and administrators in the same
terms of Saint Michaell and at the said, Palace of S. James one part of the
said sum and sums of money, and other clear parts to be divided. AND as
concerning the residue of the said sum and sums of money, and other clear
profits to be divided, it shall and may be lawful, to, and for, the said Simon
Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, and assigns, to retain and keep
one part thereof to his or their own propper use and uses, and for the other
fourteen yearly parts of the said thirty three parts of the said yearly
sum and sums of money, and other clear yearly profits; It shall, and may
be lawful, to, and for the said Simon Sturtenant, his executors,
administrators, and assigns, at his, and their discretion, and in such manner
and form, and by such rates and proportions, as he, and they, shall in their
discretions think meet to dispose thereof and to expend and distribute the
same, and every part and parcel thereof, amongst such person, or persons, as
shall adventure, join, be asisting, aiding or helping to the advancing, or
setting forwards of the works and inventions aforesaid, or any of them, and
amongst such person or persons as shall be owners of the said workhouses,
furnaces, hearthes, milnes, structures, engine, vessels, tests, tools,
instruments, devises, and things before mentioned, or any of them.

And the said Simon Sturteuant, for him, his heirs, executors, administrators,
and assigns and for every of them, does covenant, and grant, by these
presents, to, and with, our sovereign Lord, his heirs, and successors, that
he the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, or assigns, shall,
and will, yearly and every year, during the said term of one and thirty
years, well and truly yield, render, satisfy, content and pay, or cause to
be contented and paid, the said ten parts of the said clear profits, in
manner and form aforesaid, unto our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs, and
Successors, and shall, and will like-wise, during the aforesaid Term of one
and thirty years, well and truly yield, render, satisfy, content and pay unto
the said Prince of Wales, his executors or administrators the said five parts
of the said clear proffits, in manner and form aforesaid, And also to the
said Duke his executors or administrators the said two parts of the said clear
proffits in manner and form aforesaid, And also to the said Lord Vicount
Rochester, his executors or administrators the said one part of the clear
proffits in manner and form as the same one part is formerly in these presents
appointed to be yielded, rendered and paid to the said Lord Vicount Rochester,
his executors and administrators; AND for as much as when the said skill, work,
and Inventions of the said Simon Sturteuant, which he by his great industry,
cost and expenses has attained to, shall appear and be made commonly known,
it is very likely that many persons will without the priuity of the said Simon
Sturteuant his executors, administrators or assigns, make, frame, and erect
the like, and peradventure having his Platform, add thereunto some further
new invention for their gains, or otherwise put the same in practice at their
pleasure, and make the said mettles, and other materials and premises
aforesaid, thereby reaping the fruits of the labors of the said Simon
Sturteuant, and so defraud, both our said Sovereign Lord, and the said Prince,
and the said Duke of York, and the said Lord Vicount Rochester, and also the
said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators and assigns, and such
others, as shall adventure therein, of a great part of the benefit and profit
which might otherwise accrue unto our said Sovereign Lord, and to the said
most excellent Prince, and Duke of York, and to the said other parties by such
skill, work, and Invention aforesaid. Our said Sovereign Lord therefore,
favoring the good endeavors and studies of the said Simon Sturteuant in the
premises, and his former service done unto his Highness, for him, his heirs
and successors, for the better encouraging of him the said Simon Sturteuant,
his executors, administrators and assigns, in the same, and the better to
enable him to undergo and bear the burden and charge thereof, and to avoid
all deceit that any way may hinder our said Sovereign Lord, or the said most
excellent Prince, or Duke of York, or any of the said parties aforesaid, does
by these presents declate and signify, that his Majesty's Royal will and
pleasure is, and our said Sovereign Lord does hereby straightly will, and
command, all, and every person or persons, of what state, degree, or condition
soever, that they, nor any of them, during the said term of one and thirty
years, shall not presume or attempt, by any art, devise, skill, or cunning,
directly or indirectly, without the special license, allowance, and consent of
him the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, or assigns, or
of his, or their deputy, or deputies, thereunto by him, or them lawfully
authorized, to make, frame, erect, contriue, or perform any kind, or kinds
of the aforesaid mettles, and the other Materials and things, or any of them,
by, or with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewell, or all, some,
or any of them, by all, or any the said Inventions, or means, invented or
devised by the said Simon, or by using or exercising any part, or parcel of
the same, or to utter, or sell the said mettles, or other materials, or things
so made, framed, or performed, or any of them, or to make, frame, work, erect,
use or employ, within any the said Realms and Dominions of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, any such or the like engines, instruments, or works heretofore
used in any other Arts or Sciences, for, or to the making, founding, or
effecting the said mettles, things and materials, by and with Sea-coale,
Pitt-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, and all, or any of them, or any of
the said new devised Instruments and things, either too, or about the making or
working the said mettles, things, and materials, as aforesaid, or to any end or
purpose whatsoever, or to make or do, any act or thing, whereby, or by means
whereof, our said Sovereign Lord the King, or the said most excellent Prince
of Wales, or the said Duke of York, or the said Simon Sturteuant, his
executors, administrators or assigns, or other the said parties, shall or may
sustain any prejudice, loss or detriment, in the said Inventions or works,
or in any profit or commodity which they, or any of them, may or might
otherwise have, receive, or enjoy, by means of the same inventions or works,
or any of them, upon pain of the high displeasure of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, and upon pain of imprisonment of their bodies, and forfeitures of
all, and every the said materials, instruments, and things aforesaid, which
shall be wrought, framed, or made, by any person or persons, contrary to the
tenor of these presents, and Royal prohibition therein, with such further
penalties, pains, and forfeitures, as by the laws and statutes of the said
Realms, can, or may be inflicted, upon them, or any of them, for their wilful
and obstinate disobedience, and contempt of his Highness said commandment and
prerogative Royal. And if it shall happen that any person or persons,
contemptuously neglecting this his Majesty's will and pleasure, in these
presents declared, after notice thereof given, shall make or acquire any kind or
kinds of the aforesaid mettles, and other the materials and things, by, or
with Sea-cole, Pit-coale, Eearth-coale and Brushfuell, or all, some, or any of
them, by any of the said means and Inventions, or any part or parcel of them
or any of them, or shall frame, work, erect, use or employ any such or the
like engines, instruments, tools, implements or works, for, and to the purpose
and purposes aforesaid, the same, and all, and every of them shall be taken
and seized, by the Constable or other officer, dwelling nearest thereunto, to,
and for the only use and behoof of our said sovereign Lord the King, his
heirs and successors, AND further our said sovereign Lord the King of his
more abundant grace, certain knowledge and mere motion does by these presents
for him, his heirs and successors, give and grant full power and authority to
the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, and assigns, and his
and their Deputy and Deputies and every of them with the assistance of a
Constable, Tithingman, Headborough, or any other ordinary officer in any City,
town, place, or places, as well within the liberties as without, within the
said Realms and Dominions, at all and every time and times, to have access
and entry into any house, place, and places, where such mettles and other the
premises shall be made and wrought or otherwise laid up contrary to his
Majesty's grant, and there to search, provide, and see, that during the said
term of 31. years, no manner of such or the like Inventions, works, or
practizes, of making, or erecting, any kind, or kinds, of the said mettles and
other the premises to be made, wrought, sold, used, or employed, within the
said Realms contrary to the true meaning of these presents, and by all lawful
and convenient ways and means to search, see examine and find out, all
offenses during the said time that shall be committed contrary to any gift,
license, authority, commandment, prohbition, or other thing in these presents
mentioned, specified, and to seize, as aforesaid, such instruments and other
things whatsoever, made, framed, or erected, used, exercised or occupied
contrary to the true intent of these presents or any clause heerin contained.
And his Highness will and pleasure is, and by these presents for him, his
heirs and successors, his Majesty does straightly charge and command all
Justices of peace, Majors, Sherifs, Bailifes, Constables and al other Officers,
ministers and subjects of his Highness, his heirs and successors for the time
being, that they and every of them, during the said term of 31. years, or the
duplicate exemplification or the enrolement thereof, shall be aiding and
asisting to the said S. Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, assigns and
deputies and every of them in the due execution of all and every the said
grants, authorities, commandments, licenses, privileges, inhibitions,
prohibitions, and every other thing in these presents mentioned and specified,
or any of them. PROVIDED always, that this Indenture, nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to restrain or hinder any
person or persons, for using, or exercising any their own Inventions or Arts
heretofore exercised, put in use, and privileged, by any his Majesty's Letters
Partents, heretofore made and granted to them or any of them, but that it
shall, and may be lawful, to and for all and every the said person or persons,
to exercise, use, and put in practice all and every the said inventions
heertofore practiced, put in use, excercised, and privileged by any of the
said Letters Pattents, to them, or any of them, made or granted, in as ample
sort, and manner, as they might, or may, exercise, practice, or use the same,
if these presents had never been had, or made any in these presents to the
contrary notwithstanding. IN WITNESS whereof, to the one part of these
Indentures remaining with the said Simon Sturteuant, our said Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, has caused the great Seal of England to be put, and to
the other part thereof remaining with our said Sovereign Lord the King, the
said Simon Sturtenant has put his seal. Yeouen the day and year first above
written.

Exam. Henry Hubbert.

The Docquet to the Pattent.
THis is your Majesty's part of the Indentures, whereby your Highness does
grant, license, and privilege unto Simon Sturteuant Gentleman. That be, his
executors, deputies, and assigns only, and none other, shall and may, during
the term of 31. years, make, practice, and put in use, within any your
Majesty's Realms and dominions, certain Inventions, Furnaces, and
Instruments, devised and invented by himself, for the working, and effecting
with Sea-coale, Pitt-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, diverse things and
works heretofore done with Wood-fewell, as namely Irous, Steeles, Leads,
Tinnes, Coppers, Brasses, Glassemettles, Mines, Tiles, Bricks, Potter-ware, and
such like. And there is reserved to your Majesty upon this grant, ten parts in
thirty three parts, to be divided of the clear yearly profits that shall be
made by the said new Inventions: and to the Prince his Highness, five of those
parts: and to the Duke of York two of those parts, and to the Lord Vicount
Rochester, one of those parts; and to the said Simon Sturteuant one other of
those parts, and to the disbursers of the moneys for the trial and effecting
of the said Inventions, fourteen such parts, and the declaration and
discovering of this Invention, is partly set down in a certain sckedule, which
is to be annexed to these Indentures. And the full and plain manifestation
thereof is to be set forth in Print, by the said Simon Sturteuant, before the
last day of Easter term next, and contains a prouiso, that this new grant
shall not cross any former grant, heretofore made to any others.

And is done upon signification given unto me by Christopher Perkins, Knight,
of your Majesty's good pleasure in that behalf.

Exam. Henry Hubbert.

It is his Majesty's pleasure, that these do pass by immediate warrant.

Robert Salisbury.
Received 29. of February 1611.
An Indenture between the Kings Majesty, and S. Sturteuant.

COPPIN.

The Manuscript Treatise of Metallica. CAPVT. 2.
Reader.

5. IN the Transcript of his Majesty's Indenture, which you have rehearsed,
there is further referrence unto a manuscript Treatise, or certain schedules
which are annexed unto the grant, which I pray you also rehearse unto me,
according to the Tenor of the words in the original.

A. The manuscript Treatise of Metallica, which otherwise is termed by the
names of schedules in the Indenture, is comprehended in these ten Sections
following.

SECT. 1. Metallica, the general of all Metallicall Arts.
MEtallica, mentioned in the petition, is thus defined.

Metallica is an Art or Invention, showing how diverse things and materials, now
made and atteined unto in a very chargeable sort, after the ordinary way, may
be made and attained unto after a more cheaper manner, and as with the help of
common instruments, so more especially by diverse new devised Metallicall
Instruments and means, as in the printed treatise of Metallica, more at large
shall be mentioned and expressed.

From these Metallicall Instruments the Art is generally called Metallica.

The doctrine of Metallica cannot distinctly be known or methodically
expressed, except that the Art which prescribes precepts, general to all Arts
and inventions called Heuretica be first precognized.

R. Define Heuretica.

Heuretica is the Art of inventions, teaching how to find out new, and to judge
of the old, and so forth, as follows in the printed treatise of Metallica.

Metallica, thus generally described is of two sorts, Ignemetallica, which
works with fire and hearth, or Inignemetallica, which uses not the means of
fire, for to attain to the thing or material intended, yet it uses the other
Metallicall Instruments, whereupon it is called more propperly Metallorganica.

Ignemetallica, comprehends many general inventions, which are reduced into
these 7. heads, first Metallica, propriae dicta, secondly Pressoria, thirdly
Terrica, fourthly Hydrelica, fifthly Hydrometallica, sixthly Hydropressoria,
seauenthly Hydroterrica.

SECT. 2. Metallica proprie dicta.
MEtallica, in the propper and strict signification is thus defined.

Metallica is an Ignick invention, for the cheaper making of all kinds of
mettles or Metalique concoctures, by the means of cheap firing, and other
Metallical, instruments, whereupon the materials and things made by this Art,
are called Metaliques.

The contents of Metallica, proprie dicta, in the several Materials which the
Art makes.

The Metalique Materials are as 1. All kind of Mettles as 1. Prepared or
roasted oars, Mine-stones, or Mettle-stones being the fit matter of
Metallique liquours. 2. Irons, Steeles. 3. Leads. 4. Tins. 5. Coppers, brasses.
6. Any other new kind of mettles, which may hereafter be found being made and
wrought after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Invention. 7. All
compounded mettles of the same kind, as Pewters, Belmettles, Sodars,
Candle-stickmettle, being made and wrought after the said Simon Sturteuant his
manner and Invention.
All kind of Metalique concoctures and their co^creats, as 1. All kind of
Sand-mettles, or Ash-mettles. 2. All kind of Ammels, Beugles, or such
commixtures. 3. All kind of Metallique slagges or cinders, if (perhaps) they
may be turned to some profitable use. 4. Other compounds of the forenamed
concoctures, being made and wrought after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner
and Invention.



And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 3. Metallicall Instruments.
THe Instruments and means Metallicall, which are used for the producing of
metallique materials or things, are of two sorts, common or peculiar.

The common instruments are such which are borrowed from other trades,
occupations and mysteries, amongst which we have especially use of Ioyners,
Smiths, Turners, not only of their Instruments and Tools, but also of their
Emporeuticks which they ordinarily make, as Presses, Vices, Screwes, Bellows,
Tongs, etc. made either of Iron and Wood, or of both together.

The peculiar instruments are those that are of the Authors Invention, being
of chief and principal use, for the working of Metallicall effects.

The peculiar Instruments of invention, are principally of three sorts, Lenick,
Plegnick and Caminick.

Lenicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which work their opperation and
effect by pressing, impressioning, or moulding, and that either by thrusting or
drawing.

All the kinds of these Lenick instruments, are at large described in the
doctrine of the art Pressoria, which is part of the Printed treatise of
Metallica.

There is great use of these Lenick instruments, for the tempering and
commixing of Sea-coale and Stone-coale.

Plegnicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which perform their
opperation and effect, by their dexterous and artificial ioynt-moouing.

All the kinds of Plegnick instruments, are at large described in the doctrine
of the art Plegnica, which is part of the Printed treatise of Metallica.

There is great use of the Plegnick instruments for the making of Eumechanick
and reformed Milnes and Bellowses.

Caminicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which perform their
opperation and effect, by the new kind of Furnacing and Hearthing.

All the kinds of Caminick instruments, are at large described in the doctrine
of the art Caminica, which is part of the Printed treatise of Metallica.

The instruments Metallicall, although they are of chief use in all the
Metallicall arts, yet are they more peculiarly belonging to Metallica, proprie
dicta, and for this cause they are anexed to it.

And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned, and enlarged in the printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 4. Pressoria.
PRessoria is a kind of Ignick Invention, which by the means of cheap
fiering, and by other Metallicall Instruments and means, makes all kinds of
Press-wares or Mould-wares.

Press-ware or Mould-ware is any thing that can be made, wrought, or formed of
clay and earth, not by hand, and the round table (as the Potters use) but by
Press and Mould, or by pressing and moulding, and that by the help of
Metallicall Instruments and means.

There be many sorts and kinds of Press-wares by reason of different figures
and diverse uses unto which they are to be applied, all which kinds are reduced
to these two heads of Rude-ware and Polisht ware.

Rude-ware are such sorts of Press-ware, which after they are pressed and
molded, require no further ornament; as Prest-pipes, Prest-tiles,
Prest-brickes, Prest-stones: and such like, expressed in the printed treatise
of Metallica.

Pollisht-ware, are such sorts of Press-wares, which after they are pressed and
molded, do receive further ornament or beauty, as prest-monions for windows,
and prest-columnes, and such like, described in the Printed treatise of
Metallica.

And so sorth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 5. Terrica.
TErrica is an Ignick invention, for the cheaper making of all kinds of
Burnt-earths, by means of Metallicall instruments, whereupon the Materials
made by this Art, are called Terricks.

The contents of Terrica, in the sever all Materials which the Art makes.

The Terrick Materials, are all kind of burnt-earth, as 1. All bricks burnt or
baked, after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and invention, though made
and molded according to common order of Brick-makers. 2. All kind of Tiles
burnt or baked, after the said S. Surteuant his manner and invention, though
made, and molded according to common order of Tile-making. 3. All kind of
Potter-ware, burnt or baked after the said S. Sturteu. his manner and Invention,
though molded according to common order. 4. All kind of limes, plasters,
allablasters burnt, after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Invention.
5. All kind of Way-stones, Way-grauels, Way-earths, burnt and made after the
said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Invention, This art is called Itineraria.
6. Lastly, any other kind of burnt-earths, that here-after may be devised, as
good and profitable for the commonwealth, being made, burnt, and wrought,
after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Invention.


And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 6. Hydrelica.
HYdrelica, is an Ignick invention, for the cheaper making of all kinds of
hot liquids, or liquoures, by the means of Metallicall instruments,
whereupon the materials made by this art are called Hydrelicks.

The contents of Hydrelica in the several Materials which the Art makes.

1. The Hydrelick materials are, as All kind of Hydrelick waters and their
concreats, of which there are diverse sorts, as 1. All bathing waters, for
washing of the body. 2. All kind of washing, scouring waters, for washing of
foul vessels, foul linen and other cloth. 3. All kind of hot-borne, or
liquor, for making of bear or ale, or any other kind of Beauoridge. 4. All
kind of hot or warm waters for dying of cloth, silk, or leathers, etc. 5.
All kind of hot-waters for Felt-making. 6. Lastly, all hot-waters for other
trades, occupations or mysteries, as the Treatise further expresses.
2. Al kind of Hydrelick unctions, liquids, or liquours, which flame or burn,
and their concreats, as 1. Oils, Tallowes, Fatts, Marrowes, and such like. 2.
Waxes, Rossens, Pitches, Tarres, Turpentines, brimstones, and such like
unctions, gummes.
3. Al kind of Hydrelick liquors which are mixed and compounded of waterish and
unctious liquids and their concreats, as. 1. All kind of Sopes, whether they
be blacksopes, sweet-sopes, or white-sopes. 2. Any other compound Hydrelick,
which hereafter may be devised or found out, by the said S. Sturteuant his
invention.



And so sorth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 7. Hydrometallica.
HYdrometallica is an Ignick invention, which with the same furnace, makes at
the same time, Metalique Materials, and Hydrelick Materials, both together, by
means of Metallicall instruments, whereupon the Materials, made and brought
forth by this Art, are procreated as pares, twins and couples, and are called
from hence Hydrometalicks.

The contents of Hydrometallica, being an Invention compounded of two kinds,
is diverse and manifold, according to the several coupling and joining of the
opposite simples together.

As for example 2. Mettle-stones prepared and hot-waters. 1. Irons and
hot-waters. 3. Leads and hot-waters. 4. Tins and hot-waters. 5. Glasse-mettle
and hot-waters, and so other couples of opposite Metaliques and Hydrelicks.


And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned, and enlarged in the Printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 8. Hydropressoria.
HYdropressoria, is an Ignick invention, which with the same fire, and the same
furnace, makes at the same time Pres-wares and Hydrelick Materials both
together, by the means of the Metallicall instruments, whereupon the Materials
made and brought forth by this Art, are procreated, as pares, twins, or
couples, and are called from hence Hydro presswares.

The contents of Hydropressoria, being an Invention compounded of two kinds,
is diverse and manifold, according to the several coupling and joining of the
opposite simples together.

As for example.

1. Prest-pipes and hot-waters. 2. Prest-tiles and hot-waters. 3. Prest-bricks
and hot-waters. 4. Prest-monions and hot-waters. 5. And such like combination
and couples.
And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed
treatise of Metallica.

SECT. 9. Hydroterrica.
HYdroterrica is an Ignicke invention, which with the same fire, and the same
furnace, makes at the same time, Terricke materials, and Hydrelicke materials
both together, by means of metallicall instruments, whereupon the materials
made, and brought forth by this art, are procreated as pares, twins, or
couples, and are called from hence Hydroterrickes.

The contents of Hydroterrica, being an Invention compounded of two kinds, is
diverse and manifold, according to the several coupling, and joining of the
opposite simples together, as.

Burnt-earth, and hot-water.

As for Example. 1. Bricks, and hot-water. 2. Tiles, and hot-water. 3.
Potter-ware, and hot-water. 4. And such like combination, and couples.

And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed
treatise of Metallica.

Note also that the compound arts, being rightly and discreetely performed, are
far more profitable, then the practice of the single arts alone, and the
reason is, because that by such a compound furnace, two different works are
done at once, and in a manner with the same charge.

And these are the seven several heads, and kinds of inventions: The general
whereof is called Ignimetallica.

There are also diverse other new Arts, and inventions, which work not with
fire, al which arise (in respect of the means and instruments) from the
former, And therefore, the general of them all, is called Ignimetallica, or
Metall-organica, as was specified before.

SECT. 10. Metall-organica.
MEtall-organica is an invention Ignicke, for the cheaper making, and acquiring
of diverse profitable things, works, and materials, by the means of the
Metallicall instruments, fire only excepted, whereupon, the things made and
acquired by this art, are called Metall-organickes.

Metall-organica, comprehends many worthy inventions, whereof these seven
are principal, every one of them making royalties a piece, excepting the wood
pleite art.

First, then there is a new art and invention, Metallorganicke, with cheifely,
by means of Plegnicke instruments, makes a new kind of water-milnes,
wind-milnes, and wind water milnes, and a new kind of horse-milnes, and
hand-milnes, for the grinding of corn, tanners bark, brazill, for the sawing
of woods, making of oiles, battering of Irons and coppers, and for tuckeage,
and fulleage of woollen cloth, or yeallow oyled leathers, or for any other use
or purpose whatsoever, which other milnes are ordinarily turned into. And these
Metalorganicke milnes, are less chargeable to make, set up, keep and repair,
and yet more necessary and convenient, then the ordinary sort of milnes,
which be now in use.

Secondly, there is another new art and invention, Metallorganicke, which
chiefly by means of Plegnicke instruments, makes also an artificial kind of
waterworke, for the abundant raising and mounting of water, after an easier
order, then those that are already in use in the common wealth.

Thirdly, there is another new art and invention Metallorganicke, which chiefly
by means of Plegnicke and Lenick instruments, jointly together, makes
singular, effectual and most excellent devices. and means for the dreyning
and drying of marshes, fennes, and low-grounds.

Fourthly, there is another new art and invention Metallorganicke, which
chiefly by means of Plegnike and Lenicke instruments, jointly together, makes
singular, effectual and most excellent devises and means for the ridding,
clearing, and mounting of waters out of Colepits and Minerals, the like was
never in use or practice before.

And here the Balance engine, made of presswares, is of great and worthy good
use.

Fifthly, there is another new art and invention Metalorganicke, which chiefly
by means of Plegnicke, Lenicke, and Caminicke instruments, ioyntely together
makes singular, effectual and most excellent devises for the firtelizing,
hartening, and improuing of pasture ground, corn ground, and all other barren
grounds whatsoever.

Sixthly, there is another new art and invention Metallerganicke, which chiefly
by means of the Plegnicke instuments, makes very effectual and beneficial
instruments of fishing, as new kind of Burces, new kind of Nettage, and
Bateage, by which new devised means great abundance of fish may be caught
with far less charges, and in shorter time, then by the ordinary arts of
fishing.

Seventhly, there is another new art and invention, Metallorganicke, which
chiefly by means of the Plegnicke instruments makes diverse kinds of
househould moueables, as artificial Doors, Windows, Curteines, Presses,
Tables, Stools, Beadsteds, Hangings, Chests, and diverse other things,
handsomer and more convenient then heretofore is done by the ordinatie way of
other stuff.

Where note, that the Materials made by this Mechanicke art, are called
wood-pleits.

And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed
treatise of Metallica.

CAP. 3. Heuretica defined and divided into his real and Tecknick parts.
R.

6. SIR you having thus set down both the Transcript of his Majesty's
Indenture and the Schedules anexed, I pray you proceed more fully to entreat of
the doctrine of Metallica, which seems to be handled in the next place.

A. It appears out of the first Section of the Schedules, annexed to the
Patent, that the doctrine of Metallica cannot distinctly be known or
Methodically expressed, except that the art which prescribes precepts, general
to all arts and Inventions, called Heuretica, be first precognized.

R. 7. Define therefore breefely Heuretica.

A. Heuretica is the Art of Inventions, teaching how to find out new, and to
judge of the old.

R. 8. What division is there for Heuretica?

A. The doctrine of Inventions has two parts Real and Technick.

R. 9. Define the Real part.

A. Real is the first Part of Heuretica, which treats of the Instruments and
Real things, which belong to the Inventions.

R. 10. How is the real part divided;

A. The Real part spreads it self into two branches, whereof the first is
called Organick, and the other Emporeuticall or Polecall.

R. 11. Define the Organick part.

A. The organick is a part of Heuretica, which sets down the means and
Instruments, whereby the work of Art, intended, is brought forth, made and
effected,

R. 12. Define the Emporeuticall or Poleck part.

A. The Emporeutick is an Organick part of Heuretica, which treats of the
work of the art, which are commodities and wares for use and sale, whereby
profit is raised.

Where note that the commodities, wares and things of every invention, for
general use, are called from this part Emporeuticks.

Note also, that Emporeuticks, being things artificial, are also fitly called
materials, but if they be natural, they are called things accquired by the
art. So fish and foul are the Emporeutick things, acquired by the art of
fishing and fouling, but lead and Iron are Emporeutick Materials made and
wrought by Metallicque art.

R. 13. Define the Technick part.

A. The Technick is that habitual part of Heuretica, which treats of the
dexterous habit and faculty wherewith all the Artizands are to be quallified
and endowed, who are appointed to make the Emporeutick works of Inventions,

CAP. 4. Another partition of Heuretica and an Invention Mechanic defined.
R.

14 WHat other division is there for Heuretica?

A Heuretica in respect of the work intended is divided into two parts,
namely, into the Scientiffick part and Mechanic part.

R. 15. Define the Scientiffick part.

A. The Scientiffick is that part of Heuretica which prescribes prceepts
general to all liberal arts, the end of which Arts, is cheefely Science or
knowledge and not any real visible work, or sensible thing.

R. Define the Mechanic part.

A. The Mechanic part is that part of Heuretica which prescribes precepts
general to all illiberall arts, the end of which arts is chiefly a real
visible work or sensible thing.

And the Invention in this kind is called an Invention Mechanic.

R. 16. Define therefore an Invention Mechanic.

A. A Mechanic Invention is the art of the Inuentor, which by effectual
Instruments and means brings forth some new visible or sensible work good
and profitable to the commonwealth.

So the Invention of printing is the skill and art of Faustus Guttenbergius,
which mystery (by the effectual devised means of the Press, the Incke, the
Characters and paper) brings forth impressions and Books, which Mechanic
works are profitable and good for man's use.

Where note, that, First the Mechanic Art, secondly the Instruments and
means, thirdly the work of the art, made by those Instruments, and means,
are all called Mechanics, and are all Inventions in respect of the Author that
devised them.

R. 17. Express further every word and clause of this definition, to the
intent that I may the better understand them.

A. Your desire shall be satisfied. First then to speak of the thing defined,
you must note that any other device, course or way which brings forth no
external or Material work, are also in respect of the Inuentor termed
Inventions.

So the first discovery of the west Indies by Columbus, (in respect of him) is
fitly called his Invention, and the turning point of Navigations called the Cape
of bona Speranca is Gaymus his invention the like may be said of fretum
Magellanicum, and fretum Dauies, which although they are laudable Inventions,
discovered by ingenious and venturous persons, yet cannot they be said to be
Mecanicks. because they produce or leave behind them Mechanic work, nor had
any Mechanic instruments made by hands of man directly, and of purpose for the
performance of them, for these Mechanics are only propper to these kinds of
inventions which we treat of.

R. 18. Wherefore call you an invention a Mechanic Art.

A. To put a distinction between these inventions Mechanical, and other
inventions of the liberal Arts and Sciences, of which sort are Logic,
Rhetoric, Grammar, and the Mathematical sciences, all which had their first
Authors and Inuentors.

R. 19. Wherefore say you the art of Inuentioner.

A. To show that there is no Invention without relation to the Inuentioner.

R. 20. Why then it seems that all Arts, sciences, mysteries, trades, crafts,
things and devises, which are now extant in the commonwealth, are, and may be
called Inventions.

A. Yea verily so they may, if we respect the Inuentioner, and first Authors
of them, but if we respect the persons that use and put in practice the said
Inventions at the second hand, as we say, such as are the Artificers, Tradesmen
and others that make the said Mechanic works, in respect of these secondary
persons they are called Arts, Trades, Crafts, Syences, Mysteries, Occupations,
Professions, and slightes, etc.

So the printing, as also the Press, the Paper, the Characters, together with
the works done, as impressions, books, and vollumes, in respect of Faustus are
his Invention, but in respect of Printers, which now a days work by his
invention, Printing is rightly called an art, trade, or mystery, the like may
be said of all other Mechanical trades now extant in the commonwealth, and
of all other profitable inventions, which here-after may be brought to light in
the commonwealth.

R. 21. To what use serves the knowledge of this.

A. This fitly serves to refute the erroneous folly of such shallow simple
persons, which cannot abide any new invention, which this our age brings
forth, they utterly distaste both the proiects and Inuentors, they forsooth (as
they say) will give no assistance, they will not meddle nor deal with them,
they will not use their new work, though never so good and profitable, nay
they say more, after their fond fashion, it will never prove good, or come to
pass, with a hundred such like speeches, tending to the dispraise both of the
Inuentioner, and of things devised by him, but being demanded for their reason,
they have none to allege, except only a woman's reason, like unto that of the
Epigrammatist: Non amo te Volusi, non possum dicere quare,
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.


But if these men, who so much spurn at inventions, did well consider, that
all ancient Mechanic trades, occupations, professions and works, which now
are in use in the commonwealth, were new at the first, and had their beginning
and infancy, and how they were then the peculiar inventions of some ingenious
wits, who traveled with all their endeavors to bring forth the said
inventions, to the good of that age wherein they lived. If I say they did well,
consider and ponder this, they would not be so auerse and bitter against
laudable, and good proiects, brought forth now a days, for with as good reason
they might enueigh against printing, shipping, milning and buildings, against
the ordinary ways of making of salts, alloms, coppresses, and saultpeeter,
against the trade and art of making of hats, and knit-stockings, shoes,
boots, and apparel, against the art and trade of making of saddles, carts,
ploughes, harrowes, and against the art of melting, founding, and casting of
mettles, of forging, hammering, and battering of irons, brass, peuters,
silver, and gould; and finally against all other trades, occupations,
vocations, and professions in the commonwealth, as so basely to regard and
esteem the proffitable and new inventions of our days. Again, in scorning,
and contemning of profitable business of late invention, they set themselves
not only against man, but also against the spirit of God, who is the author
of the said gifts, and first work of them in man, as it is expressly taught
in the 31. of Exodus: in the example of two worthy inuentioners, and
artificers, the words of the text are these. Behold (says God to Moses) I
have called by name Bezaleele the son of Vri, the son of Hur, of the tribe
of Judah, whom I have filled with the spirit of God in wisdom and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all workmanship, to find out curious
works, to work in gold, in silver, and in brass. Also the Art to set stones,
and to carue in timber, and to work in all manner of workmanship. And behold
I have joined with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamah of the tribe of Dan, and
in the hearts of all that are wise-harted, I have put wisdom to make all that
I have commanded thee.

Out of which words of holy Scripture it is apparent that all Mechanicke Arts
and Inventions, as well as the graces of salvation, are the peculiar works,
and gifts of Gods holy spirit in man, which blows where, and when he lists,
and powers out his spirit, upon some men in every age.

CAP. 5. Transient isntrumental means.
R. 22. In the definition of the Organicke part, you say that the work is
produced by instruments and means, I would therefore know of you, how many
kinds of instruments and means there are to effect a new business.

A. The Organick things for the effecting of a new Invention are of two sorts,
Permanent or Transient.

R. 23. Describe the Transient Instrument and means.

A Instruments and means are said to be Transient, when in respect of their
use, they serve but once for that employment for which they were appointed, so
fuel and oar are Transient, because they wast and consume in that Material
which they make.

R. 24. How many kinds are there of this Transient sort

A. Two: Efficientall, or Material.

R. 25. Describe the Efficientall Instruments.

A. Efficientall are such Transient Instruments and means as vanish and
consume away in their first use, whilst they are performing their operation and
efficiency to produce the pretended Mechanic work, as namely the fuel or
fiering in every business.

R. 26. Describe the Material Instruments.

A. Material, are such Transient Instruments and means whereof the Instruments
consist and are made, not vading or vanishing away, but remaining transformed
or altered in the substance of the thing effected, as namely the stuff and
matter of every Mechanic instrument.

CAPVT. 6. Permanent Instruments and means.
R.

27. I understand well the Transient instruments, with their several kinds,
pray you describe the permanent.

A. Instruments and means are said to be permanent when as they serve to
perform their operations diverse times (to wit) in this thing, in that thing,
and in many others, of this sort are all tools in every trade, all kilnes,
furnaces, ouens, hearthes, in every trade. If we respect the first making and
creation of permanent instruments, then must we consider their efficientall,
and material means also.

R. 28. How many kinds are their of this sort.

A. Two, for these permanent means, are either personal, as namely the
workman and artificers in every action; or else impersonall, of which sort are
all other instruments of the business.

R. 29. How many sorts of workmen are there for every invention.

A. Two, primary, and annual, primarie as the inuentioner to guide, and
artificers to make, the annual are the daily workmen which make the
Mechanicke.

R. 30. How many artificers are necessary for the prymarie, and first
foundation of mechanicke inventions.

A. These subsequent are most necessary, as namely; Ioyners, Carpenters,
Smithes, Brickelayers, Masons, whereunto in several inventions, diverse other
Artificers are to be added, as occasion serves, as Shoomakers, Glouers,
Bellowes-makers etc.

R. 31. How many sorts of annual workmen are necessary for the yearly
managing of an invention.

A. Two, the master and ouerseer, or his apprentices, or servants, which make
the mechanicke work, And secondly, the repairationers, which maintain and
mend the instruments and means which at the first they made and formed.

R. 32. What distribution have you for impersonall instruments.

A. The impersonall instruments, are either general or special, the general
is the worke-house wherein other instruments do their operations, work and
employment, and under this head we comprehend the ground, place, yard, or
room, where the Mechanicke business is wrought or done. The special
impersonall instruments, are all other impersonall instruments, besides the
worke-house or place. Amongst which impersonall instruments furnacing may here
be briefly touched as being a necessary instrument in most inventions.

R. 33. How define you a furnace.

A. A furnace is the artificial receptacle, which bears and contains
fuel and the fire.

R. 34. How may kinds are comprehended under this head of furnacing.

A. Diverse, as namely all kind of ouens, lamps, stoues, kilnes, hearths, all
which we generally comprehend under the name of Furnacing.

CAP. 7. Instruments and means procured and merely opperatiue, moneys and
charges of a business.
R.

35. WHat other distribution have you of instruments, and means of a business,
in respect of charges.

A. Organicke means of a Mechanicke, are either procuring, or merely
opperatiue.

The procuring means is money to be impended and disbursed in charges.

It is the instrument of instruments, and mean of means, procuring all other
instruments and means merely opperatiue, and when once they are procured and
provided by it, it measures their worth and valluation, whereupon Aristotle
calls it, communis mensura omnium.

R. 36. What is generally to be known and considered, concerning the moneys to
be disbursed in a business.

A. Moneys or charges of a business, are either primarie and once impended, or
else annual, and at certain times to be renewed.

R. 37. What differences are their of primary moneys.

A. Primary moneys are either disbursements about the first foundation, or
about the trial.

R. 38. What call you fundamental charges.

A. Charges of foundation are all such primary moneys which are to be disbursed
at the first erection or setting up of a new business, or of grand
Mechanickes, in some one convenient place, whereby a worke-house is furnished
with all permanent necessary tools and instruments.

R. What call you charges of trial.

A. Charges of trial are the primary moneys which are bestowed and disbursed
about the trial and experimenting of an invention or new business.

R. 40. Wherein consists the chief charges of trial.

A. The trial moneys are to be disbursed first about the Theoricke
instruments, and means of an invention, that is the whole description of an
invention. Whether it be by way of manuscript writings, or printed treatises.

Secondly, about the moddles of an invention, whether they be superficial, or
real, motionall or directionall.

And lastly about the erection and foundation of the Protoplast, unto which all the other grand mechanickes are to be conformed.

R. 41. Concerning the charge of trial, what is fittest for an Inuentioner to
demand of them that are willing to deal in a new business.

It is the wisest, safest, and most credible course for the Inuentioner, not to
ask underhand, whereby he shall be driven to repair to them again the
second time, but rather at the first let him ask and agree for more money, and
not for less then will serve the turn.

R. 42. What other chief rules ought an Inuentioner carefully to observe in
the practice and trial of any new invention.

A. That he may make trial and put in practice his new devise and invention
with good success and to purpose, let him always well remember these
subsequent rules.

1. Make things stronger, then that exact strength which the thing is to have.

2. Make things greater then that exact greatness which the thing is to have.

3. And therefore make things longer, broader, thicker and wider, then that
exact length, breadth, thickness and wideness that the thing is to have.

4 Make more in number then that exact number which is required to serve the
turn.

5. Take longer time for a new business then will serve the turn.

6 For quallities as hardness, softnes, dryness, moistnes, stiffnes, toughnes,
etc. observe this Rule.

Let things be tempered to a greater quallity then will serve the turn.

7. Yet if the Inuentioner can make the thing in the exact truth, then let him
do it accordingly, for this is always least chargeable.

R. 43. In the first trial of things can the Inuentioner perfectly hit on the
exactness of every particular instrument and means belonging to the new
business.

A. The Undertakers and dealers are to expect some loss in trial of new
businesses, be the Inuentioner never so perfect in his Theorick; for although
he do his best indeauor, and give perfect directions to his workmen and
Artificers, yet they will often fail and err in their work, by which means
the instrument being experimented and put to trial, becomes insufficient, for
the appointed use, and many times the Inuentioner in some one point may fail
himself; for which there is no help but only to redress and amend the fault
in the instrument, or else to make a new instrument in the others stead,
neither of which can be done but with further charge.

R. 44. What call you the Annual charges of an invention.

A. Annual, are such monyes which from time to time, upon occasion, are
bestowed after the first Plantation upon the repairing, maintaining, and
continuing the said primary instruments belonging to the said new business.

CAPVT. 8. Inventions intermixtand pure moddle, Protoplast and grand Mechanic
defined.
YOu have handled the doctrine of the general means and Instruments of
Inventions, proceed I pray you to speak of the differences and diverse kinds
of Inventions, and First therefore I desire to know.

R. 45. How many sorts or kinds of Invention are there being compared or
considered one with another?

A. Two, An Invention is either pure or intermixed, an Invention is said to be
pure and entire within it self, when as none of the parts essential are
common to any other Invention for the same use.

Intermixed when as some of the parts are found in some other former invention.

So a Windmill is an intermixed Invention, because some of the parts, as namely
the Milne stones, the rong-wheeles and the Cogg-wheeles were first extant in
awater-milne or horse-milne and quernes.

But a hand-Querne was a pure and simple Invention because none of the parts
there of were formerly extant in any other Mechanic.

And so printing is a pure and simple Invention, because none of the essential
parts thereof were taken from any former Invention, where they were applied to
the same use.

Where note that the common parts of an intermixed Invention are to be esteemed
as propper and peculiar to the same Invention, when as they are conjoined and
mixed in with other new things Instruments and means, which are the essential
parts of the new devise.

R. 46. What other distribution have you of an invention in respect of
magnitude.

A. In respect of greatness or quantity, there are three sorts of inventions,
namely the Moddle, the Protoplast, and the grand Mechanic.

R. 47. Describe the Moddle.

A. The Moddle is a Mechanic, which only represents and decyphereth, in
some little platform, the true part and lineaments of the Mechanic invention,
being insufficient to yield any Emporeutick use of the invention.

So the Moddle of a winde-milne, represents the fails and other parts of
Fabric and structure, but grindeth no corn.

Where note, that some times the moddle is to be made greater then the
Mechanic, esp ecially in small curious things, as in a watch, and such like.

R. 48. How many sorts of moddles are there.

A. Two, Superficial and Real.

The Superficial describes only the parts and line aments in paper, bordes
or past-bords, by limning, drawing, or painting, showing no action or
opperation, nor corporal dimensions of the parts.

A Real moddle is that which shows every part of the greater Mechanic, in a
true and lively (though little) proportion, having his parts fitted for motion,
action, or opperation: Nevertheless it is not so effectual or fully useful,
being only representative, as was touched before.

So a little ship, which you have hanging up in a merchants house, is the Real
moddle of a grand ship or sea vessel, because it represents every part and
action thereof.

R. 49. What is the principal use of a Real Moddle.

A. The cheifest use of a real moddle is that the Invention may thereby more
perfectly and exactly direct both himself, and also guide his workmen for the
finishing of any grander Mechanic of the same kind, thereby the better to
produce and bring forth the Theorick conceived in his mind into the grand Real
Invention.

So the use of a small real moddle of a Wind-milne serves uery fitly to
direct both the Inuentor himself and likewise all his Carpenters and other
workmen, to proceed infallibly to build and set up a real and grand windmilne
intended to be made.

R. 50. How many sorts of real moddles are there.

A. There are two sorts, for either they are merely directionall or also
motionall.

Directionall is that moddle which is made only to direct and guide the
Artificer in the dimensions of all the parts, as also for to direct them for
the kinds of the matter and the stuff that they are to have to make the engine
intended.

R. 51. What is the fittest and cheapest stuff to make a directionall moddle
of.

A. Past-boordes and reeds are the fittest either for Iron-works or woodworks,
whereof the Past-bords are in stead of boordes, plancks and bed-sides.

And the Reeds are to represent round Cylindriack timber, as also other square
timber, as namely single quarters, double quarters, puncheons, rafters,
transummes etc.

So that of these the Inuentioner may fitly and speedily make and contriue the
fabric and structure of any directionall moddle.

R. 52. What call you a motionall moddle.

A. A motionall is that moddle Real which is made complete in every part,
having his true use, opperation and motion, as in the grander Mechanickes, yet
having no Emporeuticke commodity, but only for show and trial, and not for
sale and use.

There are three degrees in this motionall moddle, the mean moddle, the lesser
then the mean, the greater then the mean.

The mean moddle is a motionall, which has his magnitude and greatness
between the other extremes, being the least chargeable to be made. And it is
always greater then the lesser motionall, and lesser then the greater motion
all: and there is but one mean modle to be found in the progressio^ of the
same degres

Where note that it belongs principally to the Inuentioners skill and care to
set forth the dimensions and parts of his moddle, intended with the least
expense of charges that may be, and in the easiest and rediest manner for his
workmen to understand and imitate, or else he hitteth not upon the mean
moddle, but upon some other extreme.

R. 53. Define the Protoplast.

A. The Protoplast is an Invention mechanic which first is set up of that
kind, and serving to profitable Emporeuticke uses, having all the principal
parts, actions, and perfections, which all other subsequent grand Mechanics
ought to have of the same kind, which afterward are to be made and framed by
it.

So the first windmilne that the inuentioner ever set up to grind corn was
the Protoplast and example from whence all other wind-milnes sprange and were
derived, the like may be said of the first of every kind of Mechanicke, as of
Faustus his first Printing Press, etc.

R. 54. Define a grand Mechanicke.

A. The grand Mechanicke, is that which is set up after the form and tipe of
his Protoplast, for the same use and purpose, only differing from the
Protoplast in greatness, or with some profitable additions which later
experience has taught.

So the Windmilnes in More-fields are Mechanics of that kind of invention,
for they are builded after the Archerype of the Protoplast which the inuentor
first invented and erected, serving to the same use of grinding of corn; they
differ only in this, they have a devise called the Crampe, which will suddenly
stay (in the face of the storm) the violent motion or circumgyration of the
wheels, until the sales are taken down or fardled up.

CAP. 9. Innentions Heterocresious and Homocresious, primative, and deriuatiue,
defined.
Reader.

55. What other distribution have you of a Mechanic invention, considered one
with an other.

A. Inventions considered compasatiuely one with another, have two differences,
for they are either Heterocresious, or else Homocresious.

Heterocresious, are inventions which produce different Mechanic works, wares
and commodities. So milning and shipping are two Heterocresious inventions,
because the work of the one is meal or flower, and the work of the other is
carriage or transportage.

R. 56. Define Homocresious Inventions.

A. Homocresious inventions, are such which produce and bring forth
Emporeuticall works for the same use.

So a horse-milne, a water milne, a wind-milne are Homocresious, because they
all grind flower, though after different manner and ways.

R. 57. What distribution have you for Homocresious.

A. An Invention Homocresious, is either primative or deriuatiue, the primative
is that which was the first in use in the world of the same kind.

So a Pestle and a Mortar is a primative invention, because it was first used
for to beat and bruise corn into meal and powder, and at this day it is still
used to grind eaten grotes, but a hand-querne, a hors-milne, a winde-milne,
and a water-milne, are Inventions deriuatiue, all which were found out in
succession of time, long after the pestle and the mortar.

R. 58. Give some other illustrious examples of primative and deriuatiue
inventions.

A. In matters of literature, the Art of writing with the pen, is a worthy
primative invention, both for writing and reading, found out by Moses, that
learned Leuite and thrice holy Prophet, the deriuatiue invention, whereof is
Printing, a far more exquisite mystery devised of late years by Faustus
Guttenbergius.

So in husbandry the Spade, the Rake, and Shouell, was a worthy primative
invention of Adam, for the tillage and sowing of the ground, according to that
ancient and old proverb.

When Adam dug, and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman.
But the Plough and the Harrow are their deriuatiue inventions, which for the
uses of husbandry do far exceed them, for by them more work of tillage of
the ground may be done in one day with the same charge, then could be done by
their primative inventions in twenty days.

Again the Barrow which carries burdens from places is a primative invention,
but the Cart with wheels is a far more excellent derived Mechanic, because it
carries more in one day, then the primative can do in ten days with the same
charges.

And this Invention of round wheels to draw and carry loades with a small
strength undoubtedly was grounded on this Geometrical axiom, Circulus tangit
planum vnico puncto, for if the wheels should have been made square, trencher
wise, or in any other poly-angle, forty horses would not so easily draw them
being laden, as two does now with both speed and ease. And thus much for the
example of primative and deriuatiue Inventions.

Where note, that the deriuatiue must always be of a greater use, and do
more good in the common wealth, then the primative, or else it is not to be
received.

Note also, if there be many deriuatiues in the same kind, the latter
invention must always better the former, and being all of them compared and
rancked with their primative, they make an Inuentionall progression, one
exceeding an other, in goodness and use, amongst which, the last of all ought
to be the best, and is therefore called the Eumechanick in the progression of
that kind.

R. 59. Give some examples of Inuentionall progression.

A. I will satisfy your desire, and first in matter of husbandry, for the
making of bread, which mainteineth the life of man, there is a progression of
these five Inventions.

First the Mortar, secondly the Hand-querne, thirdly the Horse-milne, fourthly
the Water-milne, fifthly the Winde-milne.

To which if we add the invention of the Plegnick Milne, it makes up the
sixth, and is the Eumechanick of that kind.

Secondly, in hose or stockings, there is a progression of three, cloth or
kersey stockings, which were first in use: Secondly in knit stockings with
Needles: Thirdly, and lastly, in knit stockings with loome, which is a late
Invention of one Master Lee.

Thirdly, in vessels of drinking, there is a large progression. For first, to
pretermit the cup of the hand, out of which Adam and Gedeons three hundred
Soldiers drank, Judge. 7.6. There is secondly the earthen Pitcher, which the
Samaritane woman had at the Well: and the third room came up the use of the
black Leather Iacks, an ancient drinking vessel of our native countrymen, and
the fourth place sprung up the use of Tankards and Wodden Kans, in the fifth out
of Horns, in the sixth Silues, Gould, greene-Glasse, Venice glass, and Peuter.

All inventions, for the most part, of latter times, are deriuatiue, and the
Inuentioners are to make choice of this kind, and needs the less to spend
his time about any primative device.

CAP. 10. Inventions organicall and emporeuticall: The parts and adjuncts: The
Theoricke and Practicke of an Invention Organicall.
R.

60. What other distribution is their of an invention Mechanicke.

A. An invention Mechanicke, in respect of use is either Organicall or
Emporeuticall.

An Invention Organicall is that artificial fabric or structure compacted of
all impersonall instruments and means which make the Emporeuticke commodities.

So the windmilne considered in it self is the compact, structure or fabric,
which comprehends all permanent instruments and means which produce, yield,
and bring forth meal or flower.

But the flower and meal thus ground and made by the windemilne Engine is fitly
called the invention emporeuticall.

So likewise the whole structure and complement of all the permanent, and
impersonall instruments, and means which make up the Ferricall furnace, is
termed the invention.

R. 61. What differences have you for the parts of an Invention Organicall.

A. The parts of an invention Organicall, are either essential or
inessentiall, common or peculiar Organicall.

But the earth-coale iron which is made by the said complement, and panoply of
instruments is fitly called the Emporeuticall invention of the Author or
Inuentor.

R. 62. Describe the essential parts of an invention Organicall.

A. The essential part of an invention Organicall is any maine and chief
member, whereby the engine is well enabled to perform his work and operation,
which being lacking, the other parts of the engine become ineffectuall, and
inoperatiue, for the producing the Emporeuticke intended.

So a windmilne consists of all hisessential parts, besides his cross sales
is ineffectuall and not able to grind corn, the like may be said if it lack
a cogwheele, a ronge wheel, a milne-stone, or any other essential part.

R. 63. Describe an inessentiall part of an Invention Organicall.

A. An inessentiall part is an additament, which indeed somewhat bettereth and
helps the Invention, when it is added to the maine complement of the Machin,
or Engine, yet being lacking and not used, it takes not away the opperation or
work of the invention or engine: of this sort, is the crampe of a windmilne,
which is a very good and worthy addittament, found out by some ingenious Milner
of late, and it is able to hold the cross sales immovable, even in the very
blast of a storm.

Yet wind-milnes which have not nor had not this later addition of the crampe
do daily grind corn as well as other wind-milnes which are there withal
furnished.

But in a storm they are driven to this inconvenience: that three or four
must presently go down to turn their cross fails out of the wind, that
they may take down and fardle up their sails.

So likewise the brass plate and the rouling girth are necessary and
convenient additions in the engine of the Printing Press, and both of them were
of late years first devised (as it is said) by one Master Haruie an ingenious
Printer in London.

Yet before they were added or used in the mystery of Printing, Faustus his
invention was absolute and complete of it self.

R. 64 Describe the common parts of an invention Organicall.

The common parts are such as are borrowed from other trades, occupations and
mysteries formerly invented and in use, and now adjoined and mixed in, amongst
the new parts of the Invention.

R. 65. What call you the peculiar parts of an invention.

A. The peculiar parts are such as are proper and of the essence of the
invention, not being taken from any other Mechanicke, formerly in use.

So the sails, the milne-post, the spurs of a wind-milne are his peculiar
parts, but the cogge-wheeles, ronge-wheeles, and milnestones are common parts
as being assumed and borrowed from the horse-milne and water-milne formerly in
use.

R. 66. What differences have you for the adjuncts of an invention Organicall.

A. The adjuncts of an invention Organicall have the same differences, which
the parts of an invention had before.

For the adjuncts are either essential or inessentiall, common or peculiar,
the nature and distinction of which differences may be easily conceived and
understood by the descriptions of the former several parts.

R. 67. What other differences have you for the adjuncts of an invention
Organicall.

A. The adjuncts of an invention Organicall are also necessary or less
necessary.

Necessary adjuncts are all such which of necessity are to be used for the
producing of the intended Mechanicke.

And the less necessary are all such which bringes some small help to make
and bring forth the Emporeuticke.

R. 68. What distribution have you of an invention Organicall.

A. An invention is said to have a Theoricke or a Practicke.

R. 69. What call you Theoricke Invention.

A. The Theoricke of an invention is the declaration of the contents thereof by
a plain and familiar description, and that either by manuscript writings or by
printed treatises.

R. 70. What Arguments are chief for the description of an Invention.

A. The arguments of the parts and adjuncts, or the Arguments of Instruments
and means.

R. 71. Do the parts, and adjuncts, and Instruments, and means, express
diverse means.

A. No, for by parts and adjuncts are understood the self same things, which
are meant by instruments and means, but yet in diverse and different respects:
for they are called parts and adjuncts in respect that the Mechanic Engine
subsisteth and consists of them, but in respect of the Emporeutick, which is
made by them, the said parts and adjuncts are fitly called Instruments and
means.

So a printing Press has his several parts, whereupon it does consist, as the
screw, the nut, the pare-tree and the chase, etc. it has also his adjuncts
belonging to it, as the Inck and the Inck-bals etc. which said parts and
adjuncts of the Press considered, with the printed papers, books and
impressions which are the saleable Emporeutick works. I say in this respect
they are called Instruments and means whereby printed Books are atteined unto.

R 72. Define a practick of an Invention.

A The practick of an Invention is that which is made in real parts and
adiunct, according to the description of the Theorick of an invention.

So if you describe an Iron furnace by every part and adiunct which belongs
thereunto, such a description is called the Theorick of a Furnace, but afterward
if you make a real Furnace, either of moddle, stuff or of brick, clay, or
earth, according to the description and Theorick proportions, then such a
Furnace is called the practick of a Furnace, the like may be said of any other
Mechanic or Engine.

R. 73. What cannons have you of an invention in respect of the Theorick.

A. The Theorick of an Invention is to be described by his parts and adjuncts
that other men's labors and indeauors be incroached upon or forestalled
thereby.

CAP. 11. An Invention triable and vntriable conformable and inconformable,
Royal and Coppy-hold.
R.

74 WHat other kinds or sorts have you of an Invention.

A. An Invention is two fould, An Invention of discovery, or an invention of
experiment, or an Invention is triable, or vntriable.

R. 75. What call you a triable Invention.

A. A triable Iuuention is an invention whose worth and goodness cannot
certainly appear before trialls and experiments be made, not only in the
moddles thereof, but also in the Protop last it self.

Of this sort, are all the Inventions Metallicall, comprised in the Patent and
also the Invention called the Register for general commerce.

R. 76. Define an invention vntriable.

A. An vntryable invention is a new project or discovery, whose worth and
goodness requires no trials, but may be judged and discerned only by the
description or declaration of the plot and project.

Of this sort are all Monopolies, new customs, imposts, taxations, subsidies,
statutes, with fines, and diverse other state businesses, discoueries and
inventions, which are ordinarily propounded or petitioned of his Majesty.

Of this sort is Sepherica, a late invention of the Authors, the project and
contents whereof shall be handled in a treatise called Sepherica.

R. 77. How many sorts of tryable inventions are there.

A. An invention tryable is either conformeable or inconformeable.

R. 78. Define a conformeable invention.

A. A conformeable invention is an invention tryable which reformeth and
bettereth a former invention (requiring but some small and not chargeable
alteration) after that the new is united to the old.

So the Iron furnaces, fineries and chafferies may be much reformed and
bettered with small charges, having our Ferricall invention united to them, and
therefore the Ferricall invention is fitly called a conformeable invention.

R. 79. What Cannons or rules have you for a conformeable invention.

A. Conformeable invention being priueledged is far more beneficial and
commodious to the Pattentees and the dealers in that business, the^ an
inconformable invention, and the reason is because that imediatly after the
grand trials are brought to pass and performed in the Protoplast, they may
choose whether they will be at any further charge, and yet they may raise
present rent and benefit by conforming of the former inventions to the
Protoplast, and not at theirs, but only at the charges of the owners of former
works and inventions.

R. 80. Define an inconformable invention.

A. An invention is said to be inconformable whose Protoplast being erected and
set up, cannot be conformed to any former invention in use, where by yearly
profits of conformity may be raised without charges to the Pattentees and
dealers.

So the presseware invention makes tiles and brickes, and all other clayworks,
after a far more gainefull and beneficial manner then by the ordinary
course, yet nevertheless it is an inconformable invention, because that the
ordinary Arts of tilemaking and brick-making cannot be conformed unto the
Presse-ware Protoplast with some small alterations and small charges.

R. 81. What Cannons or Rules have you of an inconformable invention.

A. An inconformable invention requires a great stock and great disbursements
for the Pattentees, to lay out, as well for the Protaplest as also for some two
or three grander Mechanics thereof.

Secondly an inconformable invention after the erection and perfection of the
Protoplast in continewance of time, may raise great rents and fines by
licenses, leases and devises though no by present conformity.

R. 82. What other distribution have you for an invention Mechanicke.

A. An invention Mechanicke, is either privileged or vnpriuiledged, again it
is either a royalty or a coppy-hould.

A royalty is such a new business, which in regard of the greatness thereof
belongs peculiarly to the King.

Or a royalty is an invention Mechanicke which produces extraordinary and
worthy yearly profits and revenues, whose valuation exceeds the sum of
ten thousand pounds. per annum.

R. 83. Define a coppy-hould invention.

A. A Coppy-hould is an invention whose yearly valuation and worth exceeds
not the sum of ten thousand pounds. per annum.

84. What cannons or rules have you concerning royal or coppy-hould Inventions.

A. These Cannons belong to a Royal Invention, first, no subject or subjects,
of what estate or degree soever by his service or demerit, except the Queen
mother, the Kings children, is capeable of a whole entire royalty, and
therefore if the King have passed away way a royalty, ignorantly, he may
justly recall and revoke his grant.

Secondly, a subject may by his service to his Prince and Country, demerit part
or portion of a royalty, it being no greater then a Coppy-hould.

R. 85. What Cannons or Rules belong to a Mechanicke in respect of privilege
or impriueledge.

A. First, it is most reasonable and fitting that a Mechanicke invention should
be priueledged for a certain time wholly to the Inuentioner and Author, if so
be it be but of the yearly value of a Coppy-hould.

Secondly, the first Inuentor of a Royalty though of mean degree has as
great demerit in the invention, as any other subject of what estate or degree
soever, excepting Royal persons.

R. 86. What Cannons or rules have you concerning Royalties.

A. There are diverse other rules and observations which I spare to speak of at
this time, because at further leisure I purpose to Print a little Tractate of
Royalties and coppy-houlds, which is a parcel of this treatise of Metallita.

CAP. 12. Cannons or rules serving to judge of the goodness of a deriuatine
Invention Emporeuticall.
R

87 How may those who are willing to deal in the trial of new inventions
judge of their goodness.

A. There are many infallible Rules by which if a diriuatiue Invention be
examined, we may easily judge of the goodness thereof, but to reduce this
doctrine to some head, we are to consider both the general virtues, and
general faults in inventions.

R. 88. What are the general virtues by which an Invention is to be examined.

The virtues of an Invention are of two degrees, the lesser and the greater,
and each degree is three-fould.

R. 89. Which are the lesser virtues of a deriuatiue Invention.

A. These three, Equi sufficiency, Equi-cheapenes, Equi excellency.

R. 90. What mean you by Equi-sufficiencie.

A. Equal sufficiency is when the new Invention or Emporeuticke is as
sufficient and as good for use as the old.

So Printed books are as sufficient and as good to read as written
Manuscripts, and the meal grinded by the winde-milne, is as good and
sufficient to make bread as that which is grinded by the water-milnes, and
earthen pipes by the Pressorian Art, being well made are as strong to hold and
convey water as leaden pipes or potters pots, which two kinds of water
conueiances werein use long before presse-ware pipes were invented.

R. 91. What mean you by the second virtue which you call equi-cheapenesse.

A. The new Emporeuticke is said to have equicheapenes, cheapenes, when as it
may be sold and uttered as cheap as the old commodity or invention which
was in use before.

So if Printing books be but as cheap to be sold as manuscript books, then
they are said to have equicheapenes.

And if Tiles made by the Pressorian Art may be afforded to be sold and
uttered as cheap as the tiles made by the old and ordinary way, then the
Presseware Tiles may well be said to have Equi cheapenes with ordinary Tiles.

R. 92. What mean you by the third virtue which you call Equi-excellency.

A. The new Invention is said to have Equi-excellencie with the old, when it
has in it the same beauty and perfection that the old commodity of sale
has, and in the same degree, measure and equallitie.

So if Muscouie glass be as clear, transparent and excellent as green glass
for windows, then in regard of the beauty and perfection of the substance it
is said to be Equi-excellent.

R. 93. Which are the greater virtues of an invention.

A. These three, more sufficiency, more cheapnesse, more excellency, all which
are easy to be understood, by their lower degrees described before.

R. 94. Which are the lesser faults of an Invention deriuatiue.

A. There are three in number, less sufficiency, less cheapenesse less
excellency.

R. 95. Which are the greater faults of an Invention.

A. There are also three, insufficiency, exceeding dearnesse, exceeding
baseness, ugliness or ill fauourednesse,

R. 96. What Cannons or rules have you to judge of a deriuatiue Invention, by
comparing these virtues and saults to gether.

A. There are many, whereof these following serve to judge of the unworthiness.

R. 97. What is the first Cannon.

A. If an Emporeutick have only in it all the smaller virtues, although it may
be esteemed commendable for a new invention, then surely it will do no good to
be set up and followed:

So if any clay-worke made by Presse-ware art, as namely tile, slate,
freestone, paning stone, archings. etc. or green glass made by Seacoale, If
these two new inventions fall out to be but Equi-sufficient, Equi-cheape and
Equi-excellent, with old Inventions of tiles, slates, free stone, pauing
stones, archings etc. then surely there will be no good to be done by them,
because they yield no benefit to the common wealth.

R 98. What is your second Cannon to judge of the worthlessnesse of an
Invention.

A. If a new Invention of sale have in it but all the smaller faults only, it
is not to be commended nor ever will prove good, for example, if one should
devise a Water-worke, to raise waters, which is less sufficient for that
purpose, and more chargeable to be erected, and in regard of excellency more
imperfect then the ordinary raising of waters in use, I say such an Emporcutick
is to be judged a worthless Invention.

R. 99. What is the third directory Cannon.

A. If a new invention, compared with the old, be found to have in it but one
of the grander faults, although it be accompanied with some one or two of the
grand, virtues, yet is it to be rejected for stark naught, for there can no
good be made of it, for instance sake say that one has devised to make
windowing of the pure mettle of Venice-glasse, or of the pure substance of
Crystal, which is not impossible to be done, This his sale Mechanic will be
exceeding dear and costly, And therefore although it be more excellent or
stronger, or more sufficient then the ordinary kind of windowing by green
glass, yet the Inuentioner will never do good of it, except it be to beggar
himself, and all that shall deal in it: for a scrap of coloquintida, I say,
marreth a whole mess of good pottage.

R. 100. How many directory triplicities is there of this Rule.

A. There are, First exceeding deerenesse, more sufficiency, more excellency.
Secondly insufficiency, more cheapnesse, more excellency. Thirdly unsightly
baseness, more sufficiency, more cheapnesse.


This last triplicity although it has two good grand virtues, yet the buyers
of this Emporeutick will not deal with it, because they cannot abide to behold
it.

R. 101. What other triplicities are there of this Cannon.

A. Three by one grand virtue, and three by another, which for breuities sake I
omit.

R. 102. What other Cannons have you to judge of the worthlessnesse of an
Invention.

A. If an Invention contain all the grander virtues, and yet tend to the utter
confusion of Kingdoms and Civil Estates, then is it by no means to be
attempted or enterprized by any Inuentioner, Of this kind is the Invention to
walk invisible, if such a device may be attained unto, to make a barge or ship
to fly as well in the air as to sail upon the water.

R. 103. What Cannons or Rules have you to judge of the goodness and worth of
a deriuatiue Invention.

A There are many Cannons likewise for this purpose, all which are grounded
upon triplicities of the former virtues or lesser faults, or intermixed of both.

R. 104. What is the first Cannon.

A. An Invention that has none of the grand faults and has at the least one
of the grand virtues, or more in his triplicity, then is it to be esteemed good
and valuable as it apeareth by all these subsequent triplicities.

R. 105. Recite the triplicitie of this Cannon.

1. A. More sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, Equi-excellency.

As for example, earthen tileage is more sufficient and durable, equi-cheape
and equi-excellent then the old way of covering of houses by wooden pannells,
when wood and timber was then as plentiful in England as is now in Virginia or
new found land, and therefore a very good Invention.

2 Equi-sufficiency, more cheapenesse, Equi-excellency.

3. Equi-sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, more excellency.

4. Equi-sufficiency, more cheapnesse, less excellency.

5. Lesse-sufficient, more cheap, Equi-excellent.

Of this sort is Lees Invention of loome stockings, and the tillage of ground
by Plough and harrow, comparing it with Adams old tillage with spade and Iron
rake, which Gardners still use.

6. More sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, less excellency.

7. More Excellency, lesse-cheapnesse, Equi-excellency.

8. Equi-sufficiencyl, esse cheapnesse, more excelency.

9. Lesse-sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, more excellency.

10. More sufficiency, more cheapnesse, Equi-excellency.

11. More sufficiency, more cheapnesse, less excelency.

12. Equi-sufficiencie, more cheapnesse, more excellency.

13. Less sufficiency, more-cheapnesse, more-excellency.

14. More sufficiency, Equi-cheapnes, more excellency.

15. More sufficiency, lesse-cheapnesse, more-excellency.

16. More sufficiency, more cheapnesse, more-excellency. Which is the best and
most eminent of all other triplicities.

CAP. 13. Metallicall Instruments defined with their several kinds. Lenicks,
Presse-wares and mouldes described.
Reader.

106. THe Manuscript Treatise or Schedules annexed to the Indenture, as it
seems, comprehends many worthy matters and excellent inventions, but it is
somewhat obscure and obstruce, both by reason that some points are implicitly
set down, and also in respect of some strange and hard words which I do not
perfectly conceive or understand: I pray you therefore enlarge and describe the
same Material points, in a more familiar phrase and style, that such plain
men as my self, who are willing to deal and adventure in these your
inventions, may more fully understand the purport and goodness of your
business.

A. Sir you need not be offended with the scholasticall terms, for it has
always been lawful to the Authors of new Arts and inventions at their own
pleasure to give names to their new Arts, instruments and devises which are not
so vulgarly known. Go but to a Printer, and you shall hear many strange
words of his invention and mystery, as namely Charrecters, the Compositer, the
Long-primer, the Pica, the Italica, the Chase, etc, the like terms you shall
find in diverse other trades in London.

I hope therefore I shall not be barred or denied of that liberty of making
choice of words of Arts, for new matters, which is given and allowed unto every
tradesman in his own science and mystery.

Indeed I confess that some points are more closely and briefly touched of
purpose, and the reason was, because I had often promised to explain and
illustrate them in the printed treatise, and it would have bin both tedious and
more chargeable to have drawn the manuscript in a prolixe and ample sort.

Nevertheless to the intent that no just exceptions may be taken, and that the
meanest capacity may perceive my meaning, I will be ready to explain and
amplify the several contents of my Pattents in as plain and easy mannner as
I can think or devise.

R. 107. It is evident by your Pattent, that all Mechanic Arts and Inventions
which perform their work by the help and opperation of Metallicall
Instruments, are all of them privileged businesses unto you. Wherefore I pray
you describe at large all the sorts of Metallicall Instruments and means,
which are the strength, nerves, and sinews of your privilege.

A. The Instruments and means Metallicall, which are used for the producing of
Metalique Materials, or things are (as it was showed before) of two sorts,
Common and Peculiar.

The Common Instruments are such which are borrowed from other trades,
occupations, and mysteries, amongst which we have especially use of Smithes,
Ioyners, Turners, not only of their instruments and tools, but also of their
Emporeuticks which they ordinarily make, as Presses, Vices, Screwes, Bellows,
Tongs, etc. made either of Iron and wood, or of both together.

R. 108. What call you the peculiar Metallicall Instruments.

A. The Peculiar Instruments are those that are of the Authors Invention, being
of chief and principal use for the working of Metallicall effects, when they
are used and conjoined with other Common Instruments, and they are of two
sorts, Principal, and Less principal.

The principal are those which in the Manuscript are called by the names of
Lenick, Plegnick, and Camminicks.

R. 129. Define the Metallicall Instruments, which are called by the name of
Lenicks.

A. The Lenicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which work their
opperation and effect, by pressing, impressioning or moulding, and that either
by thrusting or drawing.

R. 110. What call you the Emporeutick materials which are made by these Lenick
Instruments.

A. The Materials that are made and brought forth by these pressing and
moulding instruments, are called Press-wares or mould-wares.

R. I pray you set down the definition of Pressewares or Mould-wares together,
with their several sorts or kinds.

Presse-ware or Mould-ware, is any thing that can be made, wrought, or formed
of clay and earth, not by hand and the round table, as the Potters use, nor
after the common manner of Tile-making and Brick-making, but by press and
mould, or by pressing and moulding.

There be many sorts or kinds of Press wares by reason of different figures,
and diverse uses unto which they are to be applied, all which kinds are
reduced to these two heads: Rude-ware and Pollisht-ware.

Rude-ware.
RVde-ware are such sorts of Presse-ware which after they are pressed and
molded, require no further ornament.

Pipeage is the principal branch of Press-ware, and it is nothing else but the
making of earthen pipes, for the conducting and sweeter conueighing of fresh
waters, for the serviceable use of houses.

Field Pondeage, is a kind of Pipeage, which from higher springs and
fountains conueigheth and distributeth water into several pastures, closes
and fields, and in every one of the said places, makes and leaves a pond of
water for cattle and beasts to drink in, this kind is very necessary for
country towns, where there are but some few springs, and many hundred of
enclosed pastures, which in the heat of Summer want waters.

And Kennellage is one of the chief kinds of Pipeage which passes and voydeth
away the stinking and filthy waters of cities and towns under earth into the
common ditches or sewers, and this kind is very necessary for the avoiding of
noisome and infectious airs, especially in the heat of Summer.

Of Presse-wares also are made Pumpes, as sufficient as those of Lead or Wood,
and far less chargeable.

Welleage is a kind of Press ware for the speedy making of Wells, far cheaper
then the rounds, which are made of Brick to keep the earth from falling down.

Privy Funnels or Vaults, may aso be made by the Press-ware Art so close and
so sweet that there can no annoyance or vnfauory smells euapoure out or press
through them. This kind of Presse-ware is very necessary for many houses in the
city, which are much annoyed by the leaking and sincking through the funnels
of Brick.

As Walls are made of ordinary Bricks, so may they be made of Press-wares more
handsome, cheaper and dureable.

Open Gutters are made by the Press-ware way, which may serve between houses
instead of Lead, or in Fields to conduct and lead away water, or on the Eues of
houses or Pent-houses.

The Press ware Arte-likewise, ministrech a kind of Tiling and Slates for the
covering of houses more substantial and dureable then those that are made by
the ordinary way of Tiling, or then those blew and hewn Slates which are
dug out of the Slate Quarries.

Spouts ordinarily are made of Lead, and hanged on the outside of the walls,
but Spouteage may more conveniently be made of pipes, brought down within the
midst of the Brick walls, for to couueigh rain water into the sincks under
the earth.

Pollisht-ware.
POllished-ware, are such sorts of Presse-wares, which after they are pressed
and molded, receive further ornament and beauty, by Turners, Ioyners or
engrauors tools, or by Turning, Planing, or engrauing, and there are three
degrees of this ornament, for else it is merely by cutting off the edge, when
the Presse-ware of Clay is liver dry, or else by repressing again, which is
when they Presseware is figured or fashioned the second or third time with the
mould again. The third degree is by fire, coloring, which is the glaring,
glazing or leading of the Presse-ware, this adds a super-excellent grace and
luster to the work, if it be well and curiously done and performed, and it
has in it this singular prerogative. For whereas freestone greeneth presently
with the first wet and rain and after in continuance of time becomes
ouergrowne with moss, or else moulteth or crometh away, but this sort of
Pollished ware continues always in his native and lively hew, never tainting
or altering with any weather, no more then the stone Iugs or Cruses, which we
usually drink out of.

Of Pressewares also we may make all kind of pauingstones larger and greater
then those which are made by Potters or Tilers, which kind is very
serviceable. for pauing of houses, galleries, ouens, courts, and furnaces.

Fish Ponds may be both flored in the bottom and wainescotted on the sides by
the Presse-ware Art, so sufficiently, that neither the earth can fall down,
nor the ouse or mudd to swell up within. So likewise for bathes and baynes.

Spouts, ordinarily are made of lead, and hanged on the outsides of the walls,
but they may be made of turned Pipes being also beautified with glazing,
leading, or other ornaments, stamps or impressions.

The like may be said of Windowing and Menyons for windows, which may be made
and cast of white clay, as sufficiently and substantially as of hewn brick or
Freestone.

Gardens, Squares, and Walks are usually compassed and environed with railes
and pales of wood or stone, this may also be done by Presse-ware, cheapor,
stronger and handsommer.

In a word there is no part or appurtenances in buildings, which is made either
of Brick, Tile, Lead, Wood, Tarras, or Freestone, which cannot more
conveniently be made by the Pressing Art of casting, and the reason thereof is,
because that mouldes may be made to cast all kind of Solid shapes, figures,
and bodies whatsoever.

So that from hence also we may make Bullets, Globes, Coping stones, Archings,
Pillars, Columns, Finishings Chimney Fannels, Mantletrees, or Clauels for
Chimnies, Cesternes, Coppers to brew in, Wainescoaring for Chambers, and such
other like things, and Vtensils.

R. 112. What are the general and chief instruments of making of Pressewares-

A. The instruments of Pressing and moulding, which are usually called by the
names of Press and mould.

R. 113. How many kind of Presses or Pressing Instruments are there.

A. Pressing or impressioning of things is performed by diverse means, as
namely by beating, stamping, knocking, or falling.

Secondly, by screwing or viceing. Thirdly by the drawing of flexible girths or
cords. Examples of all which sorts, are to be seen at my worke-house at
Highbury, in the parish of Islington near London.

R. 114. What call you a moulding instrument, mould or moulder.

A. A Mould or Moulder, is an artificial instrument which mouldeth, figureth,
and proportioneth the tempered earth, which being forced, passes thorough the
mould.

R. 115. How many sorts are there of Moulds or Moulders.

A. Moulds are of two sorts, for either they are as long as the Pressware,
which they make and figure, of which sort are all those which are called by the
names of scouring moulds at the Work house at Highbury, or else they are
shorter then the presse-wares which they make, whereupon they are called Short
Mouldes. Diverse sorts both of long mouldes and short moulds, are to be seen at
the said Workehouse, and therefore I will not further enlarge or describe them
hear, but refer the Reader to see them at the place aforenamed.

R. 116. When a press and a short mould are in one frame united together, what
is the fittest name to call that instrument by.

A. It may aptly in a word be called a Presse-mould, which is further described
and handled in the next chapter.

CAPVT. 14. The Pressmould: and the Plegnick Instruments defined.
R.

117 DEscribe therefore the Press-mould by his end and use.

A. A Press-mould is a pressing and moulding Instrument for the making of all
kind of Press-wares, that is to say, all kind of tiles, bricks, pauing-stones,
furnace-stones, or any kind of clay-worke or tempered earths whatsoever.

R. 118. Describe the Press-mould by his parts and adjuncts.

A. The Press-mould consists of these general parts.

1. Two clay-boxes. 2. Two Receipt tables. 3. One Screw. 4. Two Pressours. 5.
Four Anti-pressoures. 6. Two Nutboxes. 7. Two squease tables. 8. Two Coane
spits. 9. Two Screw posts. 10. Frames for the said parts. 11. Driers and
Rammers, which are adjuncts.
There are many sorts and differences of Press-moulds, every sort consisting of
different parts and adjuncts, All which shall be at large described in the
second edition of Metallica, or in the Appendix, or addition unto this treatise
called Pressoria.

In the meanewhile if any be desirous to see both this Presse-mould, Engine and
the working thereof, at Highbury, and at Islinton, he may have diverse sorts of
them, which in an Artificial manner do make all kind of Clayworkes with
extraordinary speed and readinsse.

R. 119. I understand what you mean by Lenicke Instruments, I pray show what
use they have in Iron business.

A. First, the Lenicke Instruments ferue very fitly for the tempering,
stamping, and comixing of Seacole, or Stone-cole, that a kind of substance
being there made of them like unto past or tempered clay, the Presse-mould may
sorme and tranfigure that clay-like substance into hollow pipe. cole as it does
earthen pipes.

Now this pipe-coale is of very good use for the making and working of some
kinds of Irons and steeles.

Secondly the Lenicke Instrument serves very fitly for the breaking and
brusing, stamping and beating, tempering and impastening of all kind of Iron
oars, whereby they are prepared for the Furnace in a very beneficial manner
and course, for when this impasted oar is by the-engin of the Presse-mould
Intubated and formed into pipes, as if it were Clay or loame, These oare-pipes
being made hollow and full of holes are sooner melted and consumed by the heat
of the furnace and with far smaller charges of fuel or firing then the
ordinary oar which Founders put into their furnace in pieces or gobbits as
great as wallnuts.

R. 120. You having handled sufficiently the doctrine of the Lenickes or
Pressing instruments, I pray you proceed end show me what you mean by
Plegnickes, which your Maunscript makes the second kind of your Metallicall
Instruments.

A. Plegnicks and Metallicall instruments which perform their opperation and
effect by means of their dexterous and artificial ioynt-mouing.

R. 121. How many kinds of Plegnicke instruments be there.

A. There are five kinds of Plegnicke engines or Machins, the Plegnicke
Bellows, the Plegnicke Milne the Plegnicke Schrew, and the Plegnicke Rombus,
and the Reciprocal Plegnicke.

R. 122. What odds and prerogative differences is there between the ordinary
bellows (which Smithes and Mettle-founders daily use) and your new devised
Plegnicke bellows.

A. There are many differences, first the Plegnicke bellows is more handsomely
and strongly made, then ordinary refining bellows, and with far less
expense of leather, for here the leather is not closely nailed upon the wood,
but strongly grasted and incorporated into the very substance of the timber, so
that by this means the ioytning of the leather and the wood together, is as
thite and close as the substance of the boords themselves.

Secondly the Plegnick bellows may be made to blow and stream forth not only
could wind and air (which is all that ordinary bellows can do) but also to
blow and send forth flames of fire, water, vapors and dust, all which is very
necessary for the blowing of Metallicque substances, as shall be at large
showed in the second Edition or in the Appendix called Plegnica.

Thirdly the Plegnick bellows may so be made and contrived, to blow ten times
more then the ordinary bellows, and that either by moving ten times faster,
or else by being made ten times greater.

R. 123. What odds and prerogative differences is there between the ordinary
Milnes and your new devised Plegnick Milnes.

A. The Plegnick Milnes have many prerogatives and conueniences which the
ordinary Milning lacks: and to begin with the Wind milne.

First the ordinary Wind-milne has nor only his sails mounted up in the wind,
but also the workhouse wherein the Milne-stones and the Cogg-wheeles grind the
corn, by which means they are subject to be blown down with storms, but
the Plegnick Wind-milne has his worke-house upon the firm ground, by means
whereof you may make your Rooms as wide and as large as you will without any
hazard or danger of blowing down. Secondly the cross sails of the Wind-milne
do move verte callter, as they call it, or through the zeneth or the nader;
whereupon arises this inconvenience that the Wind-milne must be turned and
haled about continually as the wind changes, but the Plegnick Wind-milne has
his crosse-sailes over the top of the workhouse, and they fly round about
with a circular motion, parallel to the Horizon: whereby it is ready for all
winds without turning or haling about. Thirdly this Plegnick devise may be
made to go with three or four pair of Milne-stones at once, whereas the
wind-milne can go only but with one pair, and by this means the Plegnick
Wind-milne will grind three or four times more meal in an hour, especially
in a good gale of wind. Fourthly the Wind-milne grindeth only corn, and cannot
be made to do any other work, as the water-milne does, but the Plegnick engine
does all manner of works, it will grind corn as well as the Wind-milne, it
will serve for the Iron furnace to blow the bellows as well as the ordinary
Water-milne, and finally to do any other work which the Water-milne or
Horse-milne does. Fifthly the Wind milne stands still in a calm and when the
wind serves not, for there is no means to make it go but by wind, but the
Plegnick milne is perpetual, for when the wind serves not, it is made to go
with horse, and in a small gale of wind the horse may help to draw and move it
faster. Sixthly there are also many other conueniences in the Plegnick
Water-milne over and above the ordinary water milne as more at large shall be
showed in the second edition of this treatise.
R. 124. How many sorts of Plegnick milnes are there in regard of the force
that moves the Engine.

There are five sorts of Plegnick milnes, The first is called the Horswin
because it moves both with horse and wind, the second kind is called the
Horsewater because it goes both by horse and water, The third kind is called
the windwater, because the Wind and the water moves the engine jointly
together.

The fourth kind is called the Horswinwater because it is moved with horse,
wind and water altogether, and at one time. The fist kind is called the water
Plegnick which moves either inuisibly and secretly under the water and by the
water with one rong wheel or elce with two Horizontall wheels above the water.

R. 125. Did you ever make any of these Plegnick milnes to experiment their
goodness by trial.

A. I have made diverse milne engines to go both by wind and water, in the
moddle, but not in the grand Mechanic, and I have at this present a horswin
now framing at Highbury, which the next term God willing shall stand upon
some Turret in London near unto the Thames side, where all passengers by water
may see it go and move continually. I have also at Pickle herring over
against the Tower a water. legnick which moves only by the water, and goes
very swift with two pair of Milne-stones, whosoever is desirous to see it may
have it there at a ship-Carpenters yard upon the Wharfe. And thus much of the
Plegnick milne.

R. 126. Define the Plegnick Screw, the Plegnick Rhombus, and the reciprocal
Plegnick, which are the three last kinds of your Plegnick Engines.

A. The plegnick screw is an engine whose spirall line moves with one motion,
two vice nutts or Matrixes at the same time, which no other screw did before,
This plegnick screw is very available in Metallicall works, above any other
ordinary screw, which has been usually in the common wealth, but especially
it is very convenient for tempering, beating and impastening of all kind of
oars and pitcoales

The plegnick Rhombus is an Engine of extraordinary and admirable power and
faculty, and in regard of quick and speedy motion there was never any Machin
yet devised, which comes near unto it.

The Reciprocal Plegnick is an Engine that has wheels running reciprocally,
turning backwards and forewards by one great wheel that moves but one way at
the same time which kind of reciprocal motion was never done or performed
before by any other Engine.

This reciprocal is of great use for the battering and beating of Iron,
lattin, plate, copper, or any other mettles.

If any be desirous to be further certified concerning the truth of the
admirable motions, opperations and works of these three engines, let them
repair to Highbury, and it shall be enidently showed and demonstrated unto
them, in diverse real moddles and examples.

CAP. 15. Caminicke instruments, as fewels, liquours and furnaces defined.
127. Having described the Lenicke and Plegnicke instruments, I pray you
proceed to the third kind of Metallicall instruments, which you call by the
name of Caminicks.

A. Caminicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which perform their
opperation and effect by their new kind of furnacing and hearthing.

R. 128. How many kinds of Caminicke instruments be there which serve for the
making of all kind of Irons and other mettles and materials.

A. There are three kinds, the fuel, the liquor, and the furnace.

R. 129. Define fuel.

A. Fuel is any substance combustible being apt or fit to burn, or to make,
or take fire.

R. 130. Rehearse the several kinds and sorts of fuel.

A. There are three sorts of Fuel, whereof fire is made: Wood-fewell, which
is either Char-coale or unburned Wood-fewell. Secondly Pit-coale or Earthcoale,
and thirdly Brush-fewel.

Char-cole is the Principal and best for use, but by reason of scarsity it is
grown very dear in our country.

Earth-coale is that kind of fuel of siring, which is dug out of the
bowels of the earth, or else upon the superficies of the earth, of which sort
also there are many kinds, having difference in their burning. The Scottish
coal is the best flamer, and consumes away into white ashes, as having in it
more vnctiousnesse then sulpharousnesse. The New Castle coal, usually called
Sea-coale, is more lasting and dureable then the Scottish, for being stirred
up, it will make a secondary or third fire, whereas the Scottish-coale
consumes at once; For which cause all Brewers and artificers of London rather
use this sort. Howbeit it is not so fit for some Metalique purposes as
Scottish-coale, by reason of the more abundant heavy sulpherous substance
remaining in it.

Turffe and Peate makes a third kind of earth-coale, and if they have any
sulpharousnesse in them, it is not so heavy and fretting as that which is in
the Sea-coale and Stone-coale, the Low Countries use for the most part this
kind of fuel, instead of wood and sea-coale.

Brush-fewell is the third kind of firing, which is neither of the inward
substance of the earth, nor of the upper superficies as Sea-coale and Turffe
is, but grows upon the earth in a brushie or twiggie manner, of this sort is
all kind of stubble, Baueings, Straw, Furs, Fearne, Ling, Heath, with other
stalks, of herbs, weeds, and vnder-shrubs, all which burn with great
flames, yet are they of no great heat or long continuance. Under Brush-fewell,
we comprehend also an other sort, which is not so much used for firing, as for
lights, as namely, oils, tallowes, waxes, which are used in lamps and
candles. Secondly, pitch, rossen, turpentine, tar, mastick, with such like
liquids and gums, as issue and proceed from trees being combustible. This kind
of fuel is most fit for the Ventignoll Mechanic, which has good and
profitable use for many purposes, where other fuel is not so fit.

R. 131. What means are to be used to make earth-coale as serviceable for
Metalique purposes, as wood or Char-coale.

A. There are three sorts, the first is to bring earth-coale to that equallity
of heat, that wood or charcoale has, that is to say, that it makes neither
hotter nor coulder fire then wood or Charcoale does: the second means, is so
to order and prepare pit-coale, that all nociue proprieties, which are aversse
from all Metalique substances, may be abstracted from it, or at least destroyed
in it. The third means is the Addition and infusion of those deficient
proprieties, which as they are in char-cole, so ought they to be found in
pit-cole.

R. 132. What mean you by Caminicke-liquores.

A. By Caminicke-liquores I understand diverse kinds of intermixed and compounded
waters for the lauing, washing and steeping of all kind of mettle-Ewres to
cause them the better to yield and give down their liquid mettle from their
slaggs and cinders.

So that as the Gould-smith has his waters which will segar gould from silver,
and the Allom-maker his vrines for the segaring and bringing down of his
allomes, so these Caminicke-liquoures are very behoofefull and effectfull for
the steeping and tempering of oars, which being thereby prepared, they will
the more easily let down their pure mettle being severed and abstracted from
the recrement and dross of the cinder and the slagg.

R. 133. Define a furnace.

A. A surnace is a Caminicke instrument made and built of furnace-earth; or a
furnace is the Artificial receptacle of fire and fuel, for boiling, nealing,
and backing of all kind of Rawe-materials or Rawe-matters.

R. 134. How many kinds of Rawe-matters are there for furnaces to work upon.

A. There are five sorts of Rawe-matters, the mettle-matter, the
liquour-matter, the fiery earth-matter, the dry matter and compounded-matter.

R. 135. Describe more plainly these several kinds of Rawe-matters.

A. The Mettle-matter is that Mettellar substance which is put into the Furnace
to be baked, boiled or nealed, which in one word may be called the Mettellar.

R. 136. How many kinds of Mettellars are there

A. There are three sorts of Mettellars.

The first is the raw or baked oar, as it is dug out of the earth, which
being put into the furnace melts down into two substances, the one is called
the Glass-slag, and the other the Sowe-liquour.

The Glasse-slage is a liquid material of a glassie substance being tough,
thick, and ropy, like bird-lime, it swimmeth upon the superficies of the sow
liquour, as barme does upon bear, or cream upon milk.

The second kind of Mettellar is the sow of Iron which when the hearth or
furnace has received it, it melts down into two substances, whereof one is
called Ferrica substantiae, or the Iron substance, the other is called the
cinder or after-slagg.

The after-slagg is a liquid material which inhereth in the
Ferrica-substantiae, as whey does in a posset, or crudds.

The Ferrica-substantiae is tougher then the liquour of the alter-slagg, which
when it is battred under the stroke and press of the hammer, the after-slagg
is squeased and pressed out, and so the substance is made and becomes good
Iron, even as the whey is wrung out by the violence of the Press, and so the
cruds are made into a cheese.

The third kind of Mettellar is the could Iron, which when the fordge, furnace
or hearth receives it, it is nealed and heated into glowing Iron, which
glowing Iron afterward is forged by the Smith into diverse Emporeutickes for
many-fould uses and purposes, as namely into knives, horse-shooes,
Iron-weapons, window bars, window case-ments, and into a thousand such like
Emporeuticks, whereby Smiths get their living and maintenance.

R. 137. In the definition of your Furnace, you make mention of Furnace-earths,
I pray you what mean you by them.

A. Furnace-earth, is any earthy substance, being made and prepared of stone,
clay, or lome, that so it may become the fit and sufficient matter for the
Caminick Furnace.

R. 138. How many kinds of Furnace-earths are there where, withal you build
up your Furnaces.

There are three sorts of Furnace-earths. The first is the clay-pipes made of
white clay, being tempered, wrought, and impastned with the dusts and pouders
of diverse other things. The second kind of Furnace-earth, is the clammy
mortar, which is of the same substance and temper that the Clay pipes are. The
third kind of Furnace earth, is the Furnace-stone, which is made into diverse
figures, forms and proportions by the Press-mould Art, and of the same matter
that the other two kinds were made of before.

R. 139. Define the second kind of Rawe-matters, which you call the
Liquour-matter.

A. The liquor matter is any kind of liquor or liqueable, whether it be cold or
hot, which is put into the Furnace Pot, Kettle, Caldron or Copper, to be
further heated, and boiled, as namely, all kinds of fatts, tallows, oils, and
all kinds of waters, whether simple or compound, as fresh water, Seawater,
Alloms-water, Coppresse-water, and a thousand such kinds of liquours.

R. 140. Define the third kind of Rawe-matters which you call fiery-earths.

A. Fiery-earth is any kind of earth or earthy substance besides the Mettler
which before was described, as namely all kind of Raw Presse-wares and
burnt-earths, before they are burned, baked or nealed, nevertheless the
Raweoare if it be but nealed or baked belongs to this kind.

R. 141. Define the fourth kind of Rawe-matters which you call dry-matters.

A. Dry-matter is any kind of Rawe-matter besides the three former which were
described before, under this head we comprehend all kind of pastes for bread,
malts, safrons, papers, wet clothes etc.

R. 142. Define the fifth kind of Rawe-matter which you call compounded matter.

A. Compounded matter is any two or more of the former kinds, coming and
issuing from one furnace and from one fire, together, and at the same time.

R. 143. Having thus handled and described the several sorts of Rawe-matters,
which are the things that the stomach of the Furnace works upon, laboring to
digest boil, and concoct them, I pray you now proceed to the distributions of
the Frunace.

A. The Furnace in respect of the several kinds of Raw-matters which it
boileth and baketh, is likewise of five sorts and kinds, namely the
Mettelar-furnace, the liquor-furnace the fier-earth-furnace; the
dry-matter-furnace, and the compounded-furnace.

R. 144. Define these five several sorts.

A. The Mettallar-furnace heateth, melts and nealeth all kind of Mettallers,
and so works them into their Emporeutick Materials, under this head is
comprehended all kind of Iron Furnaces or hearths, for any other kind of
mettles.

The descriptions of the other four kinds of furnaces may easily be gathered
by this, and therefore I refer the further explication of them until some
other time.

R. 145. What odds and perogatiue differences are there between the ordinary
furnaces which refiners and mettle-founders daily use, and your new devised
Caminick furnaces. A. There are many differences both in regard of the form
and figure of making of them, as also in respect of other conueniences and
prerogatives, whereof these are principal.

1. First our Caminick Furnace is made and built up of such dureable
Furnace-matter, and continually maintained with such fier-resisting means,
that it cannot possibly melt or burn down by any reuerberating flames or
heates whatsoever. 2. Secondly, our Caminick Furnace is always built with some
moveable part, as namely the doors, Fewel-beare, matter-beare and the
Ash-beare, or any other part as we please. 3. Thirdly our Caminick Furnace is
built up with glass windows for every several room, so that thereby the
Furnar may continually see and behold both his Rawe-matters and his Emporeutick
Materials, and how his fire and Furnace works upon them, which is a singular
conuenience which our ordinary Furnaces want.
These forenamed differences and conueniences, with many others, shall be truly
showed and demonstrated in the several examples of our Caminick Furnaces,
which very shortly (God willing) shall be raised and built up at Highbury and
at Islington.

R. 146. What and how many are the general parts of your furnace, which are to
be found in every kind of your Camin.

A. These five, the doors, the windows, the fewell-beare, the Matter-beare, and
the Ash bear.

1.2. The Doors are to shut and open, and so are also some of the Windows.

3. The Matter-beare is a general part of the Furnace, which bears and
holds the substa^ces of the Raw-matters.

4.5. The Fewell-beare, is a general part of a Furnace which bears and
holds the fuel and fire, and the Ash-beare bears the Ashes.

R. 147. What and how many are the rooms of your Furnace which are to be found
in every kind of your Caminicks

A. There are four several rooms, which are to be found in every Furnace,
the Ash-roome, the Fewell-roome, the Matter-roome, and the Vent-holes.

The ashroome receives and holds the ashes, the fuel room, the fuel and
firing. The matter-roome receives and holds the raw-matter. The lower-vent
holes receive and take in the air, and the upper vent-holes lets out the smoke

R. 148. Having thus described your three principal Metallicall Instruments
called by the names of Lenicks, Plegnicks, and Caminicks, I pray you describe
your other Metallicall Instruments which you called before the Less-principall.

A. There are indeed diverse other Metallicall Instruments which are propper and
peculiar of the Authors Invention, all which shall be showed and described unto
you in the second Edition.

R. 149. To what end and purpose do you publish the treatise of Metallica in
print, which describes and discovers all the chief Instruments of your
Inventions.

A. There are diverse reasons which moved the Author to describe publicly to
the view of the world these his Metallicall Arts and Inventions.

Frst that it might appear that his inventions are new, and of his own
devising, and not stolen from any other.

Secondly it is fit and reasonable that that which was granted in the Pattent
by general words and in an implicit manner should be so specially expressed and
defined, that the endeavors and Inventions of other men being different from
his, might not be prevented by him.

Thirdly that none hereafter should presume to petition or trouble his Majesty
concerning any kind or kinds which are described and comprehended in his
printed treatise of Metallica, which are all priueledged businesses unto
himself.

And lastly because the Author by Indenture from the Kings most excellent
Majesty is tied and enjoined to print and publish his book of his new
Metallicall Inventions before the last day of Easter Term, whereas he is not
tied to any time for the trial of his Inventions.


