A SVMME or a brief collection of holy Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments
instituted of God even since the beginning of the world, And of the true
orriginall of the Sacrifice of the Mass.

Imprinted at London for W. C. 1609.

To the right worshipful and worthy lover of learning and virtue, Sir John
Brett.
SVch as from time to time have employed their studyes, in publishing those
labors that have bin thought worthy the view and acceptance of others, have
likewise for the most part selected such patrons, (as well strangers as of
acquaintance) as have been known and reputed to be learned, well minded, or
well descended: Imm^tating which Custom and p^escriptio^, (aduenturing the
pardon of your discretion) I have inboldned my self upon good notice taken of
your honorable disposition, to present this Treatise unto your favorable
acceptance, tending to no idle or unprofitable substance: I humbly entreat you
will be pleased to vouchsafe of my goodwill, and favor a Scholars pen with
your gracious acceptance, who answers in well wishing what he wants in
worths. So shall I rest devoted unto you, and bestow my future studies to
effect matter of better deserving.

Ever remaining in all humble duty, ready to be commanded by you.

W. C.

A SVMME OR A brief collection of holy Signs, Sacrifices and Sacraments
instituted of God even since the beginning of the world, And of the true
original of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
IN the time ordained before of God, by his unsearchable and vnco^prehensible
wisdom after he had created man to his own Image and likeness to the end that
he might stir him up to fear and obedience, and give unto him also some
exercise of virtue to acknowledge his God his creator, there were ordained many
signs Sacrifices and Sacraments. First to our first Father Adam and to his
successors being bodily men, were ordained corporal signs of God, the better
to approve and make known his obedience. Trees of life. Gene 2.3. Eusebius.
Theodor. and Sever.
To wit: The trees planted in the midst of the Harbor and earthly Paradise.
These trees although they were of no other quality then the other plants, yet
they were dedicated and consecrated of God to serve for Sacraments, (that is to
say) for holy signs, their quality then dedicated and hallowed to serve as a
seal for a witness, attestation and approbation of the godly will. For the
infinite goodness of g^d willing to make known the fellowship, bond, and
alliance, contracted with man his creature, created to his own likeness has
from time to time ordained outward and corporal signs which man might see
and behold with his corporal eyes, to serve for assurance gage, and pledge, of
the divine covenant, like as to our first and common father were ordained
trees, and corporal fruits, left and given unto him to keep, without wasting,
eating, or consuming, in pain of everlasting death. We must then believe by
faith, that the trees and fruits were not signs or sacraments of vanity, as
a simple picture, but more that upon them did hang both life and death they
containing the sign and the thing signified. Proverb. 1.2.3.
Wherein did consist the knowledge and wisdom to fear God, and obey him. This
was the cause wherefore they were called the fruits of knoweledge of good and
evil, and the trees of life. For in keeping these fruits hallowed, in obeing
God, everlasting life was promised contrariwise in abusing these Sacraments in
going against the will of God, declared by outward tokens everlasting death and
damnation was gotten.

For other exercises of man toward God, to the end that he might reverence,
Sacrifices before the Law written.
honor, and worship him many and diverse sacrifices were celebrated, yea before
the law written by Moses. And although the almighty God creator of heaven and
of earth has no need of man's works, Psalm. 50.
neither is nourished with the blood of beasts, or fruits of the earth: Yet
he has always desired to draw man unto him in fear and outward obedience by
Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: In such sort that the sacrifice of the
lambs offered by Abel, Gene. 4. Hebre. 11. Gene. 6.7.9.
was pleasing unto God. Noe likewise after the great floods passed, in sign of
knowledge and obedience toward God did erect an altar, offered and lifted up
sacrifice of sheep without spotte, and of birds, wherewith he did make
sacrifices sound and pleasing unto God By these examples it is easy to know
that sacrifices did not begin in the time of Moses: But the innocent and just
lamb represented by the sacrifice of Abel (the figure of Jesus Christ) was
slain and offered up from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.


After the rigor of the flood comen for the punishment of the offenses of the
tyra^ts of the earth in sign of reconciliation and covenant renewed, our good
God did ordeine the sign of the Bow in heaven, Rainebow. Gene. 9.
for a gage and assurance of the divine mercifulnes. This sign and heavenly
Bow, although before it did appear in the thick clouds, a token of rain to
come Yet before it had never bin a mark dedicated to serve man for a sacrament
or holy sign, until it was ordained of God a sign of the covenant contracted
with good Father Noe and his off spring.

Unto the faithful Patriarch Abraham another covenant and alliance was
contracted by the wisdom of GOD, Circumcision in the year of the world 2048.
which he gave unto him for a gage and assurance of him and of his posterity,
the outward sign of circumcision to serve for a sacrament and perpetual mark
of the divine will. It was ordained unto him to circumcise his children males
within eight days after their birth, Gene. 17.
in pain of being rejected from the number of those people, which God had
adopted or chosen.

To the same people of Israel was ordained the Sacrifice of the unspotted
Lamb, the blood whereof spilt, Pascal Lamb
should preserve the people from the appointed death in Egypt, Exodus 12.
the flesh also was ordained to be eaten, and in celebrating the feast every
year in the day called Pasque, in sign and co^memoration of their deliverance
from Pharaos bondage, Exodus 12.
with the sign of the communion of the flesh of the Pascall Lamb, it was
ordained to eat unleavened bread seven days in pain of death. Other holy
signs were sent of God to his elect people, always to draw them to his fear
and obedience. As the sign of the cloud, Cloud.
a token of the way to guide the people by day, the flaming and fiery pillar to
conduct them by night out of the hands of Pharao the tyrant. Pilelr of fire.
Exodus 13.
Moreover the sign of the division of the red sea of Arabie through the
midst whereof the elect people of God did pass. The division of the red sea
in the year 2453. 1 Cor. 10. Tite. 3.
By the which wonderful signs, God would signify the holy sacrament of
baptism, afterward ordained by the sign of water which is ye lauer of
rege^eratio^ and renewing of the holy ghost.

During the time that the elect people of God were holden in the wilderness of
Arabia, Manna.
to them was ministered food of heavenly bread, Exodus 16.
wherewith they were nourished 40. years. This holy sacrament instituted by
the power of god was in such great admiration that every of the people said,
Manhu, 1 Corin. 10. Ioh. 6.
what is this here they did see the heavenly Manna given unto the^ without
travel, a sign of the living bread descended from heaven and giving life to
all the faithful.

Also another marvelous sign was ordained of God by the rock flowing of
lively water in Hereb to quench the thirst of thirsty people a sign and figure
of the true rock Jesus christ out of who^ did issue water and blood to staunch
the thirst of all sinners for evermore. Water of the Rock. Exodus 17. Number. 20.
1 Corin. 10, John. 19.


The signs and sacraments aforesaid, Diverse sacrifices ordained of God in the
year of the world. 2455.
were not on^y ordained of God, but also the law of Sacrificers was published
by Moses, as signs figures, and shadows of the Sacrifice performed by Jesus
Christ.

The Sacrifices are either public or particulers, Holocausta.
some were here offerings, sacrifices consumed with fire: other were of beasts
slain, Division of sacrifices drawn out of Exodus Leui. and Number.
and offered up to eat, some were of earthly beasts, other were beasts of the
air. Among the earthly beasts were such as were most obedient as Beafe, Beasts
for sacrifices.
and Veale, sheep and Lamb, the Goat and the Kid: Among the birds also the
most tame, the Pigion and the Turtle. Of Sacrifices some were public, other
were particular, the public either were daily, Days appoin^ed for sacrifices.
or else seven times a day, or in the new moons, or in time of abstinence, or
else in three feasts celebrated in a year: To wit, in the days of sweet
bread, when the pascall Lamb was offered and eaten without leuened bread,
Exodus 23.
in the time also of harvest of first fruits, and in the feast of Wine and
Olives toward the end of the year. ^earch the book of Philo ^he Jew, and
Josephus.
It is commanded every day to offer two Lambs the one in the morning, the
other at night after that the Altar was perfumed with incense and sweet
odours. Also some of the sacrifices were ordained for corporal things which
were offered with shedding of blood, other for incorporal things without blood.
The sacrifices called Holocaustes did concern only the honor of God,
Holocaustes Philo the Jew in his treatise of beasts appointed for sacrifices.
Josephus. lib. 3. cap. 10 de antiqui. in lat.
because all the sacrifice was consumed with fire, for the which sacrifice
Holocaustes, the male and not the female was received that is to say, the Beaf
the Lamb and the Goat of one year. For the sacrifice for health it was
indifferent to take male or female, Leui. 1, 2.3.4.
always three parts of the sacrifice was reserved for the Priest. To wit, the
fat the two kidneies and the kall or the fat of the flanks. Another
difference there is also betwixt the sacrifice for health, Sacrifice for health.
and the sacrifice celebrated for sin, for in the one was ordained to eat all
the sacrifice in two days, and in the other for sin, it was enjoined to eat
all in one day only. Sacrifice for sin.
By reason whereof some sacrifices were called Holocaustes, other for health
and other for sin. The sacrifices for sin, were diverse as well for because
of the persons as for the offerings. Sacrifice for the sin of ignorance.
For he that sinned by ignorance, was cleansed by offering an Ewe or a she Goat:
but the clensing of sin done wittingly was cleansed with a Ram. Sacrifice
for the sin of the high Priest, Prince, Magistrate and particular person.
Leuit. 3.4.5.6.
The sin of the great Priest was cleansed by offering of a calf: of the prince
by offering a goat and a bull, that of the magistrate with a Goat, that of any
particular, with the offering of a female. Sacrifice for the man poluted. For
the woman delivered. Leuit. 12.
The sacrifice for clensing of sin done against God was done with a ram. The
sacrifice for a man polluted was with an Ewe or a she goat: for clensing of a
woman after her childbirth was a lamb of one year, a young pigion and a
turtle. Sacrifice for the Leprous. Leui. 14.
For the clensing of Lepre, were 2 birds alive, pure and clean, Cedre wood,
and Isope, 2 whole lambs and one Ewe of a year with flower and oil. Another
sacrifice also was made for the person poluted by seed shed or me^struous,
Sacrifice for the poluted menstruall.
with 2. turtles, and 2. young pigio^s. If the great sacrifices did fail, then
did they repare to doves, pigions and turtles the one for the burnt offering, the
other for the food of the Priests And in all sacrifices there was pure flower
without leven, salt, Leven and honey forbidden in all sacrifices. A sacrifice
for the woman suspected of adultery. Numb.
incense and oil. And it was not lawful to offer any thing with leven or honey
upon the alter. Always in the sacrifice ordained for the purging of women
suspected of adultery, there was no incense nor oil as in other sacrifices,
but for her was offered water mixed with dust or ashes gathered upon the
pauement of the temple. Sacrifice of the Nazereus, Numb. 6. Philo the Jew in
the treatise aforesaid.
Again there was another sacrifice celebrated for them which had made the
great vow called Naserius, when the time of their devotion was done, it was
ordained unto them to offer three sacrifices a Lamb, an Ewe and a Ram. One
(to wit) the Lamb for the burnt offering, the second (being the Ewe) for the
salvation, and the third for health. Moreover the hears of him which made the
sacrifice should be cast into the fire with the burnt offering to be burned.

I have thought good to discourse the diversity of sacrifices, briefly to the
end to make known the great goodness of our God who by the law of Sacrifices
published by Moses, would (as with a bridle) restrain the rude people of
Israel, which could not forget the idolatries of Egypt wherein they had been
nourished 430. years, under the tyrranny of Pharaoh.

But what straight laws, what ceremonies and sacrifices so ever were ordained
for them, ever this people did fall to Idolatry abusing the law of God, and
corrupting the holy sacraments and sacrifices it shall be declared hereafter.

If any man be desirous to know more of the multitude and diversity of
sacrifices let him read the books of Philo the Jew and Josephus of the
Judicial antiquities, following that which Moses has plainly written in his
books of Leuiticus and Numbers.

The Arc of witness. Ex. 25.27.28.
Another sign and sacrament instituted of God by the Arc of the covenant
described in Exodus, being a holy sign dedicated to receive the holy and
heavenly answers to the end to bring the people to the remembrance, fear and
obedience of God, to honor and accompany the Arc of the covenant Many other
exterior signs were ordained of God, as the ornaments and consecration of
Priests, Ephod.
specially the ornament called the Ephod the which and the sacrifices the
Israelites did abuse by their Idolatries.

Another holy sign there was of the purging and sprinkling water ordained by
God to Moses and Aaron the high Priest. Purging water consecrated. Numb. 19.
This sprinkled water was consecrated with ashes gathered by a clean person of
the sacrifice offered in Holocausta. To wit, of a Cow all red without any
spot, and which had never bin labored. The Wood ordained to make the fire for
the burnt offering was Cedar and Hisope, Purple with Crimsin. With this water
were sprinkled polluted persons for the purging and cleansing of their
corporal defilings. Exodus 38.


At the entering of the Temple or Tabernacle was a Lauer made of Brass, and
forged first with the images of the women of Israel, in this Lauer was put the
sprinkling water wherewith the sacrificers are sprinkled before the celebrating
of their sacrifices, to the end they might be purified and obtain grace and
remission of their sins.

After the death of the great Priest Aaron, the people of Israel unthankful
to God for the goodness sent them of him, murmuring as annoyed with the heavenly
Manna freely given unto them for their noriture, were punished by the biting of
venomous serpe^ts. But the merciful God gave unto them an holy sign whereby
they should be saved and restored to health (to wit) the brazen serpent lifted
up in the air a figure of Jesus Christ crucified. Brazen serpent John. 3.7.


These were in sum the most part of the signs sacrifices and sacraments
ordained of God in the first Church of the Israelites figures of the true and
perfect sacrifice performed by Jesus Christ, the true Messiah and everlasting
Priest, sitting at the right hand of God the Father. Sacraments broken by Adam
Gene. ^.


Now rests the sum to bring forth, how man by his own proper fault did
fall in obliuio^ and disobedience of God his creator, abusing Gods favor, and
corrupting the holy signs, sacrifices, and sacraments ordained to him.

What persuaded our first father and his companion to bide themselves at the
hearing of Gods voice but because they had abused the holy sign, and broken
the law of the fruits to them forbidden. This holy sign which our first and
universal father had abused, was the original of other vices and corruptions
hereafter described, into the which all men are fallen sauouring of the
corrupted lump of Adam.

Leaving the particular corruptions of the signs, Corruption of the sacrifice
by Aaron. Exo. 32 Deuteronomy. 9.
sacrifices and sacraments before the law written by Moses we will begin to
bring forth briefly the most notable error committed by the most great
sacrificers, as Kings, Priests and others having the chief government of the
people.

When Moses was abiding in the mount Synay to receive the commandments of
God, his brother Aaron the high Priest forged a calfe of gold, of the golden
earings given unto him by the people of Israel, he builded an altar offered
incense, and celebrated sacrifice causing the common people to worship the
molten Image.

Was not this an abusing of the Sacrifices ordained of God, and a corrupting of
the true usage of the same, in causing the calfe to be worshipped in place of
the slain and offered sacrifice, as it was appointed in the law: Corruption of
the sacrifice by Nadab. and Abihu. Leui. 10 Numb. 11.
His sons also Nadab and Abihu, were not they consumed with fire, for abusing
the use of sacrifices in taking unhallowed wood and corrupting the law? The
people of Israel unthankful for the goodness done unto them in being delivered
from the Pharao^ical captivity, did they not murmr against the holy sacrament
of heavenly Manna, when they did disdain and contemn this bread of life,
Joshua.
and demanded flesh to eat: Achan the son of Charms, did not he violate the
law of the holy signs, when he committed sacrilege, and kept back the
spoils of Ierico vowed and consecrated to God for sacrifices: If any more
curiously desire to see the continual abuses and corruptions of the people
themselves, Judge. 2.3.6.8.9
let him read the histories of the Judges of Israel, and in all times he shall
find man never to be content with the true worshipping ordained of God. But in
steed of outward signs ordained of God to draw the people to fear and
obedience, they have forged inventions. And in place of reuerencing the alters
and arc covenant in the name of the only God being (outward sacred signs:)
The Israelites infected with the Idolatries of their neighbors, the Syrians,
Judges. 10
Sidonians, Moabites, Ammonites and Philistines did erect alters unto their
strange Gods, The ungentle sacrifice of Iephtha. Judge. 11.
Baal and Astaroth. Ieptha, Judge and Captain of the Israelites, did not he
corrupt the law of Sacrifices when he sacrificed his own proper daughter,
excusing himself by a vow, which he made, Judge. 8.9: Idolatry by the Ephod.
Judge. 17.18.
which was not appointed to him of God: The holy sign ordained of God for the
high Priest to celebrate sacrifices in (called Ephod) the uppermost garment was
not it abused by Gedeon, captain of the Israelites, when as of the spoils of
the Madianits and of their earings he made an Ephod of gold, whereby the people
fell into great idolatry? How long time was this holy outward sign Ephod
abused (an Image being erected by the mother of Michas in Silo, Priests and
sacrificers appointed expressly to sacrifice thereunto, an Altar builded and the
true use of sacrifices corrupted: So long as the temple continued in Silo, into
what wicked manners did the Priests and sacrificers fall, which were ordained
of God for the ministry of sacrifices and holy sacraments, when they usurped
by long possession to have this privilege of the people, 1 Samuel 2.
that when they did sacrifice, and the flesh of the offered sacrifice was
seething, their boy or servant having a three grained flesh-hooke of iron in
his hand, had liberty to catch out of the pot or caldron all that he could
carry with his hook. Further the leuiticall tyranny was such, that this servant
of the Priest had liberty to demand of the sacrifice giver, flesh to roste for
the sacrificer, otherwise to take it by force even as he would. Was not this a
great abuse and detestable corruption practiced by the Pristes and chief
sacrificers, under the pretense of sacrifices: What greater corruption can be
declared, then that of the sons of the chief Priest Ely, called Ophni and
Phinees? Ophni Phinies, corrupters of the sacrifices 1 Samuel. 4*
Who under the pretense of devotion committed shameful whoredom with the
covered women behind the holy Tabernacle instituted of God for the which
wickedness they were miserably slain, and the Arc of covenant taken away by
the Philistines. Which they set in the Temple of their God Dagon, 1 Samuel 7.6.
The arc of the holy covenant.
but God not suffering this holy sign thus to be profaned, threw down the
Image Dagon, and sent grievous punishments to the Philistines in such sort that
they were constrained to restore the Arc of the covenant of God. Against
corruption of holy signs.
This holy sign was so precious that forasmuch as the Bethsamits (which were
not of the order of the Leuits) had abused it 50000 of the common people and
70. of the chief rulers were rooted out and slain by the vengeance of God.
This example might make all those to tremble which enterprise to abuse the holy
signs and sacraments ordained of God.

2. Samuel. 6. Vzzah.
Vzzah also for that he abused the same sacred sign (notwithstanding that he
did it of a good intention) for to lift up the Arc of witness hanging to much
on the one side was he not punished with death? Of others abuses committed by
the Israelits there is many examples, Osias. 2 Chronicles. 26.
Osias was punished with leprosy for abusing the sacrifices, in taking upon
him the ministry of encensing appointed to the priests only Saul he first
elected King of the Israelites was slain and his kingdom given unto another
(as was declared before of Samuel) for abusing the sacrifices, Saul. 1 Samuel 13.
Joseph. lib. 7 cap. 4. of the Jews antiquities.
and suffering his people to commit the like abuses. His successors in the
kingdoms of Judah and Israel have not they always continued in abusing and
corrupting the sacrifices and sacraments ordained of God, when they did offer
sacrifices to the Gods, Astaroth of the Sidonians, 1 Kigs. 8.11.
to Chantos of the Moabites, and to Melcom or Moloch of the Ammonites, in so
much that they builded temples and oratories, even to offer incense, and to do
sacrifices unto them.

Jeroboam king of the Israelites, Hieroboam 1 Kings. 12.
did not only cause a golden calfe to be erected, as the high Priest Aaron had
abused before, but also did ordain two golden Kine in the two Temples of
Bethlel and Dan, and ordained strange Priests corrupting the law of God, and
causing them to do sacrifice after the fashion of Aaron. 1. Kings. 14.
This Idolatry and corruption of sacrifices did continue among the Israelites
more than 400. years during the reign of their kings, who had taught them to
corrupt the true use of the sacrifices in chapels, and particular oratories
builded on the tops of hills and thick forests consecrated, in violating the
law of sacrifices ordained by God in the holy temple, within the holy city.
1. Kings, 15.
For particular examples of the abuses committed against the true use of
sacrifices, the history of Ma^cha mother of king Asa is manifest, who erected
an Image of the God Pan, and did consecrate and dedicate unto him a thick
forest, offering sacrifices unto it. Achab another king of the Israelites did
erect an Altar, Achab. 1. Kings. 16.
and made sacrifices to the God Mars, otherwise called Baal. unto whom he
dedicated a groan, to satisfy his wicked wife Iesabel.

He caused also another Altar and Temple to be erected to the God of the
Tyria^s, he ordained Priests, Sacrificers, Joseph. lib. 8. chap. 10.
and instituted four hundred false Prophets. Ochosias.
His son and successor Ochosias taught of his father to corrupt the use of
the sacrifices, 2. Kings. 1.
did not only offer to Baal (otherwise called Mars) but went forward in
greater abuse, he builded a Temple unto the God of Accoronites called by
Josephus, Myos, Joseph. lib. chap. 1.
and by the Greeks Priapus, unto the which God, he did sacrifice.

To be short, what more abominable corruption can be described, Purgatory.
2. kings. 16. 2. Kings. 16.23 In the book Alcoran. Asoar. 29.46. Asoar 5.
ignem gehe^na non nisi numero dierum preterminato animas sentire docet Alcor.
liber and ad diem vetitatri omnes accedere operum ^orum mercedem accepturas
Asoar
then the invention of the fire Purgatory? wherewith the Israelites did
transgres, causing their children to pass through the fire in Tophet, a valley
of the sons of Ennon, sacrifizing unto the God Moloch. This corruption of
sacrifices, notwithstanding that it was in the time of Moises, yet the Idol
Moloch in the valley of Ennon, was not cast down till the reign of King
Josias, more then nine hundred years after Moses. Nevertheless this abuse does
continue among the Arabians and Affricans to this present, so that the
Alcoramists and Mahometists have this belief that the souls of the departed,
must paste through the fire to be purged and purified from their offenses.

By this brief gathering a man may clearly perceive that from the beginning of
the world man by his own fault has fallen into the bottom of error and
corruption of holy signs sacrifices and sacraments, ordained to him of God.
But the principal abuse, Cause of the corruption of sacraments.
whereof is sprung the original of all Idolatry, entered by this means, that
fleshly and carnal men did stick more to the visible signs and outward
ceremonies, then to the things signified by the Sacraments: Apo 13.
for in place of circumcisiing their hearts, Deuteronomy. 10.30.
and cuting away of the old skin of sin, to be regenerated and purified by
the blood of the heavenly sacrifice offered before all worlds, they have taken
circumcision carnally for the cutting of the carnal skin.

Wherefore did they not follow the interpretation of God, by Moses to
circumcise the foreskin of their hearts? Wherefore did not the children of
Israel give credit to the good prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 4.
which admonished them of the spiritual circumcision, and to circumcise the
forekinne of their hearts, in putting away the foreskinne of their natural
corruption. The like is come to pass of the sacrifices and holy signs
ordained of God, for figures of the sacrifice fulfilled by Jesus Christ: For
the carnal man rests in the corporal blood of earthly beasts, where he
ought to lift up his spirit to heaven to comprehend and conceive that which is
figured and signified by the sacrifices of beasts offered up. For this
therefore the justice of God is declared by the Prophets.

What need have I (says the Lord God) of your sacrifices? Esry. 1.
I am weary of your offerings of sheep. Moreover, I take no pleasure in the
blood of beasts, lambs, and goats offered. Wherefore travel you to address
Altars unto me? I will none of your offerings and vain sacrifices, I abhor
your incense, I can not suffer your new moons, your Sabbaoths, your
assemblies, and your feasts: all is but vanity. I hate your feasts of new
moons (O Israelites) and your solemn feasts. I am weary in suffering so
much. You have goodly directed your prayers unto me, I will not hear you any
more, for the abuses which you have committed with your hands embrued with
blood. Psalm. 51. Esaias. 66. Ierem. 7.
Moreover I will not receive of the house of Israel any Bull, because your
sacrifices are not pleasing unto me. Eccle. 7.
I am as well pleased with the offering of a beast, as with the murdering of a
man, and with the offering of Incense, as with the worshipping of an Idol.
Wherefore then (says God) do ye take so much pains to seek Incense unto
Sabba, and odours from far countries, to offer and make sacrifices unto me
wherein I delight not? Who has moved you (O Israelites) to erect images unto
the Gods Moloch, and the star Rompham during the time that you were in the
Wilderness, where I did nourish you with my heavenly Manna? Your feasts be
odious unto me, your offerings, oblations, Amos. 5.
and sacrifices for the health, I will reject, your offerings do displease me.
Mich. 6.
After what manner should one prepare himself to God? Shall it be by
sacrifices of Bullocks of one year? Does God take pleasure in a great number
of sheep offered unto him? Or in a great quantity of holy oils? To him says
the Prophet shall I offer of the first borne, for the remission of sins.

Our good God has very clearly declared that service which he comma^deth,
Psalm. 51.
follow equity, love mercy, and of an humble and contrite heart, fall down
before him, for obedience is more worthy then sacrifice, or the fat of
offered Rams. 1. Samuel. 15.


What gave an occasion to God to put away those sacrifices and sacrament which
he himself had ordained, bu^ the abuse and corruption which the Israelites
had committed, taking over grossly the signs and ceremonies, ordained to draw
them to fear and obedience?

For in place of conceiving that which was figured by the signs and corporal
sacrifices, they did rest in the flesh of the beasts offered. And in stead of
cutting away the foreskinne of their hearts, they rested in the carnal
circumcision, and in the mean time turned away from the true worshipping of
God, addressing themselves to creatures. As to stars, to the queen of
h^auen, and other strange Gods, offering to them incense, building for them
temples, preparing for them priests, chaplains and sacrificers to offer unto
them oblations and sacrifices.

Moreover to accomplish this corruption they did sacrifice with the blood of
innocents offering of them and causing them to pass through the fire of
Purgatory in the valley of Tophet Wherefore (for the abuse committed by the
children of Israel against the holy sacraments, 4 Esdr. 1.
sacred signs and sacr fices ordained of God) it was said unto them by the
Prophets, 4 Esdr. 1.
that God would no more of their feasts, of their new Moons, of their
circumcision, nor of their sacrifices, celebrated by people idolatrous and full
of blood.

When the unsearchable wisdom of God did perceive the hardness and infidelity
of the people of Israel, which did ever continue to commit idolatry, by
corrupting the holy signs sacraments, and sacrifices in place of
acknowledgeing the infinite goodness of God, which had delivered them from the
Pharaonicall tyranny, which had nourished them in the Wilderness, which had
brought them into the fruitful land promised unto them: and which so many
times had succored them in the wars against their neighbors the Cananites,
Moabites, Madianites, Philistines, Ammonites, Syrians, Sidonians, Sicyonians,
and other envious people: Nevertheless this rude people did continue in their
idolatries taught them by their Priests, Sacrificers, Kings, and Princes,
without turning to the true worshipping of one only God.

Wherefore after the great mercy and long tarying of the just Judge, which by
all manner corrections would have brought again his people by divine
vengeance particularly; as by raising up of wars, by captivity and bondage,
by dividing of the kingdom parted between Roboam and Jeroboam, the successors
of Solomon plunged in the depth of idolatry, in inward wars among the people
divided, and by other scourges accustomed to correct those whom God does
favor, to the end to bring them to his fear and obedience. In the end these
people, 4 King. 15.24
to much hardened and waxen old in their Idolatries, were taken into miserable
bondage, under thy tyranny of Infidels, Assirians, and idolatrous Babylonians,
their Realms quite overthrown.

But within a little while after that this self same people, by the great
mercy of God was delivered from the hands of unfaithful tyrants, was set
again at liberty, and was restored to their land of promise: Joseph. 13. cap.
the Jewish antiquity.
they fell again to their Idolatries, more then ever before, under the
government of their Sacrificers and high Priests, which joined the temporalty
and spiritualty so together, that they were clad with Scepter, Josephus in the
book of the antiquities of the Jews.
Roial and Crown. Then succeeded the heresies of the Pharisees, of the
Saduces, Esseens, Galileans, Masbutheens, Hemerobaptistes and Samaritans,
corrupted by the diversity of strange nations which had inhabited and subdued
the country of Samaria, near unto Judea.

For the Babylonians did worship for their God Soccobenoth, the Cutheens and
Persia^s having for their God Mergal, or Mergel, the Hemate^ses, called upon
their God Asima, the Annoys did worship their God Nebahaze and Thartace, the
Sepharuainenses did hold upon their Gods. Aaramelech and Anamelech.

Unto the which Gods they sacrificed their children causing them to pass
through the fire.

Thus then, when all kind of Idolatry was spread among the Isralites, the
sacrifices were altogether corrupted, the Priests became buyers and sellers,
covetous tyrants and Idolaters, the people paid tribute to the tyrants of
Rome, their country of Judea made one with the Province joining unto Syria
under the power of the Romans. Josephus lib. 15. cap. 3. Io ephus lib. 18.
cap. 3 Eu^rop. lib. 1. cap. 2.
The order also, the law and election of the high Priests was corrupted, and
their dignity abastarded altogether, insomuch that without regard of the
Leuiticall race, the high ptiestes were appointed by Consuls or Lieutenants of
Rome as pleased them. And whereas before they continued during their lives, now
they changed ye^ely And when as the Scepter was taken from the stock of Judah,
Genes. 49.
and her kingdom quite overthrown, as before it was prophesied: The
inco^prehensible greatness of God did manifest it self by his son begotten
before all worlds, which did so humble himself, that he took humane flesh of
the virgins womb to redeem his people, and restore them to grace before God.

For as in Adam by his breaking and abusing of the holy sign given unto him to
keep, A conferring of Adam with Jesus Christ.
all the lump of mankind was corrupte^ with the leven of sin: Even so by the
second Adam Jesus Christ we are by grace purged from our offenses. To our first
and universal father Adam was given a holy sign to exercise his obedience,
and to his successors was given other holy signs sacrifices and sacraments
instituted of God, as the tree of life, the fruits of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, the raine-bowe, circumcision, the lamb without blemish, the
bread without leuain, the cloud, the fiery pillar, the red sea divided, the
heavenly Manna, the water of the rock, the immolation and offering of beasts
for sacrifices, the arc of covenant, the brazen serpent, the purging water,
the Temple builded in the midst of the holy City: All which sacred signs,
sacrifices and sacraments, were figures of that which was accomplished by Jesus
Christ.

Jesus Christ the tree of life. Apoca. 2. Romans 11.
For first he was the true tree of life, planted in the midest of the garden of
God, in whom and by whom we which were bastard trees are grafted and set, to
the obtaining of eternal life: he has given us the keeping of the fruits of
the tree of wisdom by his holy gospel, and commanded us to keep it whole
without abusing, without corrupting, without adding or diminishing, in pain of
eternal death.

Rainebowe.
He has bin as the celestial Bow bended in the air to assure us of the band
and covenant contracted between God and us that we should be no more drowned
in the flood of sin. He was circumcised to accomplish the law in himself,
Circumcision. Gala. 4.
that he might cut away the foreskinne of our hearts, to spoil us of our old
corrupted skin in Adam. The burning bushe.
He was the flame in the burning bush, taking flesh in the womb of the virgin
conceived by the grace of the holy Ghost, without the seed of man, the holy
virgin as the bush, remaining nevertheless perfect and vncorrupt. He was
sacrificed as the just and innocent Lamb, Pascall lamb. John. 1. Hebr. 13.
his blood being shed to preserve us from the tyranny of Satan, and to open
unto us the passage into the la^d of promise the kingdom of heaven. Bread of
life. John. 6.
He is the true bread which came down from heaven, without leaven, without
corruption, and spot, whereof we must eat for our spiritual nourishment, to
the end we may celebrate the feast of the Pharaonicall passage in the land of
liberty. 1 Cor. 5. The cloud, fiery pillar and red sea.
He was the cloud, the fiery pillour, the red sea divided, which has
conducted us, which has delivered us from the hands of our enemies, 1 Cor. 10.
John. 19.
out of whose side opened, came blood and water for our salvation and
redemption.

He was the heavenly Ma^na sent from heaven to nourish us for ever, The
heavenly Manna, the rock flowing water of life. 1. Corin. 10.
and the true rock from whence flowed water to quench the thurst of all those
for ever, which thurst and believe in him. It was he that made the sacrifice of
health for the defacing of our sins, Sacrifice. Heb. 7.8.9.10.
the sacrificer and sacrifice, the offering and offerer abiding forever a
sacrificer at the right hand of God his father. Heb. 9.
He entered into the heavenly sanctuary, builded not with the hands of men, but
with the hand of God. The arc of witness.
He was the true Arc of covenant and appoyntme^t, by the which God did
manifest and declare his oracles and in the which he did rest to accomplish his
divine and incomprehensible mysteries. He was as the brazen serpent fastened to
the cross, Brazen serpent John 3.
to give health to the sickness of al those which did turn toward him, and
behold him in faith.

Temple of God. John 2.
He was the true temple of God wherein the holy ghost does dwell, in whom and by
whom one God in trynity is worshipped. The host and holy water.
He was the true and holy sacrifice whereof was made the purging water for the
cleansing of all spots, having by his own ashes, that is by his own body
offered up, John 19.
sprinkled and watered with water issuing out of his side, all people
believing in him.

The ceremonial law being thus accomplished not by figures, but really
executed by the incarnation, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, our
Savior, our mediator, our everlasting sacrificer, and mercy obtainer, the
infinite goodness of God was yet more manifested by the new band, Heb. 9.
new covenant and new coming of the son of God incarnate: For by his new
testament confirmed by the death of the testator, Romans 8.
he has made us fellow heirs and inheritours of the kingdom of heaven with
God.

For assurance of this heavenly succession gotten to us by grace, after that he
had finished the ceremonial law, and abolished the same (as we have showed) by
the sacrifice perfectly made by the everlasting Sacrificer, S. Augustine in his
3. book of the christian doctrine. cap. 9.
there were left unto us two sacred signs and holy sacraments, wherein God
has used more favor and more special grace, than ever he did before his
incarnation, in this that he has delivered us from the servile law of
circumcision, of difference of meats, and of diverse sacrifices ordained in the
first Church of the Israelites, and in discharging us of this heavy burden, he
has so much the more comforted us in ordaining unto us for a memory and
remembrance of our regeneration and life everlasting, two holy sacraments,
Sacraments of the new Testament.
under two holy signs. To wit, the water of Baptism, and the bread, and wine,
for the partaking of his body, and that his grace might extend to all nations,
God did choose those tokens and signs which were most common and easy.

For Circumcision was a special mark for Abraham and his posterity, the
which Circumcision other nations were not accustomed to use, although Herodote
a Greek in the history which he writes of the manners of the Egytians, Herod.
lib. 2.
does attribute unto them the custom to circumcise, especially their Priests.
But it is easy to conjecture, that he had heard speaking of the Jews
dwelling in Egypt for the space of four hundred and thirty years observing
the circumcision. Moreover the Circumcision was ordained for the men only, A
comparing of the circumcision with baptism. Exodus 12.
and not for the women: there was also a day set for Circumcision, the eight
day after the nativity: and the cutting of the skin was paineful and
grievous. But the grace of God having abolished by his incarnation and perfect
sacrifice, Genes 17.
the rigor of the ceremonial law, as well for the difference of meats as of
days, has left unto us by his new will and covenant, the holy sign of water
common to all, as well men as women, without difference of days, Number. 19.
and in this holy sacrament the child baptized feels no grief, as he did
feel in cutting of the skin.

This sign of water, to represent unto us the purging and cleansing of our
sins by the blood of Jesus Christ, was common not only to the Jews, which
were wont to use their cleansing water, but also to the Gentiles and all
nations who had in use the cleansing and washing with this water called
Lustrall and Expiatorie, as may appear by reading of ancient histories.

To the end then that the grace of God, by Jesus Christ might extend to all the
world generally, to all nations, countries and provinces, as well circumcised
as uncircumcised, Jews as Gentiles, God did choose the sign of water most
common, so much the more applying it to the comm^ditie of man to draw him to
fear and obedience. Tit. 3. Galath. 3.
By the which sign he instituted the holy sacrament of baptism, for a note
and assured mark of our regeneration, and purifying, represented sacramentally
by the virtue of the holy ghost, in the which sacrament God does assist and
assure us to be borne a new and made one with Christ Jesus, to be renewed and
made members, of his members, and that he will receive us as clad and
incorporate into him and by him.

Like reasons might be brought for the other holy Sacrament ordained of God by
his new Testament, to wit, Sacrament of the holy supper of Jesus Christ.
of bread and wine. Which signs, tokens, figures and notable forms, all
nations have been accustomed to use in their sacrifices, oblations and
ceremonies, concerning their religions, as well circumcised as uncircumcised,
as well Jews as Gentiles. Also the two kinds of foodes for the nourishment of
man, are contained under bread and wine: For these causes our good God desiring
to draw unto him all nations, to nourish and minister most necessary food
unto the^, did institute the communion of the body and blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ under the forms, holy signs and sacraments of bread and wine:
For as we are assured by the mark and element of water in baptism to be
regenerate and renewed in the body and blood of Jesus Christ, represented by the
sacrament of holy water, by the virtue of the holy Ghost: Even so are we
nourished by the communion of this body and blood represented really by the
Bread and Wine, consecrated for spiritual food and nourishment everlasting,
and quickening by the power of the holy ghost, wherein God favored us much in
discharging us of bloody sacrifices ordained in the first Church of the
Israelits, which were wont to be charged with many and diverse sacrifices
celebrated with the shedding of the blood of earthly beasts* after the
diversity of offenses, and persons offending. All which sacrifices were ended,
and put away by the shedding of the blood of the just and innocent Lamb, Heb.
9.
Jesus Christ, which by his perfect sacrifice has utterly abolished all other
sacrifices, reserving unto himself the dignity of the great and everlasting
Sacrificer, sitting at the right hand of God his Father. But he has favored
us so much, that in place of the abolished sacrifices, he has instituted the
two holy sacraments before mentioned to assure us of our regeneration, our
purging, our adoption, our nourishment, and eternal life, given us by the
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,

But as the Israelites too gross and carnal, did rest in the exterior signs,
Corruption of the Sacraments.
corrupting the true use of the sacraments and sacrifices given unto them of
God: Even so like abuse, yea, greater corruptions are come unto our two holy
Sacraments left unto us by the new testament of Jesus Christ, for the sacrament
of Baptism succeeded in the place of Circumcision, man (conceived of corrupted
clay) would not be contented with Gods holy institution: Sacrament of Baptism
corrupted.
But some have brewed and corrupted the use of the holy sacrament of Baptism
with adiurations and coniurings, suggling of salt, of oil, of tapers, cream,
blowings, hoodes, or biggins, with an infinite number of crosses, on the
forehead, on the eyes, Theodor. in his book of the fables of heretics.
on the nose, on the back, on the breast, on the shoulders, on the mouth, to
chase away Devils: For the Massalians heretics authors of coniuring, and
crossing, do say that the child borne is accompanied with his Spirit or Devil,
which cannot be chased away but by adiuration and coniuring. Ca. sine. Ca.
post. quam de consecratione distinct. 4.
And for this cause, this holy sacrament of Baptism has been corrupted so
far, that they have added thereunto strange terms of the Syrian language,
with spettell and purging sniuell, Ephetath. per Satyr. 2.


What greater corruptions could there be described then these abominable
inventions, as if the blood of Jesus Christ had not been sufficient for our
regeneration and purgation: And as if God had not been of power sufficient to
perfect and regenerate us by the holy sign of water representing the blood of
Jesus Christ, Gala. 3. Ephe. 4. 1 Cor. 15.
if there were not spettell coniured sniuell, oiles, salt, biggins, cream,
torches or tapers, or milk or honey invented by other Heretics.

Other more subtle Magicians, Tertullian in his book of the crowned Soldier.
Pithagorians instructed in the Massalian doctrine have added moreover to
pronounce twenty times over the man child presented to Baptism, the name of a
Devil (which they say) does accompany him, by that means to adjure and
conjure him away. And at the Baptism of a wench, to say the same thirty
times. Was there ever such detestable corruption in the sacrament of
Circumcision? Wherefore (O Massalia^s) have you brued your oiles, in the holy
Sacrament of Baptism? Following the heresy Marcus and Marcosus, Epipha. lib.
1 tom. 3. here is. 34
which commanded to anoint the children that were to be baptized. The holy
sign of water instituted by the hand of God, was it not sufficient to
represent the precious blood of Jesus Christ for our regeneration and
purification, without brewing of greeses, of oil, of spettel and other
minglings, inverted by the corruptors of the holy sacraments: The body and
blood of Jesus Christ, whrewith we be clad by the holy water of Baptism was
it not sufficient to preserve us from all tempests without borrowing of
Biggins and Crisomes? And for another more great corruption and abuse it was
permitted unto women to baptize, Tom. 1. Epipha. lib. 1. here is. 42. and lib. 2.
Tom. 1. here is. 49.
following the error of the Marcionistes, Quintilians Cataphriges, Montanists,
Pepuzians, Priscillians and Artotirites. Was it ever permitted unto women by
the law of God to administer the holy sacraments or sacrifice instituted in
the first Church of the Israelites, or in the new Testament of Jesus Christ?
In the History of Moses it is recited, Exodus 4.
how that his wife Sephora, moved with a womanly rage, took the stone or knife
wherewith she circumcised her son, but it is not written that she or any
other her like, has at any time been permitted to minister the holy
sacraments by such corruptions of the holy sacrament of Baptism: Many heresies
have sprung up by the Catabaptists, Anabaptists, Antipedobaptists and other
heretics, and scismatikes which not contented with the pure and sincere
institution of God, did more rest in the outward signs, then in that which by
them was represented in spirit. He that desires to know more particularly the
abuses and corruptions invented at diverse times by diverse humors of men, let
him read our Ecclesiastical commentaries. It remains presently to come to the
corruptions of the other holy sacrament of the supper and communion of the body
and blood of Jesus Christ. By this short discourse, a man may clearly know how
variable and frail man is, always having abused the grace of god. For like as
from the beginning of the law and instruction given unto them, the people of
Israel did ever corrupt the true use of sacrifices, holy signs, and sacraments
ordained of God: even so is it come to pass of the law of God by Jesus
Christ, having instituted the manner to communicate his body and blood under
the figures and holy signs of bread and wine. The which holy sacrament was
abused in the time of the Apostles by the Corinthians: Against whom the holy
Apostle did write epistles, Sacrament of the supper corrupted. 1 Cor. 11.
to the end to bring them to the true and sincere observation of this holy
Sacrament. Let no man therefore hereafter think it strange if the successors of
the Apostles, from time to time have corrupted the true use of this holy
Sacrament. And the more they were distant from the time of the Apostles of
Jesus Christ, the more they fell into corruption: Yea abominable, turning the
use of the Sacrament into a depth of idolatry. First into what contention fell
the Church that was next unto the Apostles, Ecclesiastical history.
about the determining of the days wherein the holy sacrament should be
celebrated? Sabatius the heretic did institute the celebration of Easter with
unleavened bread after the manner of the Jews. Histo. tripart. lib. 9. cap 37.
and lib. 11. cap. 5.
Certain of his sect did ordain the use of the holy Sacrament to be
celebrated the 14. Moon, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. Histo, tripart. lib. 9. cap
38. and 39.
as the Jews did. It is said, there were of this sect. Policrates bishop of
the Ephesians, Philip Hieropolitan, Policarp, Truseas Melite and Narcissus
Bishop of Jerusalem. Of the contrary opinion were Victor bishop of Rome, and
Eleuther his predecessor, with Theophile Bishop of Palestine. This contention
continued more the^ 300. years after the Apostles. Some celebrated the feast
of Easter after the Equinoctial, when the Sun did enter into the sign of
Aries. Other observes the month Nanthisoc, called by the Romans April.

Some said (to wit) the Quartodecio man's, that it was instituted by S. John, to
celebrate in the 14. Moon. Others advanced themselves to be taught by S.
Peter, whereas yet there was no evident appearance of any thing. The Montanists
Phrygians condemned the Quarto decimans obseruers of the course of the Moon,
and that they ought to order themselves by the course of the Sun, beginning at
the Equinoctial in Prime-tide: And by this means they celebrated eight Ides
of April, which is the 14. day of the same month; Provided that it fell upon
the Sunday.

There was not only contention for the use of the sacraments in what days it
should be celebrated, but also there was great division among the Christians
for ceremonies invented to prepare themselves to receive the same worthily:
Euse. lib. 5. cap. 4.
For some (as the Romans) did keep the fast three weeks before Easter: The
Illyrians and all Greece with the Alexandrians did ordeine a Lent to fast six
weeks Others ordained seven weeks of fasting, leaving off from five days to
five days.

More and more to corrupt the holy sacrament of the supper, there was restored
another Judicial ceremony, by the differences of meats: Histo. tripart. cap.
8.
For some (during the time of fast) forbade eating of flesh and fish. Other
forbade eating of flesh only, permitting to eat fish and fowls, which they
said according to Moys. did take part of the substca^e of the water. Some also
did ordeine to eat dry bread and water only. Others fasted till noone without
distinction of meats. And to be short there was in the beginning an infinite
number of customs and corruptions in the use of the holy sacrament of the
supper, by ceremonies brought in by the difference of days and meats,
abbrogated and put away, by the grace and law of Jesus Christ. Colos. 2.
Galath. 4. Heb. 7.
But was there ever any holy Apostle of God, which ever left in writing any law
or commandment for the distinction of days or meats to celebrate the holy
supper of Jesus Christ? their intention was not to institute a religion of
feasts and a distinction of days and meats, but their doctrine did tend
only to teach good life, and the true worship of one God only. Wherefore
we must needs conclude that the ceremony and feast of Easter, to celebrate
the supper of our Lord God is proceeded of mere custom: Histo. Tripart. lib.
9. cap. 38.
For none of the Apostles has left any thing in writing touching the same.

To moderate such dissentions and corruptions many councels were assembled, one
at Sangaria in Bitine, by the which (to avoid all contentions) it was
permitted to every one to celebrate Easter when he would. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap.
23.
Another counsel was holden at Cesaria by Theophile Bishop of that place, and
by Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem. Another council in Achay. And another
council was holden at Rome by Victor, Bishop of that place.

After these little corruptions, there succeeded greater from time to time, In
the year of Christ. 114.
according unto the humors and affections of the Bishops of Rome, Alexander
the first of that name, Platine. Sabellieus.
being come to be superintendent of the Roman Church, the first of the
successors, of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and also the first of the
corrupters of the holy sacrament of the supper ordained to mix water with the
wine before the communion: wherein he meant to reform the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, which had instituted the communion of his body and blood, to be under
two kinds, Bread and Wine, but Alexander added a third kind (to say) Water. He
restored also the Judicial ceremony of unleavened bread (called sweet bread)
to celebrate the Easter as the Jews did, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 27. and lib. 6.
cap. 14.
following therein the Ebionits, which taught that the ceremonial law of Moses
was necessary for salvation: As also Symmachas an Heretic in Palestine had
taught. If Jesus Christ was circumcised to accomplish the ceremonial law, is
it therefore needful for us to be circumcised? Moreover if it pleased him (to
accomplish the ceremonial law) to use in the days of sweet bread, unleavened
bread: It is therefore necessary to turn again unto the rigor of this
ceremony abrogated by the sacrifice perfectly ended by Jesus Christ? In what
place of the holy Gospel could Alexander ever find to mix water with the
wine? Cel. lib. 39. cap. 21.
And for to bind Christians to unleavened bread. Is it of any more value, then
his invention, to chase away Devils with water salted and coniured? And as
touching his coniured water ordained by him, we will show hereafter that the
original thereof came from Numa Pompilius the great Coniurer and Roman
Idolater, But as for the mingling of the water with wine, that should seem to
be taught by the religion of the ancient Idolaters, which were wont in
celebrating their sacrifices, in one chalice to consecrate the water with the
bread, specially in the feast dedicated to the Sun, which the Persians did
worship, called of them Mythros. And in the feast also of Nephalies, Just. in
his apology.
water was used for the sacrifice. According to this comparison, Justin Martyr
makes relation of the custom observed among the Idolators, and Christians,
for the bread, wine, and water consecrated. By the one that is to say, by the
Idolators, in the name of their Idolles and by the Christians in the name of
their true God. Always this first corruption in the usage of the holy
sacrament by the mingling of water with wine, beyond the commandment and
ordinance of God did not continue without controversy: Inno. lib. 4. cap. 5.
For the Greeks were of a contrary opinion that it was not necessary to mix
water with wine, and that they would not follow the corruption of Alexander.
Amarcanus was of the same advice that Alexander was saying that it was
necessary to mingle it with water.

The subtle Sophist Scot does affirm absolutely that it is not necessary the
water to be mingled with the wine, because says he it cannot be changed and
transubstantiated into blood if first it be not changed into wine.

Other more ingenious would rather interpretate the institution of Alexander,
saying the wine to be converted into blood, but as for the water it was
transubstantiated into the water which came out of the side of Jesus Christ.

This first corruption of Alexander did give occasion of many other to succeed:
For some invented greater bruings to mingle it with blood drawn out of young
Infants to mixed with the bread of the holy supper of Jesus Christ, S. Augustine
in his book of the relikes. cap. 26. and 64.
as the Cataphriges which began a kind of transubstantiation of wine into blood
really and corporally. Epipha lib. 2. Tom. 1. here is. 49.
Some other adjoined thereunto cheese called Artotirites, that is to say,
cheese bread. Others also abusing this sacrament, in steed of wine took water
under pretense of more greater abstinence. Other ordained to temper the bread
with wine, which the Massalians do yet hold in their missall sacrificers.

For another more detestable corruption of the holy sacrament, some bishops of
Rome have forbidden their Massalian sacrificers to minister unto the Christen
people (which they call lay) the body of Jesus Christ under both kinds, but
only under the holy sign of bread, and not of wine, the which they kept for
the Priests Massalians sacrificers. Is not this corruption directly against
the holy gospel and instition of the supper of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 29. Mark.
14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
which has ordained and commanded all faithful to eat his body, and drink
his blood. When he took the cup used he not these proper terms, Drink all
of this wine in memory and remembrance of my blood shed. Has he used any
other terms for eating of his body by the figure of bread, then he has done
for the drinking of his blood by the sign of wine? If one should compare
herewith the holy sign ordained of God in the Church of the Israelites, a
figure of the communion of the body of Jesus Christ (which was the pascall
lamb) the flesh whereof was commanded to be eaten of all persons without
exception, for as much as they were circumcised: Was there ever any difference
in the eating of the pascall Lamb, and celebrating of the Passover of the
Jews among the Levites of the stock of the Priests and the other common
people? For another detestable corruption, the Massalians have instituted by
their missall Idolatries, to sacrifice and offer the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, in reiterating (by means) the sacrifice of Jesus Christ perfectly
ended and cannot be done again: for that it was not after the order of Aaron,
1. Cor. 11.
but after the order of Melchisedech, an everlasting sacrificer, who has left
no successor. Also the holy apostle when he admonished the Corinthians
reverently to celebrate the supper of Jesus Christ, did he command them to
sacrifice? No, but to communicate and eat together the body and blood of
Jesus Christ. The beginning of the holy supper was not to kill, offer, and
ordain a sacrifice to offer to God: But only to eat and drink at the holy
feast prepared for us by Jesus Christ the everlasting sacrifice and everlasting
sacrificer, which has reserved unto himself only this eternal priesthood; And
yet nevertheless has left his holy institution a banquet ordained for us of
bread and wine, representing his body and blood.

After the corruptions aboue-sayde, Satan the diligent Babilonicall builder
employed all his forces and strengthes, to build an invincible sortresse of
Idolatry, to the end to fight against, and utterly to throw down the kingdom
of Jesus Christ, when he did enterprise the building of the Masle to be brought
in, in the place of the holy sacrament of the supper, as we will briefly and so
clearly declare, that the most hard hearted Pharisees (made old in their
ancient Idolatries) shall acknowledge by the verity of histories their errors
and abominable heresies.

Before the painting out of this Maze of error (whereinto the Messalians are
plundged) I thought it necessary, briefly to discover the ancient religion of
the Romans, the reign of the occidentall empire, and of the Emperors which
have exercised both the temporal office, and the dignity of the great bishops
superintendents of the religion and Church of Rome. Tit. Liu. lib. 1. Decad. 1.
All other (as well as I) shall confess that the Roman religion altogether
for the most part to have been instituted by Numa Pompilius the second King of
the Romans, Funestella. his book of magistrates of Rome.
about 700. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. Then were instituted
the Bishops which afterward were brought to a certain number, unto four, then
the number was augme^ted to eight, and by Syl^a to 15. In the college of
Bishops there was one chief Bishop, which was chosen by the other less
bishops of the same order and dignity, like as the little bishops purple
Cardinals have practiced the election of the great Roman Bishop, of their
estate, order and dignity. This Pompilian religion has been so well observed
by the Romans, from the father to the son, that it has been impossible to
destroy and pluck up the same, but has continued to this day, as every one
may easily perceive by this little collection.

To confirm this point there is none that can be ignorant, which lusts to
read the Roman histories, that before the incarnation of Jesus Christ there
was not one King, Consul, Dictator, or Roman Emperor instructed in the law
of God. But all were Idolaters and Infidels, following the religion of Numa
Pompilius the coniurer. And that more is, after the incarnation of Jesus
Christ, for the space of 300. years or thereabouts, there was no Emperor,
Eusebius. in his book of the Church history the years of Christ. 34. 68. 94.
112. 113. 167. 202. 238. 254. 257. 276. and 292.
nor Roman Council which would change his religion to embrace the law of
Jesus Christ. But contrariwise they have labored with tooth and nail to
exercise all kind of cruelltie against the church of Jesus Christ, as the
Ecclesiastical histories do largely declare, painting out great persecutions
under the great Roman Bishops, to wit, Claud. Tiber. Nero, Claud, Domitian
Nero, Fla. Domitian, Traian, Elie Hadrian, Antonian Philosopher, Septime
Severe, Iul. Maximus, Mar. Quin. Traian, Dece, Licime, Valerian, Valere
Aurelian, and Diocletian. All which were Emperors and governed the Empire and
Roman religion for 300. years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ, and in
their moneys, sepultures, monuments, tytles and autentique letters, did hold
the name of great Bishops and high Priests as diligently is gathered in a
book of the antiquities of Rome, wherein be described the Images, In the
book entitled the discourse of the religion of the ancient Romans by Wiliam
de Choa^bayly of Daulphine.
moneies, and monuments of the anancient Emperors of Rome, which were all
called great Bishops, by these titles, s^l. Ces. Pontif. max. Tiber. Nero Pon
if. m^x. Claud. Nero. Pontif. max. Vaspasianus Ces. pontif. max Traianus
Impera. Pontif. max. Marc. Aurel. Anton. August. Pontif. Holiogahalus summas
sacerdos Aug. Adrianus Imper. Pontif. max. Galerius Maximini^ans Pontif. max.
Tit. Ces. Pontif. max. Com^^od. Impe. pontif. max. Flauius Constantius Aug.
Pontif. max. Which being then Emperors and great Bishops would suffer none
other head in the religion and Roman Church then themselves, being always
enemies of Jesus Christ. For when the Apostles did preach Christ to be the
Sovereign Priest, great and everlasting sacrificer, without any successor
after the order of Melchisedech, the tyrants of Rome and their Lieutenants, did
take an occasion to condemn Jesus Christ, fearing that the authority of the
Emperors and great Roman Bishops should be diminished. In the Catalog of
Emperors, in the end of the history of Nicephore the year of Christ 410.
With what fury were they enraged for the space of 300. years against the
christians and Christ's religion, to defend their ancient religion of
Pompilius? what answer was given to Theodose the Emperor by the senate and
senators of Rome, when it was put forth unto them to change their religion,
and to receive the religion of Jesus Christ, They showed that they had
possessed their Pompilian religion more then 1000. years, and that all
changing of religions were the destructions of common wealths.

Wherefore consisting in their old Roman religion, they remained without
receiving of the law of Jesus Christ.

By these histories it is easy to be resolved that for the space of 400.
years and more the bishops of Rome (which called themselves Christians) could
never obtain of the Senate and Roman Senators to receive the holy Gospel,
much less could they convert the Roman Idolater, causing them to forsake
their inueterate Idolatry: For the Bishops of Rome were too much occupied in
restoring the Iudaical and Pagans ceremonies for the distinction of meats,
ordinance not to fast Sunday and Thursday, In the cannon revealed by Clement
Bishop of Rome. 21. 22 62. 95.
to set an order for table clothes, veales, vessels of gold and silver,
sensors and tapesterie, and other ornaments of the alters which consumed with
age, were ordained to be burned and the ashes to be put in the fount. Other
were meruailously occupied to restore the Judicial ceremonies of sweet
bread, and travailed their spirits greatly to corrupt the true usage of the
holy sacraments instituted of God, Alexander the first of that name Bishop of
Rome in the year of Christ 110.
by mingling of water with wine, bruing of salt with the water to make it
purged and coniured to drive away Devils. Sixtus Bishop of Rome in the year of
Christ 121.
Other also did travel to institute Corporasses of fine linen to lay up the
consecrated hosts, and to ordeine also albes and other vestiments of the
Priests for their sacrifices of white color without spot. Siluester Bishop of
Rome
Some did torment their brains to invent the feasts of dedication and
consecration, Higinus Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 140.
with coniuring, with salt to drive away Devils. And some other to invent oils
and creames to corrupt the holy sacrament of Baptism. ^abian Bishop of Rome in
the year of Christ 240.
Moreover (during the reign of these Tirants, Emperors, and great Bishops)
the Bishops of Rome desiring to make their names to continue for ever, did
dream in their spirits to build Temples, Pius Bishop of Rome in the year of
Christ 144.
not unto the honor of God, but in the name of their he and she Saints,
canonized by them at their pleasure. Other did occupy themselves to ordain
that the consecrated bread and wine falling upon the ground, should be left to
the sacrificer, and the rest remaining should be burned with fire: and the
ashes should be laid up among the relics. Zepherin Bishop of Rome in the
year of Christ 200
Other did travel to set an order among chalises, whether they should be of
glass or of wood. And by other were instituted solemn ceremonies four times
a year to bring Christians to the bondage of distinction of days. Calixtus
Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 220


E^tich Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 282
Some were occupied meruailously to ordain the offering and consecration of
fables, to celebrate funerals in purple garments after the manner of the
vestiment called Trabea, the which the Idolaters did use in triumphs
celebrated in the honor of their Gods.

The red robes of Cardinals. Siluester bishop of Rome in the year of Christ
314.
And the like purple garment is used of the Cardinals to this day. Others were
occupied to invent a confirmation for young children, and that the Bishops only
should consecrate the cream: To honor also the Bishop of Hostiense, by whose
hands the bishop of Rome must be consecrated, with a cloak called Palliu^. And
to invent an infinite number of other unnecessary ceremonies, contrary to the
liberty of the Gospel given unto us by Jesus Christ: How was it then possible
that the first Bishops of Rome should draw the Princes, Senators and Romans
unto the law of the Gospel, during 300. or 400. years after the incarnation of
Jesus Christ, seeing they did not labor but to corrupt the use of the holy
sacraments, and to restore the Judicial ceremonies, and Idolatries of the
heathen the ancient Romans?

But here might one object one Philip which some vaunt to have been converted
to holy Baptism, the manners of whom were so wicked that they gave occasion to
the most credible authors, to describe him unworthy the name of a Christian.
Chronicle of John Baptist.
One might bring in Constantine the great, which caused the Council of Nice to
assemble: but his reside^ce was in Grecia being called the Emperor of the
East. And yet would he never receive the sign of Baptism to be regenerate by
the blood of Jesus Christ, until he was 65. ye ares old, Histo. tripart.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
at what time he was baptized by a Bishop of Nicomede Arian, named Eusebe, the
same Constantine being at point of death. Siluester then Bishop of Rome, must
not crack that he converted this Emperor to the faith: For this same
Siluester would not assist the assembly of the Council holden at Nice in the
year of Jesus Christ. 327. How so ever it be, it is convenient to have
recourse always to the verity of Histories, wherein is recited the answer of
the Senate and Senators of Rome, to the Emperor Theodoze more then 60. years
after the death of the same Constantine the great: Which was, that they would
not receive the law of Jesus Christ, but observe their ancient law
Pompilian, to avoid the ruin of their common wealth, which might come by the
changing of religion, whereby may be well gathered that then the law of God
was not received nor approved at Rome by the Senate and Senators.

It rests that presently we come nearer to the time following. After the
decease of Theodoze, the Roman Empire of the West began so to bow, that in
short time it was quite put out by Wandeloys and Alayns, Paul. Emil. lib. 1 the
year of Christ. 412. 15.
which were the chief that sacked Rome, burnt the most part of it, and
ravished the proper daughter of the Emperor Theodore: whom they married to
Ataulphe king of the Goths. A little while after succeeded the Hu^nes. Blond.
lib. 2. Decad. 1.
Then Attilia King of the Goths, which usurped Italy.

About this time the Roman Empire of the West was spoiled of all Germany,
Asia, Sarmatia, Procop. lib. 3. 0 the war of the Vandals in the year of
Christ 486.
and all the Provinces tributaries, unto Danube: Spain also, Aquitania,
Gascoygne, Bourgoyne and all the Gauls did revolt from the Roman tyranny.
Then succeeded the Ostrogothes with their King Valemir, The year of Christ.
550. 554
Theodemer, Theodorike and other Heathen and Infidels. The Visigothes also, all
usurpers successively of Italy. Paul Emil lib. 1 the year of Christ. 568.
Afterward reigned Totilas, which forced, robbed, and burned Rome, and all
Sicile. In the end the Lombards conducted by their Kings Alboin did reign,
which usurped Italy. These barbarous nations, Idolaters and Infidels did serve
as whippes ordained of God to punish the Idolators of Rome committed by them,
which had knowledge of the holy Gospel. And yet turned back from the true
worshipping of God, violating and corrupting the holy sacraments by the
inventions of men: To punish also the infidelity and obstinacy of the
Emperors and Senators of Rome, which first of all caused the Lieutenants, and
officers appointed in Judea to crucify Christ and his holy Apostles, to
persecute the Christians, and always to resist the law of the Gospel to
maintain their religion Pompilian.

Thus we may conclude, that during the space of 400. years the Roman church
of Emperors and Senators, has ever been contrary and enemies to the law of
Jesus Christ. Then afterward (the occidentall Empire being overthrown) Rome
and all Italy was ruled and governed 300. years, or there about, by Kings,
Princes and Dukes, Idolators and Infidels. namely by the Va^dales, by the
Goths, by the Hu^nes, by the Astrogothes, by the Visigothes, and by the
Lumbards in such sort, that during the space of 700. years or there about,
after the incarnation of Jesus Christ there was no Emperor, King, nor Prince
of Rome, which would embrace the law of Jesus Christ. The which gladly and
shortly I have declared, to the end that the Reader think not strange, that I
have here showed the sacrifice of the mass, to have taken his beginning of
the ancient religion instituted by Numa Po^pilius more then 700. years before
the incarnation of Christ.

And so afterward also the same sacrifice has been continued by the
Idolatrous Romans inueterate and hardened, so in their Pompilian Religion,
that they would never put away the same.

But to the end that nothing in the Roman Histories be kept close which might
obscure the clearenes of the verity, during the tyranny and usurping of the
nations aforesaid, in Italy was erected a little Lordship at Rauenna, which
continued about 183. years until it was ravished by a Bishop, which invested
himself, and encroched into the chair of S. Peter by the means of a donation
and demission practiced by Pepin in the year 758. in recompense of a tyranny
exercised by Zachary Grec. Bishop of Rome, who spoiled the true inheritors of
the crown of France, namely Chilperic or Childeric, whom he shut up in a
cloister to make the kingdom to fall unto the said Pipin the son of Charles
Martell bastard. This donation of Pipin thus given to the great Roman Bishop,
was the first original of the greatness of the Popes of Rome, who do hold
unto this day the Lordship of Rauenna. land. lib. 1. cul. Emil. 2.
(800. years being past) with a great number of Towns a long the Sea
Hadriatike, committed unto them by Pepin, contrary to the express
commandementes of Constantine then raigninge Emperor of the East in Grecia.

Whiles this little lordship was continued at Rauenna, The year of Christ. 588.
long time before the donation of Pepin, the Bishop of that place seeing that
there were no more Emperors of Rome (which was governed and kept under by
barbarous people and Infidels) lift up his horns in such sort that he
preferred himself to be Bishop of Rome, Sabellic.
and made himself the head of the Church, and also himself and his
successors Bishops of Rauenna, so long as the Lordship has continued. This
was the first little Antichrist which would take upon him a tyranny in the
Church, to follow the earthly tyranny of his Lordship.

Afterward there rose up another greater Antichrist in Constantinople, In the
year of Christ. 600. Blond. lib. 1.
named John Bishop of that place: Who seeing the occidentall Empire of Rome
overthrown, and the other of Constantinople highly exalted, Greg. lib. 4. of
his epistles, cap. 26.
he would also follow the tyranny of the world, and stir up a spiritual
rule in the Church of Jesus Christ. He caused himself to be declared (by a
council holden at his pleasure) Bishop Ecumenique, The year of Christ. 604.
that is to say, general and head of the whole Church. Platin. Sabellic.
But soon after the great Bishops of Rome gave such order that by treason the
Emperor Maurice in Constantinople was cruely slain, he, his wife, and
family, by wicked Phocas: who to recompense this detestable murder committed
by the advice of the Church of Rome, always contrary to Jesus Christ, The
year of Christ. 612.
he declared Boniface the third of that name, the general head of the church
of God, taking upon him the authority of Jesus Christ the great and
everlasting high Priest, the only spouse and head of his church. Who can
better describe an Antichrist, than he that does enterprise a tyranny in the
church of God, Mark 26,
a poligamie in the church the spouse of Jesus Christ attributing to himself
that power which Jesus Christ has reserved to himself, to be perpetual with
his church, by the virtue of his holy spirit to conduct and govern the same?
May not he rightly be called Antichrist which does enforce himself directly
to go against the holy gospel of Jesus Christ, who commanded his Apostles
(when he sent them to preach his word) that they should not institute a
Monarchy in the church, as the Princes, Kings, Math. 23. Luke 11. Mark 2.
and tyrants of the earth? That none amongst them should enterprise to call
himself the head or greater then other: but all as brethren were humble being
assured to have one head, and one heavenly father, which will tarry with them
and assist them for ever, to inspire and conduct them in his holy will. Is not
he of good right Antichrist, which will have himself called the successor of
Jesus Christ in the great Bishopric, and in the high priesthood by him
exercised? The which dignity he has reserved to himself, abiding a high
sovereign Priest for evermore: who has left no successor in his dignity as
Aaron did and his successors in the dignities of the high Priests of the
Jews: But is after the order of Melchisedech a king and high priest without
any successor in his dignity, Wherefore then (O Antichrists of Rome) have you
taken upon you the dignity of the highest Bishops as the heads of the church of
God, and usurped also the authority of Jesus Christ, causing your selves to be
called most blessed and most reverend fathers and Popes, having instituted a
college of little purple Bishops to choose the great Bishop, but only to
the end to renew the ancient Roman religion of Numa Pompilius, the first
author of your Pontifical dignities.

About the same time that Phocas the cruel murderer did erect an Antichrist
in the Roman Church, Mahomet was risen in the Church of Arabia, instructed by
the Monk Sergius, about the year 620. for this Apostate Heretic, seeing the
law of God altogether corrupted by the traditions of men, and the holy Gospel
contemned, sects and diverse heresies sowed, as well by the Jews, Pharisees,
Esseens Saduces, Masbutheans, Galileans, Hemerobaptists, and Samaritans: as
also by the Christians, Simoniaques, Nicolaits, Cerinthie^s, Menandrie^s, and
Ebionites, Vale^tinians, Cerdonians, Marcionistes, Montanistes, Seek the
Church histories.
Cataphriges, Tatians, Eueratits, Seuerians, Artemonistes, Porpherians,
Helchesaites, Nouatiens, Sabellians, Chiliastes, Paulianistes, Manicheans,
Automousiastes, Arrians, Eunonians, Macedonians, Euuomiotheophroniens,
Eunomioentichiens, Aetians, Donatistes, Luciferiens, Patripassians or
Theophatites, Photiniens, Marcellians, Paulosamosetans, Apolinaristes,
Iouinianistes, Pelagians, Acariens, Olimpiens, Quaternitaries, Monothelites.
And other Heretics having corrupted the true usage of the holy Sacraments
ordained of God. Seeing also specially the Messalien sect to prosper in their
ceremonies, taken partly out of the Judicial law, and partly out of the
heathen Idolatry he invented the great Alcoran* decree, wherein he set many
chapters and articles called Azoares, which are as laws and rules of the
Mahomet Religion.

This preface and brief discourse of the Roman history me thought necessary
to recite before I would begin to discribe the original of the sacrifice of
the Mass: Always to bring the Reader to understand the verity of the fact:
How the Emperor of Rome has bin governed until the decay thereof, about the
year of Christ 410. And how the barbarous Idolators did usurp the same: for
the space of 300. years how also the Antichrists did rise, and in the end the
Emperor of Rome was transferred to the Almaines, which keep it to this day,
500. years being passed.

Of the Mass.
TO begin this our little treatise of the Mass, first of all it is convenient
to interpret this term Mass, The original of the term of the Mass.
of the ancient Romans called Missa. Some have honored this Missal sacrifice
to have taken his beginning of the Hebrews, bringing in the place of Daniel
Daniel. 11.
speaking of Maozin, as if they would signify the Mass by Maozin. But this
term is very strange from Missa, or Mass. And there are other Hebrew words
which are more nearer, to wit, Messa, which is as much to say as conculcation
or treading down, whereof mention is made in the history of the kings of
Israel. 4. Kings. 11. Missa.
Another term also is found, very comfortable unto this common term Mass,
namely Messall, Joshua. 19. Messall.
that is to say, hell or grave. But I am well assured that the high Priests of
Rome will not take the original of their sacrifice of the Mass from the
Hebrews, acknowledging their Mass and Messall to be a conculcation, grave, or
hell. Further to speak the truth the Author of the Roman Religion Numa
Pompilius never thought of the Hebrews, when he first instituted the Mass much
less this term Missa or Mass can have his original of the Greeks, Messal.
Hell.
seeing they have no sacrifice of that name, notwithstanding that some have
made some reason to bring in this term of Greek Miz^in, that is to say in
English, to whisper or hide in secret. As if the Messalian sacrificers had
received of the Greeks Idolatours, to keep secret the chief and principal
words of their Masses, to the end they should not be understood of the
assistance but have observed to murmr and blow between their teeth the
Canons, and other special words, which neither they understood themselves,
nor other, which beheld them. Nevertheless neither the Hebrew terms, nor
Greek vocables in no wise can be appropriated to the missall sacrifice.
Wherefore it behooves to have recourse to the true original of the term Missa
or Mass Mass taken of the ancient Latins Romans.
taken of the ancient Latins the Romans, which were accustomed to use these
terms, Missus, Missa, Missilis, and Missio. As we say in English a Messenger,
a Message, and Messiuenes for letters sent: For when the ancient Idolaters
Romans would give leave unto the assistance at their Sacrifices celebrated to
go home, Apud Graecos Sacerdos functus misterio sic renunciabat Laois aphesis
quasi populum misum faceres
they caused to be pronounced in the end of the sacrifice these words. I,
lieet, Missa est. Depart, it is permitted the assembly has leave to retire or
depart. And in process of time, for that this song did note unto the people a
license to go home, most agreeable and desired as a song and term most
comfortable and pleasant it has bin kept and the sacrifice honored with this
term Mass or Missa to confirm this point there is two thousand years past,
Apul. lib. 11. de asin. au.
and the same terms be sung yet unto this present day, Ite Missa est, which
does signify a leave given to the company or assembly to depart and go home.

In such sort that those which do haunt the temples or churches, as soon as
they do understand this pleasant song, Ite Missa est, a man may see them
ordinarily to awake, and leap for joy, as being assured to have license to go
to dinner.

The Arabian Mahomistes instructed of long time by the monk Sergius, as we
have declared, have this term of Mass in great commendation, In the book of
the description of Afric by John Leon Affricain.
with which vocable they have honored 3. towns or cities called Messa situate
upon the mouth of the Ocean, upon the point which does make the beginning of the
mount Atlas.

Nere unto the same towns in the suburbs, there was a temple much reverenced
by the Idolatrous Turks, Messa o the Turks.
for that they did believe that in Messa should be borne the just bishop
promised and prophesied by Mahomet. They did believe also that upon the coast
of the said place of Messa, Jonas was cast after he was swallowed up of the
whale. Messalamans. In the book of the great Turks Court by friar Antony
Gefferie.


They have also this name Messalamaines in as great honor as we have the name
of Christians. As if the would signify by this vocable Messalanian saved.

Moreover the Mahematists do honor also their priests with the name of Mass,
calling them Messen, In the book above said. Messen. Messit.
and their temples Messit or Meschit. Those then which are enforced to bring to
light the Anatomy or description of the Mass, the pieces, the grounds, the
paths and encreaseme^ts, ought to describe it with great reverence, having due
respect to the ancient religion Pompilian and Alcoran of Mahomet.

Now after that we have resolved the name of Mass, and of Missa, in the Latin
tongue, to have taken her beginning of the ancient Roman Idolatours, and not
of the Greeks or Hebrews. It behooves us to come to the garments of the
Messalian sacrificers. But in passing by we must not omit that name Bishop, to
have his original also of the Romans as we have declared also in our
commentaries. Also the name Papa or Pope had his beginning of the ancient
Idolatours, who were wont to call upon their God Jupiter calling him Papa
Jupiter, specially the Bithinians and Scithes. The which name Pope is taken of
the Greek word Papus, that is to say great father. And also the very title
written upon all the requests presented unto the great Roman Bishop, is most
blessed father, and to the less purple Bishops most reverend father, and to
the little Bishops reverend father. Holding all this word father or Papa, a
great father, which was wont to be a common name for all Bishops But afterward
the great Roman Bishops did reserve it for themselves only. There is also
another name reserved for the little bishops, called curates, which are
superintendentes in every little parrish, having borrowed this name Curate of
the ancient Curions of Rome. If one will not deduce the etimologie or
signification of the same from the Greek word Cura, Cura. Cario. sacerdos C
ur qui in sua cura, id est in sua parrochia sacris praeerat. Tit. Liu. lib. 1.
Decad. 1.
that is shauing or polling, for that the ancient Curions and Sacrificers had
their pollings and head shaven after the form of the Babilonians, or of the
Herculians Bishops, called for the same cause Stephanophores, as bearing a
crown upon their heads. Wherefore me thinks that all the members of the
Missall sacrifice had their beginning of the Pompilian Religion and that one
should do wrong to the ancient Roman Idolators if he should take from them the
original of the names of Mass of Bishop and of Curate, Tit. Liu. Fenest.
Pompo. Let.
as it is justified and evident by the ancient Roman histories. Touching the
vestiments of the Mass Sacrificers Numa ordained that it should be white,
called by the Latin word Alba, an aulbe. The which name Aulbe has continued
to this day for the vestiment of the Priest celebrating Mass. Above the aulbe
Aulbe. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Super tunicam aeneam pectori tegumen.
Tit. lib. Deca. 1.
was also ordained for the sacrificer to wear a little iacket painted in
colors. And above that an ornament for the breast of brass or copper,
afterward changed into gold or silver, which the Massalians called a Cheasuble,
they used also a veil to cover their head in sacrificing, Chasuble. Virgil.
lib. Ene. 3. purpureo velare comas ad opertus amictu sit capite ante aras
phrygio velamus amictu.
called an amice first instituted by Eneas. These be the principal vestiments
instituted by Numa, more then 700. years before the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. True it is that afterward many inrichments of the Jews were added
thereto, as the Stole, the Ephod, the Zone, or Girdle the Miter or Thear, and
certain other ornaments, the goodlier to garnish the great whore of Babylon.

Titelman in tracta. de exposi. myniste. miss and Gaber. Biel in li. de exposi
missae.
But the Massalians willing to disguise the original of their vestiments of
the mass have imagined the aulbe to figure the conversation of Jesus Christ in
his flesh, or the purity of his body incarnate in the womb of the virgin.
Other do interpret the white color to signify chastity and continence.
Others playing and mocking the passion of Jesus Christ do sophistically
signify by the aulbe, the white garment presented by Herod unto Christ when he
was sent back (as a fool) to Pilate. Philo the Jew a more excellent
philosopher, in his treatise of dreams, does subtelly say the aulbe does
signify the certainty of the most clear light of God, which he calls ens:
the linen also whereof the aulbe is made, they do interpret the subteltie of
the scriptures. And as touching the amice invented by Enea. they disguise it to
be the vale wherewith Christ was covered when the Jews in the house of Caiphas
did mock him in buffeting him. Titelman one of the most subtel Massalians does
sophistically say by the amiae to be signified the divinity of Christ hid
under the humanity. Some other also do confess the amice to be come in, in
place of the Ephod of the Jews. The zone, the manipule and the stole which be
3. kinds, they figure the 3, cords wherewith Christ was bound and led before
the Priest, and before the Lieutenants of the Romans in ^ury, Biel another
fubtel Massalian does interpret by zone the rods wherewith Christ was whipped,
by the stole laid a cross to signify the gibbet or gallows that Christ
carried upon his shoulders. The manipule also carried upon the left arm to
figure the bond of love wherewith Christ was holden. Another mummerie by the
zone wherewith the aulbe is trussed to signify the bond of the charity of
God. The stole put upon the ammas in the neck of the Massalian in form of the
cross to figure the obedience of Jesus Christ unto the death of the cross.
The maniple carried upon the left hand to figure eternal felicity of Jesus
Christ. Another sophistry by the ammas to figure faith, by the stole the
humility of obedience, by the manipule, the watch and hearty devotion of the
massing sacrificer. Titelman does surmise otherwise of the manipule on the left
hand, to be figured the force and battle of Christ against all powers visible
and invisible, as a buckler against all temptation: and the hemmes of the
manipule to figure a final perseverance. He does sophist also by the left
hand to be understood the human infirmity of Christ, the which bound with the
manipule, does figure Christ holden as it were overcome by the divinity.
Brunus another Massalian doctor does imagine by the manipule the care of the
massing priest to chase away evil affections, or otherwise to figure the lord
wherewith Christ was bound by the Jews: by the Stole, to be figured the yoke
of the Lord, the which the Massalian ought to have garnished with arms of
righteousness on the left side and on the right. The other painted orname^t
first instituted by Numa the magicia^ they have disguised it with the name of
planet, as a wavering vestiment, otherwise called a cope of a chasuble, which
they do sophist to present the purple robe presented unto Christ in the
judgment hall of Pilate, to mock him, calling him king of the Jews. Another
sophistry by such a garment to be figured the nature of Christ, where the Deity
was hid. Philo the Jew platonicing, does interpret by this vestiment decked
with diverse colors, to be figured the stars and heavenly signs. The^ the
Massalia^ sacrificer thus rigged with his aulbe, Ammas, his zone, manipule
stars, and with his chasuble or cope of diverse colors, must stretch out his
arms to play two personages at once, representing by his chasuble or cope
(whereof the part before is less then that behind) the first Church from Abel
to Christ. And by the part behind more large and also enriched with the sign
of the cross to figure the Christian people. This chasuble must accord with
the Amice which was before upon the head to signify the coniun^tio^ of Christ
and his church. The aulbe also must be agreeable to the chasuble to signify
Christ to be applied unto our infirmities. Beside the vestime^ts above said
Philo the Jew does ad the mitre to figure the riall diadem of the Massalians
which ought to have their heads anointed with cream or with holy oil to
signify the princelines of the Priests the which ornament of the mitre is
now reserved for great Sacrificers only. Philo in lib. de profug.


It rests to descend to the description of the parts of the Mass, the
original whereof particularly we desire according to the truth. First to the
Masses called high celebrated on Sundays. The Massalian Sacrificers have taken
of the religion Pompilian to conjure a clensing water called Holy Water, Apul.
lib. 11. Of the golden Ass. Proclas in lib. de sacrifi. and Gag Procl.
Platonicatu.
consecrated to sprinkle the assista^ts at the sacrifice. The coniuration and
enchaunting instituted by Numa was of sea or salt water, for this cause says
he, that the salt was participant of a fyrie nature, or of fire very apt to
purify.

For this cause the ancient Roman Idolators did sprinkle with this salt water
co^iured (as with Mercury water) purging and clensing the faults of the people,
Eius aquae aspersione, peccata presertim periuria, mendatiaque dilui credebant.
Blond. lib. de Romans tri^m. Ovid lib. ^ast. 3. In the law of the discourse of
the religion by Choul. i. Holy water, stocks of two sorts.
specially of perjured and liers. To co^serue this water hallowed and co^iured
they had two sorts of holy water vessels. The one great fixed and made fast at
the entry of their Temples, where they did worship their Images, to the end to
sprinkle with the same salted water those which did enter into the said
Temples. The other holy water ve^ssel was cariable to transport of the same
water through their Temples or houses, to the end to water the^ for their
clensings and purifyings.

Dijs superis sacra facturus corporis ablutione purgabatur cum vero inferis
litandum erat sola aspertio sufficiebat. Blon. lib. 2. de Romans trium Macro. lib
3. Satu. cap. 1. In delii. Apolonis templo praecipua erat aqua sacrificantum
vsui accommoda qua^ ad alios vsus hausisse magni crimiminis instar erat Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 4. cap 17. Platina. Si sinis vitula aspersus populum iudeoru^
mundebat multo magis aquasale conspersa populu^ sanctificat and insidias
diaboli auertit ca. aquam
They which ought to celebrate the Mass, if it were to the inferior Gods, it
was sufficient that the sacrificing Priest did sprinkle himself with the same
purging water. But if the sacrificer did celebrate Mass to the superior Gods,
he must bathe his whole body, and wash all his members. It was also defended to
apply this purging water to any other use, save for clensinges and purgings.
Alexander the first of that name, next successor of the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, and one of the first corrupters of the holy sacraments ordained of God,
following the same institution of Pompilius continuing this Idolatry of
coniuring and consecrating of holy water, to chase away Devils. But the better
to color of this Pompilian witchcraft he invented this comparison. If it be so
(says Alexander) that the ashes of a red Cow, offered up in sacrifice
mingled with water of the fountain purified the people of the Jews: By much
greater reason the water coniured with salt should purify Christians and chase
away Devils. Is not this a breaking and corrupting of the law of God, de
consecra. distinct. 1. Law of God* corrupted.
to accord with the Romans, taught in the ancient doctrine and religion of
Numa Pompilius the coniurer. If Alexander had not bin so much given to the use
of salt, instituted by the ancient Idolators for their clensing water, Number. 19.
he would rather have followed the Judicial ceremony, and have ordained ashes
to consecrate the purging water. And where he would think to vyser his doing
by the miracle of Elizeus which did purify the water with salt. 4. King. 2.
Moses also did the like with the wood showed unto him, when the people of
Israel were in such necessity of sweet water to drink. Exodus 15.
But by these miracles it is not recited that Elizeus nor Moses had instituted
a purging water to purify the people of the Jews. Number. 19.
And it shall not be found that there was at any time amongs the Judicial
ceremonies any other purging water but with the ashes of the beast offered up
for burnt sacrifice. Number. 19.
Wherefore Alexander and his like must freely acknowledge the invention of
their Salt and coniured water for the purging of sins, to have taken his
original of Numa Pompilius, more then seven hundred years before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ.

Histo. tripart. lib. 6. cap. 35.
This purging water was so well observed of the Roman Idolatours, that more
than 360. years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ, it is recited how the
Emperor Valentinian entering into the Temple of the g^ddesse Fortune,
Valentinian the Emperor against holy water sprinkled
a sacrificer watching the said Temple, did sprinkle him with this blessed
purging salted water; which he had taken out of the holy water stock being at
the entrance of the said Temple, wherewith the Emperor being chafed, smote the
Priest holding the holywater-sticke, saying he was rather defiled then
purified. By these true Histories the Massalians may vaunt themselves, the
first part of their Mass sacrifice to be very ancient. Holy water very ancient.
And that their holywater stocks, and salted cleansing and purging water, are
of the ancient doctrine of Numa Pompilius and not of the Evangelical doctrine
of Jesus Christ, which they call new doctrine, and new Testament, as differing
from the ancient Ceremonies of the Jews and Painyms Idolatours. Against salt
holy water of Alexander Pope of Rome.
But again I cannot marvel enough, wherefore Alexander did enterprise the
restoring of the Pompilian Idolatry, seeing he had a mean to reinstitute the
ceremonial water after the fashion of the Jews. And this doing to follow
rather the law of God then Numa Pompilius, for he had easy means to recover
ashes to make a purging water after the manner of the Jews: namely of holy and
precious ashes, to say of the ashes kept in their shrines, and coming of
courtaines, Ca. Omnes de consecrat. distinct. 4. and ca. Altaria and ca.
Vestimenta. distinct. 1.
towels and vessels consecrated, which the Bishop Clement predecessor of
Alexander had forbidden to be applied to any profane use, But being worn with
oldnes, to be burnt in the fire. And the ashes to be put into the Fount. Were
not these holy ashes, to have moved Alexander to restore the ashie and purging
water after the manner of the Jews, if he had not been so dainty of salt and
found a better taste, to continue the ancient Roman religion? Other ashes
might have been found by the successors of Alexander: Ca. Al^aris de
consecrat. distinct.
To wit, of the round hosts unleavened and consecrated, which the great Bishop
Higinus ordained to be burned (which falling upon the earth might not be left
for the massing sacrificer) and the ashes of the same hosts to be put into the
shrines. Other ashes also might have been gotten of the rattes, mvce, and
other beasts devouring the said consecrated hosts, and ordained to be burned,
and the ashes to be put into the shrines.

In lib. cautel. Miss.
Seeing then that Alexander would not follow the ceremonial law of God, to
ordain a water blessed, salted, consecrated and coniured: Why did he not at
the least put his salt into the host of the Massalian Sacrificer, which they
say is offered to God as a health sacrifice? Leuit. 2.5.6.
In doing whereof he should have followed the ceremony of Moses, by the which
he commanded the salt should be offered in all sacrifices, and therewith to
sprinkle the sacrifice offered for health. But if Alexander and his successors
would have followed the law of God, they would have inverted nothing of their
own brains, they would never have made themselves so renowned to have left
the memory of their institutions: The occasion of inuenting new idolatries.
For this occasion they would in nothing follow the law of God, but
cont^ariwise have forbidden to put salt into the round hosts consecrated to
celebrate the Missall Sacrifices. They have forbidden also to put ashes into
their holy water, to the end that in all their institutions, men should know
they borrow nothing of the law of God nor of the law of Moses, much less of
the Euangellicall law of Jesus Christ, but only to have taken thought to
bring in inventions, notwithstanding that they were invented by the ancien
Painims and Roman Idolators, 700 years before the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. To finish this first part of the Mass: It had been more expedient (o
Massalians) that in place of your sacrifices, and coniured salt water,
wherewith you sprinkle the people, The true holy water of all Christians.
to have clearly declared the holy Gospel, causing the people to understand,
that the purifying and washing of their sins, did hang only on the blood of
Jesus Christ, who is strong enough to drive away Devils to bring us from hell,
to preserve us from death everlasting, Hebr. 9.
and to def^ce in us all spots of sin, without using of adiuration and
coniuring with salt, to drive away Devils, according to the witchcraft of
Pompilius and the heresy of the Samaritans, Epi^^ a lib. 1. tom 1. ^ec 9. and
17. conte. hec.
which did believe to be purified by washing themselves every day with holy
water.

^ part of the Mass.
After the Asperges song, and the holy coniured water sprinkled upon all the
Aulters, Images and assistance at the missall sacrifice, followed the
Procession which some would attribut to Agapet Bishop of Rome. Procession.
Platina Tit. Liuius. in his decades.
But it was instituted more then a thousand years before him, which the
ancient Roman Idolators did call Supplication.

The manner instituted by Numa to go in procession to appease the wrath of their
Gods, or to obtain peace, Supplicationes quas nos proc^ssi ones vocamus f^^
bant circa delub^a sanaque and pulumaria in quibus honos diis dabatur, pr^^e
d^nubus puerit ingenuis a^ sacerdotious coronatis ac ^aureant tenentibus manu
voce modul^ta canentibus carmen ubsequente maximo pontifice v^^curione deinde
sequentibus patriciis ac senatoribus cum coniugibus and liberis pleru^q,
coronatis Apul. lib. 11. de Asin. aur. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium. Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 5. cap. 27. In the book of the discourse. (...) the ancient
religion of the Romans. Apul. lib. 11. Of the golden Ass. Alex. ab Alex. lib.
50 cap. 27.
or to pray to God for the fruits of the earth, the order was in this sort.
First before the Processio^ went young childeren* then the Priests clad in white
surplisses, singing Himnes Praises and Songs to the honor of their Gods,
after marched the high Bishop or Curate, then the ancient Senators of Rome,
with their wives and children, and sometime the common people did ^ssist the
same also. In this Procession was carried commonly the Pagent or Shrine of the
God Jupiter, or ^nub^, by some of the Priests clad in white Su^pli^^es (their
heads being shaven) and having a crown upon their heads. This crown was in
such reputation, that the Emperor Commodus Antonius himself the high Bishop
caused his head to be shaven and shorn round, expressly to bear the Pagent
of the God Anubis. Before the pagent or Shrine went a Torch-bearer carrying a
taper light in his hand. When the Processio^ did pass through the streets,
there were resting places prepared, to serve for stations for the Priests
Page^t porters to breath themselves. During the Procession the temples were
opened, the Aulters and Images perfumed with incense and the Relics of the
Gods visited. In the days appointed for Procession it was kept holy, the
shoppes being shut, the Halles of Justice closed, and the Prisoners unchained.
Who could better paint forth the order of the Processions observed unto this
day by the Massalians, Herodote in his history. Ierem. in epist. ^d Iudeos in
Babylonem abdu^endos. Ne verticem dera^itote neue barbam vellitote.
instructed from the Father to the Son by the Religion of Pompilius? What
other author can there be alleged for the ceremonies observed in the
Processions but Numa Pompilius? If the Massalians will not run further for
their shaven crowned heads their vestiments and white Surplices, which the
ancient Idolatrous Egyptians were accustomed to use, or to the Priests the
Goddess Isis, or to the Babylonians Sacrificers, which had their heads and
beardes shaven: Leuit. 19. nec in gy^um ^e rotundum attondebitis om^m vestr nec
radetis barbam. Ezech. 44.
For as touching the law of God the contrary was observed and the Priests
were forbidden to clip round their heads and hairs and that they should not
have shaven beardes. And as for the law of the Gospel, there is no like
ceremony commanded by Jesus Christ, nor by the Apostles. They must then take
their course unto the ancient Religion of Pompilius. Banner of Proces^ion.
Moreover in the Procession there is added a cross and a banner. This Banner
was called by the ancient Roman Idolatours Labarum, which was a sign reputed
holy and reverend as well by the Dictators and Emperors, as by the Soldiers,
Ex libris messalae ad Octauianum Augustum.
going on Warfare. In this banner first Antenor caused this Italian word Truye
or Troy (after the name of Troia) to be painted, Apul. lib. 11. de asin. aur.
which signifies in english a Sow. The which banner Antenor vowed and
dedicated to the temple of Juno. In the book of the dis^ourse of the anci^n^
religion of the Romans.
Queen of the Heavens for that, that the Sow was the sacrifice consecrated
unto the same Goddess Afterward the ancient Romans caused to be painted in
their banner Mercuries Mace In the which was painted the Portrature of two
Dragons or Serpents enterlaced. Then after was painted an Eagle, for the arms
of the Emperor of Rome But Constantine the great, Emperor in Grecia, caused
to be graven a figure in Greek let^ters of an X interlaced with an, and at the
two sides a and o in this sign, me^ning to signify this word (...), Christ.
This banne^ was carried upon a pole of wood in crossewise, the banner being
fouresquare after the fashion of an ensign of crimson or violet Say, the
borders enriched with fringe of gold or of silver and precious stones. After
this manner have our Massalians enriched their Pompilious Processio^s, in the
which were carried banners as they should go to war.

But in place of painting there the name of Jesus Christ they have painted the
^mages and likenesses of diverse Gods and Goddesses* he Saints and she Saints
patron^ of every parish. This in some is the beginning of the Mistall
Processio^ for the second part of the Mass. Was there ever so great Idolatry
amongst the Israelites, when they would celebrate their feasts of sweet bread,
to eat the Pascall Lamb a figure of the holy sacrament of the supper, which
the Massalians have disguised by their sacrifices of the Mass? Did they ever
cause to be carried in Procession the flesh and blood of the unspotted Lamb?
Did they ever lay it up in shrine to be carried in Procession throughout the
streets? The brazen serpent (notwithstanding they abused it) did they ever
cause it to be borne in a shrine upon the shoulders of the Priests, which had
their heads and beardes shaven. As the great bishop Vrbain did ordeine to carry
in procession the consecrated host by the Massalians: In the year of Christ.
1264.
And institu^ed a solemn feast a thursday every year, to the end to turn the
use of the sacrament into a more detestable idolatry, then al his predecessors
had done before him; After the sprinkling of holy water, and the processio^
done Numa ordained that the Massing sacrificer to celebrate the sacrifice,
being clothed with his aulbe, 3. part of the mass, are the Altar, taper, and
light.
and chasuale or tunicle painted, the head crowned, and beard shaven should
approach to the Altar, to the end to make all things ready for the sacrifice
furnished with a Lamp or Taper light which commonly was of Tede or pinaple
tree. Ovid. lib. 4. de fast. Apul. lib. 11. de asin. aur. Plutar. in Numa
For without an Altar or fire no sacrifice could be celebrated. He ordained
also that the Massing priest should turn himself to the Altar toward the East.
Porphier the heretic did not only continue this Pompilius witchcraft but also
did ordain the porches and the images to be turned toward the East, to the end
that those that entered into the Temples in bowing themselves before them
should address their prayers toward the East, Alex ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
like as the Persians do worship the Sun in the East. Be not these
institutions Massalians and Pompilions contrary to the ancient ceremonial law
of the Jews, in the which it was forbidden to address prayers toward the East,
for a difference from the ancient Idolaters.

Acknowledge then (O Messalians) that the erection of your Altars toward the
East* your lamps and tapers light, Exodus 20. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5. Esaias. 40.
your pictures and Images reverenced in your missal sacrifices to have taken
their beginning of the ancient Roman religion appointed by you from one to
another. For the pictures and Images wherewith your Altars be decked and
adorned to celebrate your missall sacrifices, can not take their original of
the law of God, the which does not forbid only the suffering of any Images in
the Churches, but also to make them, and reverence them Unto whom can God be
made like? What Image, picture or what portrature can be invented for him?
Nevertheless, by a most detestable and abominable heresy, Abominable
Idolatry.
you (o Massalians) have caused the Image and likeness of the Trinity one God
and 3. persons to be prynted in your round hosts which you cause to be
worshipped.

Nevertheless the two doctors Massalians Titelman and Biell enterprete the
Altar otherwise, when the m^ssing Priest does approach laden with his chalice of
gold to figure Christ carrying the cross unto the mountain of Caluery, th^n
the Priest kissing the Altar to figure the marriage and wedding sign of Christ
with his Church. The right hand of the Altar to figure the people of the Jews,
and the left hand the people of the Gentiles. For this cause Durand a subtle
Massalian has written, that the missall memory ought to begin at the right
hand of the Altar, Durand. lib. 4. rubr. de mutat.
and on the same part to and. And yet notwithstanding the principal aperies
are cel^brated at the left hand of the Altar. Touching the fire and lighted
taper, th y figure Christ: as being the fire that consumes the rust of our
sins, or otherwise the fi^e of charity compassing about the christian people,
and the burning taper to signify the light of ^aith, the joys to come, and
the incarnation of Christ.

Be not these detestable sophistries, the which Numa the Sorcerer never thought
of, when he instituted the Altar, the fire, and the burning ^aper to sacrifice.

To continue the order of the missall sacrifice the Massalian Priest approaching
to the Altar, 4. part o the Mass.
the taper burning and clad and adorned with his aulbe and chasaul tourning his
face toward the East, beholding the Images guilt and carved, before all things
must say his Confiteor, and confess himself in acknowledging his offenses,
and ask pardon of the Gods and goddesses, rem diuinam facturus ad sua^
leuandam culpam se in primis rerum dicere de. bebat and nouae penitere as
sateti admissum, vultumque submittere. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Blond.
lib. 1. de Romans trium.
of the he Saints and she Saints, requiring just and reasonable things: As
Pithagoras does say in his golden verses, and Orpheus in his hymns, for Numa
the Sorcerer esteemed the conscience of the Priest Massalian to be well purged
by his confession And that without Confiteor the sacrifice could not be well
celebrated.

Behold then neither Damaze nor Pontiam Bishops of Rome, cannot give the glory
to themselves that they first instituted the Confiteor, for the Massalian
sacrificer: for more then a thousand years before them, it was forged by the
ancient Roman Idolatours; And yet is continued unto this present day, that
the Priests celebrating their missall sacrifice shall pronounce or murmr a
Confiteor, in a language neither understood of them, nor of the assistants,
addressing their prayers and requests unto the Gods and Goddesses, to the he
Saints and she Saints, in place of reuerencing, honoring, praying, and
worshipping the true, only, and almighty God, creator of all goodness.

Nevertheless, the Alcoran of Titelman does interpret the Co^fiteor of the
Massalian to signify the confession of Christ for the sins of the people.
Cap. 9.


After the Confiteor murmured to observe the religion and ceremonies of
Pompilius, 5. part of the mass.
the massing Priest ought to toss and retosse, turn and return, along the
Altar: lifting up his hands, Turnings and beckings. He^u^t vertigines in sacris
a Numa institute dexteram ad osculum far and se in orbem circumagere. Blond.
lib. de Romans trium. Macro. in Saturnali.
than letting them down, with prayers and meditations toward the East. For
Numa the sorcerer, had an opinion of great holiness to be in these turnings,
bowings, and conuersions of the Priests body. This is the occasion (as a man
may conjecture) of the adding to, of this pleasant song at the entrance of the
Mass, when the sacrificer begins to make his nods, and turns, I will enter
(says he) unto the Altar of God which makes my youth to rejoice. The
entrance of the Mass.
He has not just cause of rejoicing seeing the table-cloth laid, the Table
furni^hed, the ba^quet prepa^ed the music of orgaines, and other instrumen^s
sounding, the odours and encensing, the cup full of wine, the collacion ready,
the pot and offering to fill his pursse? Be not all these means to rejoice the
youth of the sacrificer entering unto the Altar, to mass turn, and dance after
the manner prescribed unto him by the Magician Numa Pommlius? Plin. lib. 28.
And not only the Romans, but also the other Idolatours in celebrating their
sacrifices were wont to turn and return lifting up the right hand unto their
mouth then turning all their body, the which turnings and noddings were
accounted holy.

Titelman in his ^l^or an does recite that the Massing sacrificer in making his
traversing along the A^tar, does make 7. courtesies or salutations unto the
assistance in his sacrifice, to the end to chase away the 7. deadly sins by
the seuenfold grace of the holy Ghost. But in making his 7. courtesies in his
Mass dance, he ought to turn himself toward the assistance (except before
the preface, and kissing the Pax) what time is occupied in the creaking of the
host, to tra^substantiate him into an accidence without a substance.

These beckings, bowings, turnings, Six part of the mass. Organes,
and towings finished by the Massalian sacrificer, Numa ordained the sound of
Orgaines. Fluites and Violles, to singe hymns, praises, and songs, to the
honor of their Gods in the name of whom, the Missall sacrifice was celebrated.

This part of the Mass has been enriched with diverse songs, by diverse
Bishops of Rome. Some as Flaman and Diodore did institute Anthemes,
Thelesphere, Antiphones.
the Collects: Leon or Gelase the Graduels, Gregory or Gelease the Traictes,
Collects.
Gothgere abbot of Sa^dal, the Sequences. Graduels. Sequences.
Which are diverse songs of music serving to adorn and enrich the missall
sacrifice. But if the commentaries of the ancient Roman Bishops instituted by
Numa were discovered, much greater diversity of song^, Hymnorum plures species
erant. hypingos Dianae, Apollini pean and prosoedia Dionysio dithiranibus,
Ceteri iulus: Veneri erotichus: praeter quos fucre prosoedion, hyporchema. and
stafimon. Alex. ab Alex lib. ac. 4.17
ballets, hymns, odes and canticles, should be found dedicated and
consecrated to diverse Gods and Goddesses, even like as the diversity of diverse
songs of music has increased according to the diversity of diverse Missall
sacrifices ordained to diverse Gods and Goddesses, he Saints and she Saints. For
like as the ancient Idolatours did celebrate their sacrifices to diverse Gods
and Goddesses: So the Massalians continued the celebration of their Masses to
diverse he and she Saints, One in the name of our Lady, another in the name of
Saint Sebastian, other of the holy Ghost, Diverse Masses.
and other of Requiem, insomuch that they made a difference between dry
Masses and other common Masses, Dry Masses.
wherein they made the soppe steeped in wine. In such sort that thereof came an
infinite number of Missall sacrifices unto diverse he and she Saints. Unto the
which were sung diverse songs and sequences. Be not these horrible and
abominable corruptions of the holy sacrament of the supper of Jesus Christ,
thereof having made an Idolatry after the fashion of the ancient sacrifices
instituted by the coniurer Numa? Wherefore the Bishop Vitalian ought not to
glorify himself that he enriched the sacrifice of the mass with the sound of
Organs. For more then 1200. years before him this institution was published by
the Magician Numa.

But to stuff this Babylonical sacrifice, the Massalian Alcoranists have
interpreted the diversity of their musical songs, by a Pythagoricall
phylosophie. Touching the collects, that is to say, the patched prayers they
have commanded, that they shall be sung in number odd, to wit, 3.5. or 7. the
3. to figure the trinity, the 5. to represent the five wounds of Christ, the
7. to figure the 7. words of Christ upon the cross, or else the 7 gifts of the
holy Ghost. Moreover for a more subtle Pythagoricall divinity, the Masses
air ought not to pass the number of 7. by the ordinance of Pope Innocent the
third of that name: the sophist Biel in his alcoran of the interpretation of
the Mass, does add that the number of the collects should be equal to the
prayers of the secrets, that is to say, prayers of the Massemunger murmured in
secret to the end they be not contemned of the people. After the collects is
the song of the graduall more sharp and grave, a figure of the confession of
the publicans having heard the preaching of John Baptist. Notwithstanding the
song of graduall was not sung in the Missall sacrifices from Easter unto the
feast of pentecost, to figure the blessed estate of the world to come.

7. part of the Mass.
Further beside the sound of Organes, and songs of Music the ancient Roman
Idolatours were wont to use in their sacrifices perfume of incens which they
caused to be kept in a little vessel called Acerra a censour. Perfume of
incense.
In this little Frankensence coffer were put the odours which the sacrificer
did take to incense the Altar, the Images, Blond. lib. 1. de Romans trium. Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 4. ca. 17. Iliacis temporibus veteres non thure, sed cedri, and
citri, fumo deus adolebant. Platina.
the hosts or sacrifices specially in the Masses celebrated unto the God
Ianus, and unto the Goddess Vesta, which took pleasure in incense and wine
offered unto them. For in the time of the Troianes, in stead of incense, cedre
and Citron were used for perfume. It was not then Leo bishop of Rome that first
instituted the use of the incense and incensing in the Missall sacrifice. For
more then 700. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ the ancient
Roman Idolatours did use incense in their sacrifices. Tit. Liui. lib. 3.
Decades. 3.
And also the Romans did retain the word in Latin Thus, which signifies
incense, of the ancient word Thyo, that is to say, I sacrifice, because the
Idolatours did use in all their sacrifices incense, Tit. Liui. lib. 9. Decad. 3.
they had also a portable incensor to incense withal. Nevertheless, some
write that the ancient Roman Idolaters celebrating their sacrifices unto the
Goddess Ceres used the gum of Pyne called Tede, Ovid de fast. li. 3
in stead of ince^se, for which cause Ceres was called of the Poets Tedifere.

By the Alcoran of Titelman, the incense is interpreted the prayer of the
Massalian, for that it does mount up into heaven in a savor of sweetness,
even as the smoke of incense does rise up on high. He does sophist also with
Biel his companion the censour, to figure the grace of the holy Ghost. These
subtle Alcoranists allege the place of Toby, who chased away the devil by the
perfume of the broyled liver. The same Biel interprets otherwise the incense,
to figure Mary Magdalens anointing of Christ, and because Christ was twice
anointed, the incense must be also offered twice in the missall sacrifice.

8. part of the mass. Plin. lib. 1. cap. 3. Offertorie.
For another part of the missall sacrifice celebrated by the ancient Idolators,
was the Offertory, of the first fruits offered, to the honor of the Gods in
the name of whom the sacrifice was celebrated. This Offertorie was for the
massing sacrificer, which he might freely carry into his own house, for the
nourishment of himself and his family: notwithstanding there were other
offerings distributed to those that were needful. After by the covetousness of
the Massalians, this usage was changed into an offertorie or offering of silver
or gold to enrich the coffer, Platina.
which some would have attributed to Leo Bishop of Rome, notwithstanding that
the Offertorie was practiced more then a thousand years before him. And to the
end to justify this by the Roman histories: When Numa had instituted the
ministers of the Religion, as Bishops, Augures, Sauliens, Feciaux, Blond. lib.
2. de Romans trium.
Curions and others, he ordained also the means how to nourish and intertaine
them, he commanded to make of the common revenues foundations, for the
nourishment and maintenance of the religions Vestales. Following his example
many particular persons did the like. Sacerdotiorum sieve beneficiorum duo erant
genera vnum quorum collatio ad re^p. aut principem aut ad pontificu^ collegium
specta. bat: Alterum quorum collatio, ad aliqua^ familiam eiusque successores
pertinebat. quae beneficia viris patronatus censebantur. Blond. lib. 2. de Rom
trium.
So that benefices became rich by foundations. The same benefices were of two
sorts. The one at the presentation and bestowing of the Prince, or of the
commonwealth, or of the college of Bishops. The other were at the presentation
of some particular patrons of the said benefices, by whom they were founded
and endowed with great riches. Of the which benefices the great Bishops of
Rome have usurped authority to give dispensation to have two at once, even as
it is recited in the history of Liuie, of Fabius Maximus, who had by dispense
two benefices then when he was created Bishop, more then two hundred years
before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. This was their first reuenew of the
Massalian sacrificers to have benefices richly founded. A dispense for many
benefices.
The second reuenew was the Offertorie, Tit. Liuius lib. 30.
or offering, the Offectorie and oblations. The founding of benefices.
Vacations and setting over. Offertorie.
The third reuenew was the vocations of the first fruits, which the Idolatrous
Roman Bishops were accustomed to take, for the vacation of the benefices
which they gave, sold, or dispensed with.

The fourth reuenew was deaths annuals, legacies, and bequests given, Tertia
sa^erdoteorum opulenta, saluti omnibus inueniebat quas inferiores superioribus
pontificibus impendebant quale apud nos est cum pontifici romano fructus primos
antistites and his minores sacerdotes ad obu tinenda beneficia pecuniam
dissoluunt. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium. Cicero in oratione pro domo sua ad
pontifices. Blond. lib. 3. de Romans trium.
to pray unto their Gods for the souls of the departed. The which is verified
this day by the monuments and tombs of the ancient Idolatours.

The first reuenew was amerciaments, condemnations and confications levied by
the bishops of Rome: as the place and house of Cicero (when he was banished)
were confiscate to the College of the priests, and dedicated specially to the
sacrifices celebrated in the temple consecrated to the goddess Liberty.
Passing by I thought good to recite this sum of the ancient Roman
sacrificers, to the end that unto all it may be known, that all the abuses
and Idolatris succeeded in the Church of Jesus Christ are not new: but had
their original restored and taken of the ancient Romain Idolators: As the
fou^dations of Masses, Obites: Monethminds, the dispensing of many benefices,
annuals, vacantes, translations, offerings, and Mass box, amercements and
confiscations, adjudged by the sentence of the bishop of Rome as are also other
ordinances restored by the new Roman Bishops and continued from the one to
the other. The year of our Lord. 383. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium.
To this purpose it is recited in the Roman histories that since the reign
of the Emperor Valentinia^ the xii. of that name, great sedition happened at
Rome between the Christians, and the Idolatrous priests, which striued
amongst themselves, whether had more enriched the Church by foundations,
legacies, bequests, offerings, and other inventions: in such sort that the
heathen Idolatours and infidels which did usurp again the temple, presently
called the Church of Saint Peter at Lians, did fight against the Christians of
Rome which would have dedicated the same to their devotion.

cap. 35.
After the offertorie the Alcoran of Titelman does hold that the Mvsse-mo^ger
must for a time keep silence to figure the flying of Christ or fear of the
Disciples to confess him before the Jews. Then after the sacrificer does
singe on high Per omnia secula seculorum for this that Christ after that he
was in secret did show himself openly in the house of Lazarus. Then he
sings sanctus sanctus, sanctus, to signify the song of the Jews when
Christ entered into Jerusalem. This music ended the sacrificer must secretly
murmr between his teeth, counterfaiting sadness without any turnings, but
yet he must play a dumb mo^merie by signs of crosses drawn hear awaies and
there awaies, as we shall hereafter declare.

After the offertorie we must come to the 9. part of the Mass, 9. part of the
Mass the round host of flower.
the most rich and most daitie for the Massalians. That is, the host or
sacrifice. Wherein does consist the principal end or mark of the Mass
sacrifice. In the time of the coniurer Numa the Romans had not yet in use to
kill and offer up the blood of beasts. Plutar. in Numa. Pollux in enom. lib.
6. Misteriis peractis, qui sacris intererant rotundis panibus quos in honorem
deorum adhibebant stantes vescebantur nec nisi sacrificio perfecto vesci
licebat Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
But about the end of the Mass sacrifice, it was ordained to eat and
communicate together within the temple little round Cakes consecrated to the
honor of the Gods in whose name the Mass was celebrated. The little round
hosts of fine flower were eaten by the sacrificer and the assistants standing
and not sitting. The flower whereof they were made was called Mola, whereof
comes this word immolare to offer.

There were diverse hosts, that is to say, diverse little round cakes,
dedicated unto diverse Gods like as they had diverse sacrifices of the Mass.
With the same round hosts was offered (the altars serving in place of tables.)
And whiles the sacrificer and assistants at the sacrifice did eat and
communicate together the foresaid little round cakes, consecrated to the honor
of their Gods, there was sung Hymns, and pleasant songs. Some playing upon
Orgaines and Cymbals.

Before the devouring of this round host printed with pictures, the Massalian
Dostors have ordained that the sacrificer shall use adiurations and coniuring
by signs of the Cross. First he ought to make three crosses upon the round
host to figure the threefold doctrine of Christ. To wit by the father, by
himself, and by the holy Ghost, in pronouncing these words: Haec dona, haec
munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata. Other Doctors Alcoranists and
Massalians interpret the third cross to signify the treason of Judas who
delivered his master into the hands of the Jews. Beside the aforesaid three
crosses, does follow five more to figure the five days of respit from Palm
Sunday to Good friday, or otherwise to represent the five wounds of Christ,
twain his hands, two in his feet, and one in his right side. Of the which five
crosses, the three first must be made on the chalice and upon the round hosts
to figure the delivering of Christ unto the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, or
to figure the price that Christ was sold for, to wit, three times ten which is
30. pence. The two other crosses are seperatlie made, the one (being the
fourth) upon the host, the other upon the chalice alone, to play the two
persons of Christ and Judas, which the Massalian sacrificer does continuing
still his mockes and mummeries, stretching out his arms to figure Christ
stretched on the cross. Then he lifts up his round host printed full of
pictures to cause it to be worshipped. And that he begins again to make
three other crosses. One upon the host. another upon the cup, and the third
upon himself, to play the personages of three estates of those that be in
Heaven, in Purgatory, and in Earth.

He smites afterward upon his breast, to play the personage of the thief
hanging upon the cross which repented himself.

But in smiting of the stomach must be with the 3 hindermost fingers of the
hand, for the thombe and the next finger be reserved to consecrate and
transubstantiate the round host. Moreover he must smite his breast three times
to figure the threefold offense of the heart, mouth and deed,. In lifting up
his voice to represent the thief or the centurion which confessed God in the
passion. Six other crosses are made once again, three upon the Chalice
covered, to figure the three hours that Christ hanged on the cross on live,
and the three other crosses are made upon the chalice discovered (with the
round host lifted up again) to figure the 3. hours that christ hanged upon
the cross dead. The^ after the Massalian has kissed his chalice there are yet
2. crosses more, to figure the mystery of the blood and water issuing out of
Christ's side. Beside the dumb mu^meries abouesaid, the Priest must take the
covering cloth from the chalice, and cover it with the plantyn to figure the
breaking of the veil of the temple in the midst at the death of Christ. This
done the round host is put from above the chalice, and is couched under the
corporas to figure the burying of Christ. The Priest thus having played the
person of the hanged thief of the traitor Judas, of Christ and of the
Publicans, plaieth afterward the personage of the Centurion in singing the
Pater noster. But the Alcoran of Durand expounds by the seven Petitions of
the Pater noster, the seven weepings of the virgin Marie, or the seven
virtues, or the seven gif^es of the holy ghost, or the seven Beatitudes, or
the seven deadly sins. This song finished, the Massalian a little white
keeps silence, to figure the silence or rest of Christ in the tomb. Another
aperie or mummerie does the Messalian play with his round host, the which he
lays upon the paten to figure the unity of the divinity with the humanity,
but when he plaieth the secret mystery, then the host is hid out of sight.

Re d^uina and ceremoniis celebratis sacerdos tunc. I, licet sucelamabat. qua
voce illos qui interfuerant. missos faciebat. Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
The sacrifice thus finished and the little round hosts eaten, Numa ordained to
sing these words, I, licet (vel) Ite missa est, that is to say, go it is
granted, the assembly is suffered to go home. Be not all these parts of the
Mass sacrifice ordained by Numa the coniurer more then 700. years before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, to wit, the Vestiments, the Aulbe, Parts of the
Mass ordained by Numa 700. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ.
the Casual, the holy purging water coniured with salt to chase away Devils,
the Altar, the Taper-light, the turnings and trauersings along the Altar, with
prayers and meditations, toward the East, the Processions with Shrines and
Relikes, carried upon the shoulders of the Priests, clothed in white surplesses
and crowns upon their heads: the Confiteor made to the he Saints and she
Saints, the playing on the Organes, the Canticles, Peans, Hymns and Odes, the
Censor and the Incense, the communion of little round bread consecrated in the
name of their Gods, and in the end this song Ite missa est, do ye not
acknowledge (O ye Massalians) that ye have borrowed all these parts and
members of your Mass of Pompilians Religion? Why do you hold this word Mass,
seeing Jesus Christ did name it a supper or the partaking of his body? Why have
ye taken these Vestiments, the Aulbe, Matthew. 27. Luke 20. Mark. 14. 1 Cor. 11.
and painted Chasual proper to the ancient Roman Idolators, of the which
garments Christ ordained nothing? Why have ye given more credit unto the
witchcraft of Pompilius to chase away Devils with salt water coniured, and
called holy water, the^ unto the holy gospel of Jesus Christ, the which does
assure you in his name to drive away Devils, Mark. 16.
and not with witchcraft and salt. Who but the spirit of Numa, did inspire you
to shave your crown round, and to deck your selves with white Surplesses, to
bear the Shrines and Banners in Procession? When Jesus Christ celebrated his
holy supper, and instructed his Apostles of the communion of his body and
blood, did he command the^ to follow the religion of the ancient Roman
Idolators, to have their Altars enriched with Images, to use turnings and
trauersings along the altar, to be shorn round, to have aulbes and chasuals,
adressing their prayers and confession to he and she Saints, to pipe with
Organes, to perfume their altars and Images with Ince^se, to go to the
offerings, to carry money to the Priests box, to eat little round hosts
consecrated, and last of all to sing Ite missa est?

But I well perceive (O Massalians) your Mass subtelties, whereby you shall
confess to me, that the body and chief parts of the Mass took their
beginning and creation of Numa Pompilius.

Nevertheless the deckings and enrichings were inverted by other Bishops of
Rome: specially by a Monk called Gregory the first of that name, that came to
the Popedom: Who was instructed in the Magic and Philosophy of Pythagoras,
and had also studied the laws of Tullius Hostilius, King and successor of
Numa, to the end to make his name everlasting by adding some new thing to the
missall sacrifice he ordained to singe nine times these words in Greek,
Platina. Volateran
Kyrie eleyson: For Gregory did greatly esteem this number nine, Kyrie
eleyson. Quoties prodigium nunciebabatur sacrum nouendiale per nouem dies
agebatur.
even as the ancient Roman Idolators had recourse to the nouendiall sacrifice
or signs, and monstrous wonders. He did also ordeine that in the Mass
sacrifice should be sung two words of Hebrew, to accompany the two words in
Greek. And that at certain times men should singe these two words Allelu ya:
Tit. Liui. lib. 1 Decad. 1.
and certain times they should not.

In place of which Allelu ya, is song another song called the Tract, with
sharpness of voice prolixitie of song, and heaviness of notes of music, to
figure the miseries of this world, and he that sings Allelu ya must be
higher then he that holds the graduell, as the Alcoran of Titelman does
recite.

Is there not witchcraft enough in your sacrifice (O Massalians) unless ye
put thereunto Hebrew and Greek words? and mingle together Pythagoricall
numbers, and nouendiall songs, and institute a difference of days, to sing
and not to sing Hebrew words, and invent crosses and dumb mu^meries? Be not
these corruptions of the holy sacrament of the supper ordained of God? ordained
Gloria patri. Agnus dei kissing the paten.

Some other have enriched the missall sacrifice as Damase bishop of Rome with a
Gloria patri. Sergius with an Agnus Dei, song three times (which Titelman
expounds to figure the assention of Christ. Innocent the kissing of the
priests Paten.

The which Paten of gold by the doctrine of the Alcoran does signify the
divinity of Christ. cap. 14.
The Gloria in excelsis by Symmachus, Cap. 56.57.
the which song pronounced in a voice sweet and base, does signify as holds
the Alcoran of Titelman the warlike and childish voice of Christ, being yet in
the Cradle. O Blasphemy and detestable mummerie of the son of God. Leo the
second instituted the kissing of the Pax, which the Alcoran of Titelman says,
does signify the union of Christians. Pax kissing.
And that the kissinge of the Paxe came in, in the place of the holy communion,
observed in the first Church next the Apostles.

This kissing of the Paxe was song of the Massalian saying these words Pax
domini, and making three crosses upon the chalice when the third part of the
host is cast into the wine, to figure the incarnation of Christ, or for the
threefold peace, of the time, of the spirit, and of the euerlastingnesse to
come. Moreover the forging of the Canon of the Mass is attributed to
Alexander, Gelase, Syricie, The Cannon of the Mass.
Leo and Pelage. These be pieces patched too, according to the humors of the
Bishops of Rome the authors and restorers, the sounders and augmentors of the
Mass sacrifice.

Platina. Sabellicus.
The best enriching instituted in the Mass sacrifice must not be forgotten to
wit, certain places of the old and new Testament called the Epistles and
Gospels. The Epistles and Gospels cut in the Mass.
The which the Massalians have cut and mingled with the Pompilian Idolatry, and
therein have profaned the law of God, even as did the Apostate Sergius,
Doctor of the Mahomet, the the which decked the Alcoran with many places of the
holy Bible, and patched a hotch-potch of fables and heresies, with the holy
law of God.

The Massalians have ordained two persons to sing the Epistles and Gospels to
the end to enrich their Masse-daunce, to wit, the subdeacon, who marches
before to play the person of the first law of the Jews, and the deacon which
comes after with more great dignity, to represent the law of the Gospel,
the which deacon carries upon his breast a cushon to figure the humbleness of
heart. The subdeacon receives not the blessing of the Massing Sacrificer as
the deacon does, for this cause (say the Massalian Doctors) that God sent his
Prophets invisibly.

But the deacon playing the personage of the law of the gospel, he receives
blessing as being sent among Wolves, because Christ sent his Apostles as men
visiblie. It is ordained that the deacon shall wear a stoale cros-wise hanging
upon his shoulders one end over the other, to figure force and continence
joined together in the Masse-monger. The Deacon playing his pagen and singing
some piece of the Gospel in a language understood neither of him nor of the
assista^ts must turn himself toward the north standing upright, Because
(says Titelman) the north part is cold and malicious. And therefore he must
make a cross to chase away the Devils of the north. Be not these sorceries
and conflictes more horrible then all the commentaries of the ancient Roman
Bishops Idolators?

Against the long possession and prescription of Idolators
Does not this approve the Alcoran of Mahomet, the long possession whereof Turks
presently have had for these 900. years past, having conquered Countries,
Against Turks
Realms, and Empires, prospered in all their enterprises, and still observing
the abominable law set out in the Alcoran: Against the people of Israel
offering to Moloch.
Where the people of Israel excused before God (when they did sacrifice in the
valley of Tophet to Moloch with innocents blood) by alleging the long
possession, 4 King. 16.23. Against the idolatry of the brazen serpent.
and accustomed usage, for the space of 1200. years before this Idolatry was
altogether destroyed by the good king Josias? Did the Israelites murmr
against the virtuous King Ezechias when he destroyed the brazen serpent, which
was made by the express commandment of God, 900. years before. Where the
same people excused of their Idolatries committed in Dan and Bethel, wherein
are the Images of 2. heiffers of gold instituted by their King Jeroboam, under
pretense of long possession, and that they had continued this Idolatry for the
space of 300. or 400 years. The Jews, Against the image set up in Jeroboam. 3
King. 12. Against the infidelity of the Iewe^.
now vacabonds, shall they be excused before the majesty of God, by showing
the long possession of this ceremonial law instituted of God himself three
thousand years ago?

Also you (O Massalians) can you allege against God the continuance and long
possession of celebrating your Po^pilian Masses long time, and that you and
your predecessors have used, sold, and put to usury, your Missall sacrifices.
Is this reason sufficient to ground upon long possession, as your
predecessors, Senators of Rome did allege unto Theodose the Emperor, their
Pompilian religion to have been observed more then a 1000. years. This is not
an excuse sufficient to bring in long possession and usage of long time
observed, for the confirmation of your Idolatries: For if God of his mercy and
wonderful patience did suffer the Jews in their unfaithfulness, the Turks
in their Alcoran law and the Christians in their Mass Idolatries. It is not
for us to dispute of the incomprehensible secrets of God, but with all humility
to take again the way of truth, when it shall please him to give it us, after
long and deep darkness, whereunto the people in all ages have fallen and turned
from the true worshipping and ordinance of God: even so as briefly before we
have declared of the Israelits the chosen people of God, the which
notwithstanding that they had Moses and the Prophets which did admonish them
by many miracles and th^e^^nings how they should honor God and keep the law,
nevertheless they never ceased by men's inventions to commit Idolatries. So
that during the reign of the Princes Judges of Israel, when the people were
governed as in Aristocratia, then after submitted under the yoke of Kings, as
in a Monarchy, and last of all brought under the government of the Pristes
having gotten both the temporaltie and spirituality, the law of God has been
corrupted, the sacrifices and sacraments defaced and defiled, and Idolatry
continued more then 1600. years, from the law written by Moses, unto the
incarnation of Jesus Christ. What may one hope for, then of the people of Rome,
instructed in all Idolatry as a dry tree, a Heathenish and bastard people? But
these Massalian heretics cannot vaunt themselves of very long possession of
their Mass sacrifices except of the 9. pieces, before described, restored and
borrowed of Numa Pompilius for the other parts of the Mass were invented at
diverse times by diverse antichrists corruptors of the holy sacraments ordained
of God. And to understand the times and years of the chief builders, Agapet
Pope of Rome, reigned in the year of Christ 533. and brought in the procession
after the order prescribed by Numa. The Confiteor was restored by Damase
reigning the year 577. The Kyrie eleyson and the Letanies, by Gregory reigning
in the y. 593. The Graduell the Collects and the Traict, by Gelase, reigning in
the year 493. The Sequences by Gothere Abbot of Sandale. The Gloria in
excelsis by Symachus reigning in the year 508. The Incens and the Offertorie
restored from the ancient doctrine Pompilian by Leo the third of that name, in
the year 800. The kissing of the Paxe by Innocent the first of that name in
the year 408. Agnus Dei, instituted by Sergius, in the year 697. The
Commemoration of the dead invented by Pelagius in the year 558. The Cannon
forged by Gelase, Siricie, Leo, and Pelagi reigning in the year 800. The
transubstantiation instituted by the bishops of Rome about the year of Christ
162. Wherefore of what impudency are these Alcoranists Mass Doctors to be
condemned, the which falsely do affirm that the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ
did celebrate their missall sacrifice. Seeing that this sacrifice was not
restored to his integrity after Numa Pompilius but after Christ 800. years? In
what approved histories is there mention made that such Idolatry was committed
by the holy Apostles of God? How is it possible to believe or think it, when
as this great whore of Babylon has not been restored with her deceit and
mask of holiness till long time after the incarnation of Jesus Christ.

But it behooves to return to our history of Rome, Continuing Histories.
more and more to discover the true original of the Mass. We have declared in
discovering the parts and chief members of the Mass sacrifice, how the
ancient Romans before they were accustomed to sacrifice with the blood of
beasts did use little round cakes consecrated in the honor of their Gods, the
which standing they did eat within the Temple about the end of the sacrifice.
These little round hosts of wheat flower were taken up of the Massalian
Sacrificers, but they have enriched the witchcraft and Idolatry of Numa
Pompilius insomuch as they have decked the little round hosts with Images and
pictures, Abominable idolatry.
printed within the round circle of the said hosts to the end to make them more
holy, Against the idolatry of the round Hosts.
even to be worshipped, by the invention of Honorius Antichrist of Rome, in the
year 1226. the which Numa the Coniurer never practiced, nor yet came to this
abominable idolatry. What more detestable heresy can be discovered then to
paint the majesty of God in form and likeness of a man, as the Antropomorphits
imagine. Who taught you (o Massalians) to corrupt the holy Sacrament of our
Lord Jesus Christ's Supper in making little round hosts, if not Numa the
Coniurer? When Jesus Christ celebrated his holy supper with his Apostles, did
he ordeine to have little round hosts, and to print them full of pictures and
the likenesses of men, to adjure and conjure with crossings and blessings odd
or even, and to make them to be worshipped? Acknowledge then (O Massalians)
your principal part of the Mass to wit, your little round hosts to have taken
their beginning of Numa more then 700 years before the incarnation of Jesus
Christ, who never commanded you this roundnes of hosts, nor that they should be
rather round then square, three cornered or eight cornered. But so far was he
from choosing the figure of roundnes after the fashion of Numa, that
contrariwise when he instituted the holy sacrament of the communion of his
body, he used breaking of the bread in morsels, which he distributed to his
Disciples, for a simbol, sign, and fihure, signifying really and sacramentally
his body by the virtue of the holy Ghost, and the Massalians have not only
chosen the fashion round in their little consecrated hosts, printed full of
pictures, to cause them to be worshipped after the manner of the ancient Romans
but further they have exceeded all Idolators: For in the the time of Numa
Pompilius, those that assisted at the sacrifice of the Mass did eat together
standing in the little round hosts consecrated. But since the Massalians have
reserved for themselves, the communion of the said little round hosts
consecrated, using no charity toward those that stood by at their missall
sacrifice. Is this to follow the ordinance of Jesus Christ, who brake the
bread and gave it to his Apostles? Jesus Christ the everlasting sacrificer,
was he alone at the Altar, eating one little round host graven full of Images,
when he celebrated the holy communion of his body? Can you (O Massalians) too
too abominable, and much less charitable Idolators then all the ancient
Romans, so much play the subtle Sophisters that you will make men to
understand that your Mass sacrifice wherein the sacrificer alone deuoureth all
the little round host printed full of pictures, without giving part to any other
is a communion, and by a marvelous wicthcraft to cause the assistance at the
sacrifice to believe that they have communicated together with the Priest,
notwithstanding that they neither received nor did eat any portion of the
round host.

And beside this for a more extreme idolatry the Massalian doctors expounders
do declare the round host to be divided in 3. parts, one for those which are in
paradise another for those which are in Purgatory, to have remission of their
sins, and the third drenched in wine, for those which are living in this
world. But the Alcoran of Durand declares the three parts of the host broken,
to present the three fashioned body of Christ in the sepulcher sleeping, in the
earth lying, and after rising again. The other subtle doctor Biell, because
he would not confess the body of Christ in the round host to be bruised and
broken does subtelly define the breaking of the host to be done in an accide^ce
without a substance. Be not these horrible heresies to make the souls to
communicate which are in Heaven or in Purgatory, instituted by Sergius Doctor
of the Mahomet, by the means of one round host devoured by the Massalian.

But you (O Massalians, may here object unto me the use of the primitive Church
observed in the communion of the holy supper, whereas every one of the assembly
in the temple did take a portion of the broken bread consecrated to eat and
communicate together. The which use has been kept unto this day in your
missall sacrifices celebrated upon Sundaies, the which you cause to be
distributed by morsels of holy bread unto the assista^ts within the temple. A
communion of holy bread.
But in this ancient communion does abide nothing but an Image only; Because
the Massalians abusing the holy sacrament, have preserved for themselves only
the litte round host consecrated to be devoured, without giving any portion
unto the assistants: unto who^ they leave the bits of holy bread, Notable
differences between the round host and the holy bread.
which are four square for the most part. The round host without leaven, and
the holy bread is with leaven. The round host is without salt, and the holy
bread with salt. The round host is printed full of pictures, and the holy bread
is without print or picture. The round host is worshipped, and the holy bread
is received with thanksgiving. The round host is devoured of the Priest, and
the holy bread is divided among the assembly to communicate and eat together.
The round host is steeped in wine, the holy bread is eaten without wine. To be
short there is as great difference between these two kinds of communion as
there is between the ancient Law of the Idolators, and the law of the
Gospel. Provided always that they agree in one point that is, that both in
the one and the other there is a corruption of the holy sacrament of the supper
ordained of God. Transubstantiation.
It rests to come down to the deep Maze of Idolatry. We have recited the
history of the people of Israel, which did not content themselves with the
heavenly bread Manna given unto them of God, during the time that they were in
the Wilderness, but did murmr against God and Moses their leader, requiring
to eat flesh. The people also of Rome being heathen and Infidels were not
contented with the institution of Pompilian touching the communion of the little
round Cakes. Blond lib. 1. de Romans trium.


But the Bishops of Rome, Idolators, did institute the killing and offering up
of beasts, to the end to eat and communicate the flesh of the offeringes in
their Sacrifices, specially the sheep, the Sow, the Goat, and the Beef,
which first were ordained by Euander King of Arcadic. To the end therefore that
the Massalian should not go out of kind from the Idolatries of their
predecessors, they have followed this communion of flesh, and are not contented
with the little round, unleavened hosts consecrated and printed full of
pictures, Hosts of meal are changed into flesh, and wine into blood.
but have in time invented a new witchcraft to change their little hosts of
flower into flesh and bone, the bread being no more bread, but an accidence
without substance: and by this means to change their round host of meal into
an host of flesh and blood. The wine also offered in their Mass chalices to be
changed into blood: the wine being no more wine, but an accident without
substance. Was there ever any witchcraft more abominable and heresy, more
detestable then this transubstatiation of the Mass? When the children of
Israel were wearied with the eating of Manna and the heavenly bread, demanding
flesh, was the Mauno turned into flesh bones and blood.

When the Romans the ancient Idolatours did change their round hosts of
meal, and demanded to eat of the flesh in their sacrifices, did they use this
wichcraft of transubstantiation?

Wherefore I do freely affirm that the Massalians have lately instituted this
addition of the Mass, yea more then 1000 years after the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. This heresy began to spread abroad greatly in the time of Antichrist
Nicolaite, In the year of Christ 1062. Chronolog. Fon. Volater.
crept into the Roman bishopprick by the conspiracy of Hildebrand, having
chased away by force, the other chosen Bishop, namely Benedict the 12. of that
name in the year of Jesus Christ 1062. Lanfranc. de sacr.
Afterward it advanced it self by a conspiracy holden in the Lateran at Rome
during the ecclesiastical tyranny of Innocent the third of the name: about
200. years after the solemn recantation of Berengarius deane of S. Maurice of
Angiers. Against transubstantiation.
Against the which abominable wichcraft and heresy, we must briefly bring in
by the way of recapitulation the institutions of the sacraments ordained of God.

First the fruits of the knowledge of good and evil, Trees of life.
forbidden to our first father Adam, as holy signs and Sacraments of fear and
obedience, whereupon did hang life and death, were they changed and converted
into knowledge or death, leaving the nature of trees and fruits, and reduced
into an accidence without substance? Heavenly Manna, and the rock flowing
water.
the Manna from heaven, and the rock flowing with water of life sacraments
agreeing with the holy sacrament of the supper, were they changed into an
accident without substance? Lambs offered by Abell.
the lambs without spot offered by Abel in sacrifice well pleasing to God,
were they changed into another nature? Circumcision.
The little skin cut off for a note and mark of the covenant unto the good
patriarch Abraham, and his posterity, was it changed into an accident without
substance? The blood of the Paschal lamb for the assurance of the health of
Israel, Pascal lamb.
was it changed into another substance? The flesh of the unspotted lamb,
ordained to be eaten in the day of the Passover, a true figure of the holy
Sacrament of the Supper, was it changed into an accide^t without substance?

The brazen Serpent, Brazen serpent.
by the only sight whereof health was given unto diseases, left it to be a
serpent of brass, was it changed in being ordained a sacrament and holy sign
unto the people of Israel? The oblations offered in sacrifices, The offered
sacrifices.
as well of earthly beasts as unleavened bread, and other holy signs ordained
of God for sacraments and holy signs, to cleanse the people of Israel: Were
they changed into an accidence without substance? All the holy signs ordained
of God in the Church of Israel, notwithstanding that they did represent really
and sacramentally, that which they did figure, and not as a simple sign
without effect, yet so it is that there was never none so horrible an heretic
that did invent this wichcraft of transubstantiation.

Yet must you confess (O Massalians) that the good and holy fathers of
Israel were adopted, grafted and regenerated by faith in Jesus Christ,
begotten before all worlds: and that they were nourished and got everlasting
life by Jesus Christ, A conference of the faith of the ancient fa^hers of
Israel with ours.
and that they and we have but one only God, and one only Jesus Christ our
mediator and redeemour.

And that they through faith did sacramentally communicate, and spiritually
partake the blood of Jesus Christ for their salvation and everlasting life. And
there is no difference (as touching God) between them that were before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, and we that are after the incarnation. But they
and we are the Church of God bought with the blood of the just and unspotted
lamb Jesus Christ.

Furthermore that they had faith in the promise to come: and observed the
sacraments and holy signs of the sacrifice which ought to be finished by Jesus
Christ. And that we by the new law do celebrate the memory and remembrance of
the sacrifice already finishede by Jesus Christ, having the fruition of his
promise accomplished. 1. Cor. 10. August. in Psalm.
If then the Israelites did eat of the same heavenly bread, and drink of the
same water of life (by faith) that we do in one only Jesus Christ: if they
had holy signs to represent actually and really the death of Jesus Christ to
come, even as we have had holy signs of his death present or past: they for
the time to come, and we for the time past: Wherefore is it then that the
Massalians have invented this new witchcraft of tourning one holy sacrament
ordained of God into a wichcraft of transubstantiation, and an accident without
a substance? If God (to make known his power, and to declare the hardiness
and stiffeneckednesse of Pharao) pleased to do merueilous things by Moses and
Aaron, Against the mir^cles alleged by the massalians. Exodus 7.8.14.
in changing a rod into a serpent, the water of the river into blood, and into
frogs, the dust of the earth into lice, and further to make the saileable sea
dry, and to do many other miracles: Is this to bring in a transubstantiation
of little round hosts, unleavened, printed full of pictures, into an accide^ce
without substance? In what place of the holy scripture (when there is mention
made of holy Signs, Sacraments, or Sacrifices, ordained of God) is it said the
sign or sacrament is changed?

Contrariwise (God willing to acco^modate himself to the infirmities of man)
has ordained unto him from time to time common signs, for notes and marks of
the assurance of the thing signified; Wherein the might of God is more renowned
and magnified by giving unto us with the holy sign the thing represented, by
the power of faith and the holy Ghost, then if the self sign were really
changed by some visible miracle.

For the Sacraments do contain in them more spiritualnesse the fleshlines,
for which cause God did always blame his people Israel by his Prophets, for
taking his Sacraments over fleshly, as we have before briefly declared. The
exposition of Jesus Christ of the communion of his body.
But tell me (O Massalians) when Jesus Christ would expound, that he was the
true bread of life which came down from heaven, to give everlasting life, and
how these sacramental words ought to be understood, to eat his flesh and
drink his blood, when the Capharnaites your predecessors were offended, did
he teach by his interpretation, that to eat his flesh ought to be understood
by a little round host transubstantiated? The round host of flower and the
wine to be no more bread and wine but an accide^ce without substance? Is this
your abominable Witchcraft the doctrine of Jesus Christ?

John. 6.
Nothing less: but Jesus Christ as a true law giver, unto whom the
interpretation of his law appertained, answered unto the Doctors Capharnaites,
that they were to gross and carnal, and that they did abide in the flesh as
ye do (O Massayers:) Notwithstanding that the flesh alone proffiteth nothing:
saying that these sacramental words were spiritual. John. 5.
The flesh (says he) profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth.
Moreover (O Massayers) how can you safely make to agree your transubstantiation
with the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which does promise and assure to give
everlasting life to those which eat his flesh and drink his blood, if yea
take these words carnally? For you cannot be ignorant that your bodies
(notwithstanding that they have devoured the little round hosts
transubstantiated into flesh and bone, and supt and licked the wine changed
into blood) do die and are mortal, by the necessity of the law. Wherefore
life everlasting promised by this communion, may not be understood of the
body nor of the mortal flesh You must then of necessity acknowledge, for a
sure interpretation, that to eat the body and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ ought to be referred unto the life spiritual and heavenly, and that the
flesh profits nothing, but the spiritual word and communion of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ by faith and in spirit giving everlasting life. John. 6.
This interpretation is often recited by the holy Apostle John in many places
when he uses these terms, he that comes unto me, shall never hunger, he
that believes in me shall never thirst, but shall have everlasting life. Are
not these terms sufficient plain to interpret this holy sacrament of the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, without running unto your witchcraft of
transubstantiation.

Conference of baptism unto the sacrament of the supper.
Another like interpretation of the doctor and author of the sacramental law
is discribed, when Jesus Christ was asked of Nicodeme the mean how a man could
be regenerate and borne again. Is it possible (says Nicodeme) that a man
should enter into his mothers womb and be borne again? Did Jesus Christ
answer unto this demand, that in the holy sacrament of Baptism the water was
turned into the body, into flesh, and into blood, and transubstantiate into a
carnal womb to be thereby again engendered and borne? Is there not as great
reason after your witchcraft here to use this answer as in the holy Sacrament
of the supper? for by the one of these two holy sacraments we be regenerate,
and by the other nourished. And the regeneration is as marvelous unto man's
wisdom, as the nourishment. For after man's carnal judgment it seems
impossible, twice to be engendered. But our good God has used like
interpretation for the regeneration as he did for the communion of his flesh
and his blood, namely that these sacramental terms must be spiritually
understood, and not carnally: for the flesh profits nothing, but the spirit
quickneth. John. 3.
That which is of the flesh, is fleshly, that which is of the spirit, is
spiritual.

The holy Apostle giving unto the Corinthians that which he received at the
hand of God, did admonish them of the second coming of Jesus Christ, in
looking for the which he commanded to communicate the body and blood of Jesus
Christ by breaking of bread, and the Cup of blessing called the new Testament
and the new Covenant contracted by the blood of Jesus Christ, For as much then
as we are assured of the second coming of Jesus Christ. Being gone up into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God his Father, until the day
appointed that he must come again to judge the quick and the dead. How do ye
(O Massalians) with this issue, when as by your Magic you say that every day
you cause to come down, and make return the body of Jesus Christ in flesh and
bone, before the time appointed of his second coming be come. Tit. Liuius. 1.
Decad. 1.


This witchraft was restored by you from the first author of your Mass
sacrifice Numa pompilius, Valerius. Max. lib. 1. cap. 3
who by his witchcraft gave to understand that he caused his Nyphe and Goddess
Aegerie and also his Jupiter Eticius to descend from heaven, by whose means
the heavenly secrets and mysteries were revealed unto him. Even so by our
witchcraft the round host consecrated, is transubstantiated into the true and
real body of Jesus Christ: John. 19. Exodus 12. Numb. 9.
The bread being no more bread. How have you learned this boldness to bruise
and break in pieces the body of Jesus Christ, Corruption of the holy
sacraments.
according to the invention of Sergius the second of that name, your
predecessor Bishop of Rome? Are not you more detestable hangmen, then your
predecessors Lieutenants of the Church of Rome, Against tra^substantiation.
which crucified Jesus Christ, but without bruising and breaking his body in
pieces, as it was propheceied before. And that more is, you are not content to
break it in 3 pieces, but in your Mass sacrifice ye have enterprised to
drown or steep one portion of it in the wine changed into blood to devour it.
To confirm your witchcraft of transubstantiation, have ye not ordained to
preserve your little round printed hosts, the which you do keep and lay up so
curiously in boxes and shrines after they be changed into flesh and bone,
Harman. contr.
and into the real body of Jesus Christ. Is not this a detestable heresy to
believe that the body of Jesus Christ can receive corruption? Blond. Platina.
Yea, and often it is eaten of worms, mites, rattes and mise. Can you
interpret, that this is an accidence without a substance, seeing that your
hosts become often stinking, and corrupt within your boxes: Many times also
devoured of earthly brute beasts, the which you cause to be burned and their
ashes to be put into the place for Relikes. When the Bishop of Rome Victor the
third of that name, received poison by your transubstantiated wine was it an
accidence without a substance? Or when the Emperor Henry the seventh of that
name, was poisoned in eating a little round host consecrated, was it an
accidence without a substance, seeing it gave him his deaths wound? There is a
more manifest appearance in the heavenly Manna given unto the people of
Israel, Neem 1. Psalm. 78.104. John. 6. Sapi. 16
the which notwithstanding that it became corrupt (if it were kept) yet being
put in the secret place of the Arc of the Covenant, it was preserved without
corruption, was it therefore transubstanciated into flesh and bone, to be
called the heavenly bread, the bread which came down from heaven, the bread of
life, and the bread of Angels.

Now it remains to bring into judgment the subtell reasons of the Massayers,,
The exposition of the sacramental words.
which for the whole foundation of their witchcraft do carnally in this word
Est, saying these words are expressly written. This is my body, this is my
blood, when Jesus Christ, did institute the communion of his body and of his
blood under the signs of bread and wine. But I beseech all that are zealous of
the honor of God, diligently to consider the holy institution of the
sacrament, by the which God would declare and signify the communion of his
body by the bread, and the drinking of his blood by the wine, and the cup. All
will confess that the true and principal nourishment of the body of man is
contained under the kinds of bread and wine, so the true bread is often taken
in the holy scriptures for the nourishment and life of Man. But let us begin to
bring in the places of the Bible. Genes. 3.
To the first man created to the likeness of God, for punishment of his offense,
Genes. 28.
was it not said unto him before, that he must eat his bread in the sweat of
his body? Is there any man so ignorant that he will not confess all the food
and life of man, to be understood by the bread? When Jacob prayed unto God to
give him bread and clothing, did not he understand by the bread all that was
necessary for his nourishment.? Exodus 16. Neem. 9. Psalm. 78. Sapi. 15. John,
6. Genes. 14.
When it is recited that God made it to rain bread upon the people of Israel
in the wilderness, and that with this heavenly bread the children of Israel
were filled, was not this term bread understood of the heavenly Manna sent of
God for the nourishment of the people of Israel?

This Manna is not called the bread of heaven, and the bread of Angels given
unto the people without travel. Genes. 41. Genes. 47. Numb. 21. Leuit. 26.
When Melchisedech would relieve the host of the good Father Abraham, did he
not present unto him bread and wine? When Abraham would gratify and refresh
the three Angels appearing to him, did he not offer to them cakes baked in the
ashes? Gave hen ot to Agar bread for her nourishment. The mother of Isaac
favoring her well-beloved son, gave him bread. Joseph in Egypt offered bread
unto his brethren for their nourishment. When one will describe a famine and
dearth, John. 4. Psalm. 104. Matthew. 4. Luke 4. John. 6. Matthew. 4.
does he not say, there lacks bread? When God promises any favor unto
people keeping his commandments, does he not give them assurance of sufficient
bread? when he commanded the poor, as his members, did he not command to give
them bread? It is then the bread that nourishes and maintains the heart and
life of men. Luke 9. Matt. 15.
When Satan took upon him to tempt Jesus Christ, to declare unto us that he
was very man, did he not chose bread, to entice him to change stones into
bread? When Jesus Christ, did celebrate his feasts, to give food one time unto
5000. men, the other time unto 4000. persons, did he not show his might under
the sign of bread? When he taught us to make our prayers unto God, Matthew. 6.
Luke 11.
did he not ordeine the Lords prayer, to beseech God to give us our daily
bread? And not only in the holy Bible is there mention made of bread for
corporal and common food: But also the sacrificers celebrated by the Priests of
the Hebrews, there was a law prescribed of the bread ordained of God, Exodus
21. Leui. 4.21. Matthew. 11. 1 King. 21. Esaias. 30. Proverbs 20. Ezec. 4.
namely, sweat bread without leaven, other bread there was called show bread
which the priests did renew every week and eat, which David used, being
presented unto him by Achemelech the high Priest, cotrariwise this term bread
is applied unto bread of wickedness, unto bread of lying, Malac. 1. Psalm.
23. Ezech. 12. Oze. 7. Deuteronomy. 8. Matthew. 4. Luke 4
unto bread of sorrow, unto unclean bread of idolatry, unto unclean bread
offered at the Altar, unto the bread of trembling and unto the bread of tears.
The Ephraimites also are called the bread of ashes not turned, that is to say,
in part baked and part not, circumcised Idolators. Wherefore, O Massesaiers
Capharnaits, Math 25.
ye must not be so hardened and rooted in your fleshlinesse,, that you regard
not the phrases of the holy scriptures in that which the term of bread is
sometime taken for the earthly and bodily bread as when it is said that man
lives not by bread only, Math. 15. Mark. 7.
but also by all that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Sometime also bread is
taken for the word of God and for doctrine, when Jesus Christ commanded his
Apostles to take heed for eating of the leauened bread of the Scribes and
Pharisees, are not these terms of bread, and leaven taken and interpreted for
the doctrine of the Pharisees, heretics? When the woman of Canaan did demand
grace and mercy for the health of her daughter, holden with a sore disease.
Did not Jesus Christ answer, that it was not lawful to take the bread of the
children and give it unto dogs? In this answer is not the bread taken for
life and health, and not only for the corporal nourishment: Seeing then that
bread is taken for the life of man, the which hangs chiefly of bread and
wine, and that the goodness of God willing to apply it self unto our
infirmities would choose those two signs, notes and marks notable, to signify
his body and blood, namely, bread and wine, being two substances common to all
nations, is that an occasion to imagine a carnal transubstantiation, as if
without the same God were not able enough to figure and represent really and
sacramentally life to be given unto us, yea everlasting life by the communion
of the holy bread and wine consecrated, figures and signs of his body and
blood. Matthew. 6. Mark. 14. John. 5.
Jesus Christ spoke these words: That the bread was his body and the wine his
blood, he said also, That he is the living bread, that he is the bread of
life, that he is the living bread which came down from heaven, he says
also, that he that eats of this bread shall live for ever. Is this to bring
in that by this word (is) Jesus Christ is turned and transubstantiated into
bread, and is no more Christ, but an accident without substance. O detestable
heresy: O Massalians have ye no more reason to interpret carnally these words,
(this is my body) to change the bread into his body, then when he affirms
that he is the bread, to change him into bread, considering that it is written,
that the partaking of this bread gives life everlasting, Jesus Christ said,
John. 6. Matthew. 26. John. 6.
Hoc est corpus meum. He says also: Hic est panis qui de coelo descendit. In
both these places is there not this word (is) bestowed? Must we therefore bring
in a witchcraft of tra^substantiatio^, in place of sound interpreting of the
scriptures, by a likeness or familiar comparison of bread with Jesus Christ,
causing us to understand that by him life everlasting is given unto us? And by
him our spiritual nourishment is given us like as by the bread we have our
bodily food. How so ever it be, we must always have recourse unto the true
interpretation of Jesus Christ, the true Lawgiuer, and author of the holy
sacrament, who putting forth his institution said in the first place that he
was the bread of life, then after that this bread is his flesh and his body,
which must be given for the health of the world. He said that his flesh is true
food and his blood the true drink, he says, that he that eats his flesh
and drinks his blood, shall abide in him. How does he interpret this eating?
Jesus Christ does interpret it himself by these words: John. 6
He that comes unto me stall never hunger, he that believes in me shall
never thirst, Is not this the true eating and the true drinking never to have
hunger, and never to have thirst. Behooves it to get faith, which consists in
spirit: behooves it to address ourselves unto Jesus Christ our heavenly bread,
our spiritual drink, to fill us for ever, to quench everlastingly our thirst
of sin, to run into a witchcraft of transubstantiation, and to forge an
accidence without a substance. Wherefore (O Massalians) have ye invented
another interpretation, then that of Jesus Christ, who witnesses that the
flesh profits nothing, but the spirit quickneth, and that his words are not
carnal but spiritual, giving spirit and life by faith and hope that he is the
savior of the world, incarnat, dead and crucified to give us eternal life,
and after rose again, ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God his Father, abiding an everlasting Priest propiciator, mediator and
redeemer.

Let us return again to this term (is) which tormenteth the brains of the
Mass sayers so sore, John. 15.
to imagine a transubstantiation. If Jesus Christ has said that he is the true
vine, that God his Father is a husbandman, ^ohn. 14
and we are the branches. Is this to bring in this term (is) a witchcraft of
changing God into a Husbandman, Jesus Christ into a vine and us into vine
branches? If Jesus Christ is said to be the unspotted lamb that blotteth out
the sins of the world: is this to bring in a transubstantiation? If Jesus
Christ has said that he is the door of the sheepe-folde, by the which we must
enter to salvation, and that he is the Shepherd and we the sheep, must we
therefore ratch these places of the holy scripture so far, that necessarily
we must believe a transubstantiation: for as much as this term (is) is there?
When Jesus Christ admonished his Disciples, Matthew. 5.
saying to them, that they were the salt of the earth, did he change and
transubstantiate them into pillors of salt as he did the wife of Lot? Genes. 28.
If Jesus Chrrist has said by his Apostles that we are the temple of God
wherein the holy Ghost does dwell: Is this to imagine that we are
transubstantiated into a piece of stone? 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.
If the Apostle have said that Christ is the rock out of the which did come
the living water to wash us clean from our sins: 1. Cor. 10.
is this craftily to devise a changing of Jesus Christ into a rock or
material stone? 1. Cor. 12.
If the Apostles have witnessed that we are the body of Christ: Is this to
bring in that we are vanished away, and are no more men, but changed into an
accidence without a substance?

I foresee well (O Massesayers) more than hardened, that you will object that in
all these places before alleged wherein this word (is) is found, that no
mention is made of sacraments, which must be deeply considered, for as much, as
they be holy mysteries ordained of God, which also is true. And also this word
(is) is not only found in the holy scriptures before noted, Genes. 17. Exodus
12.13.
but also when there was speaking of the holy sacraments ordained before of
God, unto the people of Israel, was it not written that circumcision is the
band and covenant of God. Genes. 17. Numb. 10. Psalm. 68.94. Mattfl. 21. John. 2.
In the other holy sacrament of the communion of the Paschall lamb, is it not
said that the Lamb is the Passover or passage? Is this to bring in a
witchcraft of transubstantiation. Will you not confess (O Massalians and
changers of substances) that in these places of holy scriptures, speaking of
the sacraments, this word (is) cannot otherwise be expounded but to signify:
and that circumcision was the sign and mark of the band and covenant
contracted between God and Abraham, that the Pascall lamb was also the sign
of the holy passage: for remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt. The Arc
of the covenant for another sacrament, whereof it is written that it is the
true power of the Lord. Is this to say that it was transubstantiated into the
majesty of God. It behooves to interpret the holy scripture with dicression and
humility, without sophistry and witchcraft to understand soundly the true
meaning of words, and not to abide in the letter that kills: but to receive
the word of God in spirit that puickneth. If then the holy Arc be named the
Lord, and called God, for that in it he exercised his might, and showed his
wonders and mysteries, to draw the people of Israel by an outward sign to
remember God, and to fear and obey him, Also if Jesus Christ is called the
bread that came from heaven, the bread of life, that the bread broken is his
body, and the wine is his blood, that the cup is the new Testament, that by
these outward signs of bread and wine, he might cause us to understand our
life and nourishment of salvation to stay only upon Jesus Christ, and that by
his death and bloudshedding we are so assured of everlasting life, as the bread
and wine are nourishment for the body, and that it pleased him to ordeine these
holy signs to serve us for sacraments for the trial and confirmation of our
faith: is this an occasion to play the Capharnaits or the Nicodemianes to doubt
of the power of God, how is it possible to eat the body and drink the blood
of Jesus Christ? How is it possible to be regenerate and borne again? Then
seeing we have a promise given unto us by the word of God, wherefore (O
Massalians) have ye imagined a carnal transubstantiation, mistrusting the
incomprehensible power of God, ought it not to suffice you to believe simply
that the body and blood of Jesus Christ is offered unto us really and
sacrame^tally to communicate for our nourishment, and to give us everlasting
life by the bread and wine consecrated with giving of thanks the bread being
truly his body: and the wine his blood, which ought to be received worthily by
faith, and in pureness of conscience, as holy signs and marks of the godly
badge, without enquiring ever subtly the means, otherwise then Jesus Christ
has interpreted (saying) the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that
quickneth, and that his words were spirit and life, Ought we to doubt that God
has not the power to make us partakers of the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
by the holy signs of bread and wine consecrated, the bread nevertheless
remaining bread, and the wine, wine. If it were otherwise, this should not be
called a sacrament but a miracle, as when Jesus Christ, turned the water into
wine, that he used a miracle of transubstantiation, changing water into wine.
But he did not then ordeine a sacrament as he did of the communion of his body
and blood by the holy figures of bread and wine. Was it not as easy for God to
make the wine to be changed into blood, or the bread into flesh, as for Moses
and Aaron to change the water of the river into blood to approve the hardness of
Pharaoh, or when the clouds were turned into the flesh of Qailes, which rained
upon the people of Israel, always God did not ordeine these miracles to serve
for ordinary sacraments, but would apply himself to our infirmity, giving
unto us signs, holy and not transubstantiated, which are neither vain nor
fantasies, but are outward signs, which we can see, touch, eat and taste,
abiding in their substance, and nevertheless representing sacramentally, that
which is comprised and signified by them, wherein our trial of faith does
stand, to declare us by a sacramental work to be of the number of them that
are regenerated and nourished by the holy sacraments of baptism and of the
supper. If it be lawful to make comparisons of the 2. holy sacraments of
Baptism and of the Supper, A comparison of the two holy Sacraments.
notwithstanding that there is difference between regeneration, which does not
reiterate (for it suffices once to be regenerate and borne again.) But the
nourishment must be often done again, according to to the order of nature, and
other differences largely discribed by the holy Apostles and ministers of the
word of God. Yet the same end, the same God, the same Jesus Christ is showed
and declared as well in baptism, as in the supper. By the blood of Jesus
Christ we be regenerate and by the same blood nourished. By the blood of Jesus
Christ we are renewed, set, and graffed, and by the same blood we are kept and
preserved from hunger and thirst for evermore. By the blood of Jesus Christ we
are spoiled from the old corrupt skin, and clad with his body, of the self
same also we have our nourishment and everlasting life. By the blood of Jesus
Christ we have access into the kingdom of heaven. And by the same blood we
have the fruition of the kingdom, for unto the same purpose the holy Apostle
witnesses, we are all baptized by the virtue of one holy spirit, and we have
all drunk of one spiritual drink given unto us by Jesus Christ. Be not these
comparisons taken out of the holy scripture, to justify that Jesus Christ is
the only end, unto the which tends as well Baptism as the holy Supper. It
follows then that the signs of the sacramental water for baptism, and
bread and wine for the supper of Jesus Christ, are holy signs, ernest, gages,
paunes, marks, seals and sacraments, instituted of God for proof and
assurance of our says. Well, then (O Massalians) seeing ye have invented a
witchcraft of transubstanttiaion for the sacrament of the Supper, Against the
Massalians.
why have ye not also subtelly devised the same witchcraft in the sacrament of
baptism? why have ye not ordained the sacramental water after that it is by
you coniured and bewitched with salt to drive away Devils, to be changed into
the blood of Jesus Christ, the water to be no more water, but accidence
without substance, as ye have imagined of the bread and wine? What difference
can you show, but Sophistries, Sophismes, and Mass subtelties. If ye continue
your heresy by this word (is) it is also found in the water of Baptism, which
is called renewing and regeneration, the same is also named the holy Ghost, and
the garment with which, and by which, we are clothed, renewed and borne again in
the blood of Jesus Christ. Then seeing (O Massalians) that you confess that
ye cannot find a second Berengarie to make a decree of recantation to the end
to enlarge your witchcraft of transubstantiation, unto the holy water of
Baptism, and by the same mean to change your spettell and salt water, your
oil, your creames, your salt water and other drugs, wherewith you have
corrupted the holy sacrament of Baptism. Wherefore then are ye so hardened
and waxt old in your Pompilian Religion, that you would pluck Jesus Christ
from the right hand of God, to make him to descend in body and blood by your
whispering witchcraft, Luke 1. Malach. 4. A comparison of the Sun with Jesus
Christ.
(as Jupiter Elicius did) before the day appointed of his second coming? I can
bring you in the similitude of the Sun, called by some Apostles the Sun of
Righteousness Jesus Christ, because that light comes from heaven by the
great and bright star. ^he which S. ^ustine the Martyr used in ^is treatise
of ^he exposition of faith. cap. 2.
And even so the spiritual light is given unto us by Jesus Christ, who has
restored us to light, out of the night and darkness of sin.

Well then (O ye Capharnaites, carnal and gross) understand now a comparison
sufficient enough to show you the infinite power of God to be much more
perfect then your abominable invention of transubstantiation? Do ye not
acknowledge if you have not your eyes blinded and holden in depth of the
darkness of frowardness, that the Sun does give unto us his light, his
beams, his force, his heat and strength, And yet the body it self of the
Sun does rest and abide in heaven? Do not ye say ordinarily in your common
language, when the window of the house toward the sun is open, that the
sun comes into the house? Yet the sun remains always in heaven?
Behooves it to snatch and catch the body of the sun, causing it to come down
and to transubstantiate in this earthly place before it can give his heat, his
beams, his light, and nourishment to plants, herbs, trees, and earthly
creatures? Are ye so brutish (O Capharnaites) that ye will not confess the
true son of righteousness Jesus Christ, to have much more power then this
star of the sun, create and mortal? If then the mortal creature, have
this power to give us the virtue and strength of his body, by his beams, by
his light, and by his heat sent down into the earth really, and effectuously,
the body notwithstanding abiding in heaven. It behooves to believe that God the
everlasting creator has much more power to give us the true son of
righteousness Jesus Christ, to give us his force and virtue of his body and
blood, shed for us, by the beams, light and heat of his holy spirit, without
co^straining him by your witchcraft to be plucked from the right hand of God,
and to be drawn out of heaven by your transubstantiation into earth. Wherefore
has not Jesus Christ this power to give us his light, and to offer to us his
body and his blood, to enter within us, if by faith and pure conscience we will
receive him by the virtue of his holy spirit, even as well and better then the
son enters into our houses by his might and power, without drawing it out of
heaven to change the substance thereof? The son is one only body created
abiding in heaven, the cause of the growing of plants, trees and herbs, which
gives nourishment by force and heat unto all things living upon the earth,
and in one and the same moment has power to quicken, heat and nourish an
infinite number of plants, trees, herbs and earthly creatures, without
seperating, dividing or plucking his body from heaven to transubsta^tiate it.
The body also of Jesus Christ which he has carried into heaven, and set at the
right hand of God, has it not more force, more virtue, and more strength to
regenerate us, to feed and nourish us, to give his virtue, his light and his
beams, to inspire, quicke^, sustain, lighten, and in a moment make us through
faith partakers of his body and blood: to make us members of his members, knit
together in him, and by him, by his true promise contained under the bages and
holy signs, left unto us till that the second coming of his humanity be
seen upon the earth. Wherefore (O Massesayers) have ye invented this
witchcraft of transubstantiation, to blaspheme against God, to lesson his power
and less to esteem his power and virtue, then the virtue of the sun his
creature? wherefore will ye pluck the body of Jesus Christ from heaven before
the time appointed, to change his substance into your little round hosts, Jesus
Christ as God aideth all.
unleavened and printed full of pictures which you cause to be worshipped
seeing that Christ as God, does aid his church everlastingly, and has power
to regenerate feed and nourish us, yea with everlasting life and food, by his
promise witnessed and assured by his holy sacraments of Baptism, and of his
holy supper. For other comparisons (O Massesayers, familiar and homely)
consider how the earthly and mortal princes are esteemed, reverenced and
honored for the sacred signs ordained by them. I will only set forth unto
you two, that is to say, Wax and Metalles, of the one is made the seal of the
prince, wherewith is sealed graces, pardons and forgiuenesses, the letters and
privileges, granted by the prince He that counterfeiteth this seal, is he
not punished for treason, even as if he had hurt the very person of the
prince? Does not this seal represent the very person of the prince, as if he
himself were there present? yet the wax notwithstanding that it is called the
seal of the prince, is not therefore transubstantiate, but remains still
wax, yet after that it has received the reverend print of the Prince it is no
more called wax but the princes seal.

The metalles of gold and silver marked for the coin of the prince to serve
for money, although they be no more gold nor silver, but have changed their
names at the will of the prince, be it into the name of ducate, crown,
shillings, pence or other names, do they leave to be metalles, and the same
substance they were before? this only difference there is, they are appointed
and stamped with the print of the prince, which does really represent him, in
such sort, that he that clippeth and counterfaiteth this money, 1. Cor. 11.
is punished as for the crime of treason, and as he had hurt the proper person
of the prince: By much better reason the bread and wine consecrated and marked
to be sacraments of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, do really represent him
and not in painting. Wherefore he that uses it unworthily shall have
everlasting damnation as a traitor to the majesty of God. If ye (O Massalians)
Nicolaitains and transubsta^tiators, are not sufficiently satisfied with the
interpretation of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, ne yet with similitudes and
familier comparisons to bring you to the true way and certain form ordained
of God for the celebration of his holy sacraments in abolishing of your Mass
Pompilian Idolatries casting away also your abominable witchcraft of
tra^substantiation, at the least, yet will ye give no credit unto the
interpretation of the ancient doctors of the church. Hear then that which S.
Augustine does recite against Adamantine, even as the blood in many places of
the holy scriptures is called the water and the rock Christ. August. cap. 12.
^uthorities of ^he ancient ^octors. The exposition of saint Augu^^ine.
So is the bread called the body of Jesus Christ, the which three places must
be expounded to be figures and signs. When that says the same doctor, Jesus
Christ spoke these words, ^ib. de doctri. ^^risti. and in pre^^ti. Psalm. 3.
Hoc est corpus meum. This is my body, and gave them bread. He gave them the
sign of his body, for he thought otherwise that it was a thing unlawful, and
too discourteous to devour the flesh and body of Jesus Christ if there were not a
figure there, namely, lib. 10. de candes cap. 5. sacrificium de consecr.
distinct. 2.
the bread to put us in mind of the flesh and body of Jesus Christ to have
been offered up, for our life, and everlasting food. Moreover the same doctor
uses this interpretation, the visible sacrament is the Testament, that is to
say, the holy sign of the invisible sacrifice. The like interpretations are
described by Tertullia^ against Marcion the heretic: Tertul. lib. 1. and 3. 4.
wherefore then O Massalians have ye not followed the holy doctors of the
Church, which would not blaspheme against God by a witchcraft of
transubstantiation? but have freely acknowledged the sacrament to be a sign or
holy visible figure signifying in spirit and by faith the which is invisible?
Vt quid paras deutem and ventrem creed and manducasti. ca. Vt quid de
consecratione. distinct. 2. August. in by, de remedi.
wherefore prepare ye the mouth and the belly to devour the flesh of Christ
corporally? why do ye not offer your souls by lively faith worthily to eat
Jesus Christ? why did you not interpret the eating of the body of Jesus Christ
by the notable distinction of the holy Doctor Ierom, poeniten. and in John.
tract. 25. cap. 6. S. Hieron. in epist. ad Ephesians.
saying the flesh of Jesus Christ is understood fleshly when there is mention
made of the shedding of blood, Ca. dupliciter eadem distinct.
and crucifying of the body of Jesus Christ for our salvation: But spiritually
when it is said, that the flesh is the true meat which must be eaten. For
another holy doctor I will allege Gelase Bishop of Rome, who disputing against
the heretics Eutichians and Nestoriens, Saint. Gelase. against Eutychius and
Nestorius
does affirm that the bread and wine consecrated and made sacraments, do not
leave in substance still to be bread and wine, but are figures and signs of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ by the mystery of the sacrament. S. Ambrose
in his book of sacraments cap. 11.
Will ye have more large witnesses of S. Ambrose who upon the Epistle to the
Corinthians has expounded eating and drinking the bread and the wine, Origin.
in Leui. homil. 7.
to signify the flesh and the blood of Jesus Christ, offered for us? Origin
also in his homilies has expounded the sacraments to be figures, which must be
examined spiritually and not carnally, S. Chrysostom. in ^omil 31. cap. 15. com. 1
Psalm. 22.
for this faith says he that the letter kills, if it be not understood
spiritually when it is written to eat the flesh of Christ. Wherefore Saint
Chysostome warns to honor this sacrament in offering the soul unto God, for
which Christ was crucified and that by this holy sacrament of bread and wine,
is signified unto us the likeness of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. To
make an end, it behooves to be ruled by the holy interpretation of our doctor
Jesus Christ and of his Apostles, to honor and reverence his holy sacraments
ordained of him for outward signs, to lift up our minds to heaven, to take
that which is represented by the signs, not to esteem them as vain
paintings, or fantasies, but worthily to receive them in lively faith by the
virtue of the holy Ghost, to the end to be fed and nourished with heavenly
bread in the health of our souls, to come to life everlasting. Let us then be
assured in Jesus Christ as members of his body: Let us all come into unity to
communicate one only bread, and to drink one only wine, made of many grains
knit together, to the end that we may say with the holy Apostle, all we the
faithful are the body of Jesus Christ, saved and redeemed by his body crucified
and blood shed for us. Thus dwelling and abiding by faith in Jesus Christ,
eating him, and drinking his blood. Let us believe surely that he was
crucified dead, and risen again, and his body ascended into heaven, sitting on
the right hand of God in a certain place until that he return with his
humanity as he went up: Nevertheless his power and divinity are distributed
unto us and spread over all the earth in all places, specially in the holy
sacraments, which he has left unto us for gages, and outward trial of our
faith, for a remembrance of the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.

How to receive rightly the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
FOr as much as by the opinion of transubstantiation and consubstantiation in
the sacrament, the one holden by the followers of the church of Rome, the other
by those which follow the opinion of Luther, the truth of the manhood of the
son of God contrary to the truth of the word of God, and the best ancient
writers is apparently and plainly denied; though in words and tongue they both
do seem to confess it, yet must it needs follow upon both these opinions,
that the truth of his humanity is clean taken away, and a new imagined
human body in steed of a true natural body given unto him, even such a body
as is invisible which cannot be felt nor touched, which holds and occupies
no certain place, but is in all places at once, infinite, incomprehensible and
not distinguished nor differing in natural qualities from the divinity, all
which is contrary to the instruction and plain truth of holy scripture, by
which all christian men are taught to believe, that all true properties and
qualities of an humane real and natural body are unchangeable remaining and
being in the person of our Savior Christ of whose real natural humane body,
holy scripture thus affirms, that by the power of his divinity, dwelling in
the same bodily, it is ascended and seated in the heavens, at the right hand of
God, of whom it is thus affirmed by lively voice from heaven in the first of
the Acts, Acts. 1.
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as you have
seen him go into heaven. In the which place the Apostle Saint Peter affirms
in the 3. of the Acts he must have continual permannece and abiding and be
contained according to the proper and true nature of his humane flesh, until
his coming again to judgment, saying: And he shall send Jesus Christ, which
before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must contain, until the time
that all things be restored which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the world began. So that in his humane real natural flesh, he
is not nor shall not be on earth naturally or supernaturally, until his said
coming to judgment which doctrine notwithstanding it is assured and most true
according to the instruction of holy scripture, that his divinity is
inseperable from his humanity, and his humanity from his divinity, his
divinity extending it self to all places both in heaven and earth, being
everlasting, infinite, incomprehensible, comprehending and containing all
things by his divine power and majesty, and his humanity being contained,
seated and resting locally in the heavens, the fulness of the Godhead dwells
in the same, not being so contained of it, but that it fills the same and all
other places also; The incomprehensiblenesse of which inseperable conjunction,
of the divinity and humanity of our Savior: Being perfect God and perfect man,
of a reasonable soul and humane flesh subsisting: no earthly similitude may
fitlier serve to express then the most shining and glorious body of the Sun,
the body whereof God has locally set in the firmament, to give light unto the
world, and to cherish, comfort and nourish all things therein, with his heat;
for as the light and heat remain by the divine ordinance of God unseparably
joined to the body of the Sun, which by the true power of God is placed and
fixed in the firmament, and yet with his light and heat fills all the world;
so remains the divinity of the Son of God unseparably joined to to the
humanity, locally placed and seated in the heavens, by which coniunctio^ he is
not let from spreading, extending and filling all other places also, who in
his divine essence, power and great majesty, fills and works all in all
things, according to the true and plain doctrine of holy scripture, and yet
the huma^ity according to the proper and unchangeable nature of the same,
remains undoubtedly seated, and being but in one place at once, being
circumscriptible, local and dwelling in heaven, from whence he shall come in
most triumphant and glorious manner, to judge both the quick and the dead:
retaining and keeping still the essential properties of his true, real,
natural body, hloding and occupying but one place at once, his divinity
ouerspreading and enlarging it self, to all places, according to the excellent
power, majesty and essential properties of the same. Which sweet and
comfortable doctrine, and undoubted article of our faith, the doctrine and
opinion of transubstantiation and consubstantiation, do flatly and plainly
impugn and overthrow, as before has been showed, by which doctrine also of
transubstantiation, the truth of the blessed Sacrament, is in plain truth
denied, what colors, pretenses, shifts or shows so ever be made to the
contrary: for how can there be a sacrament of Christ's precious body and blood,
when as by the doctrine of the church of Rome the elements of bread and wine
(which by the power of the word of God are made a holy sacrament (are taken
away and changed into the real natural flesh and blood of Christ, and after
which change nothing but the very substance of Christ remains, and he is
really, carnally and corporally present? which if it be so true as they would
have it, and as they with fire and sword would force every one to believe, then
must Christ's real, natural carnal body be a sacrament of his body, and not
the elements, which by their doctrine have no essence or being at all, but by
the power of the word are transubstantiated into the carnal body of Christ, or
else there remains no Sacrament at all, which for shame I think they will
not affirm for the undoubted truth is, that the substance it self of Christ's
body and the Sacrament of the substance, which are the elements being
distinct several things, cannot so be changed or give place the one to the
other, that one self same thing should be both: seeing the true nature and
property of a Sacrament is according to the doctrine of holy scripture, to
declare, offer and give to all the faithful and true believers, that receive
the same with a lively faith, another thing then that it self is both in show
and substance, or else it should nor cannot be properly a Sacrament: for a
Sacrament, as the divines do term it: Is a visible sign, What a Sacrament is.
substance and pledge of invisible grace given to all the^ that receive the
substance of the elements by which they are and shall be made partakers of the
invisible grace, offered and given to al the^ that through the working of the
holy Gghost have a true faith to receive the same invisible grace by the
elements, as the sacrament of circumcision, and the passover in time of the
law did declare, give, testify and assure unto al^ the children of Abraham
the believing Jews the merciful promise of God, that God was, is, and would
be their God, their redeemer and deliverer, from sin and Satan's power for
ever: of which their captivity under sin and Satan, their thraldom in Egypt,
from whence they were diliuered was a figure. The Sacrament also of Baptism
and the Lords Supper, do declare, give, testify, seal up and assure through
the unspeakable working of the holy Ghost, unto all the true believers, in
Christ, their full and perfect deliverance from sin and Satan's power, their
participation, and fruition of perfect holiness in Jesus Christ, and in the
end the reward of everlasting life, purchased* given and bestowed by his means
and for his sake, who paid the price of their redemption: of all which the
true believers are made partakers in the instance of receiving the outward
elements in Baptism and the Lords Supper, through the working of the holy
Ghost in them, and unfeigned, steadfast and true faith. It belongs not therefore
to any sacrament, or to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by the doctrine of
Gods word, that the elements should be changed into the very and natural
substance of that whereof it is a sacrament, either by transubstantiation or
consubstantiatio^, for that were to fetch Christ again from above, and give
him a real, natural or supernatural corporal presence here upon earth, and
so to make him be in all places at once, contrary to the true nature of his
true humane body, and contrary to the doctrine of holy scripture, which
teaches not any presence of Christ on earth again in his humane flesh, until
the time appointed before remembered, but plainly shows the contrary:
declaring further, that as many as come to this sacrament and communion of the
precious body and blood of Christ with a true and lively faith, fruitful in
true repentance and in a virtuous and godly life, the holy Ghost works in
them a lifting up of their hearts and minds into heaven, where Christ si^teth
at the right hand of God, and there through the operation of the same Spirit in
the instance of receiving the sacrament, they receive, apprehend and feed
upon, in a true, unfeigned and lively faith, the true real and natural body of
Jesus Christ the son of God, whereby their bodies and souls are preserved,
nourished and strengthened, to the attainment of everlasting life by his
changing and purging all their corruptions and uncleanness, and by his
distributing and uniting unto every of them the true properties and excellent
graces of his natural holy body, as his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, all which is as truly made theirs by and
through his gracious imputation, as if they and every of them had in their own
proper nature, attained unto, and fulfilled the same, of which excellent
graces, the fruit and reward shall follow of glorification and life eternal.

Of all which benefits this sacrament and the sacrament of Baptism are
appointed unto the faithful to be as tables and glasses, The use of the
Sacramen^*
wherein they may plainly see and behold all the great mercies of God toward
wretched and miserable sinners plainly drawn and figured, that whereas the
word does as a lively trumpet sound out his gracious goodness to the ears of
the faithful, these sacraments do serve as instruments and conduits to convey
it to the eyes, taste, feeling and comfort of all the senses: so that when
their bodies are made partakers of the sacrament and outward elements, their
souls in the same instant (through the mighty working of the holy Ghost) are
fed by the inst^u^^nt of true and lively faith, with the most holy, real,
natural body and blood of Christ: through the lively power also of which holy
spirit they are moved and stirred up to give continual praise, honor and
thanks for these his bountiful mercies, and rich treasures bestowed upon
them: For in this sacrament and communion of the body and blood of Christ there
is showed, declared and given unto all and every of the faithful, the death
and sufferings of Christ, the participation they have with him, and all the
benefits which they receive by his passion, whereof they are put in mind in
this sacrament by four Similitudes. First, by breaking and receiving of the
bread. Secondly, by pouring soorth and drinking of the wine. Thirdly, by the
nourishment which their bodies receive by these elements, by the unity of many
corns whereof the substance of the bread, and the unity of many grapes whereof
the substance of the wine is made. Fourthly, by the conversion that these
elements have into the substance of the receivers.

By the breaking and receiving of the bread, and by the pouring forth, and
drinking of the wine, the faithful are put in mind of the death, passion and
sufferings of Christ, whose body was broken both before and on the Cross, and
his blood drawn forth and shed, not for any cause of his own, but for
remission of their sins, which is given and they receive by his passion, for;
by the nourishment which the bodies of the faithful have, of these elements
they are put in mind, that as these elements do in the using and receiving of
them nourish their bodies, and comfort and sustain their natural flesh and
blood, being the outward man, so the body and blood of Christ apprehended and
received through the working of the holy ghost by the instrument of the true
and lively faith of the receivers, who through the operation of the same
spirit, do by their faith apprehend and feed upon the true, real and natural
body of Jesus Christ, the son of God, which feeds and nourishes their
bodies and souls, unto life everlasting, by his distributing unto every of
them according to his gracious imputation, the true, real and natural
properties of his undefiled body and blood, as his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, his holiness, innocence, his perfect and full
satisfaction of the law of God, his incorruption both in will and nature, his
suffering and satisfaction of the wrath and justice of God, due unto us
miserable sinners, his victory against sin, death, the devil and hell, his
glorification and eternal happiness, of all which every of the faithful are
and shall be as verily made partakers by receiving this heavenly food the
bread of life, the body and blood of Christ, as if they in their own persons
had wrought, suffered and fulfilled whatsoever Christ suffered for them, and
were in full possession of the reward, whereof Christ is in possession, and
has prepared and purchased it also for them: the certainty and assuredness
whereof is approved unto every of their hearts and souls by the steadfast, sure
and undoubted promises of the word of God, delivered by Christ's own mouth in
the 6. of John, John. 6.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever, and the bread which I give, is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world: verily, verily, I say unto you, except
you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life
in you; whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life and
I will raise him up at the last day: For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed. I am the bread of life; this is the bread which comes
down from heaven, that he that eats of it should not die; he that eats of
this bread shall live for ever, and he that eats me, even he shall live by
me, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in
him: I am the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me shall not thirst: and this is the will of him that sent
me, that every one which sees the son and believes in him should have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day: Verily verily, say
unto you, he that believes in me has everlasting life, he that believes in
me though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes
in me, shall never die.

By this and many other sweet and comfortable promises of our Savior in his
word it appears plainly, that life is promised to all the faithful and true
believers: And seeing by our Saviors own words none can be partakers of this
life but such as truly eat his flesh and drink his blood, it must needs
follow that truly to believe in Christ, is truly to eat his flesh and drink
his blood, and that without true faith it is impossible to be partaker of the
true, real and natural flesh and blood of Christ. To be partaker also of the
flesh of Christ, is not carnally to apprehend and feed upon his material,
natural substance, for in that sense our Savior says, his flesh profits
nothing: But to be partaker of the spiritual graces of his true natural flesh
in receiving his precious body and blood, by a true faith, as before, which is
the very precious food whereby the soul lives, and is sustained to life
everlasting, and is apprehended only by says, whereby also Christ is said
truly to dwell in us, and we in him: and therefore all the wicked and
unbelievers which come unto the communion of the body and blood of Christ, are
refusers, mockers and despisers of his body and blood, and by receiving the
sacrament unworthily, do most worthily eat and drink their own damnation,
seeing by their lack of true faith and belief, they refuse, mock and
despise, yea and violently th^ust away from them so precious a treasure as the
body and blood of Christ's is, and come not with reverence to receive and feed
upon the same by a true and lively faith, as all the believers do, who without
great reverence and dread, with acknowledgment of their own unworthiness,
dare not presume to come to this holy table of the Lord, and communion of the
body and blood of Christ; having also a true faith working by charity,
fruitful in true repentance and in a virtuous godly life, which they have
received and do acknowledge to be of the free gift of God through the
unspeakable working of the holy Ghost, the same true faith in every of their
hearts; by which every of them does in their mind and soul partake and feed
upon the true, real and natural body and blood of Christ seated in the
heavens at the right hand of God, whither through the work of the holy Ghost,
and by their true faith they are lifted up in the very insta^ce of receuing
these sacramental elements, according to Christ our Saviors own institution
in remembrance of his death and passion: For which cause every one is commanded
to try and examine himself whether he have this gift of true faith; which is
required to be the instrument and mean to be made a true partaker of this
precious body and blood: and by the body and blood of the spiritual graces of
the same, whether he be in true charity and in the way of true repentance, and
of a virtuous and godly life, before he eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup, lest eating and drinking of this holy sacrament unworthily, because he
comes without true faith, fruitful in the effects aforesaid, he put from
himself, and be a mocker, also a despiser of the precious treasure of Christ's,
real natural flesh and blood offered by these sacramental elements of bread
and wine: and so wo^th^ly pluck upon himself his own just damnation in as
much as by lack of true faith he has not received but refused and despised
the rich ieweli that was offered whereby Christ would have dwelt in him and he
should have dwelt in Christ for ever, according to his most merciful promise
made in his word.

By the similitude of union of many corns and many grapes in these sacramental
elements, the faithful are put in mind, that as the bread which they receive
and eat in the sacrament was made of many corns, and by the liquor of water
kneaden into dowe, and yet is but one bread: and as the wine was made of the
juice of many grapes, and yet is but one wine: so they that receive and eat
Christ's body and drink his blood by a true and lively faith, watered with the
liquor of godly and true charity, are made one body and one flesh with him, as
lively members, and fruitful branches of his mystical body the Church, which
is the whole company of Gods children which are in heaven and in earth; of
which fellowship and mystical body these elements are a sacrament as well as
of his natural body, declaring the perfect conjunction which all the faithful
of the church militant here on earth, have with their fellow members the
church triumphant, together with their head Jesus Christ, who all make but one
body of Christ, being compact and knit together to him as to their head,
according as the Apostle Saint Paul affirms in the 1. to the Corinthians,
cap. 10. The cup of blessing which we bless is it not the communion of the
b^o^d of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? For we that are many are one bread and one body, because we all
are partakers of one bread. In the 12. chapter of the same epistle he says For
as the bodies is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body
which is (...), th^ugh they be many, yet are but one body, even so is Christ:
for by one spirit we be all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit.
Therefore if one member suffer all suffer with it, if one member be had in
honor all the members rejoice with it. Now you are the body of Christ and
members for your part.

By which words the Apostle shows that all the faithful both in heaven and
in earth make but one mystical body of Christ, and that the whole Church
together make but one Christ, being all in particular the several members of
his said mystical body, whereof he himse^fe is the head: of which firm and
steadfast conjunction, Baptism and the Lords supper are an effectual
declaration and resemblance, and perfect seals of assurance to all the
faithful: for by Baptism is declared their new birth into one spirit, and by
their participation of the body and blood of Christ is manifestly, showed,
opened, sealed and assured unto them their new planting and incorporating into
Christ's body, who b^^ng made lively members of the same, they are guided,
governed and ruled by one self same spirit of Christ, according as the Apostle
affirms in the 4. chapter of the epistle to the Eph^sians, There is one body
and one spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your vocation. There is
one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and father of all, which is above
all, through all, and in you all. That we be henceforth no more children,
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit of men and
craftines, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but let us follow the truth in
love, and in all things grow up unto him which is the head, that is, Christ, by
whom all the body being coupled and knit together by every joint for the
furniture thereof, according to the effectual power which is in the measure of
every part receives increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in
love, till we all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the
S^nne of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness
of Christ: And in Gal. 3. it is thus said: For ye are all the Sons of God by
faith in Christ Jesus for all ye that are Baptized into Christ have put on
Christ. By which words the Apostle notes, that all the whole church are but as
one man in Christ Jesus, making but one mystical body of Christ, whereof the
sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, are a declaration, resemblance,
testimony and perfect seal of assurance; so that Christ being now head of his
church, and the Church, which is the company of the faithful, being made one
body with him, he nourishes and feedeeth all and every member of the same, and
through the work and grace of his holy spirit, joins them together by their
particular ioints so that every part has his just proportion of food, that at
length through the virtue received and extended from him, as from their head,
every part may grow up to perfection: in which communion and fellowship of the
members of Christ together with their head, great comfort is laid up to a true
Christian soul: For as the Apostle says, if one member suffer, all suffer
with it, and if one member be had in honor, all the members rejoice with it;
because that which is comfort and honor to one, is comfort and honor unto
all, in as much as all be made partakers thereof through Christ their head, who
by the lace of love has united and fast joined them one with another, and
coupled them all to himself, through his exceeding charity, spreading it
self and ouershadowing them all, that in all good things, as also in their
evil afflictions and sorrows Christ himself with all his members do partake
and common together, according as by himself is affirmed in his word, that
whatsoever is done to the least and lowest of his members in his said mystical
body, be it good or evil, it is done unto him, he being the head of that body
from whence every member draws his life and feeling: for how can a man offend
the least part of the body, being a lively and quick member, and the whole
body and head not feel it: and what suffers the furthest part of the foot
that the whole body and head suffers not, seeing that it is the head that
gives m^tion sense and perfect feeling to all the body and every member of the
same? and what suffers the furthest, lowest and least part of the foot that
the whole body and head suffers not: and what benefit also can be done unto
any little part of the foot, in which all the body, and specially the head,
takes not comfort and rejoices? So then if any one member be feeble and weak
in faith, yet the churches faith, which is the company of all the faithful
joined to and with their head is stable, and assured strong: and if the
repentance of some one member be sudden, small and short, yet the repentance
and sorrows of the church joined with her head, is plentiful, deep, large
and sufficient, whereof this short and sudden repentant, this poor and
little but yet truly grieved member has communion: if the love and charity of
any one member be languishing and faint, but yet true and unfeigned, yet the
love of the church and spouse and head of the church, whereunto that member
with all the rest is laced and lincked, is infinite exceeding fervent and
strong, of whose infinite love, the weakest and feeblest has as full partaking
and communion as the strongest lastly, if any one member be spotted and
stained, and defiled with the filthiness of sin, yet the head and rest of the
members to which it is joined by a true though never so little and weak faith,
and in whom it rejoices through the bond of true and unfeigned love, though
never so languishing, faint and cold love, springing of that weak, and yet
true faith; this head, I say, Jesus Christ, through whom it has communion with
the rest of the members, and partaketh of all that the head and the rest of the
members have from the head, are fair and beautiful: by which faith and love,
flowing of the same, through the special and alone working of the holy Ghost,
whatsoever the head or any of the members have had, have, or shall have by
distributio^ of grace, from the head, is made common to the beautifying of the
weakest, feeblest, the most defiled and fowlest member: for so the head has
distributed to all the members to help one another, that the most honest parts
do cover, keep, and honor the less honest, according as the Apostle
affirms. To all the true beleeue^s then that have true faith, true charity,
and true honesty without hypocrisy, though never so weak, cold, and small in
comparison of others, the faith, the charity, the prayers, the fastings, the
alms deeds, the virtue, the tempera^ce, the patience, the chastity, the
clea^nes the weakness the broth^^ly kindness, the love, and whatsoever else may
be named of the benefits and graces of the head our Savior Jesus Christ, or
distributed by him, by any special grace, to the beautifying of any the
members, redoundeth to the comfort, benefitting, and honesting of the least,
and lowest of the faithful in the mystical body of Christ. For what grace or
benefit can be in the head, whereof all the members receive not comfort, seeing
they are made partakers thereof* To conclude, such is the comfort of the least
and lowest of the faithful in this mystical body of Christ, that no pen nor
tongue in this life, can serve to express it, neither any heart able fully to
conceive it; the full knowledge and feeling whereof, is laid up for the life to
come, forasmuch as no heart is strong nor large enough to conceive or bear the
joy thereof in this mortal life. Out of which mystical body, being the holy
church of God, the spouse and body of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bones, there is no salvation, forgiveness of sin, or souls health to be
found, hoped or looked for; and in this body whereof Christ is the head, there
is no condemnation to any the faithful and true believers, how grievous soever
their sins seem unto them: so that if Satan do summon any of them, to
answer for their debts and sins, in that the wife is no person to be sued,
but the husband, every of the faithful may well bid him enter his action
against their husband Christ, and he will make him a sufficient answer: for
being once knit by a true and lively faith unto this head, and body of Christ,
there shall no sin so far prevail, as to have full dominion over them, and
be able ever to separate them from the love, favor, grace, benefits and
mercies of God, which are in Christ Jesus, both for that they have communion,
partaking and fellowship of Christ himself, and of all the benefits of his
suffering and passion being made partakers also of all his virtues and graces,
and through him, of all the good, virtues, and holiness distributed or to be
distributed by him, to all or any member that ever has been, is, or shall be,
of his said mystical body the church; so that the whole church does still pray
for them by Christ's commandment, Forgive us our sins, lead us not into
temptation, deliver us from evil; yea Christ himself being their head, their
redeemer, their Savior, their only stay, and cause of all this comfort, does
pray for them, and whatsoever is evil in them, that he takes away, and
whatsoever is good in them, that he takes and distributeth amongst them, and
through his own virtue and power purges and cleanses them from all their
uncleanness, and filthiness both of body and soul, being true members of his
said mystical body, as all and every one is indeed, and without all doubt,
having never so little of true says, which faith is not as a cause, but as a
certificate or instrument given them of God, whereby the faithful themselves
may be certain of their good husband Christ, and therefore when their
conscience feels it self ^^^quieted for fear of Gods judgment against
sin, they may in no wise look upon the worthiness and sufficiency of their
own faith, because they never belee^e so fully and sufficiently as they should
and ought to believe; but only let them look on Gods grace, eternal mercy,
and peace in Christ, so shall they be at quiet when they look for their
salvation, altogether out of themselves, in Gods mercy in Christ Jesus; in
whose lap if they rest their head, then are they happy and shall find quietness
indeed. The other part of the communion which the members of Christ's mystical
body have, and ought to have one with another, is touching the temporal
blessings of this present life, who being all laced and knit together by the
bond of true charity, they do, and are at all times ready to communicate, for
the mutual help and comfort one of an other, all such temporal blessings as
God has bestowed upon them for the use and necessity of their life, as to
pray one for another, to help, comfort, and counsel one another, in all
things needful, either for soul or body, to minister to the necessities one
of another, in a frank and liberal distribution of alms deeds, according to
such measure as God has dealt to every one: a power and ability to help and
relieve such as are in need, misery, or want, either by poverty, sickness,
imprisonment, or banishment: by which outward deeds of charity, their faith
and love to God is witnessed and declared; as on the contrary, by their
covetousness, hardness of heart, and unmercifulness to the poor, they give
plain witness and testimony, they neither love nor believe in God, what
flourish or boasting soever they make to the contrary, according as Saint John
affirms in his first epistle, and 3. chap. saying, My little children, let us
not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed, and in truth: and
whosoever has this worlds goods and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? be loved let
us love one another, for love comes of God, and every one that loves is
borne of God, and knows God; he that loves not, knows not God, for God is
love. In this appeare^h the love of God toward us, because God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him: herein is love,
not that we loved God but that he loved us first, and sent his son to be a
reconciliation for our sins: beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another; no man has seen God at any time, if we love one another,
God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us: God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him; we love him because he
loved v^ first: if any man say he love God, and hate his brother, he is a lier,
for how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom
he has not seen? and this commandment have we of him, he that loves God,
should love his brother also. By this instruction of the Apostle in this
epistle it appears that it is a false, lying, and vain boasting of any man,
to say he loves and believes in God truly, when he shuteth up all his
compassion from the help of mankind, which bear the image of God in the
person of our Savior Christ, which was both God and man, who presents
himself to us to be beloved in them which bear the image of his ma^hood. For
no man can truly say he heartily loves the father, but he must also love the
son; and although the son be naughty, and unthrifty, yet for his fathers
sake he must help to better him, and even lament and be sorry for the sons
wickedness, even so much the rather, seeing God has appointed, and by his holy
ordinance commanded that whatsoever any true Christian man is, or whatsoever
he has, he should thankfully receive it as of the free bounty and gift of
God, who himself is the fountain and full treasure of all good things, the
only author and giver of every good and perfect gift, giving and distributing
to every one of the abundance of his riches and treasures; to this end and
purpose, that each should communicate to other, of the goods they have
received, for the supply of each others want and necessity: For which cause
every true Christian man must love good me^ in Christ, and evil men for
Christ's sake, who so loved us when we were his enemies, that he gave up of
his own life for our redemption; let him embrace the one because they are good,
the other nevertheless to make them good, let him forgive and pray for his
enemies, persecutors and slanderers, that God would turn their hearts, open
their blind eyes, and give them true knowledge of himself his word and
commandments: in whose nature let him see and behold, as in a glass, the
image of his own crookednes and corruption; for there is no man so mad, cruel,
furious, or hard hearted, but all other as of themselves are as far wide from
God as he; so that every man which escapes the filthiness and corruption of
the wicked and ungodly, may thank God that keeps him by his grace from that
or the like impiety, as for example, thou see a man that is a thief, a
whoremonger, and an heretic, or idolator, there thou see even thine own
image and picture, for if God keep thee not of his merciful grace and
goodness, out of such vices, thou would be even as evil and bad as he, and
seeing thou art not such a one, glory in God, and not in thy self, hate not,
nor be not angry with those which are diseased in sin, no more than a
faithful physician hates a sick man, but rather lament and be sorry for
their evils, be thou an enemy only unto sin and vice; the greater the
disease is, the more care will true charity have to remove it is he an
adulterer, or has he committed sacrilege, or is he a Jew, Turk, Heretic, or
Infidel? hate the adultery, sacrilege, heresy, idolatry, and infidelity of
the man, and seek to remove, purge, and cleanse these vices, wherewith the man
is defiled, and wherein he is wrapped and entangled through his own fault; so
that the man may be saved which God made, let every true Christian will well,
wish well, and do well unto all men unfeignedly, not hurting them which have
diserued it, but doing good to them which have not diserued it, according to
the instruction of the Apostle, Gal. 6. and To. 12. Whilst we have time let us
do good unto all men, especially unto those which are of the household of
faith. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, seed him, if he thirst, give him
drink, for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. For a true Christian man must
be glad and rejoice for all men's commodities as for his own, and so to take
to heart and be sorry for an other man's harms, as if they had fallen upon
himself, and to weep with them that weep, and to joy in all manner good
things with them that rejoice, as the same Apostle also teaches. He must not
think with himself after the fashion of the worldlings, and wicked men, what
have I to do with this fellow? he is a man unknown to me, he is a stranger,
he never did ought for me, he has hurt me some times, but he never did me
good: he must, I say, think none of these things, but remember only what
Christ has done for thee, who wills his kindness showed toward thee, should
be requited, not in himself, which thou can not, nor shall not be able to
do; but to show such kindness for his sake toward all men, as he requires of
thee, distributing of such bodily or ghostly goods as he has given thee to the
relief of others necessities, even to the uttermost of thine ability. For so
does the holy scripture teach every christian man, in many places of the same,
as Luke 3. v. 11. Let him that has two coats part with him that has none,
and he that has meat let him do likewise: by which two examples of food and
raiment, the faithful are warned by a common care and endeavor, and by a
particular special care in every one to provide, that the necessities and
wants of the poor be helped, and supplied, according as God shall have dealt to
them a portion of ability to do it, for so is it commanded in other plac^ of
the scripture, as in the 1. of Tim. the 6. chap. Charge them which are rich in
the world, that they be ready to give, and glad to distribute, l^ying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
attain eternal life and Math. 6. Lay not up for your selves treasures the
upon earth, where the rust and moth does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal, but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where
neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
and steal. and Math. 7. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, even
to do you unto them, for this is the law and the Prophets. and, Luke. 12. Sell
that you have, and give alms, make you bags which wax not old, a treasure
that never can fail in heaven, where no thief comes, nor moth corrupts:
and according as God had commanded in his law, that a merciful respect, and
diligent care should be had of the poor, so holy Toby in his 8. chapter
gives this instruction to his son, Give alms of thy goods, and turn never
thy face from the poor, and then the face of the Lord shall never be turned
away from thee: be merciful after thy power, if thou have much, give
plentiouslie, and if thou have little, do^ thy diligence, gladly to give of
that little, for so gatherest thou thy self a good reward against the day of
necessity, and in the second to the Corinth. the 9. chap. it is thus written:
He that sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly, and he that sows
liberally, shall reap also liberally; as every man wishes in his heart, so let
him give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver
and: in 13. to the Hebrews, the 16. verse, it is said, to do good and to
distribute, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is pleased: and Pro. 20.
he that has mercy upon the poor lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. By all which places and many other in
holy scripture it appears what love, tender care and compassion by the
ordinance and commandment of God is appointed to be had and showed upon such
as are in misery and want. By which kind of Communion and bond of charity,
all mankind without exception are united and knit together; but of the first
none can or may be partakers but only the faithful, which are the elect and
chosen children of God, the true members of the Church, joined to their head
Jesus Christ, among which company all the members are so compact, united and
knit together, that all make but one body of Christ, and therefore ought thus
to think one of another; he is my brother and coheire in Christ, a member of
the same body, redeemed with one blood, a fellow in the common faith, called
to the very same grace and felicity of the life to come: how can any then that
is a true member of Christ, of which body thou professest thy self also a
member, be a stranger unto thee, to whom thou art coupled with so many bonds of
unity? And as concerning the outward goods of this life, the godly, and true
members of christ, in whose hearts alone this true charity is rooted by and
through the working of the holy ghost do and ought to be ready at all times to
make partakers not only their friends and such as be of the household of faith,
but even the wicked and unbelievers, their enemies persecutors and slanderers,
distributing of the outward goods of this life unto all men in general, as
their prayers, their counsel, help and comfort, their relief, charity and
alms, whose prayer for the ungodly concerning the outward and temporal
blessings of this world, God has showed by many examples in his word, that
he has both heard and granted, as at the prayers of Moises and Aaron, he
removed the plagues from Pharao, at the prayers of the Prophet of God, the
dried hand of Jeroboam was restored to his former strength; and so will GOD
still hear the prayers of his children for the ungodly, so far as it
stands with his good pleasure and advancement of his own glory; commanding
his children not to be like the wicked and ungodly to do good only in
respect of reward, or for some special bond of alliance or friendship, as our
Savior affirms that the Publicans and unbelievers do. Mat. 5. For if you
love them which love you what reward have you, do not the Publicans even the
same? and if you be friendly to your brethren only, what singular thing do
you, do not even the Publicans likewise? but I say unto you, love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for the^
that hurt you and persecute you, give to him that asks, and from him that
would borrowe of thee turn not away thy face, that you may be the childr^n of
your father which is in heaven, for he makes his sun to shine upon the evil
and upon the good, and sends rain on the the just and on the unjust, ye
shall therefore be perfect as your heavenly father is perfect: and thus our
savior has showed by this his commandment what the true rule of charity is,
by which his children are united and knit together, even in all things both
bodily and ghostly to communicate and participate one with another, seeing from
the outward bodily participation he has not separated the wicked and
unbelievers, but has first lincked and tied them also to his own children in
the outward participation of the goods of this life. By which doctrine all the
children of God are put in mind that they must suffer nothing to let or hinder
their charity in any the outward things and temporal blessings before
mentioned, but even to be liberal, pitiful and compassionate unto all, for
that they are of the same kind and flesh with them: and yet nevertheless to
have their minds and eyes of their souls lifted up higher to that communion
and participation which they have of all things with their brethren, the true
members of the holy and undefiled body of Christ, who is their head: so that
whatsoever is bestowed upon any one member, it redoundeth to the whole body,
and from thence unto the head, and the head of Christ is God; whereof it
follows that the good which is done to any one member, it is done to Christ,
it is done to GOD. Which lively work of true charity, the head, who is our
savior Jesus Christ, works by the grace of his holy spirit in all and
every true member of his body, the Church, the body and every part thereof
drawing all their life and feeling, the power and strength also of every good
and virtuous work and of every godly act from the head, to whom all the
honor, glory and praise is due for all the good that is done or can be don
either in this life or in the life to come: only let all the faithful be
quickened in their charity when they feel it to begin to wax cold and faint, by
this spur, that albeit to their fleshly eyes and judgment, which is always
during this life corrupt and blind, there appears no kindness, goodness,
virtue or any good quality in some one or diverse men, whereby they may be
stirred to love him or them, but rather causes stirring and provoking them to a
hatred, loathing and detestation of their persons, for the filthy corrupt vices
which they see and behold rooted in them; yet according to the rule, ordinance
and commandment of God, their own blind judgment forsaken, they must show
themselves enemies only unto sin and vice, not hating their persons for the
faults, but hate the faults for love of the persons, seeking by counsel,
correction and chastisement how to purge and cleanse them from their
filthiness, wherein by wallowing themselves they are defiled, and wherein as
with fetters, bands and cords, they are wrapped, holden and entangled: let the
faithful for the love which God has showed them, be stirred and provoked to
succor, help, counsel, and comfort all men in general, not so much for any
thing they can see or discern in the^, as for the love of God and his mercies
sake which he has showed them in Jesus Christ, let them help to bear up
their infirmities, and when they fall let them help to lift them up by
admonishment, by counsel, by prayer and good example; and where there is
power and need also require it by correction and chastisement to draw them
from their evils. Further for their bodily necessities, let them be liberal
and bountiful in distributing their alms, and thus by this which has been
showed, it appears first, that true faith does certify and assure us of all
the sweet promises and mercies of God in our conjunction together with the
rest of the members unto Christ our head, and of the communion and
participation that we ought to have and shall have in all things both bodily
and ghostly, together with our head: our obedience to the word and
commandments of God, our true and unfeigned love and charity does certify
and assure us, and does give witness also and testimony thereof unto others,
that our faith is true, lively, and unfeigned, our tender compassion and mercy
our franck hearted and liberal distribution of alms does declare and manifest
unto all that our charity is true, unfeigned, fervent, pleasing and acceptable
unto God, and of the right kind which it ought to be. To conclude, this is
that which is meant by the mystery of unity in the Sacrament, that all the
faithful are united together, with their head Jesus Christ, by and through his
power and grace, to be partakers and communicate one with another in all
things both bodily and ghostly, heavenly and earthly: the faithful likewise,
through the bond of the same charity, drawn from their head, must make
partakers and communicate unto the unfaithful and unbelievers all the outward
temporal blessings of this present life; in all which outward temporal things,
they must be as one with them to communicate, help, and relieve them,
according to the true rule of charity, and mystery of unity in this
Sacrament; in which last kind of unity all mankind without exception are and
ought to be according to the holy ordinance of God in his word, united, and
knit together. By the similitude of conversion, the faithful are put in mind,
certified and assured, that as the bread and wine being taken and received, is
turned into the substance of their bodies: so every of the faithful
apprehending and receiving Christ's real natural body and blood in the
instance of receiving the sacrament, by their true and lively faith are through
the operation of the holy ghost, turned into the true nature of his precious
body and blood, that is, they are every one changed and renewed, and made bone
of his bones and flesh of his flesh, so that from the^ceforth Christ abides in
them and they in him, and they be made one flesh and one blood with Christ,
and Christ is made one flesh and one blood with them, not by transubstantiation
or co^substantiation, which cannot be without the overthrow of his true
humanity: neither does holy Scripture teach us so; but thus does holy
scripture teach, that the faithful are made flesh of Christ's flesh by his
disposing, and distributing unto them according to his gracious imputation, the
true nature* essential properties and qualities of his flesh and blood, that
is, every of them are by his imputation as truly made partakers of the perfect
holiness and wisdom of his bodily person, of his incorruption both in will
and nature, of his obedience and satisfaction of the law of God, of his
passion and sufferings of the curse and wrath of God due to sinners, of his
victory against sin, death, the Devil and hell, and shall be also made
partakers of that immortality and everlasting happy life, whereunto he is
entered, and which he has purchased for them that truly believe in him, even
as verily as if every of the^ were one self same bodily person, flesh and
blood in real and natural substance with him; so that now all and every of
the faithful may say and comfort themselves after this manner: In thee our
most gracious God and merciful Lord Jesus Christ, each of us has a portion
both of blood and flesh, therefore where that flesh whereof I am a part does
reign, there I believe I do and shall reign; where my blood has dominion,
there I trust I have and shall have dominion; where my flesh is glorious: there
I know I am and shall be gloririous, and although I am yet a sinner, yet I
doubt no whit of this participation of grace; although my sins do hinder me,
yet my substance does require it, and although mine own offenses do exclude
me, yet the communion of nature which by his gracious imputation he has given
me, has brought me again to this grace and favor. For the Lord is not so
unkind that he can hate his own flesh, his own members, his own bowels,
whereof I am a part, seeing Christ himself has vouchsafed to be made one flesh
and one blood with me and all the rest of his members, the faithful and true
believers that is, Christ has taken the nature and quality of our flesh and
blood, having caused all our sins to be imputed and laid to his charge, as
bearing the person and body of us all, having in his true natural body and
flesh suffered the wrath and curse of GOD for our sins, as if himself had
been guilty of them, and had committed and done them in his own body and
flesh; so that the sins of every of the faithful are fully satisfied for,
condemned and punished in the real natural flesh and blood of Christ, eu^n as
verily as if he were the self same bodily person, sinful flesh and blood,
and substance of all and every of the faithful. And this is the conversion
and change of the faithful into Christ, and of Christ into them, truly
represented, declared and assured in and by this sacrament and communion of his
precious body and blood, as it evidently appears by that which the Apostle
speaks in the 8. to the Romans and 3. verse. and 5. of the 2. to the Corinth.
and 21. verse. God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. For he made him to be sin for us
which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of GOD in him.
By which words the Apostle means not, that the holy body of Christ was
defiled with any the sins of mankind, but that he was the true sacrifice
propitiatory unto God for the sins of mankind, having borne away and taken
upon himself all their sins in his own real natural body, flesh and
blood, as if he himself were the particular person of every of them and had
committed their several sins, and as though he himself were the self same
bodily person, flesh and blood in essence and substance, nature and quality of
every of the faithful being sinners and transgressers of the Law of God,
guilty of the wrath, judgment* eternal damnation and curse of God; from which
punishments our Savior Christ has acquitted every of them by his death,
passion and suffering, and all that have or shall hereafter truly believe in
him. By which their faith through the working of the holy ghost as Christ is
apprehended and converted into them, and has borne away their sins upon
himself, and the punishment due for the same; so are they also and every of
them converted into Christ, and are made partakers of the righteousness of God
in him, according as before has been remembered: wherein the infinite justice
and mercy of God most lively appears to the eyes, understanding, taste and
feeling of all the faithful: infinite in justice; for that no satisfaction
could or can satisfy the justice of God for the recompense or redemption of
the least sin in mankind, but that the same must be fully punished for the
satisfaction of Gods infinite justice, in the true, real and natural flesh of
man; which satisfaction our Savior Christ made for mankind, who came down
from heaven and was made man of the substance of his mother, that in the frail
flesh of mankind he might take upon himself and suffer all the punishment
due unto sinners, that as many as believed or should to the end of the world
believe in him, might not perish but have everlasting life. For christ in the
power of his divine nature to which he joined our flesh, suffered the wrath,
curse and punishment of God due for sin, which no mortal creature being
only man, was or could be able to bear or overcome, for which cause the son
of God made himself flesh, to the end that according to gods infinite justice
the sins of the faithful might be borne away and fully punished in his
flesh: wherein his infinite Justice did most brightly shine and apeare. His
infinite mercy herein appears, that where the sins of the faithful be
fully punished through the sufferings of Jesus Christ for the satisfaction of
Gods justice, it appears plainly unto them that they are freely forgiven and
pardoned, because in them, as in their own persons, their sins are not nor
shall ever be punished, nor any satisfaction made or to be made unto GOD by
themselves, Christ having borne the wrath and full punishment of God due unto
them for sin, and quite freed and discharged them, so that neither their
sins shall be laid to their charge, nor any punishment nor purgation due for
the same, required at their hands. Which plainly sets forth and declares
unto all the faithful Gods infinite and unspeakable mercy, whereof this
sacrament and communion of his precious body and blood, is a plain
declaration, rese^blance and perfect seal of assurance unto all the faithful
But the Church of Rome with her followers, as by the Doctrine of
transubstantiation they do deny the truth of the manhood of the son of God;
so by the same doctrine they deny also and abolish the truth of the Sacrament,
and the end of the institution of the same which was to put the faithful in
mind of the great love of God, and sufferings of Christ for the^: for so, says
the Apostle, You shall show the Lords death till he come. It serves also to
put them in mind of all the benifits received by his precious body and blood,
who gave his body to be broken, and his blood to be shed for their sins;
and by this holy sacrament, gives to all true believers his real natural
flesh and blood, to be their spiritual meat and drink, to preserve and
nourish their bodies and souls unto lif^ everlasting; and to declare,
testify, and assure unto them their union that they have with him, as members
making one body, distributing unto all and every member, the spiritual graces
and virtues of his most excellent, real, natural, holy body; which spiritual
and immortal food of their bodies and souls, is received from their head
Jesus Christ, who distributeth and sends it down, to the nourishment of all
his members, even as the food of this mortal life is received by means of
the head, and sent down to the nourishment of all our earthly members; whereof
these outward elements are a fulll declaration, and a perfect seal of
assurance to all the faithful, being by the institution of God, made a holy
sacrament, to represent the same unto them, and by his holy ordinance appointed
to carry the very name of his body; which is signified by these elements,
offered unto all, and given to the true believers: wherein God of his infinite
goodness and mercy applies himself to the dulnes of the capacities of his
children, who without these outward pledges (being signs, tokens, and
remembrances of his great mercy) would never have conceived, and would have
been ready also to forget the infinite benefits and mercies of God, purchased
for them by the death and passion of his beloved son; which God in his
excellent wisdom has so lively declared and set forth in these Sacramental
elements, because the real natural bodily presence of Christ did not so
plainly make the same known and open to the understanding of his disciples,
and the Church. For which cause our Savior did institute, command, and
celebrate this holy Sacrament, whiles he was yet bodily present amongst his
disciples, both for that his bodily presence was not long to continue, but to
depart away from them, whereof this Sacrament was to keep a remembrance
amongst them; as also of all the benefits received, and to be received by all,
and every of the faithful, by his most precious body and blood, given up to
be crucified, broken, and shed for their sins; whereof these sacramental
elements did and would make a more lively declaration to the senses and
understanding of his Disciples and the Church, through the grace of his holy
spirit, working in every of their hearts, then by his bodily presence they were
able to conceive. For which cause it pleased our Savior to give to this
Sacrament, the name of his body, because in this Sacrament, the true, real
and natural holy body of Christ is offered to all given to the true beleuers,
received of them by a true and lively faith, with praise and thanksgiving, as
before has been remembered. Of which true, real, natural, holy body, the
wicked and unbelievers are not, nor cannot be partakers, either worthily, or
unworthily, as the church of Rome imagines by their doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or as the Lutherans imagine by their doctrine of
Co^substantiation, but coming to this holy Sacrament without true faith, they
receive the same sacrament unworthily, whereby they eat and drink their own
damnation, as the Apostle says in the 1. to the Corin. ver. 29. He that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, because he
discerns not the Lords body, but rejects and despises the same by
receiving the holy Sacrament unworthily, and without true faith. For when they
presume to receive the holy Sacrament without a true faith, to be thereby made
partakers of the true, natural, holy body and blood of Christ, they receive, as
Augustine says, by their unworthy receiving the holy Sacrament without true
faith, the bread of the Lord, but not together by and with the same, the bread
the Lord; that is, they receive the Sacrament, but not that which is signified,
declared, offered unto all, and given through the work of the holy Ghost, by
and with the Sacrament, unto all the true believers; and seeing the wicked and
unbelievers have wilfully put from them, rejected and despised that, which they
might have received (if they had come with true faith) they do worthily eat
and drink judgment to themselves, as the Apostle says, for not discerning
the body of the Lord. Whereby it does also most evidently appear, that there is
neither consubstantiation, nor transubstantiation in the Sacrament; for seeing
the wicked eat and drink judgment to themselves, by their unworthy receiving
the holy Sacrament, it must therefore needs follow, that they are thereby no
partakers of the true natural body and blood of Christ, of which, whosoever
eats or drinks, receive life, and not death; for the true natural body of
Christ is not judgment to any, but life unto all that receive it; therefore
that which the wicked eat and drink, is not the body of Christ, neither by
transubstantiation nor consubstantiation, but the Sacrament of his body, as
Augustine says; by receiving whereof unworthily, they eat and drink
judgment, for the reasons and causes before remembered. For the avoiding of
which fearful and intolerable punishment, it is necessary to show somewhat
of the preparation requisite to be made by every Christian man, both before,
and at his presenting himself to this holy table of the Lord. Before the
receiving then of the blessed Sacrament, every true Christian man ought thus to
consider with himself: First, by a sound knowledge, and good discretion to
meditate and imprint deeply in his heart, what he does either refuse or
receive, when he presents himself at the Communion and holy table of the
Lord; and what he himself is that does receive. The thing he does refuse, or
receive, in, by, and with this holy Sacrament, if he come with a true and
right faith, or refuse if he come not so, is Jesus Christ perfect God, that
made all things of naught, and perfect man, that died for mankind on the
Cross. He that receives must remember and know himself to be a man, and not
a beast, and therefore must present himself to this Sacrament like a man, in
whom the image of God is renewed, through the work and grace of the holy Ghost,
all malice and beastlines of sin being subdued, and not suffered to reign; and
in stead thereof, true faith and godliness, though not perfect, which is
reserved to the life to come, being firmly grounded and planted; lest if he
come like a beast, in unfaithfulness, and vnholines, he be found an unworthy
partaker of this blessed Sacrament, by which means he does not receive, but
refuse and put from him the precious body and blood of the son of God, to his
own just and eternal damnation. Secondly, he must not presume to come but
with great devotion, dread, and reverence of heart: for seeing Jesus Christ, who
offers himself to be received is holy and all holiness, he must labor
diligenly to receive him, in as much devotion and holiness as he may, earnestly
confessing and bewailing his former sins and wickedness, and making earnest
and hearty prayers unto God for pardon and forgiveness of the same. It behooves
him therefore in all humblenes and lowlines of heart, before he receive this
blessed Sacrament, to examine and search diligently his own heart and
conscience, confessing before God in the secret of his heart, the miseries of
all his sins and offenses, having displeasure and grief at himself, with
deep sighings and sorrowings for all the uncleanness of his body and soul,
lamenting and bewailing that he is yet so carnal, so worldly, so wilful, and
unmortified in all his passions, so full of motions, of concupiscences, of his
sinful flesh, so unwary and ill ordered, in all his words and deeds, and so
encumbred with vain fancies, so much inclined to outward worldly things; so
negligent and careless to the attainement of spiritual and heavenly things; so
ready to laughing and wantonness; so busy in things easy and pleasing to
the flesh, so slow and hardly drawn to hearty sorrow, and earnest repentance
for his sins and offenses, or to any care of his souls health, being so
quick and curious to hear and see the vanities and pleasures of this world, so
niggardly and scarce to give, so greedy and covetous to scrape together hold,
and keep; so rude and vnmannured, so prodigal, riotous and gluttenous in
raiment, meat, and drink without all hunger, desire, or thirst to the word of
God, the precious clothing and food of the soul, so attentive to toys and
fables, so sleepie to all holy exercise, so lightly displeased and rigorous to
reprove other men's faults, so deaf, blind, and froward, to hear, see, or
amend his own faults, so glad in prosperity, so feeble in adversity, so often
purposing many good things, so seldom bringing any of the^ to effect; all
which defaults, and many other which he sees and beholds in himself, when
he has with great sorrow and displeasure at himself for his own frailenes
in his secret heart confessed and bewailed unto God, let him the^ in a full
purpose through the grace of God set himself to amend his sinful life past
and to profit always from better to better; and with great reverence of heart,
let him be afraid as of himself, knowing his own wretchedness and unworthiness
to approach and come near so worthy a Lord as Christ is. For if a man defiled
with filthiness and stink, be unworthy to stand in the presence of a king, how
much more unworthy is any man, as of himself to receive Christ in the
precious Sacrament? For why, all our good deeds are but as uncleanness in his
sight; what are our sins then? nevertheless his goodness and his pity is more
then al our wretchedness; and therefore with all humblenes and lowlines, and
with a reverent dread in a full trust and confidence of his great mercy let him
go unto him, for his worthiness shall make him worthy: let him offer himself
in humble and hearty prayer unto God committing unto him both his body and
soul, to be made by his grace, and through the working of the holy Ghost in
his heart, a worthy partaker of this holy Sacrament, that together in, by and
with the same he may receive and be partaker of the real, natural, holy
flesh and blood of Christ, through which he may be purged of all his sins,
and receive grace of good life. For why, for that cause amongst other was this
holy Sacrament ordained that a man through offering of his prayers to God, and
partaking of this Sacrament should ask pardon and fo^giuenes of all his
sins, and grace of good life, and should obtain it. If time therefore do
suffer before the receiving of the blessed sacrament* let him meditate or say
on this manner. Lord all things be thine that are in heaven and in earth, I
desire to offer my self unto thee in a free and perpetual offering; so that I
may be perpetually with thee in singlenes and simplicity of heart, I offer me
this day to be thy servant, in thy service: and although I am unworthy to serve
thee, yet art not thou unworthy to have my service; make me therefore worthy
of that which thou art worthy of, so shall I be worthy of that which now I am
unworthy of: make me as thy will is, to cease from sin, that as my duty
binds me, I may serve thee, I offer also unto thee O Lord all my sins and
offenses that I have committed before thee, from the day that I might first
offend unto this day, that thou vouchsafe through thy great goodness, to put
away all my sins out of thy sight and remembrance, and to cleanse my
conscience of all mine offenses, restoring me again to that grace, that I
through sin have lost; and that thou forgive me al things past, re^eiuing me,
merciful Lord, into the blessed kiss^ngs of peace and of forgiveness: for what
may I do, but meekly con^esse and bewail my manifold sins, continually
craving mercy of thee for the same; forgive me, merciful Lord, now I beseech
thee; for all my sins disp^ease me^ much, and by the help of thy grace I will
never commit them again, but sorrow for them, and be ready to do penance and
satisfaction before thy congregation and Church, to the uttermost of my power
and ability* for all the injuries that I have done, to the offense of thy
Church, or to the hinderance and hurt of any my Christian brethren or sisters,
by any the offenses I have committed. Forgive me Lord, forgive me my sins,
and for thy holy name, save my soul, that thou have redeemed with thy precious
blood: I commit my self wholly to thy mercy, I resign me into thy hands,
do with me after thy goodness, and not after my wicked deseruings. I offer also
unto thee all the good works which through thy grace have been wrought or done
by me; which because they are few and very imperfect, through my frailty and
great wretchedness, I beseech thee to amend them, and sanctify them, and make
them liking and acceptable unto thee; and always make them better and better,
and bring me though I be a slow and unprofitable servant, to a blessed and
happy end. I offer also unto thee, my prayer and peaceable offering, for all
them that have hindered me, grieved me, and wrought me sorrow; and also for all
them whom I have at any time made heavy, troubled, grieved, or injured in
thought, word, or deed, wittingly, or ignorantly, that thou forgive us
altogether our sins and offenses against thee, and of each of us against
other; and that thou Lord take from our hearts all envy, suspicion* wrath,
variance, pride, indignation, and contention, and whatsoever may let charity,
or diminish fraternall love that each of us should have to other. Have mercy
Lord, have mercy on all them that ask thee mercy: and give us grace that we
may receive thy precious body and blood, which thou really and truly offerest
unto all, and give unto all thy children the true believers in this blessed
Sacrament, that through the lively power of this thy holy body, received by us
in a true steadfast and unfeigned faith, by and through the operation of the holy
Ghost, we and all thy whole Church may receive remission of sin, and obtain
everlasting life. And after this meditation, let him vow and promise, and
purpose also with himself through the grace of God, and by the working of the
holy Ghost, ever after, more diligently to serve God, for seeing a man is busy
to serve an earthly Lord with all his dilignece, much more should we be
diligent to serve our Lord God, and to lift up our hearts unto him; and to
consider the g^eatnes of God, and the wretchedness of our selves, how great and
how worthy God is, how little, and how unworthy our selves are: consider also
the great love of God, that would take to himself that is so worthy, the
frail and weak estate of mankind, not for any cause of his own, but for the
great love he bare unto us: consider also his unspeakable and rich mercy
toward miserable and wretched sinners, who not only offered himself to
death, for us on the cross, but also gives himself to us in the Sacrament to
be our spiritual meat ann drink, and to be fully with us, and in us.
Wherefore let every Christian man if he have time, before the receiving of the
blessed Sacrament, say thus in his heart. Lord I know well that al works and
deserts of men, be they never so holy, are not worthy to receive thee, how much
more am I unworthy, that each day sin, and as a man incorrigible dwell still
therein? O Lord, why do I such de^pite unto thee, for to cast thee my precious
Lord into the foul pit of my conscience? for surely there is no dung more
stinking then my soul is, O Lord what shall I do? shall I lay thee in that
foul place? surely Lord I durst not, but in hope of thy mercies; but I believe
and am assured that thy mercies are endlesly more then all my sin, and
therefore in full trust of thy goodness, I offer my self to receive thee, as a
sick man receives a medicine thou art the most sovereign salve and I am sore
sick: therefore I take thee to be made whole through thee, and the sicker
that my soul is, the more desire I have to be healed, and the more need I have
of thee, for why, in healing of my deadly sickness, shall well be showed and
commended the greatness of thy goodness, that wilt help and heal so
wretched a creature, and bring me to the possession of everlasting life,
through the merits of thy precious death and passion. And thus must we that
are sick in sin, receive this healthful medicine of the holy Sacrament, the
body and blood of Christ: and when we feel through it any comfort to our
souls, let us ascribe that comfort not to our selves, but to the goodness of
God, which so comfort and refreshes our souls, by feeding us with his own
flesh and blood, of his own great mercy and grace. and let us thus think with
our selves, lo thus does our Lord unto us, to show us our wretchedness and
miseries, wherein we lie inta^gled, unless we be loosed by him; and to overcome
our wickedness with the plenty of his goodness; for he makes us that are dead
in sin, to feel life, and being rotten and stinking worms to taste heavenly
sweetness. O Lord God since thou art so merciful to us, that now live in sin,
as to feed us with the heavenly bread of thy own flesh and blood in this holy
sacrament, by which food through the working of the holy Ghost, we are
nourished and cherished in body and soul, unto life everlasting; let our
hearts from henceforth in this most cherefully rejoice, that our God, our
spouse, and our love, is made unto us our spiritual meat and drink, to
strengthen our bodies and souls, that we may grow up to life everlasting: the
bilsse of Saints, the joy of Angels, the son of the highest father, makes
himself our spiritual nourishing, the light of the world, the son of
righteousness, the wisdom of God is made the food of our soul, the redeemer
of man, the brightness of heaven, the matter of all mirth, and the Lord of joy,
vouchsafes for to feed us with himself: what kindness, what courtesy, what
toke^ of love might be more. Wherefore since we have him let us not from
henceforth suffer our hearts to delight in any creature, for it were a great
unkindness, and vile wretchedness of us, after the receiving of so worthy a
meat, so precious and sweet as it is, to settle our selves to the liking and
lust again of the world and of the flesh. Keep us therefore sweet Jesus from
such wretchedness and unkindness, and be thou our meat and our food, our lust
and our liking, and make us continually to hunger after thee, and to feed on
thee with greedy desire, for thy sweetness suffices unto all the world: and
why vouchsafest thou, merciful Lord, to feed us with this heavenly bread, and
with this so precious food of thine own flesh and blood? what see thou in
us? or what find thou in us? or what profi^ shall thou have of us? surely
none; but thy great love constrains thee to do thus unto us: since therefore
thou which art the sovereign goodness, the whiteness of endless light, and
mirror without spot, vouchsafest thus lovingly to come to us, to dwell in us,
and to feed us; how is it that we stinking wretches desire not most
earnestly to welcome thee, and devoutly to receive thee? it is great shame to
us; but Lord we beseech thee to take away our shame, and to make us to amend.
Give us daily this heavenly bread, and make us daily to receive the precious
body and blood of thy son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, either ghostly, or
both ghostly and sacramentally through a true, lively, and unfeigned faith so
that thou may continually be with us, and we with thee, for thou have so
limed us with thy love, and so glewed us with thy grace, that we may not depart
from thee: grant therefore thy grace, that Christ in us, and we in Christ, may
dwell perpetually, and that we may worthily bear this name, since of Christ we
are called Christen. By this which has been showed, it appears how Christ's
real, natural, holy flesh and blood is received, in, by, and with the
Sacrament, wherein, as has been also showed, there is not any
consubstantiation, nor transubstantiation. It has been showed also what
preparation must be used, that we receive not this holy Sacrament unworthily,
whereby Christ is refused and clean shut out from us, and we refused and
clean shut out from him, to the eternal damnation of our own souls. From
which danger God of his great mercy deliver us, and give us grace that we may
at all times be made thankful and worthy receivers, to the praise of his name,
and the attainement of everlasting life, through his only son our Lord Jesus
Christ: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory and
praise, now and for ever. Amen.

LAMENTATIONS, mournings and woes, pronounced by the Prophet Isaiah against
impenitent sinners.
Hear O heavens, Esaias against impenitent sinners. cap. 1.
and harken O earth, for the Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up
children, but they have rebelled against me: A sinful nation, a people laden
with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children. They have forsaken the
Lord, and provoked the holy one of Israel to anger. They are gone backward, for
they fall away more and more. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is
heavy; from the soul of the foot, unto the head, there is nothing sound
therein, but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruption. When you come
to appear before the Lord, who requires this at your hands, to tread in my
Courts, and when you shall stretch out your h^nds. I will hide mine eyes from
you, and though you make many prayers I will not hear, for your hands are full
of blood. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherles, defend the widow. If you consent and obey,
you shall eat the good things of the land: but if you refuse and be
rebellious, you shall be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. How is the faithful city become an h^rlot? it was full of
judgment and justice lodged therein: but now they are murderers; thy Princes
are rebellious and companions with thieves, every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards; they judge not the fatherles, neither does the
widows cause come before them. Therefore says the Lord God of hosts, the
mighty one of Israel; ah I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of
mine enemies, and the strong shall be as tow, and the maker thereof as a
spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them. Enter
into the rocks, and hide thee in the dust, from before the fear of the Lord,
and from the glory of his majesty. The high look of a man shall be humbled, and
the loftines of men shall be abased, and the Lord only shall be exalted in
that day. For the day of the Lord of hosts is upon all the proud and haughty,
and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low. The people shall be
oppressed one of another, and every one by his neighbor. The children shall
presume against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable. The trial of
their countenance testifies against them, yea they declare their sins as
Sodom, they hide them not. Woe be unto their souls, for they have rewarded
evil unto themselves. Woe be unto the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for
the reward of his hands shall be given him. Woe be unto them that join house
to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that ye may be placed
by your selves in the midst o^ ^he earth. This is in mine ears, ^aith the
Lord of hosts: surely many houses s^all ^ee desolate, even great and (...)
without inahbitants; woe ^ee unto them that ^ise up early to follow drunke^^^s
and to them that continue until ^^ght, till the wine do inflame them* ^oe
unto them that are mighty ^o d^ nke wine, and to them that are str^ng to power
in strong drink; and the harp and violl, timbrel, and pipe, and wine are in
their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, no^ consider the
work of his hands. W^e unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of
good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for sower. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with the cords
of vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes. Therefore hell has enlarged it
self, and opened his mouth without measure, and their glory, and their
multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices amongst them, shall descend
into it. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them. Then said I,
Lord, how long, and he answered, until the cities be wasted without
inhabitants, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, for
the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the
Lord of hosts. Therefore will the Lord cut off both head and tail in one day.
The ancient and the honorable man, he is the head, and the Prophet that
teaches lies, he is the tail. For the leaders of the people cause them to
err, and they that are led by them are devoured. Therefore shall the Lord have
no pleasure in their young men, neither will he have compassion of their
fatherles, and of their widows. For every one is an hypocrite and wicked, and
every mouth speaks folly. Therefore by the wrath of the Lord of hosts shall
the land be darkened, and the people shall be as the meat of the fire. No man
shall spare his brother, for wickedness burns as a fire, it deuoureth the
briars and the thorns, and will kindle in the thick places of the forest, and
they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke: and when he shall look to
the earth, behold trouble, and darkness, vexation, and anguish: yet for all
this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Woe unto
them that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things to keep back the
poor from judgment, and to take away the judgment of the poor, that widows
may be their pray, and that they may spoil the fatherles. What will you do
in the day of visitation and destruction, which shall come from far? to whom
will you fly for help, and where will you leave your glory? without me every
one shall fall amongst them that are bound, and they shall fall down amongst
the slain: yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still. And in that day did the Lord of host call unto weeping and
mourning, and to baldnes, and girding with sackcloth; and behold, joy and
gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep; eating flesh, and drinking wine,
eating and drinking for tomorrow we shall die. And it was declared in the ears
of the Lord of hosts: surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till
you die, says the Lord God of hosts. Behold, the Lord makes the earth
empty, and he makes it wast, he turns it vpside down, and scatters
abroad the inhabitants thereof, and there shall be like people, like priest,
like servant, like master, like maid like mistress, like buier, like seller,
like lender, like borrower, like giver, like taker to usury. The Earth shall
be clean emptied, and utterly spoiled; for the Lord has spoken this word. The
earth lamenteth and fades away, the world is feebled and decayed, the proud
people of the earth are weakened. The earth also decaieth because of the
inhabitants thereof. For they transgress the laws, they changed the
ordinances, and brake the everlasting covenant. Therefore has the curse
devoured the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are desolate, the inhabitants
of the land are burned up, and few men are left; and he that flies from the
noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that comes out of the pit
shall be taken in the snare, for the windows from an high are open, and the
foundations of the earth do shake, the earth is utterly broken down. The
earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly, the earth shall reele
to and fro like a drunken man and shall be removed like a tent, and the
iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, so that it shall fall and rise no
more. No man calls for justice, no man contendeth for the truth, they trust
in vanity, and speak vain things, they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity, for their hands are defiled with blood, and their fingers with
iniquity: their lips have spoken lies, and their tongue has murmured
iniquity: they run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood:
their thoughts are wicked thoughts; desolation and destruction is in their
paths, the way of peace they know not, and there is no equity in their goings:
they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know
peace: therefore judgment turns backward, and justice stands far off,
for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter, yea truth
fails, and he that refraineth from evil, makes himself a pray. And when
the Lord saw it, it displeased him that there was no judgment. Therefore will
he tread down the people in his wrath, and make them drunk in his
indignation, and will bring down their strength to the earth, and they shall
go forth and look upon the carkases of the men that have transgressed: for
their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they
shall be an abhorring to all flesh.

O yea heavens be astonished at this be afraid, Ier. against impenitent sinners.
chap. 2.
and utterly confounded, says the Lord, for my people have committed two
evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters to dig them pits;
even broken pits that can hold no water. The Priests said not, where is the
Lord? and they that should minister the law knew me not: the Pastors also
offended against me. and went after things that did not profit. Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy turning back shall reprove thee, know
therefore, and behold it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have forsaken
the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of
Hosts: though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap; yet thine
iniquity is marked before me says the Lord, thou disobedient Israel, return
says the lord, and I will not let my wrath fall upon you, for I am merciful,
says the Lord, and I will not alwaie keep mine anger. O yea disobedient
children, turn again, says the Lord: for I am your Lord, and I will give you
pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. Thou shall call me, saying, my father, and shall not turn from
me; and thenceforth they shall follow no more the hardness of their wicked
hearts. A voice was heard upon the high places, weepings, and supplications of
the children of Israel, for they have perverted their way and forgotten the
Lord their God. O ye disobedient children, return, and I will heal your
rebellions. Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our GOD. O
Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness that thou may be saved, how long shall
thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? and in that day, says the Lord, the
heart of the King shall perish, and the heart of the Princes and of the Priests
shall be astonished, and the Prophets shall wonder; destruction upon
destruction is cried, for the whole land is wasted. Wherefore gird you with
sackcloth, lament and houle, for the fierce wrath of the Lord is not turned
back from us. I beheld, and lo the fruitful place was as a wilderness, and all
the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his
fierce wrath. For thus has the lord said, the whole land shall be desolate: yet
will I not make a full end; and when thou shall be destroyed, what will thou
do? Thy ways and thine inventions have procured thee these things, such is
thy wickedness. Therefore it shall be bitter, therefore it shall pierce unto
thine heart: for my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are
foolish children, and have no understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to
do well they have no knowledge. Then said I, ah Lord GOD, surely thou have
deceived this people, saying, ye shall have peace, and the sword pierces unto
the heart. They have denied the Lord, and said it is not he, neither shall the
plague come upon us, neither shall we see, sword nor famine. O Lord are not
thy eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed,
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction. They have
made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return. How should I
spare thee for this? Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are
no gods: though I fed them to the full, yet they committed adultery, and
assembled themselves by companies in the harlots houses. They rose up in the
morning like fed horses, for every man neighed after his neighbors wise;
shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? Lo I will bring a nation
upon you from far, O house of Israel, says the lord, which is a mighty
nation, and an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou know not,
neither understand what they say; whose quiver is an open sepulcher, they
are all very strong, and they shall eat thine harvest; and thy bread they
shall devour thy sons and thy daughters, they shall eat up thy sheep, and
thy bullocks, they shall eat thy vines and thy fig trees; they shall destroy
with the sword thy fenced cities wherein thou did trust. For amongst my
people are sound wicked persons that lays wait as he that sets snares,
they have made a pit to catch men. As a cage is full of birds: so are their
houses full of deceit, thereby they are become great and waxen rich, they are
waxen fat and shining, they do ouerpasse the deeds of the wicked, they
execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the fatherles, yet they prosper,
though they execute no judgment for the poor. An horrible and filthy thing is
committed in the land the Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests receive
gifts in their hands, and my people delight therein. Shall not I visit, for
these things, says the Lord? or shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this? Trust not in lying words, saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple
of the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord: behold you trust in lying words
that cannot profit. But this thing commanded I them, obey my voice, and I will
be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk you in all my ways which I
have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. But they would not obey nor
incline their ear, but went after the counsels and stubbornness of their
wicked heart, and went backward and not forward. Therefore shall thou speak
all these words unto them, but they will not hear thee. Thou shall also cry
unto them, but they will not answer thee: but thou shall say unto them, this is
a nation that hears not the voice of the Lord their GOD, nor receives
discipline, truth is perished and clean gone out of their mouth. Therefore thus
says the Lord, behold mine anger and my wrath shall be powered out upon this
place, upon man and upon beast, and upon the tree of the field, and upon the
fruit of the ground, and it shall burn and not be quenched, and the carkases
of this people shall be meat for the sowles of the heaven and for the beasts
of the earth, and none shall fray them away, and death shall be desired rather
then life of all the residue that remains of this wicked family, which
remain in all the places where I have scattered them, says the lord of
Hosts. How do you say we are wise, and the law of the lord is with us? lo,
certainly in vain made he it, the pen of the scribes is in vain, the wise
men are ashamed, they are afraid and taken: lo they have rejected the word of
the lord, and what wisdom is in them? Therefore will I give their wives unto
others, and their fields unto the^ that shall possess them: for every one
from the least to the greatest is given unto covetousness, and from the
Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals faslly, for they have healed the
hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet words, saying, peace, peace, when
there is no peace: for behold I will send serpents and cockatrices amongst you
which will not be charmed, and they shall sting you, says the lord. Oh that my
head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. Oh that I had
in the wilderness a cottage of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and
go from them, for they be all adulterers, and an assembly of rebels, and they
bend their tongues like their bows for lies; but they have no courage for the
truth upon the earth, for they proceed from evil to worse, and they have not
known me says the lord. Let every one take heed of his neighbor, and
trust you not in any brother, for every brother will use deceit, and every
friend will deal deceitfully, and every one will deceive his friend and will
not speak the truth, for they have taught their tongues to speak lies, and
take great pains to do wickedly. Thine habitation is in the midst of
deceivers, because of their deceit they refuse to know me, says the lord.
Therefore thus says the lord of hosts, behold, I will melt them, and try
them, for what shall I else do for the daughter of my people? their tongue is
an arrowe shot out, and speaks deceit; one speaks peaceably to his
neighbor with his mouth, but his heart he lays wait for him. Shall I not
visit them for these things says the lord? or shall not my soul be avenged on
such a nation as this? Therefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, the God of
Israel, behold, I will feed this people with wormwood, and give them waters
of gall to drink, for death is come up into our windows, and is entered into
our palaces, to destroy the children without and the young men in the streets.
Speak, thus says the lord, the carkases of men shall lie even as the dung
upon the field, and as the handful after the mower, and none shall gather
them. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong man glory in his strength, nether the rich man glory in his riches, but
let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me; for
I am the Lord which show mercy, judgment and righteousness in the earth, for
in these things I delight, says the Lord. Thus says the Lord, learn not the
way of the heathen, and be not afraid for the signs of heaven, though the
heathen be afraid of such. Every man is a beast by his own knowledge* for the
pastors are become beasts, and have not sought the lord, therefore have they no
understanding, and all the flocks of their pastures are scattered. O Lord, I
know that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to walk,
and to direct his steps. O Lord, correct me, but with judgment, not in thine
anger, lest thou bring me to nothing, power out thy wrath upon the heathen that
know thee not and upon the families that call not upon thy name: let me see thy
vengeance on them, for unto thee have I opened my cause. O lord, if I dispute
with thee thou art righteous, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments;
wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? why are all the in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? Thou have planted them, and they have taken root,
they grow and bring forth fruit, thou art near in their mouth, and far from
their reins: O lord thou have ordained them for judgment, and O GOD thou have
established them for correction. Give glory to the lord your God before he
bring draknes, and or ever your feet stumble in the dark mountains, and
whiles you look for light he turns it into the shadow of death and make it
as darkness. But if you will not hear, this my soul shall weep in secret for
your pride, and mine eye shall weep and drop down tears, for the crown of
your glory shall come down from your heads. O lord though our iniquities
testify against us, deal with us according to thy name, for our rebellions
are many, we have sinned against the. O the hope of Israel, the savior thereof
in the time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the land, as one that
passes by to tarry for a night? why art thou as a man astonished, and as a
strong man that cannot help? yet art thou, O lord in the midst of us, and
thy name is called upon us; O forsake us not. Thus says the lord unto this
people, thus have they delighted to wander, they have not refrained their
feet. Therefore has the lord no delight in them, but he will now remember
their iniquity, and visit their sins: when they fast I will not he^re their
cries, I will not accept them, but I will consume them by the sword, and by the
famine and by the pestilence. We acknowledge, O lord, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers, for we have sinned against thee, do not abhor us
for thy names sake, cast not down the throne of thy glory, remember and break
not thy covenant with us. Are there any among the vanities of the gentiles that
can give rain, or can the heavens give showers? is it not thou O lord our God?
Therefore will we wait upon thee, for thou have made all these things. Then
said the lord unto me, though Moises and Samuel stood before me, yet mine
affection could not be toward this people. Cast them out of my sight, and let
them depart: and if they say unto thee, whither shall we depart? then tell
them, thus says the lord, such as are appointed to death, unto death; and such
as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for famine, to the famine;
and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity: and I will appoint over
them four kinds, says the Lord; the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear in
pieces, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth to devour,
and to destroy. Thou have forsaken me, says the lord and gone backward;
therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee, for I am
weary with repenting. Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to be
spoiled without gain, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.
Behold, says the lord, I will send out many fishers, and they shall fish them;
and after I will send out many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every
mountain, and from every hill, and out of the caves of the rocks: for mine
eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face, neither is their
iniquity hid from mine eyes. And first I will recompense their iniquity and
their sin double, because they have defiled my land, and have filled my
inheritance with their filthy carrions and their abominations. Thus says the
lord, cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the lord, for he shall be like the heath in the
wilderness, and shall not see when any good comes: but shall inhabit the
parched places in the wilderness in a salt land, and not inhabited. Blessed is
the man that trusts in the lord, and whose hope the lord is, for he shall be
as a tree that is planted by the water, which spreads out her roots by the
river, and shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be
green and shall not care for the year of drouth, neither shall cease from
yielding fruit. The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can
know it? I the lord search the heart, and try the reins even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his works. As the
partrich gathers the young which she has not brought forth so he that
gathers riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool. O Lord the hope of Israel, all that
forsake thee shall be confounded, they that depart from thee shall be written in
the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord the fountain of living waters.
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be whole, save me, and I shall be saved, for thou
art my praise. Then the word of the Lord came unto me saying, I will speak
suddenly against a nation, or against a kingdom to pluck it up, and to root
it out and to destroy it, but if this nation, against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring
upon them. And I will speak suddenly concerning a nation and concerning a
kingdom to build it, and to plant it: but if it do evil in my sight, and
hear not my voice, I will repent of the good that I thought to do for them
Thus says the Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, behold I will bring upon
this city and upon all her towns, all the plagues that I have pronounced
against it, because they have hardened their necks and would not hear my words;
but they said desperately, surely we will walk after our own imaginations,
and do every man after the stubbornnes of his wicked heart. Behold, I will
bring a plague upon this place, the which whosoever hears it, his ears shall
tingle, and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by
the hand of them that seek their lives, and their carkases will I give to be
meat for the sowles of heaven, and to the beasts of the field, and I will
feed them with the flesh of their sons, and with the flesh of their
daughters, and every one shall eat the flesh of his friend, in the siege and
straitness wherewith their enemies that seek their lives shall hold them
strait. Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel unto the
pastors that feed my people, ye have scattered my flock, and thrust them out,
and have not visited them. Behold I will visit you for the wickedness of your
works, says the Lord: for both the Prophet and the Priest do wickedly, and
their wickedness have I found in my house, says the Lord: wherefore their way
shall be unto them as slippery ways in the darkness, they shall be driven
forth, and fall therein: for I will bring a plague upon them, even the year of
their visitation, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the
Prophets, behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the
water of gall: for from the Prophets is wickedness, gone forth into all the land
of Jerusalem, they strengthen also the hands of the wicked, that none can
return from their wickedness: they are all unto me as Sodom, and the
inhabitants thereof as Gamorah. They say still unto the^ that despise me, the
Lord has said, ye shall have peace, and they say unto every one that walks
after the stubbornnes of his own heart, there shall no evil come upon you.
Therefore behold, I even I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you and
bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall never
be forgotten. I have not sent these Prophets; says the Lord, yet they ran; I
have not spoken unto them, and yet they prophesied. But if they had stood in my
counsel, and had declared my words unto my people, then they should have
turned them from their evil way, and from the wickedness of their inventions.
How long do the Prophets delight to prophecy lies, even prophesying the
deceit of their own heart. Is not my word like a fire, says the Lord, and
like a hammer that breaks the stone? Therefore behold, I will come against the
Prophets says the Lord, which have sweet tongues, and say, he says, behold,
I will come against Prophets says, the Lord, that steal my word, every one
from his neighbor: behold I will come against them that prophecy false
dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by
their lies and by their slatteries, and I sent them not, nor commanded them:
therefore they bring no profit unto this people, says the Lord. For thus has
the Lord God of Israel spoken unto me, take the cup of wine of this my
indignation at my hands, and cause all the nations to whom I send, to drink
it, and they shall drink and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I
will send amongst them. Therefore say thou unto them, thus says the lord of
hosts the God of Israel, drink and be drunk, and spew, and fall and rise no
more, because of the sword which I will send amongst them: but if they refuse
to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then tell them, thus says the lord of
hosts, you shall certainly drink; for lo, I begin to plague the city where
my name is called upon, and should you go free? you shall not go quit. For I
will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, says the lord of
hosts. The Lord shall roar from above, and thrust out his voice from his holy
habitation, he shall roar upon his habitation, and cry aloud, the sound
shall be to the ends of the earth, for the Lord has a controversy with the
nations, and will enter into judgment with all flesh, and he will give them
that are wicked to the sword, says the lord. Thus says the lord of hosts,
behold, a plague shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind
shall be raised up from the costs of the earth, and the slain of the lord
shall be at that day, from one end of the earth to the other end of the earth:
they shall not be mourned, neither gathered, nor buried; but shall be as the
dung upon the ground. Thus my soul was far off from peace, I forgot
prosperity, remembering mine affliction, and my mourning, the wormwood, and the
gall, my soul has them in remembrance and is humbled in me. It is the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions sail not. The Lord
is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good
unto them that trust in him, and to the soul that seeks him. It is good both
to trust, and to wait for the salvation of the Lord. It is good for a man that
he bear the yoke in his youth, for the Lord will not forsake for ever, but
though he send affliction, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies: for he does not punish willingly, nor afflict the
children of men in stamping under his feet all the prisoners of the earth.
Wherefore then is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for sin. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn again to the lord. Let us lift up our
hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens. We have sinned and have
rebelled, therefore thou have not spared: thou have covered us with wrath and
persecuted us, thou have slain, and not spared. Thou have covered thy self
with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through: thou have made us as the
ofscouring and refuse in the midst of the people; al our enemies have opened
their mouth against us. Fear and a snare is come upon us, with desolation and
destruction; the joy of our heart is gone, our dance is turned to mourning:
therefore our heart is heavy: for these things our eyes are dim. The crown
of our head is fallen; woe now unto us that we have sinned.

O thou son of man, behold they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind
thee with them, and thou shall not go out amongst them, and I will make thy
tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall
not be to them as a man that rebukes, for they are a rebellious house: but
when I shall have spoken unto thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shall say
unto them: Thus says the Lord God, he that hears, let him hear, and he
that leaves off, let him leave off, for they are a rebellious house. Therefore
thus says the Lord God, because your multitude is greater then the nations
that are round about you, and ye have not walked in my statutes, neither have
you kept my judgments: behold, I, even I come against thee, and will execute
judgment in the midest of thee, even in the sight of the nations. For in the
midst of thee the fathers shall eat their sons, and the sons shall eat
their fathers, and I will execute judgment in thee, and the whole remnant of
thee will I scatter into all the winds: the third part of thee shall die with the
pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee, and
another third part thereof shall fall by the sword round about thee, and I will
scatter the last third part into all winds. And I will draw out a sword after
them, neither shall mine eye spare thee, neither will I have any pity. Thus
shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my wrath to cease in them,
and I will be comforted; and they shall know that I the lord have spoken it in
my zeal, when I have accomplished my wrath in them. Moreover I will make thee
wast, and abhorred amongst the nations that are round about thee, and in the
sight of all that pass by, so shall thou be a reproach and shame, a
chastisement, and an astonishment unto the nations that are round obout thee,
when I shall execute judgment in anger and in wrath, and in sharp rebukes. I
the Lord have spoken it, and they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I
have not said in vain, that I will do this evil unto them. He that is far
off shall die of the pestilence, and he that is near shall fall by the sword,
and he that remains and is besieged, Cap. 7.
shall die by the famine. Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon them, so will I
stretch my hand upon them, and make the land wast and desolate in all their
habitations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Cruelty is risen up into
a rod of wickedness, none of them shall remain, nor of their riches, nor of any
of theirs, neither shall there be lamentation for them. An end is come, the
end is come, it watches for thee, behold, it is come now, I will shortly power
out my wrath upon thee, and fulfill mine anger upon thee, I will judge thee
acording to thy ways, and I will lay upon thee all thine abominations. The
sword is without, and the pestilence and famine within, he that is in the field
shall die with the sword, and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence
shall devour him, all hands shall be weak, and all knees shall fall away as
water. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold cannot
deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their
souls, neither fill their bowels, for this ruin is for their iniquity: when
destruction comes they shall seek peace, but shall not have it. Calamity
shall come upon calamity, and rumor shall be upon rumor: then shall they seek
the vision of the Prophet, but the law shall perish from the Priest, and
counsel from the ancient. The king shall mourn, and the Princes shall be clothed
with desolation, and the hands of the people in the land shall be troubled. I will
do unto them according to their ways, and according to their judgments will I
judge them, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Thus says the Lord God, Woe
unto the foolish prophets that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing,
because with your lies you have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I
have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, by promising him life. Therefore thus says the
Lord God, because you have spoken vanities and seen lies, therefore behold, I
am against you, says the Lord God, and my hand shall be upon the Prophets that
see vanities, and divine lies, they shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writings of the house of Israel, neither
shall they enter into the land of Israel; for I will deliver my people out of
your hand, and you shall know that I am the Lord. And the word of the Lord came
unto me saying, son of man say unto her, Cap. 22.
thou art the land that is unclean, thou have offended in thy blood that thou
have shed, thou have caused thy days to draw near, and art come unto thy
term, In thee have they despised father and mother, in the midst of thee
have they oppressed the stranger, in thee have they vexed the fatherless, and
widow, in thee are men that carry tales to shed blood. Thou have despised
mine holy things, and have polluted my sabbaths: in thee have they taken gifts
to shed blood, thou have taken usury, and the increase, and thou have
defrauded thy neighbor by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord
God. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof, like a
roaring lion, ravening the pray, they have devoured souls, they have taken the
riches and precious things, they have made her many widows, in the midst
thereof her priests have broken my law, and have defiled my holy things, they
have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither discerned
between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths,
and I am profaned amongst them her Princes in the midst thereof are like
wolves ravening the pray to shed blood, and to destroy souls for their own
covetous lucre. The people of the land have violently oppressed by spoiling,
and robbing, and have vexed the poor and the needy, Ezechiel.
yea they have oppressed the stranger against right: and I sought for a man
amongst them, that should make up the hedge and stand in the gap before me for
the land that I should not destroy it; but I found none. Behold therefore I
have smitten my hand upon the covetousness that thou have used, and upon the
blood which has been shed in the midst of thee. Can their heart endure; or
can their hands be strong in the days that I shall have to do with thee? I
the Lord have spoken it and I will do it; as they gather silver, and brass,
and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the
fire upon it, and to melt it; so will I gather you in mine anger, and in my
wrath, and will put you there, and melt you, and you shall know that I the Lord
have powered out my wrath upon you. Say unto them, as I live, says the Lord
God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live. Turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why will you die?
When the righteous turns from his righteousness, Cap. 33.
and commits iniquity, he shall even die thereby. But if the wicked
return from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
live thereby. Ye lean upon your swords, ye work abomination, and ye defile
every one his neighbors wise, should ye then possess the land? Also thou
son of man, the children of thy people, that talk of thee by the walls, and
in the doors of houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother,
saying, Come I pray you and hear what is the word that comes from the Lord,
for they come unto thee, as the people uses to come, and my people sit before
thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouths they
make iestes, and their heart goes after their covetousness, and lo, thou art
unto them as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can sing
well, for they hear thy words, but do them not. Say thus unto them, thus
says the LORD GOD, as I live, so surely they that are in the desolate places
shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give unto
the beasts to be devoured; and they that be in the courts, and in the caves
shall die of the pestilence; the^ shall they know that I am the Lord, when I
have laid the land desolate, and waste because of their abominations which they
have committed. Woe unto the shepherds of Israel that feed themselves, Cap. 34.
should not the shepherds feed the flocks? ye eat the fat, and ye cloth
you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed, but you feed not the sheep.
The weak have you not strengthened, and the sick have you not healed, neither
have you bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven away,
neither have you sought that which was lost, but with cruelty and with rigor
have you ruled them, and they were scattred without a shepherd; and when they
were dispersed they were devoured of all the beasts of the field. Therefore ye
shepherds hear the word of the Lord: As I live says the lord God, surely
because my flock was spoiled and my sheep were devoured of all the beasts of
the field, having no shepherd, neither did my shepherds seek my sheep: but
my shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my sheep. Behold, I come against
the shepherds, and will require my sheep at their hands, and cause the^ to
cease from feeding the sheep, neither shall the shepherds feed themselves
any more, for I will deliver my sheep from their mouths, and they shall no
more devour them. For thus says the lord God, behold I will search my sheep,
and seek them out, I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that
which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen the weak: but I will destroy the fat, and the strong, and feed
the^ with judgment, because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and
pusht all the weak with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad,
therefore will I help my sheep, and they shall no more be spoiled, and I will
judge between sheep and sheep. And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture,
are mine, and I am your GOD, says the Lord God. A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your body, and will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my
spirit within you; and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them, and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your
fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will also deliver
you from al your filthiness. The^ shall you remember your own wicked ways, and
your deeds that were not good, and shall judge your selves worthy to have been
destroyed for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Be it known unto
you, that I do not this for your sakes, but for my holy names sake; says the
Lord God. Therefore be ashamed, and confounded, O house of Israel, for your
own ways.

Daniel against impenitent sinners. cap. 9.
We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we have
rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts and from thy judgments, for we
have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his ways which he
has laid before us by the ministry of his servants the Prophets. Therefore has
the Lord made ready the plague and brought it upon us, for the Lord our God is
righteous in all his works which he does: for we would not hear his voice.
Many shall be purified, made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wicked shall have understanding, but the wise shall
understand.

Hear the word of the Lord ye children of Israel, Osea against impenitent
sinners. Cap. 4.
for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because
there is no truth, nor mercy nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing,
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they break out, and blood
touches blood: yet let none rebuke nor reprove another; for thy people are as
they that rebuke the priests, my people are destroyed for lack of knowledge:
because thou have refused knowledge I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be
no Priest to me; and seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will also
forget thy children: as they were increased, so they sinned against me, they
eat up the sins of my people, and lift up their minds in their iniquity.
And as thieves wait for a man: so the company of the Priests murder in the
way by consent, for they work mischief. Therefore will I change their glory
into shame, and there shall be like people like Priest, for I will visit their
ways upon them, and reward them their deeds. Their drunkenness stincketh they
have committed whordome, their rulers love to say with shame, bring ye:
whordome, and wine, and new wine take away their hearts. Therefore shall the
Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off. The Prophet
shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother. They will not
give their minds to turn unto their God, for the spirit of fornication is in
the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord. The Princes of Judah
were like them that remove their bounds: therefore will I power out my wrath
upon them like water, I, even I will spoil and go away, I will take away and
none shall rescue it. Woe unto them, for they fled away from me, destruction
shall be unto them, because they have transgressed against me, though I have
redeemed them, yet have they spoken lies against me. I have written to them the
great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing, and they
consider not in their heart that I remember all their wickedness. Now their own
inventions have beset them about, they are in my sight, for the wickedness of
their inventions I will cast them out of mine house, I will love them no more,
all their Princes are rebels, my GOD will cast them away, because they did not
obey, and they shall wander amongst the nations.

They turn judgment to woorme-wood, Amos against impenite^t sinners. cap. 5.
and leave off righteousness in the earth: they have bated him that rebuked in
the gate, and they abhorred him that speaks uprightly; therefore the prudent
shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time, for I know your
manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins, they a^flict the just, they
take rewards, and they oppress the poor in the gate. Therefore the Lord God
of Hosts, the Lord says thus, mourning shall be in all the streets, and they
shall say in all the high ways, alas, alas, and they shall call the husbandmen
to lamentation, and such as can mourn to mourning. Cap. 8.
Behold the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water: but of hearing the word of
the Lord, and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the
east shall they run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. Gap. 9.
Behold the eyes of the lord are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy
it clean out of the earth, and I will slay the last of them with the sword; he
that flies of them shall not fly away, and he that escapes of them shall not
be delivered: though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them;
though they climb up to heaven thence will I bring them down, and though they
hide themselves in the top of Carmell, I will search and take them out thence;
and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, there will I
command the serpent, and he shall bite them; and though they go into captivity
before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them,
and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil and not for good.

For behold the Lord comes out of his place, and will come down, Micheas
against impenitent sinners. cap. 1.
and tread upon the high places of the earth, and the mountains shall melt
under him. So shall the valleies cleave as wax before the fire, and as the
waters that are powered downward. Woe unto the^ that imagine iniquity, Cap. 2.
and work wickedness upon their beds, when the morning is light they practice
it, because their hand has power, and they covet fields, and take them by
violence, and houses, and take them away, so they oppress a man and his house,
even man and his heritage; the women of my people have you cast out from their
pleasant houses, and from their children have you taken away my glory
continually. They that prophesied, prophecy you not, they shall not prophecy
unto the^, neither shall they take shame; if a man walk in the spirit, and
would lie falsely, saying, I will prophecy unto thee of wine and strong
drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this people. Therefore thus says the
Lord, behold against this family have I devised a plague, whereout ye shall not
pluck your necks, and ye shall not go so proudly: for this time is evil. Thus
says the Lord concerning the Prophets that deceive my people, and bite them
with their teeth, and cry peace; if a man put not in their mouths, they
prepare war against him, the heads thereof judge for rewards, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money;
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the LORD amongst us? no
evil can can come upon us. They hate the good and love the evil, they pluck
the skins from them, and their flesh from their bones, and they eat also the
flesh of my people, and fley off the skin from them, and they break their
bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as the flesh within the
caldron. Cap. 6.
For the rich men thereof are full of cruelty, and the inhabitants thereof have
spokn lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouths. Shall I justify
the wicked balances and the bag of deceitful waights: therefore also will I
make thee sick in in smiting thee, and in making thee desolate because of thy
sins: thou shall eat, and not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be in
the midst of thee, and thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver; and that
which thou deliuerest will I give up unto the sword. Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my
first borne for my transgression, even the fruit of my body for the sin of
my soul. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord requires
of thee, surely to do justly, and love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God. Are ye the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the skant measure that is abominable? The good man is perished out
of the earth, Cap. 7.
and there is none righteous amongst men, they all lie in wait for blood,
every man hunteth his brother with a net, to make good for the evil of their
hands, the Prince asked, and the Judge judges for reward, so they wrap it up.
The best of them is a bryar, and the most righteous of the^ is sharper then a
thorny hedge: the day of thy watchmen, and of thy visitation comes, then
shall be their confusion. Trust you not in a friend, neither put your confidence
in a Counsailor; keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom, for the son reuileth the father, the daughter rises up against the
mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law, and a man's enemies are
the men of his own house: therefore will I look unto the Lord, I will wait
for God my savior, my God will hear me, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, for
I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for
me, then will he bring me forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousness.
Who is a God like unto thee? that takes away iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retains not his wrath for
ever, because mercy pleases him; he will turn again, and have compassion
upon us; he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom
of the sea: thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as
thou have sworn to our fathers in old time.

The Lord is slow to anger, Naham against impenitent sinners. cap. 1.
but he is great in power, and will not surely clear the wicked, the Lord has
his way in the whirlewinde and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of
his feet. The Lord is good and as a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he
knows the^ that trust in him. God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth, the
Lord reuengeth, even the Lord of anger, the Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserueth wrath for his enemies: who can stand before his
wrath, or who can abide in the fiercenes of his wrath? his wrath is powered out
like fire, and the rocks are broken by him.

O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? Habaeuck against
impenitent sinners. Cap. 1.
even cry out unto thee for violence, and thou will not help: why do thou
show me iniquity, and cause me to behold sorrow? for spoiling and violence
are before me, and there are that raise up strife and contention: therefore the
law is dissolved, and judgment does never go forth, for the wicked does
compass about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds. Then shall
they take courage; and transgress, and do wickedly, imputing this their power
unto their god. Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see evil, thou can not
behold wickedness: wherefore do thou look upon the transgressors, and hold
thy tongue when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous then he? O
Lord thou have ordained them for judgment, and O God thou have established
them for correction. Art not thou of old, O Lord my God, my holy one? I shall
not die, but I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.
The Lord is my strength, he will make my feet like Hindes feet, and he will
make me to walk upon mine high places. The Lord is in his holy Temple, let
all the earth keep silence before him.

The great day of the Lord is near, Zephaniah. against impenitent sinners.
Cap. 1.
it is near, and hastes greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the
strong man shall cry there bitterly, that day is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity
and darkness, a day of clouds and blackness, a day of the trumpet and alarm
against the strong cities, and against the high towers* in the same day also
will I visit all those that dance upon the threshold so proudly, which fill
their masters houses by cruelty and deceit, and I will bring distress upon
men that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the
lord, and their blood shall be powered out as dust, and their flesh as dung,
neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them, in the day of
the lords wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
iealousy, for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all the^ that dwell in the
land. Gather your selves, eue^ gather you O nation not worthy to be loved
before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes in a day, and
before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the day of the
Lords anger come upon you: seek you the lord all the meek of the earth, which
have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek holiness, if so be that ye
may be hid in the day of the lords wrath. I said surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction, so their dwelling should not be destroyed, howsoever
I visited them: but they rose early, and corrupted all their works, she heard
not the voice, she received not correction, she trusted not in the lord, she
drew not near unto her God: her Princes within her are as roaring lions, her
Judges are as wolves in the evening, which leave not the bones till the morrow,
her Prophets are light and wicked persons, her Priests have polluted the
sanctuary, they have wrested the law. The just lord is in the midst thereof,
he will do none iniquity, every morning does he bring his judgment to light,
he fails not; but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed: therefore wait
upon me, says the lord, until the day that I rise up to the pray, for I am
determined to gather the nations, and that I will assemble the kingdoms, to
power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce wrath: for all the earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. Sure then will I turn to the
people a pure language, that they may call upon the name of the lord to serve
him with one consent. In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy works
wherein thou have transgressed against me. For then will I take away out of the
midst of thee them that rejoice of thy pride, and thou shall no more be
proud of my holy mountain: the^ will I leave in the midst of thee an humble,
and a poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the lord: the remna^t
of Israel shall do none iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a deceitful
tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall be feed, and lie down, and none
shall make them afraid.

Ha^^ai against impen tent sinners. cap. 1.
Now therefore says the Lord of hosts, consider your own ways in your
hearts: ye have sown much, and bring in little; you eat, but you have not
enough; you drink, but you are not filled; you claoth you, but you are not
warm; and he that earneth wages, puts the wages into a broken bag; you
looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when you brought it home, I did
blow upon it, and I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the
mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon the oil, upon all
that the ground brings forth, both upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all
the labor of the hands: I smote you with blasting, with mildew, and with
hail, in all the labors of your hands: yet you turned not to me, says the
Lord.

Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, Zachary against impenitent sinners. Cap.
7.8.
saying, these are the things that ye shall do, speak every man the truth
unto his neighbor, execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every
man to his brother, and oppress not the widow, nor the fatherles, the
stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother
in your heart, and love no false oath, for all these things are the things that
I hate, says the Lord: but they refused to hearken, and puled away the
shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear, yea they made
their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the
words of the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the ministry of the former
Prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts.

I have loved you, says the Lord, yet you say wherein have thou loved us?
Malac. against impenitent sinners. Cap. 1.
A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master; if then I be a father,
where is mine honor? and if be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of
hosts unto you, O ye Priests that despise my name; and ye say, wherein have we
despised thy name? my covenant was with Levy of life and peace, and I gave him
fear* and he feared me, and was afraid before my name; the law of truth was in
his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his lips; he walked with me in
peace, and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. For the Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth,
for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: but ye are gone out of the way,
ye have caused many to fall by the law, ye have broken the covenant of Leuy,
says the Lord of hosts; therefore have I made you also to be despised and
vile before all the people, because you kept not my ways, but have been
partial in the law, from the days of your fathers have you gone away from
mine ordinances, and have not kept them: return unto me and I will return
unto you, says the Lord of hosts; but ye said wherein shall we return? your
words have been stout against me, says the Lord; yet ye say what have we
spoken against thee? ye have said, it is in vain to serve God, and what profit
is it that we have kept his commandments, and that we have walked humbly
before the Lord of hosts. Therefore we count the proud blessed, even they that
work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God, yea, they are delivered.
Then spoke they that feared the lord, every one to his neighbor, and the lord
hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the lord, and thought upon his name, and they shall be to me,
says the lord of hosts, in that day, that I shall do this, for a flock, and
will I spare them, as a man that spares his own son that serves him. Then
shall you return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not. For behold, the day comes
that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly
shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the lord of
hosts, and shall leave the^ neither root nor bra^ch. But unto you that fear
my name shall the sun of righteousness arise, and health shall be under his
wings, and you shall go forth, and grow up as fat calves, and ye shall tread
down the wicked, for they shall be dust under the souls of your feet, in the
day that I shall do this, says the lord.

Cum fueris felix, quae sunt aduersa caueto,
Rursus in aduersis mel^us sperare memento.
Prospice qui veniunt hos casus esse ferendos,
Nam leuius laedit quicquid praeuideris ante,
Nec multum timeas ventur^ tempora fati,
Non timet is morte^, qui scit conte^nere vita^.
Passibus ambiguis fortuna volubilis errat,
Et manet in nullo certa tenaxque loco:
Sed modo laeta manet, vultus modo sumit acerbos,
Et tantum constans in leuitate sua est.
Omnia sunt homini tenui pendentia filo,
Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
Tutior in terris locus est quam sedibus altis.
Nam fortuna leuat infima, summa premit.
Et quodqunque libet tibi dat fortuna rapitque,
Irus and est subito, qui modo Croesus erat.
Singula quid repetam? nil non mortale tenemus,
Pectoris exceptis ingenijque bonis.
Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus,
Et certam praesens non habet hora fidem,
Vt probet, vt purget, vt puniat, vt mercatur
Vt manifestetur gloria poena datur.
Itaque fac timeas et quae tibi laeta videntur,
Dum loqueris fieri tristia posse puta.
Deoptimo correctionis modo carmina composita ex diuersis auctoribus.
Moribus ingenuis cultus si charus amicus
Esse nolit, perfer, post modo mitis erit:
Cumque mones aliquem, nec se velit ipse moner^,
Si tibi sit charus noli desistere coeptis.
Ferreus assiduo consumitur annulus vsu,
Interit assidua vomer aduncus humo.
Quid magis est aurum saxo, quid mollius vnda?
Dura tamen molli saxa cauantur aqua.
Gutta cauat lapidem non vt sed saepe cadendo;
Corr^pe sic charos non vt sed saepe monendo.
Flectitur obsequio curnatus ab arbore ram^^,
Franges si vires experiere tuas.
Obsequio tranantur aquae, nec v^^cere pos^is
Flumina si contra qua rapit vnda nates.
Obsequium tigresque domat, tumidosque leones,
Rustica paulatim taurus aratra sumit.
Tempore difficiles veniunt ad aratra iuuencae,
Tempore lenta pati fraena docentur equi.
Itaque ne cesses monitis sapientia crescit:
Rara datur longo prudentia temporis v^u.
Sola salus seruire Deo, sunt caetera frauds: Declaratur in his versibus ex
libello venerabilis Richardi Barclei militis.
DIuitias mundi fragiles qui cord sequetur,
Perdidit aeterni ^ertissima gaudia coeli.
Si tibi pulchra domus, si splendidae mensa; quid inde?
Si tibi sp^nsa decens, si sit generosa; quid inde?
Si tibi sint nati, si praedia magna; quid inde?
Si fueris pulcher fortis dinesque; quid inde?
Si doceas alios in qualibet art; quid inde?
Si faueat mundus, si prospera cuncta; quid inde?
Si rota fortunae te tollat ad astra; quid inde?
Annos si regnes foelix per mill; quid inde?
Tam cito praetereunt, vt vanitas, vt nihill inde:
Sola manet virtus qua glorificabimur inde.
Ergo Deo serui, quia tot tibi prouenit inde:
Quodque fecisse voles in tempore quo morieris,
Hoc facias inuenis dum corpore sanu^ haberis,
Et quocunque Die nil sancti egisse videbis,
Hunc tibi vel penitus deperijsse puta.
Ex eodem libello de eadem materia haec carmina componuntur.
SInt tibi diuitiae, sit honos, sit larga supellex
Esse tamen vel sic bestia magna potes:
Denique quic quid eris, nisi sit iustitia tecum,
Magna quidem dico, bestia semper eris.
The Conclusion.
A prudent man sees the plague, and hides himself; but the foolish go on
still, and are punished.

Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that hardens his heart shall
fall into evil.

The fear of the Lord leads to life, and he that is filled therewith shall
continue, and shall not be visited with evil.

A short exhortation and dialogue, showing that Christ is to all true
Christians life and joy, and that death is their advantage.
IT is good that we have sometimes griefs, sickness and adversities; for they
drive a man to behold himself, and to see that he is here but as an exile in
imprisonment and banishment, wanting heavenly light, in a world and valley of
misery, covered with darkness and shadow of death, where a man is often times
defouled with sin, encumbred with passions, disquieted with dreads, bounden
with charges, busied with vanities, blinded with errors, ouercharged with
labors, vexed with temptations, overcome with delights and pleasures of the
world and of the flesh, and grievously tormented, sometimes with sickness,
penury and need: in which world there are also diverse kinds of Devils, which
do nothing day and night, but range up and down, seeking whom they may
devour, whose continual care and only desire is to devour the souls whom
God has created, who whether we sleep or wake, eat or drink, or whatsoever
we do else, lie in wait for us night and day, by all means, by all subtilty
and craft, now openly, now covertly, aiming at us with their poisoned arrows
to destroy our souls. Behold they have laid infinite traps to take and
entangle our feet, and all our ways have they filled with snares to catch our
souls; they have laid snares in riches, snares in poverty, snares in meat,
snares in drink; in pleasures snares, in sleep snares, in watching, snares:
they have laid snares in our words, snares in our works, and snares in all our
ways; and yet such is our extreme madness, that albeit we do continually
behold these Dragons before our eyes, with open mouth, prepared to devour us;
yet nevertheless we snort and sport in our security and carelesnes, as though
we were safe before them, who desire nothing, but our destruction: Our enemies
to murder us watch always and sleep not, and we sleep and watch not for our
salvation, as one temptation goes, another comes, and the cause is, for we
have lost our innocence. It is marvel therefore that any man can be merry in
this life, if he consider well how far he is banished out of his heavenly
country, and in how great peril to perish everlastingly his soul stands:
but through lightness of heart, and negligence of our defaults we feel not,
nay we will not feel the sorrows of our own soul, but oft-times we laugh,
when we ought rather to weep, and mourn: for there is no perfect liberty, nor
true joy, but in the fear of God, and in a good conscience: never give thy
self to any manner indiscreet mirth, for no manner of thing, as nigh as thou
may have done, sorrow for thy sin, and meditate continually on thy
mortality and death, according to the counsel of Salamon in his book of
Eccles. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years approach wherein thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them, whiles the sun is not dark, nor the light, nor the moon,
nor the stars, nor the clouds return after the rain: when the keepers of
the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves and the
grinders shall cease because they are few, and they wax dark that look out
by the windows, and the doors shall be shut without, by the base sound of the
grinding, and thou shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and the daughters of
singing shall be abased: and thou shall be afraid of the high thing, and fear
shall be in the way, and the Almond tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall
be a burden, and concupiscence shall be driven away: while the silver cord
is not lengthned, nor the golden ewre broken, nor the pitcher broken at the
well, nor the wheel broken at the cisterne, and dust return to the earth, as
it was, and the spirit return unto God that gave it; For man shall go to the
house of his age, he shall lie down and be quiet, he shall sleep and be at
rest, the eye that has seen him, shall see him no more, and his eye shall
return to see no more pleasure: for as the cloud vanishes and goes away, so
he that goes down to the grave, shall come up no more, he shall return no
more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more: for he shall go
and shall not return, even to the land of darkness and shadow of death shall he
go, into a land, I say, dark as darkness it self, and into the shadow of
death, where there is no order, but the light is there as darkness, and the just
and the wicked shall sleep together in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them, they shall be brought unto the grave, and they shall remain in the heap,
the grave shall be their house, and they shall make their bed in the dark,
they shall say unto corruption, thou art our father, and to the worm, thou art
our mother, and our sister, and the slimy valley shall be sweet unto them, and
the worm shall feel their sweetness. There shall the wicked cease from their
tyranny, and they that have labored valiantly shall be at rest, there shall the
prisoners rest together, and hear no more the voice of the oppressor, there
shall be small and great, and the servant shall be free from his master, and every
man living shall draw after them, as before there were innumerable: we shall
be brought all unto death, and to the house appointed for all the living; For
in the hand of the Almighty is the soul of every living thing, and the breath
of all mankind: the days of man are determined, and the number of his
months are with him, he has appointed him as bounds, which he cannot pass,
and man knows not the hour of his death: for when his flesh is upon him, he
shall be sorrowful, and while his soul is in him it shall mourn but when death
shall come, then he sleeps, and rises not: for he shall not wake again, nor
be raised from his sleep, until the heavens be no more. For all shall go to
one place, all was of the dust, and all shall return to the dust. But though
after our skins, worms destroy this body, yet shall we see God in our flesh,
whom we our selves shall see, and our eyes shall behold and none other for us,
though our reins be consumed within us, for our redeemer lives, and he shall
stand the last on the earth, and he shall bring every work to judgment, with
every secret thought whether it be good or evil. Therefore take away grief,
anger and envy out of the heart, and cause evil to depart from thy flesh, and
think often on the saying of the Apostle, in the 9. to the Hebrews. It is
appointed unto all men that they shall all once die, and after that comes the
judgment. So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him, he shall appear the second time unto salvation; for
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things that he has done in his body, according to that he has
done in his body; according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil.
This death the^ unto which all flesh shall come, is either an entrance, or gate
to perpetual liberty and pleasure, or to perpetual prison and pain: the death
which makes entrance to everlasting pain is termed Ghostly, and the sickness
which warns of the same is also Ghostly: which Ghostly sickness and infection
proceeds of the malice of Satan, and corruption of our own wicked nature,
driving all of whom it takes hold either to error in religion, error in
life, or error in both. Of error in life, the book of Wisdom speaks,
saying, Seek not death in the error of your life, destroy not your selves
through the works of your own hands. And of error in religion it is spoken
in the 106. Psalm, and 39. verse. Thus were they steined with their own
works, and went a whooring with their own inventions. The like whereof is
affirmed in the 2. Epistle of S. John, where it is said, He that transgresses
and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God, he that continues and
abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son; which
commandment and lesson our Savior had taught before in the Gospel of S.
Matthew. the 15. chapter, and the 9. verse. And in vain do they worship me,
teaching doctrines and commandments of men: as do all the heathenish
idolaters, Jews, Infidels, Turks, Heretics and Miscrea^ts, which do worship
false gods or honor and serve the true God after a false manner, according to
the inventions and commandments of men, embracing doctrines and traditions for
the worship and service of God, more then are delivered in the holy scriptures,
the word of God, and some also contrary to the same, according as does the
Court or Church of Rome, and all the company of Catholic Papists, disciples
and followers of the Court and Church of Rome, which ghostly sickness, infectio^
of error in religion, error in life, or error in both, brings with it
everlasting death both of body and soul, if the infected truly penitent,
renouncing and detesting all his former errors, both of religion and life, be
not washed, purged, and cleansed in the precious blood of Jesus Christ the son
of God; and so through Gods merciful grace and goodness granted in his
beloved son be forgiven, and fully pardoned of the same* according as S.
Paul affirms, That without blood nothing can be made clean, and the blood of
Christ shall cleanse our conscience from all sin, It is then necessary for you
and all others that look and hope for salvation, to believe and hold
steadfastly unto your lives end, the true holy Catholic and Christian faith,
contained su^marily in the articles of our belief, according as the same has
bin of ancient time gathered and drawn out of the scriptures of the old and
new testament, the holy written word of God, and is more amply and large
declared in those holy books, with all other things taught in those books
necessary for a Christian man to instruct him fully, perfectly, and
sufficiently in the way to everlasting life.

Quest. Do you then truly and unfeignedly believe that all things pertaining to
the true worship and service of God, and for the instruction and guiding of
your soul in the right knowledge of the way to everlasting life and salvation,
are sufficiently and fully contained and taught in the holy written word of
God, of the old and new Testament, and will you heartily and unfeignedly
renounce al other faiths, worship and service of God, not being most truly
contained and taught in those holy books?

Answ. I believe and embrace that faith, worship and service of God, contained
and taught in the holy books aforsaid, as only and fully sufficient through
the grace of Gods spirit, to instruct and teach my soul in the way to
everlasting life: and I do heartily and unfeignedly renounce all faithes,
worship and service of God, more then that, or contrary to that which is most
truly and sufficiently taught and delivered in those holy books of the old
and new Testament.

Rejoice then and be of good comfort that god does give you grace to believe
and hold steadfastly the true ancient Catholic Christian faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, contained and fully taught in the holy books oforesaid.

Qu. Do you as all true believers and christians, confess according as you are
taught in gods holy word, that you have not spent the time of your life past so
holy and uprightly as you ought to have done, having in thought, word, and deed
many times and ways transgressed the most holy co^mandeme^ts of god, deserving
thereby the sentence and comdemnation, of eternal punishment and hell fire?

Answ. I confess it.

Quest. Are you truly and unfeignedly heartily sorry for it?

Answ. I am, and I beseech God by his grace to make me truly penitent of all
my offenses and trespasses.

Quest. Have you an earnest desire, and steadfast purpose through the power of
Gods grace to amend your sinful life past, and to lead a new life according to
Gods holy will and commandments, all the rest of your days, that God shall
grant you life?

Ans. I do earnestly desire it, and I beseech God who is the giver of all
goodness to direct me by his grace so to do.

Qu. Do you truly, unfeignedly and steadfastly believe that Christ the Son of
God, and savior of the world has died and shed his blood for you, and has by
his death and the shedding of his most precious blood washed and cleansed your
soul from sin, and given unto the same by his gracious imputation, perfect
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption through himself, that
your body and soul may be delivered through the merits of his death from
everlasting damnation, and obtain everlasting life?

Ans. I believe, and I beseech God of his mercy to help mine unbelief, and
to increase and strengthen this faith in me unto my lives end.

Quest. Do you steadfastly believe that there is no help, comfort nor salvation
for your soul or body, but through the precious death and passion of Jesus
Christ the son of God, who knowing no sin was made to be sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him, according as the Apostle
declares in the 5. of the 2. to the Corinths and last verse: For he made him
to be sin for us which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness
of God in him? he alone being, as the same Apostle affirms, our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

An. I do steadfastly believe it.

Q. Are you heartily glad, and thankful for this great mercy bestowed upon you?

An. I am, and I pray God give me grace so to be.

Be of good comfort then* and while your soul is in you, be thankful unto God
for this his great mercy bestowed upon you, and in the precious death and
passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ put your whole trust, commit your
self unto him, and with his precious body and blood, cover your soul, and
infold and wrap your self wholly in it, and say unto him after this manner: O
my sweet Savior, for this thy names sake be it unto me, according to this thy
name look upon me a sinful wretch calling upon thy holy name, and O savior,
be unto me a savior for thy names sake: For surely there is no man just in
the earth that does good, and sins not, neither any that can say I have
made my heart clean, I am clean from my sin. Thou only art the holy of all
holiest, and I am the filth of all sinners: but Lord if thou will, thou can
make me clean, say thou also unto my soul, I will be thou clean. Who can tell
how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins. Thou Lord have
said also in the gospel that the whole need not the Physician, but they that
are sick, and have also most graciously bidden us to come unto thee when we
feel our selves travailed and heavy laden, saying in most sweet and
comfortable words, Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy laden,
and I will refresh you. I come therefore unto thee because of thy sweet
bidding, sore travailed and laden with the burden of my sins which are so
heavy upon me, that I am not able to look up, yea they are more in number
then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me, but Lord let it be
thy pleasure to deliver me, make have O Lord to help me, for I am sore charged,
and cumbred with many evil temptations, my heart is also entangled and
oppressed with many evil passions which come of my flesh, of the world, and of
the devil, and there is none that can help me or deliver me, nor that can
make me free and safe, but only thou my Lord God, my onley savior, to whom, I
commit me. Refresh me which am so travailed, lighten me which am so burdened;
thou art the most sovereign physician, and my soul is also sore sick in
sin, heal me which come to be made whole through thee, the sicker that my
soul is, the more desire it has to be healed, and the more need has it of
thee. Turn not thy face away therefore from me, neither cast thy servant away
in displeasure, leave me not, neither forsake me O God of my salvation: for
why? in healing the deadly sickness of my soul shall well be showed and
commended the greatness of thy goodness that wilt help and heal so wretched a
creature: if thou receive me into the large bosom of thy mercy, the place will
not be the more straightened, or lessened by me. It is true Lord that I have
sinned, and in the whole course of my life have multiplied many offenses, and
no repentance or punishment of my self may suffice to satisfy thy justice.
But I humbly beseech thee to forgive me O Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not
with my transgressions, be not angry with me for ever by reserving evil for
me, neither condemn me into the everlasting damnation of hell darkness, and
pains prepared for the Devil and his angels, for thou art the God, even the
God of them that repent, and in me thou will show all thy goodness, for sure it
is that thy mercies are endlesly more then mine offenses, and though my
transgressions are infinite, yet more infinite are thy mercies. Therefore if
thou shall enter into judgment with me thy poor and unworthy servant, I will
lay before thee the rich righteousness of thy beloved son Jesus Christ my
savior, which he has purchased and given unto me by his precious death: I
will lay his righteousness given unto me between my soul and thy judgment,
otherwise Lord I may not, nay I dare not contend with thee, for thine angry
threatenings toward sinners are importable, but thy merciful promises are
unmeasurable and unsearchable, for thou art the most high Lord of great
compassion, long suffering, and most merciful. Thou Lord according to thy
great goodness have promised repentance, and forgiveness to them that sin
against thee, and for thine infinite mercies have appointed repentance unto
sinners that they may be saved; I therefore a most wretched sinner bewail my
manifold sins, and earnestly repent me of my former wickedness and ungodly
behavior toward thee, and all my christian brothers and sisters gone before
me, or remaining still in this present world, for I have sinned against heaven
and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy son; and though
for mine unworthiness I am not able of my self to purchase thy pardon having
been thy prodigal and wastful child which have wasted all the substance of my
life in sin, and am fallen to great wretchedness, yet I beseech thee blessed
Lord to look upon me with the eyes of thy pity, and receive me in the
reioicings of peace, and grant me the blessings of forgiveness, and do away the
wickedness that I have done, that I may appear clean unto thee, as thou
made me, and receive me again into favor; and if thou answer unto my
Soul, thou have deserved damnation, Lord I confess that I have sinned above
the number of the sand of the sea, and my transgressions are exceeding many. I
did not thy will, neither kept I thy commandments, and ^ am not worthy to
behold and see the height of the heavens for the multitude of mine
unrighteousness, but I lay before thee between mine evil deserts, and thine
unsearchable and terrible judgment, the death and sufferings of my savior and
redeemer, which has given his most precious body to be broken, and his blessed
blood to be shed as a just recompense for all mine offenses, in whom only thou
art pleased, and through whom thou can not be offended with me: receive O
Lord, the merits of his precious death and passion, for those merits which I
ought to have had, and alas have not; and now Lord I say again, I put the most
clear shining and glorious body of thy beloved Son my Lord and savior
between me and thy wrath, between my sinful soul and thy fearful and
terrible judgments, and in the triumphant and victorious merits of his most
precious death and passion, I commend my soul LORD into thine hands, for in
that, that I live now in the flesh, I live by the faith in the son of God,
who has loved me, and given himself for me, through whom, and for whose sake
I am assured that thou will save me that am unworthy, according to thy great
mercy. Therefore will I praise thee for ever all the days of my life, for all
the powers of the heavens praise thee, and thine is the glory for ever and
ever, Amen.

Finis.

