THE PRACTICE, PROCEEDINGS, AND Laws of arms, described out of the doings of
most valiant and expert Captains, and confirmed both by ancient, and modern
examples, and praecedents,

BY MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

Luke 14.31. (...)?

What king going to make war with a foreign prince, sits not down first,
and takes counsel, whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that
comes against him with twenty thousand?

Cicer. offic. lib. 1. In rep. maxim conservanda sunt iura belli. Ibidem. Sunt
qui quod sentiunt, etsi optimum sit, tamen inuidiae metu non audent dicere.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1593

The excellency of military prowess.
REi militaris virtus praestat ceteris omnibus; haec nomen populo Romano, haec
huic vrbi aeternam gloriam peperit; haec orbem terrarum parere huic imperio
coegit. Omnes vrbanae res, omnia haec nostra praeclara studia, and haec
forensis laus, and industria latent in tutela, and praesidio bellicae virtutis.
Cic. pro Murena. The necessity, and use of arms.
Magna imperia armis non ignauia tenentur. Tacit. Annal. 15. (...). Pericles.
Thucid. 1. Without wars we cannot escape the malice of our enemies: and the
more willing and ready we are to begin, the less courage will our enemies
have to assail us, says Pericles. Inermes prouinciae cuicunque seruitio
expositae, atque in pretium belli cessurae erant. Tacit. Annal. 17. Such
countries as are disarmed are exposed to bondage, and given as a spoil into
the hands of the Conqueror. (...). Xenophon. exped. Cyr. 3. They that by skill
and practice of arms overcome their enemies, not only assure their own
estate, but also purchase that which the vanquished possess. Vae victis, said
Brennus to the vanquished Romans that went about to redeem themselves with
money, for all calamities accompany those that are overcome. Plutarch. in
Camillo. Omnia Liu. 5. What account is to be made of valiant captains and
soldiers.
virorum fortium sunt. All things yield to valiant men. Si omnes qui reip.
consulunt, cari nobis esse debent: certe inprimis imperatores, quorum
consilijs, virtute, periculis, retinemus and nostram salutem, and imperij
dignitatem. Cic. de orat. lib. 2. If all those that care and have the charge of
the common wealth ought to be dear unto us: then especially ought our noble
Captains, by whose counsel, prowess and peril, we maintain the estate and
honor of our country. Salus publica in militibus. Lamprid. in vit. Alexand.
Sever. The safety of the state is committed to the hands of Soldiers. Against
such as for hope and desire of present peace, bring upon the state a dangerous
war.
Si Barbarorum est in diem viuere: nostra consilia sempiternum tempus spectare
debent. Cic. de orat. lib. 2. If barbarous nations only respect the time
present, it behooves us in our counsels to foresee, that by delays we incurie
no danger in time to come. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF ESSEX.
ALthough (my good Lord) discourses of arms in this time of peace and
security may seem unseasonable to some kind of men, that mislike nothing
more, then to have their ears grated with the sound of drums, and rumors of
wars: yet to such as foresee those storms that hang over our heads, and see
that there is no other sheltre, but in the practice of arms: I doubt not, but
they will be both pleasant and acceptable. The beginning of all good success,
is good counsel and direction: the accomplishment is expedition. in counsel
nothing avails more, then to follow good examples of expert and wise men. If
then we would either reform the disorders of our proceedings in wars, or
settle the discipline of arms among our soldiers which is slenderly known,
or practiced by them; what course is better then to view, consider, and
follow the doings of most famous warriors both of former, and late times?
this argument therefore I have chosen as most worthy my labor, and most
necessary, and profitable for this state; and as I could have finished the
same.

We hear of our enemies preparatiues against us, and know their pride and
malice, nay we have seen and felt their attempts. admit the wars are not at
our doors, yet we may easily perceive, that they are very near us: and how
near we know not. why then do we not awake? nay why do we not provide and
arm, seeing the Spaniard by sending over such swarms of traiterous and
seditious priests and Jesuits among us, has given us such cause of an
alarm? already he is come into Britain, that confronteth all the western
coaste of England: and shall we doubt whether he means to come nearer us? and
not doubting, why are we so slow in taking arms?

What provision is to be made, and how it is to be employed, how wars may be
for causes enterprised, and how with honor and good success prosecuted and
achieved, so that neither the enemy shall have cause to rejoice or hope, nor
we cause to lament or fear: finally how we may reform disorders, and avoid
future dangers, of compassion of my loving countrymen, and fellows, whereof
some still follow the wars, and mere love to my dear country, and no
respect of gain or glory (God is my witness) I have in this discourse ensuing
done my best endeavor to declare: and I trust not altogether out of season. for
if we have wars, what more convenient, then to reason and talk of wars?
and if we are in expectation of wars, yet do I not see what reason we have to
keep silence in such doubt and expectation of wars. but were it, that
neither we had wars with the Spaniard, nor others, nor stood in doubt of
their attemptes or forces: yet can we not continue many years without wars.
Great Nulla magna ciuitas diu quiescere potest. si foris hostem non habet, domi
inuenit: says Annibal Liu. 30.
countries and states cannot rest. if they have no enemies abroad, yet restles
heads seek work at home. therefore can no time be thought unseasonable, for
to discourse of these matters. if we enjoyed peace, yet can we not assure us of
it without arms: if we doubt our enemies practices, there is no safer course
then to arm. He qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum. Veget. lib. 3. cap. 1.
that desires peace, he must prepare for wars. and long longa belli
praeparatio celerem facit victoriam. Publius.
preparatiues of war made in time of peace, give speedy victory in time of
wars. men do not easily provoke or attempt wars againct a Nemo bello
l^cessere, aut face^^ audet iniuriam regnovel populo, quem expedicu^, (...)
promptum ad resistendum, vindicandumque agnos. cit. Cassiod. va^. 3.
nation or country, that is ready to resist, and provided to prosecute
injuries. contrariwise the peaceable and inconsideratiue are a spoil, and
pray to their neighbors. The careless and peaceable people of Judges 18.
Laish were easily oppressed by the children of Dan. so seely fowls are a
pray unto the egles and ravening birds. suppose we should yield unto over
enemies any thing, which in reason they can desire: yet is that no means for
us to obtain peace. for those that veterem s^rendo iniuriam inuitas noua^.
Lin. l^b.
endure one injury, do but give courage unto their enemies to offer an other.
and oftentimes the hosts sibi aliquid dedi postulant, vt illud sit ad reliqua
agenda gradus. Tacit. annal.
enemy desires somewhat to be yelden to him, that the same may be a step to
further matters. the bitch that desired of the shepherd (as it is in the
apologue) a couch where to litter; when her whelps were grown great, began
not only to defend that place as her own, but also to encroche more, and to
offer diverse injuries unto the shepherd. the best therefore is to resist
betime, and though we do not resist, yet it is wisdom to be provided: for no
time ought to be spent of wise governors in delights of peace, before that
matters be settled for the execution of wars. It was one of the greatest
commendations that Liuy gives to Philopoemen, that riding by the way, Liui. 35.
and in common talk, his most common argument was upon matters of war: which
made him so skillful in those matters. much more therefore ought we to consult
and provide for wars, being heretofore openly defied and invaded, and now very
hardly threatened by the Spaniard. his navy came in hostile manner upon our
coast; his commissions given to his captains declare, that he holds us for
enemies: his subjects have exercised diverse acts of hostility in taking our
goods, imprisoning, and ransomming our persons. neither does any Spaniard
think, but that such, as are by the Popes bull excommunicat for heretics, are
open enemies, and may be invaded without other defiance. And if we did not
likewise account the Spaniards to be our enemies, why have we sent our
ships to spoil their country? why have we taken their persons and their
goods? why do we assiste the enemies of Spain, and withstand the Kings
proceedings wherein we may?

That wars are not proclaimed, it skilleth not. For wars (says Bellum aut
indicitur, aut geritur. Cic. offic. 1.
Tullie) are either proclaimed, or made without proclamation. Neither can it
pass for payment, that some distinguish assistance from confederacy, and
color all our doings at sea under the name of reprisals. if the king of Spain
shall ever be able to requite us, he will well let us understand, how little
our distinctions will help us, and will use us as enemies.

Perdicca King of Thucid. 2.
Macedonia, although associate with the Athenians, yet for that under hand he
aided their enemies, bought it dear, as soon as his doubling came to be
espied. neither do I think, that we shall escape better cheap, if (which
God forbid) the Spaniard should at any time be judge. Wherefore seeing there
is no other way to escape his malice, but by force and arms, let us consider
what course is best for the enterprising, and prosecuting of wars. which
being held of the Romans at the first by Disciplina militaris, iam inde ab
initiis vrbis tradita per manus, in artis perpetuis praeceptis ordinatae modum
venerat. Liu. lib. 9.
custom, at length grew to Art, and was administered by certain precepts: by
which they grew victorious not only over their neighbors, but also over the
greatest part of the world. by observance whereof diverse ancient, and later
Captains have won to themselves perpetual fame; and which if it might be
recalled, would now also work the same effects.

Some percase will mislike this treatise, as all other of like argument, for
that they suppose, that skill in arms is rather to be learned by practice,
then rule; and that all such discourses, are vain conceits and supposalles,
of men more able to speak, then perform. and true it is, that as in all other
things: so in this especially, speculation is nothing worth without practice.
among the Romans, the Iuuentus in castris per laborem vsu militia^^. discebat.
Salust. coniur. Catil.
youth did learn the Art of war by practice, and labor in the field. but
what notorious folly is it to condemn Art and reason, because practice does
many things often times without reason, or Art? and what man that likes the
effects, can justly condemn the causes? now then seeing as practice depends
upon certain reasons, and rules, and is often uncertain, by reason that the
same has not the same grounds at all times: let no man condemn rules and the
reasons of warrelike proceedings in respect of his own experience, and
knowledge. for although a man should be trained up in wars from his
infancy; yet can he not know all the reasons of war by his own experience.

Wherefore admit a man's experience be never so great, yet shall he learn
much by reading of Military discourses, more then ever his own experience
could teach him. therefore did Scipio, and Caesar, and other famous captains
spend much time in reading of ancient deeds of Arms. and Tully reports of
Cum totum iter and nauigationem consumpsisset partim in percunctando a peritis,
partim in rebus gestis legendis, in Asiam factus imperator venit, cum esse^
Roma profectus rei militaris rudis. Cic. Academ. 4.
Lucullus, that albeit his practice in Arms was not great, yet by reading and
questioning with those that had skill, he grew in short time to be most
skillful. if Xenophon had not learned more by reading then practice, he could
never have performed so many duties of an excellent Captain, as he showed in
leading of the Greeks so long a journey, and delivering them from so many
assaults of their adversaries, in their return from their voyage with Cyrus.

a Alphonsus a king of Spain confessed, de reb. Alph.
that by books he learned both the practice, and laws of arms. Yea Selim the
barbarous Emperor of Turks (as their histories witness) was much conversant,
and skillful in Caesar's commentaries translated into Arabicke; and read
diligently the histories containing the famous deeds of his ancestors. he
must be very arrogant that would say, that the reading of Frontinus, Vegetius,
Liuy, Caesar, Xenophon, and other ancient histories and discourses of deeds of
arms, both of Greeks and Romans could profit nothing, nor add any thing to
his own experience. and mere folly it is, where men may have rules to
follow, there to rush in at all adventures. La Noue his discourses are much
esteemed of men well experimented in arms. but double commendation had he
deserved, if as he has set down certain points of his knowledge, so he had
delivered all the orders and proceedings of wars, and confirmed the same with
examples of famous captains and reasons of art, rather then with such (...)
examples, as he uses.

Neither is it reason, that the labors of all should be measured by the
presumption of some, which write of matters, of which they never had
experience, as Nicholas Machiauell, and Robert Valturius a certain Italian
pedant, which never had seen the field; and some others, which spend whole
books in talking of the diverse forms of battles, some like stars, some like
sheares, some like sawes, and some like winde-mill sails, which never have use
but in mosters; and leave the most necessary points of war, in preparing for
the wars, choice of soldiers, marching, encamping, fighting, retiring,
besieging, or defending of towns, ambuscades, stratagemes, and such like
necessary factions of arms. Wherefore, seeing I neither commend speculation,
without practice; nor tread in the steps of others, but therein make supply
where they are defective; I trust my labors shall have favorable reading. the
rather for that they are not gathered by vain speculation, but proceed from
him, that has had but too much experience in the disorderly wars of our
time: and has no other respect, then the redress of disorders, and the honor
of his country.

It may be these rules should have had more weight, if they had proceeded from
some great commander, or man of authority. for of all men they deserve most
credit that are both writers, and doers themselves. in which respect I do
above all honor Caesar among the Romans, and Xenophon among the Greeks; and
of late writers Francis Guicciardin, a man employed in great matters. as for
Iouius, and Sabellicus, and some others, that I will not name, for that they
were al ignorant of matters of war, they make many very improbable and
ridiculous reports, which no man of judgment could allow. but what if men of
authority have not, or will not, or percase for their manifold distractions,
and business cannot: will not those that know not things themselves hear the
same reported by others? great wise men in time past have not disdained to
follow the advice of simple men. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
Marius by the advertisement of a common soldier wanne a strong castle in
Numidia. (...). Xenoph. exp. Cyr. 4.
Xenophon did not except the time of his refection, or when he took his rest,
but admitted every man, that could give him any important intelligence, to his
speech. Charles the last Duke of Burgundy refusing to hear a prisoner that
craved audience, Phil. Comin. lib. 7.
fell into the traps of Campobacho his treason; and doing all things upon his
own head, without admitting any relation, or council of others, was defeated
by the Switzers, and by them miserably slain at Nancy. And if the chambers of
some great commanders in our time had not been so straightly kept; they could
not have been so ignorant of the state of the enemy and of their own forces,
and all addresses of wars, as they were. wherefore seeing I do neither
speak by speculation or hearsay, nor rest upon mine own opinion, nor desire
any thing of mine to be believed, further then the same is confirmed by the
example of those, against whom no exception can justly be taken; I trust that
these either rules or aduertisements of mine, shall not lightly be regarded.

But (may some reply) what do the examples of the ancient Romans, and Greeks,
and their proceedings in wars concern us, whose practice, and style in wars is
so far different? these men imagine by reason of the use of artillery lately
invented, that the reasons and rules of arms are changed, and that the Romans
if they lived in our times, would be new to seek. but they are much abused.
for the general rules are always the same. there is, and always has been
but one order of providing, proceeding, marching, fighting, retiring,
encamping, besieging and defending of places. and I do not think but if any
could recall, or would practice the reasons, and rules which the ancient
Romans used, he should greatly prevail. if there be any special difference,
the same shall be noted in his proper place. if then the ancient agitatu^ in
concilio est, ut si qua^do seuero imperio vllum bellum administratu^ esset:
tunc vti disciplina militaris ad priscos redigeretur mores. Liui. 8.
Romans thought it their best course in their most dangerous wars, to
return to their old discipline of arms; and if Flor. 58.
Scipio could not overcome the Numantins; nor Salust. bell. Iug.
Metellus Iugurtha; nor Tacit.
Corbulo the Parthians, before they had settled their government according to
the ancient practice of arms: let us not disdain to follow the examples of
such great captains, and wise men in reforming of present errors, and
disorders according to the true and loyal practice of arms.

Hard, I know, it will be to return back. for customs inueterate are not
easily rooted out; and desire of money has corrupted many men's minds. without
pay and provision the soldier is starued, the war is slacked, and what hope
have soldiers either of better provision, or pay? without these things how can
the soldier march, fight, or keep other orders of war? who will adventure,
without praise, or reward? who will serve his country when he sees in most
countries those adua^ced soonest, that spoil their country most to enrich
themselves? for this cause some unworthy the name of Captains make gain of
their places, and soldiers refuse all extraordinary labor, and valiant
captains and soldiers are slenderly considered, and laws of arms lie silent,
for that there is none to execute them, and few that know them. for this cause
and such like, I had almost been discouraged from writing this discourse, and
among others, that keep themselves for better times, and live an obscure life
determined to settle my self. for what hope could I have of better, seeing in
all places all things bend to worse? many seek to enjoy the pleasures of
peace. none makes any provision for war, soldiers neglect discipline of
arms, no reckoning is made in any place of brave soldiers, captains are
employed only for necessity, rewards come slowly, and only those are esteemed
that have money.

The only hope that susteineth me, and has thus far in these my endeavors
auanced me, is grounded upon that expectation, which all this nation has of
your heroical actions. God has placed your Lordship as it were on a high stage
in this estate. never man had greater favor of the beholders, nor was more
likely to obtain a singular applause of the people. all men's eyes are fixed
upon you, to see what effects will follow those virtues, and noble parts, the
which already have made your name honorable. as others choose ease, so your
Lordship has followed the wearisome travails of wars. by your own
experience in the service of the Low Countries, of Portugal, and France, you
both understand the practice of arms, and the wants of the soldiers. the
general hope of al soldiers, nay of all that love their country is, that your
Lordship which so well understands the common disorders of the wars, and the
great importance of them, and has so great favor and means by reason of your
authority to correct them; will one day be a mean to see them in some part
redressed. all those parts which are required of a sufficient general, do
seem to flourish, and show forth themselves in your doings, and promise these
things in your behalf.

Through disorder of some, and ignorance in others, to speak nothing of
pinching and false reckonings, hitherto her Majesty has not been resolved to
bring into the field a sufficient army: and those small forces, if I may so
call such small troops, that have been employed in diverse services, have wanted
much of their necessary provisions: not that the charge is so great that it
could not be borne, nor for that her care was less then is convenient. (for if
the same order were abroad that is at home, why may not this country maintain
thirty or forty thousand abroad, that mainteineth so many millions at home?
men do not spend more, nor eat more abroad, then at home:) but the reason why
a sufficient army is hardly maintained, is because there wants good
directions, and orders, and punishment of bad dealing. some impute the fault to
griedy men's insatiable covetousness, which like a goulfe will never be filled:
but that is not all, nor the greatest disorder. others think it impossible for
this Realm to bear the infinite charge of an army. but why should not this
whole kingdom be able to maintain 30. thousand in pay, when as the city of
Rome, the territory being not past ten miles in breadth, in that war which
the same had with the Liui. lib. 8. and 9.
Latins sent forth ten legions which being full at that time, amounted to
40000. foot beside horsemen? but what should I speak of Rome the mistres of
the world for warlike discipline, when as the Cities of Athens, and Sparta, nay
the towns of Thebes, Corinth, Argos, and diverse other in Greece, and Italy,
maintained great armies, both at home and abroad upon their own charges? who
sees not then, that the cause of these calamities and disorders is want of
military knowledge, and not want of means; and that as disorder, want of
reward, and punishment is cause, that our enterprises are so easily dissolved,
and vanish of themselves; so order and government in ancient times were causes
of their happy success, and would also make our affairs succeed the better?
I need not seek far to find examples for proof of this matter: seeing the
good government of Edward the first, that so long warred in Scotland, of Edward
the third, and Henry the fifth, and eight, that were so victorious in France,
aforde us such store. if then the griedines of some were restreined with sharp
punishment, and men of heroical spirits, not tainted with the base desire of
gain, were allured with honor, and preferment to take upon them the charge of
matters; if such were chosen for commanders, as have nothing before their eyes,
but honor and the enlargement of the commonwealth; and all men were resolved to
bestow more in iron and steel, then in silks and veluets and golden coats:
and most things were governed by law and order of war, and not by favor and
partiality, or (which is worse) by money; in sum, if true and ancient
discipline of arms were either restored, or settled among soldiers; I would
not doubt but that this Country would be able not only to maintain a
sufficient strength of men, but that we should also recover the ancient glory
of the English nation spread far abroad in France, Spain, and other
countries in time past, and now blemished only with some men's misgouernment.

Wherefore seeing it has pleased God, not only to make your Lordship
acquainted, but also partaker of the common calamities of soldiers, and given
you favor and access to her Majesty in whom it lies to reform these
abuses; as you have hitherto employed your person and goods in the service of
her, and your country, so I beseech you cease not, until such time, as you
have accomplished the redress of these disorders. these are they that without
any one stroke of the enemy, have broken our enterprises. it is not the
courage of the Spaniard, nor force of the Dutch, nor bravery of the French,
that has frustrated our late attemptes; neither does force so often overthrow
armies in field, as daliance, irresolution, and delay; then through
niggardise, and good husbandry, want of pay, and necessary furniture; thirdly,
presumption, and want of strength and sufficient force; and lastly, those
abuses which through want have crept into armies of late time, and for pity
could not be corrected. for what conscience is it to punish those that spoil
and wander abroad, when if they should not thus do, they should sterue for
hunger? if a General have sufficient force and provision, it is his fault, if
he do nothing: if he want either force, or pay, then it is their fault that
should have sent him forth better provided. many do great wrong to our
Generals in the Portugal expedition, when they impute the fault to them. God
knows that with such slender provision, nothing could be done more. others
that are more deeply to be charged for breaking that enterprise, yea and
famishing of many poor souls lie hid, and I think mean not to answer,
until such time as God shall call them before his tribunal seat, there to
answer once for all.

If any means could be devised, that abuses of imprests, and false musters
and accounts taken away, loyal captains might be chosen, and poor soldiers
be well furnished, and that matters might proceed with speed, and resolution,
and more force be joined together: I would then hope, there would be some
service done. without forces convenient, what reason has any to hope for
better? for as a little water sprinkled on the fire does make the same more to
flame, and sparkle; so small supplies do rather kindle, and nourish wars,
then end them, or exstinguish them. The only means to redress both these,
and all other disorders consists in the restoring, and by sharp punishment
mainteining of true military discipline, and orders. Without this, as a
discrazied body is easily dissolved without outward force; so an army though
never so great, without one blow of the enemy is broken, and scattered without
doing any effect. With exercise of arms and observance of true discipline of
war great enterprises most happily are achieved.

The Romani sibi orbem subegerunt armorum exercitatione, disciplina castrorum,
vsuque militiae. Veget. de re mil.
Romans did subdue the world by the exercise of arms, and their orders of
encamping, and practice of war. Neither did they excel the Quintilian, in
milit. Mar.
Germans and Danes in multitude; nor the Carthaginians, nor kings of Macedonia
and Asia in wealth, but in strict observance of the discipline of arms. Nor
could the Spaniards have done such things as they have of late, but that they
excel others in the observance of military discipline. Neither were it
possible that the Turks should have prevailed so much against Christians; but
that they reward virtue highly, and punish disorders severely, and keep a
strict order in the government of their camp, and army. If then we either
desire, or will hope for good success in martial affairs, nay if we mean
to maintain our state, and our reputation; of force we must observe military
and martial orders: Which if once by your Lordships means, I might see
restored, which I do hope; then would I not fear either the malice, or power,
or riches of the Spaniard, or other foreign enemy of this state. This
therefore is the thing which especially I commend to your care: which indeed
is the cause of the whole country, and ought to be the care of all that love
the honor, peace, and prosperity of the same.

For confirmation of your Lordships judgment, that well knows more then I
can say, and for direction to such as be ignorant: I have, as near as I could,
described the right course and true discipline of arms confirmed by ancient
and later precedents of most expert warriors: and because it so pleased your
Lordship, published the same: I have likewise set down not only the
proceedings, but also the causes and necessary provisions of wars, without
which all order is vain, and all proceeding without effect. The same I have
consecrated to my countries honor under the favor of your honorable name.
Vouchsafe therefore (my good Lord) to accept this my simple goodwil, not worthy
the name of a gift. Yet is it all which I have won not only by long
observation, but also by dangerous experience both in France, Italy, Flanders,
and Portugal. It grieved me not a little being in her Majesty's service, to see
such confusion among us, but much more that our wants were such, that we could
not execute laws. The causes I have declared before. The redress I have set
down in the discourse following after. The which, for that your L. seemed to
like the same, and for that I do think it may be profitable to my
countriemen, and fellows in arms that still continue that profession; I
thought it good under the shadow of your honorable favor to communicate to
others.

Partly delays and presumption, and partly disorder and misgouernment, and
partly want of necessary provisions does more hurt oftentimes, then the enemies
open force. Of all disorders the only remedy and medicine is, as I have
said, true discipline of arms, which I have here to my uttermost skill and
endeavor declared, and with diverse examples of most renowned Captains
confirmed. against whose doings many may percase repugne, but none can take
just exceptions.

I would once I might see the same put in execution under your Lordships
governance: (for what avails knowledge of law without execution and
practice?) if not, yet shall I wish all honor and good to those that shall
endeavor to put orders in execution. If any good come of my labors, the same
is wholly to be ascribed to your Lordship, whose singular favor toward me
both at home and abroad, gave me first occasion, leisure, and means to write
these discourses; if none, yet I trust indifferent men will accept my good
meaning. My purpose was, if my experience, having now almost ceased from all
such wearisome travails, could do others good, to afford them all the help
I could, and also to give my country aduertisements, concerning such matters
as are very important, and requisite to be generally known: that order may be
taken in time.

The success I commit to God, the care to your Lordship, and others whom it
concerns: beseeching the Almighty, that is Lord of armies, and govern our of
all our actions, so to direct the affairs of state under the governance of our
gracious Sovereign, and to give that favor to your endeavors, that the glory
of the English nation by your noble deeds may be increased, the blemishes of
our proceedings in wars washed away, and all good orders restored.

Your Lordships most bounden and willing Matthew. Sutcliffe.

To the Reader.
MAny do wonder, some complain, and those that have least interest, if so be
they have any love to their Country, they cannot choose but lament, that in
those warlike actions which of late years have been attempted publicly, the
success has been so slender, the loss of men so great, the charge so
burdensome, and the proceedings and effects so contrary to antiquity: and as
natural affection leads them, I doubt not, but many are inquisitiue and
desirous to know the causes. And to say truth, good it were that the true
causes of disorders were publicly known, that not only those that are
wrongfully charged may be cleared, but that those that laugh in others griefs,
and rise out of the common ruins might be known, and rewarded: at least that
the causes of former disorders may be removed, and that such provision and
order as has been hitherto wanting, may in time to come, and in time also be
better supplied. For this cause I have framed this discourse. Wherein when thou
shall see what is required in the orderly proceeding and managing of wars;
thou may easily see what we wanted, and (I fear me) shall want, unless it
please God to touch men's hearts with a more zealous care of their countries
honor hereafter. I do not mean any one special man more then others, God is
my witness. What soever he is that by delays, irresolution, niggardise,
rapine, cowardice, treachery, and other villeny abuses his prince, and country:
let him not think that I aim particularly at his person; but at delays,
irresolution, niggardise, rapine, briberie, cowardice, treachery, want of skill,
and such other abuses. I have no meaning to touch any thing that may sound to
any man's hurt or disgrace. And therefore although I have store of domestical
examples, yet have I chosen rather to exemplify abuses by foreign histories.
My purpose is to do good to all without hurt to any particulars, unless
percase those that live upon pillage, do account the common good to be their
private hurt, when the means of their gain shall be taken from them. If then
thou desire to see the causes of former losses, or else wishest to know how
breaches of former time may be repaired; behold but this treatise, wherein as
thou shall see the good success of all those that proceeded orderly, and like
men of war: so thou may also see, that those that have neglected
discipline of arms, and warlike proceeding, have had events and success
according to their deserving.

Now to the intent thou may the better both address thy affairs, if thou
have any charge in wars, and understand the proceeding and continuance of
wars, and warlike actions; I have followed in this discourse the order of
time, setting down those things first, which are first to be considered,
provided, and executed; and so prosecuting every action of war severally by
it self. Those that have done otherwise, I see they have trifled away many
words without any small profit. They talk of ranks and arayes at large,
others of building of fortresses: (that belonging to a good Serieant properly,
this to a good mason.) But how soldiers shall be provided, and how they shall
proceed, and how soldiers and fortresses are to be governed, they scarce
mention; sure few of them know, or can declare. Besides these they omit many
other necessary points of war, wherein the safety of an army, and a state
consists. Wherefore omitting, or slenderly handling those slight points; I
have chosen other matters more important to dilate, beginning first with the
causes of wars: then with the provision, that is made before wars be
attemted. For although soldiers are the principal actors in these tragical
matters: yet before we draw an army into the field, or make levy of
soldiers, many things are to be considered, and provided. First we are to
consider, that our cause be good, and just. For wars without cause are
nothing, but robbery and violence contrary to humanity, and reason: secondly
all things necessary for the wars are to be provided: the^ are soldiers to
be levied, and exercised, and so brought into the field to prosecute all other
necessary faits of arms.

1 First therefore I will (God willing) declare, what causes make wars just,
or unjust, and what are the effects of lawful wars, and therein also what
solemnities, or circumstances are to be considered in defiance of our enemies,
or first attempts of war.

2 Secondly, what provision is to be made of treasure, arms, munition,
victuals, ships by sea, and carriages and tents by land.

3 Thirdly, that we are to strengthen our selves with the help of
confederates, and associates, so much as we can, and to draw what friends, or
strength we can from the enemy, both before we attempt wars, and after.

4 Fourthly, what parts, and qualities are required in a General, and what
counsel he is to adioyne to himself, and whether it is better to give
sovereign authority in wars to one alone, or to more: likewise what
authority and commission the General ought to have: further what is to be
respected in the choice of Colonels, of Captains of companies, and other
officers of the army: and what in the choice of common soldiers: what oath
they are to take, and how much the soldiers of our own nation, are to be
preferred before strangers: what inconveniences ensue of want of pay: what
numbers of soldiers are required in wars, and finally, how soldiers are to
be exercised, that they may be made ready for the wars.

5 Fifthly, what things are to be considered of those that are to transport an
army by sea, or by land into an other country: and whether it is better for
the English nation to invade the Spaniard, or any other foreign enemy in his
own country, then to receive his assault at home, or to stay until he come on
our coast, or within our country: and lastly what cautions soldiers sent
abroad in succor and aid of other nations are to use.

6 Sixthly, what order and array an army is to observe in marching, and how the
same may march safely in the enemies country, surmounting all difficulties,
whereby either in champion, or woody countries, or else in the passage of
rivers, or hills, and straites it may be disordred, stopped, or hindered.

7 And for that we are not only to offend, but also sometimes to defend, we
are also to show what oppositions, and trauerses the defendants are to make,
thereby to stop the progression, and march of the enemy: and how to send
our men safely forth on forraging, and how to stop, and cut off the enemies
forragers.

8 For that often times, time is vainly spent in deliberations, daliances and
delays, to the impouerishing of many states, and overthrow of many good
actions; we will show by many proofs, that nothing is more aduantageous then
expedition, and celerity in preparing, marching, executing, fighting, and all
enterprises of war; nor any thing more hurtful or dangerous, then delays.

9 What orders are to be observed, in the fortifying, defending and governing
of our camp and lodging, that we be not either charged a l'improuista, or
easily forced to fight.

10 We will also show, that as the assaylants in the enemies country are to
seek that the matter may be soon tried by battle: so the defendants without
great advantage are to avoid it: and further by what means the enemy may be
brought to fight, and how those that fear to fight, may avoid the encounter
with least loss.

11 Before the General does bring forth his army into the field, many
things are to be considered, all which shall be declared in the eleventh Chapter.

12 In the twelfth we are to discourse of the array, and charge of an army
encountering the enemy in open field: and therein of the use of horsemen, of
pikes, halberds, targets, small shot, archerie, and great ordonance.

13 In the thirteenth shall follow a brief treatise of stratagemes, ambushes,
and whatsoever devises serve for the more ready atchieuing of our purpose.

14 After the victory once obtained, and the enemy vanquished, in the next
Chapter we are to show, how the victory is to be used, and the conquest may
best be maintained.

15 And because the hazard of war is doubtful, in the fifteenth Chapter we
purpose to declare, by what means an army that is foiled, or fears to fight,
may most safely, or with least danger, or loss retire, and how the enemy in
following the course of his victory may be stopped.

16 The sixteenth Chapter shall contain precepts, and orders for the
government of a camp that besieges a city or fort, and what course is best in
besieging, battering, assaulting, or entering the same.

17 For the behoof of the defendants, the 17. shall declare what proceeding is
best in the defense and government of a town or place assailed, besieged,
battered, assaulted, or demyforced.

18 And for that sea towns are not easily defended, nor besieged without a
navy at sea; in the next place follows a discourse concerning the use of
ships of war, and how they are to be provided, ranged, and managed in
sea-fightes.

19 Next unto the execution of wars follows the treaty of peace, truce, and
confederacies, of which we are in the 19. Chapter to entreat, and also of the
assurance of articles of peace, truce, and confederacy, and likewise of the
privileges of ambassadors, and messengers by which such matters are treated
and brought to pass.

20 After wars ensue rewards of such, as have behaved themselves valiantly
in the service of their country: and therefore in the 20. Chapter we are to
entreat of the rewards of valiant soldiers, and punishment of cowards and
disorderly persons.

21 In the last Chapter, for that our soldiers are for the most part raw and
ignorant, and would have things expressed and taught them plainly, I have
gathered together certain military orders, some concerning religion and
manners; others concerning and especially tending to the common safety of the
state, army, or garrison, or else concerning the special duties of captains
or common soldiers; others respecting the camp, or town of garrison; others
specially belonging to sea causes, and adventures at sea; others to the
Officers of the army, or fleet; others concerning booties, spoils, and
prisoners; and some concerning the execution of laws and administration of
justice. out of which I would have so many as are fitting for the service in
hand to be chosen out, and put in writing, and proclaimed openly and delivered
unto every captain or colonel, that every man may understand some part of his
duty, and what punishment is due for his offenses.

These things I have for thy sake not without great labor brought together,
and laid forth in this form which I have declared. Read them therefore with
indifferency, and weigh them with judgment, and say not this can not be so,
for I never saw it. the authority is drawn from those which have seen more
then thy self; and stands upon better reason, then without experience thou
can imagine. if thou allowest and likest my reasons, follow them, and use
them: if not, yet proceed not against reason. my only desire was to profit my
country, and to content and profit thee* other boon or reward I crave none,
but that I do not receive at thy hands disgrace, for my diligence; nor
reproof or scorn for my good will. which because common humanity forbids
me to fear, I will bid thee a dieu, and begin to address me to my purpose.

The right practice, proceedings, and laws of Arms.
CHAP. I. What causes make wars just or unjust, and what are the effects of
lawful wars, and what solemnities or circumstances are to be considered in
defiance of our enemies, and first attempts of wars.
IT is needelesse (as I suppose) to dispute, whether it be lawful, either for
Christian Princes to make wars, or for christians to serve in wars. Those
that think it unlawful, as men deuoyd of judgment in religion and state, are
declared long since to be both heretical, and phrenetical persons. The
lawfulnes there of is apparent, for that most godly and religious princes, as
Iosuah, David, Iehosaphat, Judas Macabeus were great warriers, and their wars
so allowed, that the spirit of God calls them the wars, or battles of the
Lord, neither was the same altered by Christ's coming, as the Anabaptists
dream. The holy Romans 13.
Apostle shows, that the Magistrate carries not the sword in vain. But he
should carry it in vain, if he might not as lawfully repel public force, as
he may punish therewith private wrongs. John Baptist when the soldiers came
unto him, he exhorted them not to give over their manner of living, but to
content themselves with their wages, and to do wrong to no mau, Act. 9.
Cornelius the Centurion notwithstanding his soldiers profession, has a
notable testimony of the holy Ghost, to be a man that feared God: and if he
had not been such; he had not received the holy Ghost. The true servants of
God (says S. Ad Bonifac.
Augustine) make wars, that the wicked may be restrained, and goodmen be
relieved. Beside this, what state in this notable corruption, and malice of
men's nature could endure any time, if wars against violent persons were
unlawful? without wars who can warrant us against spoil and injury? it is
the law of nature, and nations that puts weapons in our hands for our
defense; without wars civil laws against rebellious subjects cannot be
executed; and so should remain without edge. S. Ambr. de offic.
Ambrose says, that it is the office and part of justice by war to defend
our country from the enemy, our confederates, and such as by reason of their
weakness need our aid, from spoylers, and oppressors. Wherefore taking this
as granted, that some wars are lawful: let us proceed to examine, what
those things are that give us just cause of wars, which is a matter much to
be regarded, unless we will be accounted among those tyrants that rage and
vex men without cause.

If the cause of him that warreth be good, the issue cannot be evil, says
Bern. de nou. mil.
Bernard. the Frangit and attollit vires in milite causa. Ovid.
cause, as it is good or evil, so either abateth and breaks, or whetteth the
soldiers courage. causa iubet superos melior sperare secundos. Lucan.
and good and just causes make men hope to receive favor of God in the issue,
and trial. Euentus belli velut aequus iudex, vnde ius stabat, ei victoriam
dabat. Liui. 21.
the event oftentimes is according to the justice, and quality of the cause;
and (...). Eurip. Electr.
seldom do they return in safety, that go forth to draw their swords in
evil quarrels. Dionysius of Lib. 2. antiq.
Halicarnassus says, that the Romans therefore prevailed for the most part,
for that they enterprised no wars without just causes. contrariwise the Ius
in armis ferebant. Liu. 5.
Gauls which accounted that justly gotten, which they could win with their
sword, though otherwise very valiant, received many great foiles. for this
cause (as says Philip of Phil. Com. li. 4.
Commines) Princes when they list to quarrel with their neighbors, pretend
honest causes, although often times untrue. The French that with some color they
might receive such as in Gascoigne, or Guienne rebelled against the kings of
this realm, suborned certain Gascoignes, and Poicteuins to complain of
unjust taxations made by the English in the days of Edward the third, and
Richard the second. And Lewis the eleueuth of France instigated certain
rebels to complain of Philip of Commines.
Charles duke of Burgundy, that under color of doing justice, he might with
more reason invade his territories. These pretenses and shows make great
disputes betwixt princes, and states, while every man will seem to make his
cause good, and to do nothing without just causes. Let us therefore now
consider, what causes are sufficient to justify the taking of arms, what are
counterfeit, and insufficient.

First it is lawful to use ^orce, and take arms in defense of our country,
true religion, our goods or liberty. Hoc and ratiodoctis, and mos gentibus,
and feris natura ipsa praescripsit, vt omnem semper vim a corpore, a capite, a
vita iua propulsarent. Cic. pro Mil.
Reason teaches the learned, and custom instructs all nations thus much,
which even the instinct of nature printeth in wild and savage beasts, that it
is lawful to repel force offered to our life, to our person, and the state
with force, and by what other means we can. Most just cause therefore had the
Romans to make wars upon the Gauls, upon Annibal, upon the Daues, and other
barbarous nations, that came to take away their country from them; and like
cause had the Greeks to withstand the Persians, and other barbarous people,
that by arms would have conquered them, and deprived them of their country and
liberty. the same cause did the ancient Britons defend against the Romans,
Saxons, Danes, and Normans, though not with like success. And seeing of late
time the Spaniard came upon our coast with fire and sword, menacing the English
nation with all the calamities that follow such invasions, I think no man will
deny, but we have just cause to put on arms in defense of our country,
religion, lives, liberties, and laws. in this case not only our cause is
just, but the war is of necessity to be undertaken, which greatly helps the
justice of our cause. for as the captain of Iustum bellum quibus necessarium,
and pia arma, quibus nulla, nisi in armis relinquitur salus. Liu. 9.
Samnites said in like case, that war is just, whereto we are enforced, and
with good cons^^nce may we take arms, when there is no safety for us, but in
arms.

It is likewise lawful to repress pirates, and public robbers by force of
arms, if they will not yield themselves to be tried by order of common
justice. They are enemies of peace, and civil government, and by the laws
defied, and proclaimed as public enemies of states. their bodies may be taken,
and their goods spoiled as in wars with other nations. The wars made by
the Romans against Spartacus, who, assembling a mutinous route of rebels and
hindered al trade, was just and necessary. in this ff. de just. and iure L.
fure^. and ad L. Corn. de sicar. L. itaque.
case, because such do rise and assail us upon a sudden, the law of nature
gives warrant of defense without public commandment or commission. neither
is it only lawful, to clear the sea of pirates, but also honorable. Thucid.
Minos made his name famous, for that he cleared the sea of pirates, and opened
the way for merchants. which fact also procured great commendation to Pompey
the Great. Moreover, if our country be wasted and spoiled, and our goods taken
away by forreiners: it is lawful by force and arms to seek for restitution,
if otherwise it cannot be obtained. Tully Quod rebus repetitis geritur. offic.
1.
accompteth that war just, that is made after demand of things wrongfully
taken, and unjustly detained. these quarrels often fall out betwixt borderers,
the Romulus Albanis bellum in tulit, quod eorum dictator nollet res raptas
reddete. Dion. Hal. lib. antiq. 3.
Romans for this cause made diverse roades upon the Sabins, Volscians, Albans
and others their neighbors. Tullus Hostilius had no other causes of his wars
against the same people. This has been the beginning of many contentions
betwixt us and the Scots. of the wars betwixt the Liu. 1.
Romans and Sabins there was no other cause, but the spoil of the Roman
merchants. among other causes of the third wars of the Flor. Epir.
Romans against the Carthaginians, the taking of certain ships, and
spoiling of certain Merchants is alleged as principal. The Switzers began
their braules with the Duke of Phil. Commin.
Burgundy for a load of skins taken away by the County of Romont. likewise
it is, where at a sudden road our goods are spoiled, or driven away, and
detained from us. for which cause the Romans warred upon the Tarquinie^sibus
rebus nequicqua^ repetitis, quod agrum Romans populati essent, bellum indictum.
Liu. 7.
Hetruscians and diverse of their neighbors. Just cause therefore have we also
in this respect to make wars upon the Spaniard, that without destance of
war, stayed our ships, and our merchants, and spoiled their goods. were
not men's minds ^^oled, and almost frozen with fear and age, these injuries
would inflame them. howsoever it is, men ought not to stay until the flames of
our country inflame them.

In this case those that first offend do give just cause of wars, not those
that seek restitution by arms; as is evident Liu. 1.
by the example of the Romans, and Albans, where the first injury being
offered by the Albans, made inst the cause of the Romans. Yet if things taken
away be offered again, and satisfaction be promised to be made for wrongs
done; it is not justice nor reason, further to prosecute the quarrel begun.
it seems not reason (says (...). Thucid. 1.
Archidamus) to prosecute him by force, that submits himself to order of
law. and commonly those that refuse reason when it is offered, come afterward
to wish they had taken it, when they can not have it. The French disdaining and
scorning the great offers made by the black Prince, were shamefully by him
overthrown at the field of Poytiers. The Non suae redditae res, non alienae
accumulatae satis erant. Liu. 9.
Romans refusing the satisfaction made by the Samnites, received a notable
disgrace being by composition disarmed to save their lives at the streites of
Caudium: and Philip of Commines conceiueth, that Charles duke of Burgundy
prospered never the better, for that he refused the humble submission, and
satisfaction of the Switzers, desiring peace at his hands.

The injury that is done to the subjects redoundeth to the Prince, and
reproaches and contumelies done to ambassadors, and messengers return upon
those that send them. both these things minister lawful cause for Princes, and
states to take arms in hand. The Romans with sharp wars prosecuted Appian.
Alexandr.
Mithridates, for that by one general proclamation he had caused diverse of
their people to be massacred in Asia. the same cause armed them against the
Latins and Volscians. The Volscians again invaded the Romans, for that
reprochfully their people were commanded out of the City at the time of their
Liui. 3.
public games. The Heduans rebelled against Caesar upon Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
conceit of some wrong offered to their people in ye camp of the Romans. And
among al causes of wars betwixt Princes, this is commonly inserted for one,
that either their subjects are slain, or wronged: as appears both in the
beginnings of the Roman wars against the kings of Macedonia, and also
against the people of Carthage: and the same was ye common pretense of the
Froissart.
French, to invade us when we held Gascoigne, Guienne, and Normandy.

Yet more near does it touch a Prince when his ambassadors are violated,
forasmuch as that injury is thought to be offered to his own person.
Therefore did David war upon the children of Ammon for the villeny they
offered his ambassadors. The shameful reproach which the Corinthians offered
the Roman ambassadors, was the cause of the war betwixt the Romans and
them, and of the sack of Corinth. Friderick Barbarosse for a scorn offered
him by them of Milan, besieged and took their City. the first quarrel
between the Liu.
Romans, and Veians grew upon a proud answer which the Veian Senate made.
And dear it cost the Rhodians, that taking part with Perseus, they abused the
Romans in their insolent terms. The slaughter of the Roman ambassadors, was
the first cause that moved them to war upon Gentius-king of Illyrium, and
aggrauated the wrath of the Romans against the Veians: and caused Caesar to
sack diverse cities of the Bell. Gal. 6.
Armoricans.

The rebellion of subjects against their lawful Princes, is also a sufficient
cause to arm the prince against them. he carries not the sword for other
purpose, but to repress the wicked and rebellious. king David prosecuted not
only the rebel Ziba, but also his own son Absalo^ that rose against him.
the Romans suppressed the seditious Gracchi, Saturninus and Catiline. and just
cause had our Princes to subdue by arms the seditious route, that under the
leading of Jack Cade, Jack Straw, Kette, and other rebels rose against their
liege and sovereign Princes. for although rebels and pirates, and robbers are
not accounted among the number of lawful enemies, which the Romans called
hosts legitimos, nor did enjoy the ff. De captiu. L. hosts.
right, nor were to be used as enemies in lawful wars; yet is the force used
against them most lawful.

Moreover it is a lawful, and just cause for a prince or nation to arm their
people in defense of their associates, or such as fly unto them for succor
being unjustly oppressed. Deliver those (says the wise man) that are drawn to
death. those that are wronged (says (...). Arist. rhet. ad Alexandr.
Aristotle) not only may, but ought for their honors sake, to arm in defense
of themselves, their allies, and friends, and to help their associates being
oppressed. Cicero in his books de rep. allows those wars to be lawful
that are made aut pro fide, aut pro salute. that is, either for our own
defense, or for defense of our friends, whom we are bound by promise to
help. and as well does he Offic. 1.
charge them with injustice, that repel not injury, when they are able; as
those that do wrong themselves. And if we give credit to Saint Fortitudo quae
per bella tuetur a Barbaris patriam, vel defendit infirmos, vel a latronibus
socios, plena iustitia est. Ambros. de offic.
Ambrose, valiant men, that defend their country from barbarous people, and
protect the weak, and shield their associates from such as would spoil them,
do the office of true justice. for defense of their Populus Romans sociis
defendendis terrarum omnium potitus est. Cic. de rep. 3.
confederates, the Romans received this reward, that they became the lords of
the world. the Romans had no other cause to enterprise the war against the
Visum est Campanos deditos no^ prodi. Liu. 7.
Samnites, but for the defense of the Campanians, which were unjustly vexed,
and had yielded themselves into their protection. The first Carthaginian wars
had no other original, but for the defense of the Mamertines. for the same
cause likewise did they send defiance to Philip Romani infensi Philippo ob
infidam erga socios pacem. Liu. 31. ob iniurias and arma illata sociis populi
Romans bellu^ indictum. Liu. 31.
king of Macedonia, for that he vexed, and iniuried their confederates in
Greece. Joshua protected the Gibeonites requiring his aid, from the conspiracy
of the kings of the Cananites. the forsaking of our associates and friends,
(...). Thucid. 1.
Sthenelaidas the Spartian calls treason, and disuadeth the Spartans from
committing any such offense. the Romans were Saguntinos crules us quam Poenus
hostis prodidit, vos soci, prodidistis. L. 1.25.
accused of treason, for that they abandoned their confederates the Saguntines
being besieged by Annibal. for which fault they endured the penance of sixteen
years wars in Italy. neither was any thing more infamous in Charles of
Burgundy his actions, then his cold defense of his associat the duke of
Britain. Philip of Commines accuses Jews the 11. for abandoning his
confederats of Liege. Caesar, Verebarut (Caesar) ne Gall^^ota deliceret, (h
Gergouia capta) nullum in annor praesid^m elle^. Caes. 7. bell. Gal.
least all his associates in France should forsake him, was driven with great
hazard to succor his friends besieged in Gergouia. the duke of Normandy,
younger brother to Jews the 11. ouerthrewe his own estate departing from the
association of Charles duke of Burgundy. wherefore we have not only just cause
to warrant our proceedings against the Spaniard in defense of our confederates
of France, and the low Countries; but also necessary reasons to move us to
prosecute matters more forcibly, unless we mean to engage our honor, and
neglect our own estate. what wisdom or honor it was to refuse them, that
yielded themselves before the surrender of Antwerpe unto the duke of Parma, I
report me to those that know those mysteries. sure now that we have begun to
assist them of Holland and Zeland; it is neither honor, nor safety so to
mince at the matter, or to go back. whatsoever we call our doings, it will be as
the king of Spain will take it, if ever be have power to be judge. the only
means to mar and cross his sentence, is with great forces to withstand so
mighty a Prince, and not longer to dally.

Breach of covenants likewise is numbered among the just causes of wars. we
put on arms (says Plat. in Alcibiad.
one) either being deceived by our enemies, that perform not promise, or being
constreyned. the Romans began their wars with Perseus king of Liu. 42.
Macedonia, upon occasion of breach of the articles of peace made before,
betwixt his father, and them: and for the like cause also renewed their wars
with them of Carthage. and for the same cause wars have been opened betwixt
us, and the Scots, as at Muscleborough field upon the denial of the Scottish
Queen promised to king Edward; and between the French, and us.

Many wise princes have an eye to their neighbors greatness, and perceiving
how prejudicial their encrochments may prove unto the^, have just cause to
withstand them. Lewis the 11. sent aid to the Switzers, and Duke of Lorreine
against Charles Duke of Burgundy having no other cause, then the suspicion and
fear of his greatness. The true (...) Thucid. 1.
cause of the Peloponesian war against them of Athens was the suspicion and
fear, that their neighbors had of their power and greatness. And yet that
cause was not once mentioned. The Princes and States of Italy of long time have
had a secret league amongst them to moderate the excessive power of the king of
Spain in that country, if at any time he should go about to encroche upon any
one of them. Herein consisted the special Guicciard. hist. lib. 1.
commendation of the great wisdom of Laurence Medici the elder, that during
his time, he kept all the states of Italy, as it were in equal balance, not
suffering any to pass their ancient limits. And I doubt not but our governors
in the defense of the low Countries have a special regard, that the king of
Spain settle not himself in the quiet possession of Holland, Zeland, and the
rest: least that enjoying so many commodious ports, ships, mariners, and
commodities, he might percase afterward make that a step to stride over, or
at least to look over into England. As Vt quisque ab oppresso proximus sit,
per omnes velut continens incendium peruadet. Liu. 37.
every nation is near to those that are subdued, so will the fire once
enflamed embrace it, and so pass over to the rest, as Antiochus said to
Prusias, persuading him in time to withstand the Romans. The Romans
perceiving that the Samnites, after they had subdued the Liu. 7.
Sidicins, intended to war upon their next neighbors the Campanians; they
delayed the matter no longer, nor suffered them to proceed further. time it is
therefore for Christian Princes to awake, and just cause they have to withstand
the encrochments of the king of Spain, that under pretense of the Romish
religion eniambeth upon al his neighbors, unless they will be swallowed up in
the insatiable gulf of the ambitions tyranny of the Spanish nation.

Last of all, whosoever adhereth to our enemies, and aideth them with men,
munitions, and victuals against us, they are also our enemies, and give us just
cause of war against them. this cause moved the Romans to defy the Latinis
quod eorum iuuentus hostibus mixta populata esset Romans agros, bella^ indictum.
Liu. lib. 6. and 7.
Latins, that aided their enemies; and the same is reckened among the causes
of their wars against Philip king Liu. 31.
of Macedonia. for he did not only aid the Carthaginians with men, but also
joined with Annibal in league against the Romans. No just cause therefore have
our neighbors to complain, that we have stayed their ships, that carried
victuals, munitions, and other commodities to the Spaniard. There is no fault
but one, that as we have stayed some, so we have dismissed others, and have not
made prise of al by Public authority, and that those of the low Countries do
commonly trade into Spain, for whose sake the quarrel is undertaken with
Spain. The Romans as in the treatise of peace they comprised their own
confederates; so in denouncing of wars they defied their enemies, and their
associates. as is evident in that form of defiance, which they published
against cum Antiocho rege, quique eiu, secta^ secuti sunr, bellum initum. Liui.
36.
Antiochus. Which ye Greeks also observed in the Peloponnesian wars made not
only against the principals, but also all their adherents. And it is the
Memoires de Fr.
common form of defiances used at this day.

As for wars undertaken through Libido dominandi causa belli. Salust. coniur.
Catil.
ambition, and anger, and such like affections, they are unjust, and the causes
unlawful. neither are they to be excused, that forced by strong hand out of
their own country, do seek by violence to possess that, which belongs to
others. For this cause ye Romans resisted with such force the Gauls,
Germans, Danes, Goths, and others that came to dwell in Italy. And although
such wanderers have had good success in diverse countries by reason of the
sins of the inhabitants, as the Saxons, Picts, Danes, and Normans in this
land, the Franks, Burguignions, and Normans in Gaul, the Lombards, and Goths,
in Italy, and Spain: yet was not the cause of their wars just. for every one
is to hold him to his own lot, unless the country be waste, and dispeopled;
which country God gives to these that can possess it. and therefore did the
Sueuians injuriously forbid any to dwell in their waste borders: and the
Spaniards have no reason by force and law to keep other nations out of the
Indies, which notwithstanding themselves are not able to people.

Yet to make just What beside the cause is to be respected in lawful wars.
wars, it is not sufficient only, that the cause be just; but that they be
enterprised first, by those that have sovereign authority; secondly, that
they be not begun especially by those that invade others, without demand of
restitution or satisfaction, or denunciation; and last of all, that they be not
prosecuted with barbarous cruelty. The first point is expressly set down in
terms in the Roman laws, and allowed by consent of all nations. The C. quid
culpatur. 23. qu. 1.
Canons do also confirm the same. And if it were in others power, great
inconveniences would ensue. It is a special mark of soueraintie to have power
of war and peace. In Liuy these forms are very usual: Praenestinis ex S.C.
populi iussu bellu^ indictum est. And again, ex auctoritate patrum populus
Palaepolitanis bellum fieri iussit. The wars of the Romans against the Liu.
21.31.41.
Carthaginians, Philip, Antiochus, Perseus, and others, were not enterprised
but by authority of the people, which in that state had sovereign
commandment in those times. Him that began any braules, or made peace with
foreign nations of his own private head, (...). Plato 12. delegib.
Plato in his common wealth adiudgeth worthy of death. And therefore did Hanno
give counsel to the Carthaginians, that they should deliver up Annibal to the
Romans, for that he had begun the wars against them without public
authority. Those that offended in this case, by the ff. Ad L. Iul. may. and
L. vnic. C. vt armorum vsus.
laws of the Romans were in case of treason. Marcellus upon that ground
building his reasons, would have persuaded the Senate to deliver Caes. de bell.
ciu. 1.
Caesar to the Gauls. And so scrupulous have some men been in this Realm in
stirring without commission, that they doubted, whether without commandment
they might leuy forces to repress rebels. This percase might seem too
scrupulous, but they thought it better to be too slow, then too forward. For
they Hosts sunt quibus public bellu^ indicitur, reliqui sunt latrunculi and
praedones L. hosts. ff. de captiu.
are only to be accounted public enemies in war, who by those that have
supreme authority, are declared enemies. If any upon private motion fall on
spoiling, they are but thieves and robbers, says Vlpian. And this (says cont.
Faust. Manich.
Augustine) is the order of nature best agreeing with the peace of states, that
the council and authority to make wars should rest in Princes. That wars
are to be denounced on the assaylants side, diverse reasons persuade us. Nullum
bellum est iustum, nisi quod aut rebus repetitis geritur, aut ante denunciarum
est, and indictum. Cic. offic. 1.
There is a justice in wars to be observed, says Tully, which justice
requires, that wars be either denounced, or made after denial of things
demanded, that have been unjustly taken from us. He speaks of wars made
by those, that invade others. For to defend our selves without more words, is
lawful by the laws both of nature, and nations: and very ridiculous it were,
to threaten those that have begun to strike us already. Those therefore that
think we have no wars with the Spaniard, because they have not heard them
proclaimed, are like to those that will not ward, or strike an enemy that
comes upon them without saying, beware. Caesar minding to assail Ariouistus,
sent a Caesar perlegatos bellum indixit Ariouisto. de bell. gal. L. 1.
defiance to him before hand. When Annibal came with an huge army into Italy,
the Romans defended themselves, without spending time about denouncing, or
threatening of wars. Otherwise those that first begin wars, do use first to
speak before they strike, which was not only ye course of antiquity, but also
of later times. Only ye king of Spain has thought it lawful under color of
treaty of peace, without any defiance to cut our throtes, if he could. It may
be, he takes ye Popes exco^municatio^ against yt Prince and people of this
land for a sufficient denuntiation, or warrant to invade us without other
circumstance. This he learned of Alphonsus a Castro, that determines wars
Li. 2. de just haeret. puniend.
against heretics to be lawful, which he takes to be defied by authority of
the Canon. And in his determination Aial, de iur, bell. lib. 1.
Baltazar Aiala, a great man among ye Spaniards rests: and no marvel, if
they observe no solemnities in wars against us, who^ they hold for heretics,
having already determined, that faith Council. constant.
and promise is not to be performed unto heretics. I need not to describe ye
form and words used in defiances. He that will read ye form in time past
used by ye Romans, let him peruse Lib. 16. c. 4.
Aulus Gellius. Later forms are reported in later histories, and much talked
of by Heralds, that claim yt to be part of their office. But little seems it
material to know yt forms of defiances, seeing in these times neither form,
nor substance is strictly in this behalf observed. Only thus much Princes
messengers yt go upon this arrand of defiance are to take heed: first, that
they pass not ye words of their commission, secondly that they use no words of
reproach, or scorn. It is reported yt Francis the 1. king of France, would not
hear the Herald sent him from Charles the 5. with defiance, before he had
caused a gibet to be erected to put him in mind what he should have, if he kept
not himself within compass.

In executing of wars, this precept must diligently be had in remembrance, yt
there be no cruelty used. There is moderation even in the execution of
justice, not only in other actions of war. And Caesar in his victory against
Pompei, commanded his soldiers to spare the Romans. to delight in blood, is
sign of a savage nature. Con. Faust.
The desire of doing hurt, and cruelty in execution: a mind also implacable
and savage is justly blamed in wars says S. Augustine. those that yield
themselves, are not to be slain. Galba for that he slew the Lusitanians,
after that he had taken them upon composition, was justly therefore accused by
Cato. It is no victory to kill an enemy disarmed, nor justice to kill our
prisoners in cold blood. The execution done in the Generals chamber upon the
prisoners after the battle of Cognac, an. 1569. did greatly blemish his honor.
Who does not detest ye Histoire de troubl. de Fr.
executions that have bin done upon men disarmed after co^positio^ at Maile,
Mucidan, and diverse other places during these late troubles of France? yet may
not prisoners upon this liberty presume to abuse, or attempt any matter
against those that have taken them. for then they deserve no favor. Caesar's
soldiers at Hirt de bell. Hisp.
Munda in Spain understanding, that if the Townsmen sallyed out upon them,
their prisoners would charge them upon their backs, were forced to massacre
them. likewise were the English forced to kill their prisoners after the
battle of Poytiers, fearing least they should use some trechecie, when the
enemy made show to assail them. Que ningun soldado mate muger ninno vieio ni
person inhabil aunque sea en la furia del vincer so pena de la vida, ni ponga
la mano in tales personas. Sancho de Londono.
Women, children, and old folks, by the orders of war observed now in the
Spanish camp are exempted from the soldiers fury, in the sack of Towns.
The present French king deserves great praise, for suffering the poor, and
impotent people of Paris to pass through his army, although it were much to
his prejudice, practice of arms required percase other rigor, as appears by
the cruelty executed by Caesar's soldiers at Auaricum, and the Sea towns of
France on such kind of people, thereby to make the besieged either sooner to
yield, or to spend their victuals: but this best beseemed a Christian king.
The Turks save such for slaves. Christians therefore ought to do that for
conscience, which Turks do for gain.

Of this discourse, this is the sum, that those What wars are lawful.
wars are just and lawful, which are made by the sovereign Magistrate, for
lawful and just causes, being both orderly denounced in cas^ requisite, and
moderatly prosecuted, to the end that justice may be done, and an assured peace
obtained. In which case it is lawful for any man with good conscience to serve
in wars: but if the wars be notoriously unjust, let every man take heed
how he embrewe his hands in innocent blood. The Christian soldiers that
served Julian the Apostat, would not draw their swords against Christians,
although they willingly served him against all others. Yet do I not make
private men judges of Princes factes. but what need any judgment where the
fact is evident? and who shall answer for men that execute Princes wicked
commandments, before Christ's tribunal seat? if the injustice of wars be
not notorious, the subject is bound to pay and serve, and the guilt shall be
laid to his charge that commands him to serve. A good man may serve (says
August. lib. 22. con. Faust. Man. c. 7.
Saint Augustine) under a sacrilegious Prince, where the injustice of the
commandment shall bind the Prince, as the duty of obedience does make the
soldier innocent.

Just wars has these effects. whatsoever Item ea, instia^de reru^ division.
we take or win from the enemy, that is justly ours, and the same by the
laws of nations is accounted lawful purchase. Sunt aute^ priuata nulla
natura, sed aut veteri occupatione, aut victoria. Cic. off. 3
nothing is proper by nature, but either by ancient possession, and seisine, or
victory, says Tully. Whatsoever City therefore, or Territory is by us taken
in just wars, the same is ours: likewise whatsoever moveable goods comes to
our hands. Yet is there great difference in this case betwixt lands and
goods. the lands come to the Prince, or State that bears the charge, to
dispose at their pleasures, either among Dion. Halic. ant. lib. 2.
those soldiers by whose blood they were won, or else after they be rewarded,
among others for the benefit of the State. Alexander Lamprid. in vit. Alexand.
Sever.
Seuerus the Emperor divided the Country bordering on the enemy on the
soldiers that best deserved, and their children also, so long as they should
continue in service there. The spoils of the enemy are sometime given to the
soldiers, certain things only excepted. Liui. lib. 7. and 9.
Valerius Coruinus making a road into Samnium, gave all the pray to his
soldiers; likewise did C. Iunius at the taking of Bouian. The whole Senate of
Rome gave the sack of Veij to the soldiers. The Spanish soldiers use seldom
to march to an assalt, but they will covenant to have the spoil. But if it
might be obtained, the best course is, that all the spoil brought to one
place, the General should divide it all, or most part among his soldiers,
having regard to the most valiant, and hurt men which cannot be partakers of
the spoil, which they procured with their blood, and this was the most common
practice of the Romans. And if there should be any other course taken, these
inconveniences would fall out: the General should have no means to reward
those that best deserve. for how can he, the spoil being not in his power to
dispose: the hurt should be deprived of their part; for that they are not able
to run about to spoil: nay the most valiant should have least part. for
commonly Ita segnior est quisque praedator, vt laboris periculique praecipuam
partem petere sole^. Liui. 5.
the most valiant soldier is the last that puts up his sword to go to
spoil. and contrariwise the most cowardly and disorderly companion, may
percase light upon the greatest and richest spoils: for winning whereof he
scarce drew out his sword. furthermore by greediness of spoil, many brave
occasions are let slip out of our hands, and many disorders fall out.
Alexamenes having slain Liuy.
Nabis, and being entered Sparta, while he minded nothing but spoil, suffered
the enemies to gather head, and wax so strong, that they cut him and his
company in pieces. Last of all, diverse contentions and braules fall out about
the division of spoils, especially where there are diverse nations in one
army. All this cannot be remedied, unless there be some better order then
usual in preserving the spoil.

In time past the Romans disposed of their prisoners, as of the rest of the
spoil, and he that was taken in lawful wars, was slave to him that took
him. But now that captivity is abolished among Christians, ransomes succeed
in lieu of slaves, so that a prisoner taken in wars, is not made a slave, but
is ransommed according to that reasonable agreement which is made betwixt the
prisoner, and his taker. The laws of Spain and France do yet more
particularly divide the spoil taken in wars. Not only the country, but also
ships of war taken from the enemy, belong to the Prince by the Aial. lib. 1.
Leg. Reg. 19. Tit. 26. Par. 2.
customs of Spain. By the same Reg. 29. and 30.
customs the King has the fifth, the captain the seventh part, the soldiers
the rest. Sancho de Land. compriseth their orders in certain rimes:

Al'ausanca de Francia and Castilla (says he) el Reyno, la prouincia, and
sennorio, el rey captiuo, la ciudad, o villa es del rey, que ha exoedido
empoderio. Del General que gana, es el que pierde, el puede rescatarle a su
aluedrio. etc. The sum of his long rimes is this: that by the customs of
France and Castile, the Prince ought to have the Kingdom, Province, Seignorie,
or City, and the King likewise that is taken in wars. Other prisoners belong
to them that take them, except the General, and men of mark and quality.
which being taken by others, are notwithstanding to be used to the benefit of
the Prince. provided always, that he that takes them, be honorably rewarded.
All the ensigns, great artillery, munitions of war, and treasure, are
likewise the Generals due. small pieces without wheels, and pieces of small
bollet belong to the master of the Ordinance. all broken pieces fall to the
Gunners share. the rest of the spoil is given to every one that takes it.
This is the use when a battle is joined, or a City is won. but in a road
they that loose their horses in service, are first to be mounted either on
horses taken, or on the common charge. the rest is to be divided among the
soldiers; yet so, that consideration be always had of those that deserve best.

If our goods be taken away by the enemy, and presently recovered again, then
they return to the owners property. The Volseis ad de^^tionem compulsis
castrisque captis praedae pars sua cognoscentibus Latinis, and Hernicis reddita
sunt. Liu. 4.
Volscians being forced to yield, so soon as their camp was taken, so much of
the spoils as belonged to the Latins, or Hernicans, was restored to them
again by the Romans.

Sutrinis sociis vrbs little code^ die Camillo duce recepta, integra reddita
est. Liu. 6.
Camillus having recovered Sutrium out of the hands of the Hetruscians the
same day that it was taken, restored the same again to the Citizens. The
Praeda militi concessa, pecus exceptum quod intra dies 30. domini cognouissent.
Liu. 24.
goods belonging to their confederats, the Romans did commonly except out of
the spoil. The Romans after diverse years recovering the Territory of Liu. 24.
Saguntum, restored the same to the ancient possessors thereof. And Liu. 30.
Scipio restored diverse things to the Sicilians, which he found in the sack of
Carthage, and had been taken from them. This right by which things lost
return to their owners, the Romans called ius postliminij. which belonged to
Postliminio redeunt haec, homo, nauis, mulus clitellarius, equus, equa. Cic.
Topic. and ff. de capt. leg. 2.
prisoners in war, ships, mules, carriage horses, or mares. Slaves ff. codem
l. ab hostibus.
returning or recovered, are to be restored to their old masters. All ff.
eodem l. Postliminium.
captives returning from the enemy, recover their ancient liberty and right.
ff. Eodem. L. si captiuus,. expulsis.
Paulus the lawyer says, that when a Territory is recovered from the enemy,
the lands return to their proper owners: and so the Romans practiced in the
restoring of Verrugo, Sutrium, and diverse other Towns to the Latins, Sabines,
Campanians and others, having recovered them out of the enemies hands. Yet
lands lost by cowardice, or treachery of the owners, and recovered again
without their help and charge, are without this case, unless the Prince
restore them of favor. Those that run to the Transsugae.
enemy, and traitors, were seldom received to mercy among the Romans. Arms
and horses of service lost in wars by cowardice, return not to the owner.

These rules although by covenants and some circumstances they receive
alteration; yet for the most part they are observed: which men of judgment can
easily discern. And therefore leaving of further to discourse of the causes,
let us now discende to discourse what things are to be provided, before wars
be opened, that in our necessity, we be not to seek for things needful.

CHAP. II. That before we begin the wars, provision is first to be made of
treasure, arms, munition, ships, cariages, victuals, and all necessary
furniture, and instruments of war.
THe sequel and effects of wars being so dangerous and pernicious, and the
causes so many, and so easily offered: it behooves al Princes and States to
make sufficient provision for wars, and always to be ready; but especially
then, when the enemy is at hand, and threatens to invade us; which is now the
case of England. He ostendite bellu^ pacem habebitis: videant vos paratos ad
vim ius ipsi remittent. Liui. 6.
that desires peace, must be armed for the wars, and prepared, and those
obtain their right soonest, that are provided to win it with force, as said
a certain captain of the Latins. The Diu apparandu^ est bellu^, utvincas
celerius. Publius.
provision of things necessary is to be made long before, if thou meanest to
obtain the victory quickly. Vegetius Antequam inchoetur bellum, de copiis
expensisque solicitus fiat tractatus. Veget. lib. 3. c. 3.
exhorts those that purpose to begin wars, carefully to weigh and
consider their store and charges. When we are in action, and stand in need of
such things, it will be then too late to wish, to stir, to send. Wars
succeed not where such loose counsels go before.

The things that are especially to be provided before the levy of men are
these: first money, then arms, horses, cariages, ships, all munitions, and
furniture of war, thirdly victuals and clothes, lastly the help of
confederates and friends. With money brave captaiues and soldiers are allured
to serve, and maintained and paid in service: all necessary furniture of
war is bought, victuals and clothes provided, intelligences with the enemy
dressed, and maintained, and many commodities procured; which otherwise cannot
be had. so yt (...). Demost.
wise men doubt not to call treasure the sinews of war, without which they
neither proceed, nor move, unless it be backward. Tit. Liui. 35.
Quintius merrily noted Philopoemens want of money, when he compared his army to
a body, that had strong arms and legs, but no belly; much like unto
Philopoemen himself, yt was so made. for as ye arms, legs, and outward parts
receive nourishment from the belly, and pine away if ye belly be evil affected
and discrasied: so an Immensa pecunia inter ciuiles discordias ferro validior.
Tacit. 18
army that is not maintained with money, is easily broken, and dissolved of it
self. Contrariwise (as Archidamus the Spartan king said) (...). Thucid. 1.
store does as much often times sustain the wars, as force. Pericles
persuading the Athenians not to yield to the Lacedaemonians, whose army could
not long keep the field, or continue together for want of money, shows the^,
that the (...). Thucid. 2.
victory is furthered in wars, more by counsel and store of money, then
violent invasion. Archidamus further says, that (...). Thucid. 1.
wars are as well administered by cost and expense, as by arms, and that arms
by expenses are made more availeable. The Lacedaemonians in the Peloponnesian
war increasing the pay of their mariners a small trifle a day, drew from
the Athenians their best men. What the Spanish ducats, and French crowns have
wrought of late times, both Dutch, French, Italian, and English give testimony.
Philip of Macedonia co^sulting with the Oracle by what means he might soonest
onercome a certain town in most men's opinions impregnable, received this
answer; If he fought with (...).
silver lances. Tacius the Liu. 1.
Captain of the Sabins for gold bought the Capitol of Rome. Liu. 25.
Asdrubal with money corrupted the Celtiberians, and made them shamefully
abandon the Roman army, which first had hired them, and afterward was ruinated
by them. With a little money the Phil. Commi.
English army was persuaded by Lewis the eleventh to return back into England
to our great disgrace. Money, says (...). Olynth. 1.
Demosthenes, must be provided, and without it nothing can be atchiued in
wars in order. The Spartans that used no money a long time, were at length
taught, that war could not be managed without money. the manifold effects
whereof our own experience teaches us both at home, and abroad. for want
whereof many disorders have fallen among our forces, which have endured much
through the enemies abundance.

Yet do I not yield so much to treasure, as if treasure could do all things.
We read that the naked Justin.
Scythian overcame Cyrus and Darius, notwithstanding all their riches, and the
poor Greeks in the Xenoph. exp. Cyr.
expedition of Cyrus prevailed against the rich Persians. The army of Arr.
Alexand.
Alexander well fenced with iron overcame the huge Persian army, that was so
rich in gold and silver. and likewise the Liu. 9. and 43.
Romans armed with iron and steel vanquished the armies of the Samnites, and
of Antiochus, that glistered in gold and silver. Neither could the Carthaginian
or Macedonian kings that far surpassed the Romans in wealth, match them with
force. The rich man is commonly a spoil to the well armed soldier, and
Caesar's poor famished troops did drive the gallants of Pompey out of the
field. The poor army of the English at the field of Poytiers, overcame the
brave caualiers of France, and a few poor naked Philip. Com.
Switzers overthrew Charles Duke of Burgundy notwithstanding his riches and
greatness. They confessed that all their wealth would not buy the spurs of
Charles his horsemen. The Spaniard is rich in gold, yet does not the English
soldiers fear him in the field. It is iron, not gold, that kills in the
encounter. Gold can do much, but not all. and therefore were it to be wished,
that we had more contended with the Spaniard with the sword, wherewith we are
able to match him, then with gold, wherein though we spend all, we cannot come
near him.

Wherefore let money be provided before hand, if not in such abundance as others
have it; yet so much as may provide arms, victuals, munition, horses, for a
competent army. If any man ask how much, I answer with Plutarch. Apopth*
Cleobulus, that wars in this case have no stint, nor set bounds: this only
may suffice to show you, that if good orders were set down and executed, it
would neither be infinite, nor the charge so burdensome, as now it is.

The means whereby money may be raised are diverse; either it rises upon lands
belonging to the crown, and that either by inheritance, or confiscation, or
conquest; or upon rents, or penalties, or imposts, or other duties belonging to
the Prince; or of subsidies, taxes, contributions and loanes of subjects, or
upon our confederates, and associats, or else upon ransoms of our enemies
persons, or countries. By which means seeing su large revenues come unto the
Princes of this realm, who sees not that this realm wants nothing but good
order in dispensing of the treasure, and sharp punishment against those that
purloine it: Nay if vain expenses in apparel, jewels, silks, golden coats,
and other vanities were cut off, or employed in arms, and necessary furniture
of war: there would be not only sufficiency, but also abundance.

The Romans for maintenance of their public stock had diverse inventions and
practices. Upon Agripro pecunia dati, and in iugera ^sses vectigal^s impo^^ti.
Li. 31.
every acre of ground of a country subdued, they imposed an annual rent. The
same might have been done in Ireland, if it had pleased the governors, to
convert it to public uses, rather then to serve private men's desires, which
notwithstanding by reason of their great disorders reap small commodity.

They looked strictly to their impostes. Annibal Annibal vectigalia negligentia
dilapsa restituit. Liu. 33.
after peace made with the Romans, to encounter with the covetousness of
officers, restored the impostes at Carthage to their old order. Philip the
King of Macedonia purposing to make wars upon the Romans, did not only
increase his Vec^igalia auxit and noua instituit. Liu. 39.
customs, but devised new, for the maintenance of the wars. which is to be
done only in case of necessity, lest these new devises of Italian impostes,
make the Princes odious to their subjects.

Where the ordinary revenues were not sufficient, there wise governors have had
recourse to equal contributions, taxes, and loanes. Asdrubal Pecunias imperat
populis omnibus suae d^tionis. Liu. 23.
purposing to go into Italy with a supply to Annibals army, laid a tax upon
all the people of his government. The Duke of Alua in his time, and of late
years the Prince of Parma knew well how to put this in practice in the low
Countries. When the city of Rome wanted money in the second war with them of
Carthage, Priuatis in inopia aerarii pecunias conferentibus, ita vt Scribae non
sufficerent, nec remige in supplementum, nec stipendio ^esp. egui^. Liu. 26.
private men voluntarily lent money so fast, that the deputies appointed to
receive it, could not dispatch them* so that by this means the Romans neither
wanted mariners, nor pay for soldiers. For continuance of the public
treasury they had their lands and goods rated equally, and every man paid
according* which equal proportion, if it were now observed; I dare say it
would green no good subject to pay, albeit it were twice so much, as now they
do. Every man brought in the quantity of his la^d, and the value of it upon
his credit; likewise the sum of his rentes and money. they that only lived
upon traffike brought in the sum of their money, and clear gains yearly,
with this promise, that what was left out was confiscat and forfeit, and every
false sum given in, was punished with double. They that were not rated or at
the least nu^bred, were banished, or sold for slaves. Such as had nothing, were
only numbered in the roll. The most of this is expressly set down in their
books of law. Forma censuali (says ff. de censibus.
Vlpian) cauetur, vt agri sic in censum referantur. nomen fundi cuiusque, and
in qua ciuitate, and in quo pagosit, and quos duos vicinos proximos habeat, and
aruum quod in december annos proximos satum erit, quot esse iugera videatur. Vinea
quot vites habeat, oliuetum quot iugerum, and quot arbores habeat: pratum
quoque quod intra december annos proximos sectum erit, quot iugerum pascua esse
videantur, item sylua caedua. omnia ipse qui defert aestimet. illam enim
aequitatem debet admittere censitor, vt officio eius congruat releuare cum, qui
and in publicis tabulis delato modo ex certis causis vti non possit. Likewise
Liuy where he mentions the taxing of the colonies by Nero and Salinator, has
these words: Colonies were such towns as the citizens of Rome replenished with
their own people, and depended on the mother city.
duodecim coloniarum, quod nunquam antea factum erat, deferentibus coloniarum
censoribus, censum receperunt, vt quantu^ numero mil^^u^, quantu^ pecunia
valerent, in publicis tabulis monume^ta extarent. If the like rate and
proportion were observed among us, that every man might be rated according to
his lands, farms, rents and goods equally: the burden would be more easily
borne, and less complaint made, and more money would come to the payment of her
majesty's soldiers.

So many countries as were under the protection of the Romans, or confederate
with the^, did contribute to the common charge. wherein such equal taxation,
and good order was used, that the country where the army was maintained, did
defray the most of the charge. and good reason, seeing it was for their defense.
it would seem strange to those that know not their proceedings, how Caesar did
not only maintain his army 9. years in France at the charge of the country,
but also enriched himself, and his army. The Athenians likewise after that the
Greeks had driven out the Thucid. 1.
Persians out of their country, for maintenance of their wars against them
made an association, appointing what every Island or city, or territory should
pay toward the charge.

Sometimes the enemies being subdued or straited, were not only driven to pay
the charge of the army, but also great sums of money into the tresury. the
S^ipendium exercitui Romans ab host in cum annum pensum, and binae tunicae in
militem exactae. Liu. 9.
Hetruscians subdued by Decius did not only pay the soldiers stipend for one
year; but were constrained to furnish every soldier with two suits of
apparel. The same Liuy testisteth to have been performed of the Samnites, and
Aequians. The Volscians had truce given them with these conditions, that they
should pay the Liu. 9.
Roman army for a year, and restore that which they had taken away. Cornificius
in Illyrio (now a part of Sclauony) although the country was not able to
maintain an army, yet kept ye same in order by his prudence says Hirtius.
Beside all this the Romans after the wars ended brought infinite sums into the
treasury.

Liu. 30.
Scipio after the victory obtained against Annibal, brought into it 123.
thousand pouud weight of silver. Quintius brought 18270. pound in silver
bullion, 84000. pound in coined silver, 3714. pounds of gold, beside a shield
all of gold. Aemilius Paulus after his victory against Perseus brought in
much more. I forbear to rehearse lesser sums brought into the treasury by
Liu. 34. and 35.
Furius, Heluius, Minutius, Cato, and others. And the rather, for that it was
an usual matter, after the wars in any country ended, to bring great su^mes
of money into the public treasury. If then, beside the maintenance of the
army, such store of money could be levied of the spoils; it is no such
infinite matter, as is supposed to maintine an army, in case the same be
orderly governed, and well employed.

The reason that our small companies in France, and Flanders have cost so much
is, for that the same not being able to encounter the enemy in open field,
are shut up in some town, and live all upon charge, without doing good to
themselves, or hurt to the enemy. If there be (...). Xenoph. paed. Cyr. 1.
a mighty army in the field, what town or country is not willing to redeem
the favor of it? or what is stirring, that such power will want? if the army
be a sufficient body of it self, and well furnished, there is no doubt, but if
wise men have the managing thereof, wars as Redemptoribus vetitis frumentum
parare, bellum (inquit Cato) scipsum alet. Liu. 34.
Cato said will maintain themselves, and if not all, yet sure defray the
greatest part of the charge.

The Romans in their extremities, to furnish their soldiers in wars,
diminished and cut off a great part of their private charge. By the law Ne qua
mulie^ plus semunica auri haberet, neu vestimento versi colori vteretur. Liu.
34.
Oppia made in the second war with Carthage for this purpose, women were
prohibited to wear diverse colored garments, or to possess more then half an
ounce of gold. The Liu 39.
Censors caused the ornaments of women, their coches, apparel and jewels to be
valued in their tax books* afterward when disorders grew greater, the praetor
Ne vasa aurea ministrandis cibis, ne vestis serica v^ros foe daret. Tacir*
annal. 2.
Fronto published a decree, that no man should use golden vessel about his
meat, nor that men should be defiled (I use his word) with silken apparel.
But now if gentlemen be not all beraied with silks, they think themselves
defiled, and disgraced. If any such law were now enacted, who sees not what
abundance of money might be spared? if the acco^pts be justly taken, it will be
found that the veluets, and silks, and foreign stuff that comes yearly
into England would richly maintain an army, and to spare, so that boldly I may
say there wa^teth rather order, then treasure for the maintenance of our
soldiers, though ye number were quadruple to yt, which now is.

To restrain the greedines of officers, both Romans and other nations have
put diverse laws in execution. Such ff. Ad l. Iul. repetund. lex Iu. lia.
fraudulent dealing the Romans punished with banishment. which in ancient time
was the greatest penalty that they inflicted upon their citizens, certain
heinous cases except. ff. Ad l. Iul. pecula^. leg. peculatus.
Afterward such faults were punished extraordinarily. and not only the
principals were punished, but also their servants, and ministers. Xenoph. exp.
Cyr. lib. 5.
Philesius and Xanticles in the voyage of the Greeks with Cyrus were severely
dealt withal for dealing fraudulently, and stealing the common money. Gylippus
for the same cause was Plutarch.
banished Sparta, notwithstanding his great service done to the commonwealth
in the wars against the Athenians in Sicile. Only of late times, and in some
places the most compendious and assured way to grow rich is for men boldly to
steal, and falsely to account for such money as passes through their fingers.
Therefore had they Aerarium opul^^tum ^enues res priuatas. Plutar. in vit*
Demosth.
a rich treasury in the greatest poverty of private men: whereas in our times
while certain grow great and wealthy, the public estate seems to grow every
day more then other poor and beggarly. When the tribute due to the Romans
could not be found in the public treasury of Carthage, Peculatum quorundam
accusans Annibal, pecuniam ad stipendium Romany inuenit. Liu* 33.
Annibal by calling the fraudulent dealing of the officers in question, found
more then sufficient to satisfy them. And if some od fellows were in our time
seized by the gorge, might they not think you be made to regorge that which
they have fraudulently, and closely swallowed?

It cannot be denied, but that these are compendious ways to find money for
paime^t of soldiers. but I fear me, we shall ue^er find out, or at least never
use these ways. and no marvel: seeing men do so much delight to walk in
bywaies. If Cato in his time Auaritia and luxuria ciuitatem laborare conquestus
est. Liu. 34.
complained that the commonwealth suffered much by the covetousness of some, and
riotousnes of others: much may princes of our time more justly complain when
by couetise and extortion me^ only purchase, and by vanity brave it out in
riot* Impetrare ab animo non potuit Perseus, vt impensam in rem maximi
monumenti saceret. Liu. 42.
Perseus (as Liuy reports) for niggardise could not find in his heart to
bestow any money upon his soldiers, though nothing imported him more. I pray
God some in the end complain not, that all their riches and wealth is reserved
for them that seek their ruin and overthrow.

Money therefore howsoever it be, must be provided in time. for without it, as
fire without matter, wars wax cold and cannot long be maintained* the same is
to be delivered to the General before hand, and to be placed where it may best
serve for the armies use. The Cartha ginia^s had treasure ready at new hic
pecunia hostium sine qua illi gerere beilum non possunt, quippe qui mercenarios
exercitus alant. Liu.
Carthage in Spain to serve them in their wars in Spain. Caesar had his
store at Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Nouiodunum in the territory of the Heduans, to serve him in his wars in
France.

If so much cannot be provided, as is requisite, then must men that possess
lands either serve upon their own charge, as the Romans did at the first, and
the Spartans did always: or else those that stay at home must maintain those
that serve abroad, and a rate be laid upon every shire and city, how many
soldiers they shall maintain paid. (The Sueui 100. millia armatorum bellandi
causa suis ex finibus educunt, reliqui qui domi remanserunt, se atque illos
alunt. Caes. bell. gal. 4.
Sueuians by this means maintained a hundred thousand men which every year
went out of the country to seek adventures.) Or else like slaves and pesants
unworthy the name of English, must they serve strangers. I will not say more,
for that it would be too great a shame, if this whole country could not
maintain an army as well as Athens, Sparta, Argos, Thebes, Megara, Locri,
Tarentum, Syracusae, and other cities, and small states in Greece, Italy,
Sicily, and other places. Therefore leaving these supposals, let good orders be
set down, and strictly observed; and if we be not so wise as to find the way
our selves, let us yet learn of our enemies among which men of value be
advanced to honor, and fraudulent dealers be drawn up to the gibbet.

The next care is to be had of Of arms and furniture of war.
arms, and all manner of furniture for the war: of al sorts of weapons; as
pikes, halberds, black bills, muskets, caliuers, pedrinals, pistoies, lances,
bows and arrows, swords, and daggers: of al arms defensive, as corsalets of
proof, and others, morions, targets of proof, and lighter, iackets of male,
and plated doublets, and other necessary pieces: of great artillery both for
battery, and for the field, of horses and their furniture; of ships, mastes,
tacle, artillery, and al provision necessary for the sea: of carriages both
for ordonance, munition, and victuals, as also for other necessary uses: of
tents for encamping: of powder and bullets and all things necessary both for
great and small shot: of bridges, and boats: of spades, mattocks, axes, wimbles,
baskets, and finally al other engines or provision for wars. al which is to be
provided and laid up in places near to the enemy, and where we mean to go
forth against him. Wherein we shall not much err, if we follow the
precedents of such as have showed themselves most obseruant of the laws of
Arms. The Lily beum tentbatur ad apparatum belli. Liu. 21.
Romans intending to pass into Affrike against them of Carthage, made their
provision at Lilybeum, a port of Sicile, looking toward Affrike. Before that
Cirea armamentatia and horrea, aliumque belli apparatum visendu^ praetor,
legatique ducti. Liu. 29.
Scipio transported his army into Affrike, he made exceeding great provision
of arms, and all warrelike furniture in Sicile, which the messengers that were
sent to view his proceeding could not behold without admiration. landing in
Affrike he had there like wise his workhouses, and storehouses of provision.
The town of New Carthage in Spain served the Carthaginians for a storehouse
of al manner of provision of arms, and warlike furniture for their wars in
Spain. Liuy Apparatus ingens belli opisices 2000. Liu. 26.
says there was infinite provision, and 2000. workmen that wrought continually.
The same town being taken from the Carthaginians, served Scipio for the same
use, who Vibs strepebat apparatu belli. ib.
employed them in making of arms, and engines of war most diligently. The
Gauls reuolting from Caesar used wonderful diligence in making of arms, and
providing of horses, and furniture of war, in every Caes. bell. Gal. 7. armorum
quantu^ quaeque ciuitas domi, quodque ante tempus efficiat constituit.
city appointing what number of arms and weapons should be made. The kings of
Macedonia had diverse armories both within and without their realm; so that
although Chalcis horteum and armamentarium Phi. lippi. Liu.
Chalcis Philips storehouse for arms were burnt, yet did he not want. Philip
and his son Perseus had infinite store hereof, so that they contemned the Romans
in respect of themselves. Antiochus dressed his armoiries and workhouses in
Lysimachia, in his expeditio^ against the Romans. The Romans not only had
public storehouses of arms, but Arma habent Romani quae sibi quisque
parauerit pauper miles. Liu. 42.
also private men had arms of their own. In this land, although I doubt not,
but there is far more provision of arms, and munition then has bin in time
past; yet might there be an amends made if monopolies of powder, and arms were
taken away: and if that which is in one place too much, were placed in diverse
convenient storehouses, in every place sufficeint; and finally, if there were
so much arms in private men's hands, as the mosters pretend.

I need not speak much of the provision of shipping. it were sufficient, if
that we have, were well ordered and employed. Of the use of ships I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter. This may now suffice, that if the shipping
of this land, and of our confederates were joined together, and well furnished
and used, it would not be long ere peace should be offered by those, which now
brave us with threats of war, because they see us desirous of peace.

Cariages also and carriage horses would be provided, not only for the drawing
of ordonance and arms, but also of victuals, munitio^s, spades, axes, mattocks,
and al other neccessaries of an army. The further ye army goes from home,
the more care the general ought to have of carriages to take things necessary
with him. Caesar bell. gal. 1.
The Heluetians before they began to march into France, provided store of
carts, and horses, and draught oxen for the purpose. The Romans in their Liu.
42.
expedition against Antiochus had carriages sufficient of the Macedonians.
Without a Comitabatur Corbulone^ praeter assueta belli, magna vis camelorum
onusta frumento, Tacit. annal. 15.
number of Camels that followed the army laden with all provision, and other
carriages; Corbulo could not have prevailed against the Parthians. Beside
other ordinary carts (...) etc. Xenophon exp. Cyr. c.
Cyrus in his expedition against his brother, had 400. wagons laden with
victuals, which were not to be distributed, but in time of necessity. What
losses and travail our men have endured in Flanders, Portugal, France, for
want hereof, without my report, it is sufficiently known to soldiers.

There ought no less care to be had of tents, that soldiers may lie dry, and
more warm then commonly they do. For villages are not every where to be
found: nor is it fit that soldiers should be dispersed in villages, when the
enemy is at hand: and cabines are not so soon built, nor is stuff in all
places to be found to build them with.

The Romans to every hundred, had both cariages, and tents assigned. For want
whereof our soldiers are seldom well lodged, especially in marching; and yet
are they long about it. And where they lie, by reason of their cutting down of
woods, they leave marks of their being there many years after.

Without spades, mattocks, axes, baskets, and such like instruments the
soldier can neither enclose his enemy, nor fortify himself: and therefore
as very necessary things, are such instruments to be provided, as also
whatsoever is necessary for passing of rivers, assalting of towns, and other
faites of arms.

I need not make mention of horses of service, seeing every man knows what
difficulties an army destitute of horsemen susteineth. That which shall be
sufficient shall be spoken, when we come to speak of horsemen. Only now I will
admonish Gentlemen to have more care of keeping races of horses, because in
case of present necessity they that have them not of their own, shall hardly
obtain them of others.

The last thing that I am here to speak of, is first to be thought of, I
mean provision of victuals, without which men can neither live in wars, nor
in peace. It is a faint fight that hungersterued soldiers do make. In (...)
Xenoph. exp. Cyr. 1.
wars without things necessary, there is neither use of soldier, nor
captain. He that Qui frumentu^ necessariumque comeatum non parat, vincitur
sine ferro. Veget. lib. 3. c. 26.
provides not victuals beforehand is overcome without drawing of a sword.
Against other mischiefs, there are remedies; but there is no wrestling against
hunger. Want drives men to their wits end. When the Lacedemonian soldiers
were straited, their General writ thus to the Magistrates: the (...) Xenoph.
(...). 1.
soldiers are sterued for hunger, what shall we do? The two Liui. 23.
Scipioes writ to the Roman Senate, that without supply of victuals, their
army must needs dissolve. And Caesar Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
told his soldiers, that were determined to retrayte, that without their
cariages where their victuals were, they could no furth^r do service against
the enemy. And therefore victuals must be had ready. it is too late to seek
for them in Villages, when the hungry soldier is ready to sterue. Caesar Re
frumentaria comparata castra mouet. bell. gal. 2.
would not once move toward the enemy, before he had his provision with him.
De obsessione non prius agendum consticuit, quam rem frumentariam expedisset.
Caes. com. bell. gal. lib. 7.
Nor would he resolve to besiege any town, before he had taken order for
sufficient victuals for his army. His use Vbi instabat dies quo die frumentum
militibus metiri oporceret. Caes. com. 1. and 6. bell. gal.
was to divide victuals to every company for certain days beforehand. The
garrison towns of the Romans were furnished with wheat, vinegar, bacon,
barley, and straw, for a year beforehand, as Capitolinus shows in the life
of Gordian. The reason is laid down by Tacitus, that Vtaduersus moras
obsidionis annuis copiis firmentur. Tacit. annal.
they might be stored with provision against long sieges. The Colonies which
were peopled with Romans, and placed as gardes, and propugnacles against their
enemies were stored with all things necessary. How our soldiers were furnished
in Flanders and Portugal, I report me to their knowledge that endured those
services. Being no better furnished, it is not to be marueiled though they
kept no better order. Disciplinam seruare non potest ieiunus exercitus.
Cassiod. 4. Var. lect. c. 13.
Hungry soldiers are hardly kept within the compass of laws. The belly (as
is commonly said) in this case has no ears. The cause of all such miseries,
in wars are diverse: first want of care, and good proceeding, then niggardise
and misery, thirdly fraud and deceit; last of all impunitie. Which are not
to be redressed, but with contrary proceeding, and following the precedents of
ancient warriers.

The Romans gave to their General both treasure, and authority sufficient,
to provide things necessary for the army. They brought victuals into the army
sufficient, and for fear of want laid up abundance in garners, and
storehouses in strong places near to the country, where their army soiourned.
Opposing their forces against Annibal, they chose Liu. 21.
Clastidium for their storehouse. Caesar in the wars against the^ of Auuergne
brought all his provision to Caes bell. gal. 7.
Nouiodune, because it lay near. The Romans caused their ships of victuals to
discharge at Eo omnes ex Italia one^ariae naues dirigebant cursum. Liu. l. 37.
Chios in their wars against Antiochus: He chose Lysimachia for the place of
his store. For the wars of Liu. l. 44.
Macedonia they made their provision in Thessaly. Caesar c^rtis locis horrea
constituit, frumentum conquir^ iussit. de bell. ciu. 3.
Caesar had his garners in convenient places to supply his army in his wars
against Pompey. Pompey brought all his provision to Dyrrhachium.

Asdrubal entering Fines hostium ingrediens frumentum commeatusque in vrbem
Asenam conuexit. Liu. 23.
Spain carried all the victuals, and store of the country into Asena: and
Scipio likewise landing Horrea noua aedificata vete^a a Scipione repleta and
frumento ex population: bus and commeatu Siculo. Liui. 29.
in Afrike made new storehouses, and filled both new and old partly with
victuals sent out of Sicile, and partly with those which he got by the spoil
of ye country. When a strong army comes into any country, it is no masterie
for the same to find Formidine populationis obsides frumentum and aalia quae
vsui forent affatim praebita. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
victuals and forage either by fear, or force. But the companies sent into
France and Flanders, being so weak, it was no marnell if they pined being pend
up or confined within some garrison, the enemy being always stronger without.
For the assurance of our victuals that come unto us, garrisons would be placed
in convenient distances. Caesar in the wars with the Peditu^ 10000. sibi
celeriter mitti voluit, quo expeditiore re frumentaria vteretur. Caes. bell.
Gal. 7.
Auuergnacs used 10. thousand Heduans to this purpose. Neither would he suffer
any Vellaunodunum ne quem post se hostem relinqueret, quo expeditiore
refrumentaria vteretur, oppugnare instituit. ibidem.
town to remain untaken betwixt him and his victuals. For the fetching in of
victuals, a convenient power of horsemen would be sent forth seconded with
footmen, to forage, and range the country.

Besides this the army would have diverse cariages laden with victuals to be
assigned to every regiment, and to follow the army; as it was in the expedition
of Cyrus into Persia. Such as dwell near where our army goes, would be
summoned to bring victuals into the army, unless they would have their
country ruinated. And as the Romans had aid of victuals in the wars of
Liu. 21.
Carthage out of Sicile, in the wars of Liu. 31.
Macedonia out of Afrike: and Caesar in his wars of Belgium was furnished
from Caes. bell. gal. 2.
Rheims, in his wars with the Caes. bell. gal. 1.
Heluetians, from the Heduans: so our associates, such especially as dwell
near, are to be prayed to aid us with corn, and other provision. But yet so
that we do not altogether depend upon their pleasures, as we do in the low
countries, where our soldiers receive from hand to mouth. Honest men C. Cotta
Genabi rei frumentariae iussu Caesaris praeerat. Caes. bell. gal 7.
would have commission and money given unto them to buy provision in places
where it may be had. Finally, such as buy corrupt victuals, or use other
fraud, would severely be punished.

Further, order would be taken always before hand, that supplies of victuals
may follow the army in time, least that, as in the Portugal voyage, the army
be forced to return for want, before the provision come at it. If this be not,
then ought not the army to proceed further, then it may be assured of
victuals.

Lastly, both such victuals as may be found in the country, and such as are
in the army, are to be dispensed warely, at least without waste. Le soldat
vinant a discretion en peu de iours affame tout un pais. Hist. de troubl. de
Fr. li. 8.
Soldiers (as the French saying is) living, or rather spoiling at their own
discretion, in few days do famish a country. The Romans used to give the
soldiers certain days provision before hand, which they might not spend in
fewer, as is evident both by example of Scipio sailing into Affrike in the
second wars with Carthage, end also of Caesar in his wars in France, and
by examples of diverse others.

To conclude, all those that look for good success in wars, must provide
both victuals, and arms, and all provision for the wars before hand, as the
precedents of the preparations made by the Thucid. 1.
Athenians, and Spartanes before the Peloponesian war; of Liu. 29.
Scipio, before his expedition into Affrike; of Xenoph. exp. Cy. 1.
Cyrus, into Persia; of Salust. bell. Iug.
Metellus and Marius against Iugurtha; of the Spaniardes against us, when they
came against us with their Navy; and in sum, of all wise people and states,
that knew what perteyned to the wars, do teach us. Charles of Phil. Commin.
Burgundy sitting down before Nancy without sufficient munitions, was forced
to rise with a scorn. The same happened to the French before Hist. de troubl.
Sancerre anno 1569. and must needs happen to all, that without sufficient
provision attempt matters rashly. Wise kings therefore do forecast before hand
what force, or provision will be sufficient; fools say, Oh had I wist; or, I
never thought upon it.

CHAP. III. That before we begin wars, we are to procure what strength, or
help we can of our neighbors, or others: and to draw the same, as much as is
possible for us, from our enemies.
AS in private affairs particulars receive mutual help each of other, of
whom it is verified, that (...). Homer.
two joining together do more easily atchieue matters, then each man single by
himself; so in public executions, where many are linked together, they more
easily execute, and are hardlier broken. Insomuch as friends and Non exerc^tus,
neque thesauri praesidia regui sunt, verum amici. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
confederates are no less the strength of states, then forces and treasure.
Therefore did the Circumspiciebant ipsi externa auxilia. Liu. 1.
Sabines hearing of the preparatiues that Seruius Tullius made against them,
look out what foreign aid they mightadioyne unto themselves. The Athenians
Thucid. 2.
and Spartanes in the Peloponesian war did not so much stand upon their own
strength, as the aids, and succors of their confederates. The Thucid. 5. and
Diodor. Sicul.
Syracusans by the help of the Spartanes withstoode the invasion of the
Athenians made upon them, and foiled them in diverse incounters. I need not use
any long discourse in this matter: it has been the continual use of the
Kings of this Island to use the help of the Burguygnions, and low Countries
against France. And likewise have the French relied much upon the aid of the
Scots against us.

Neither ought any Prince, or nation so to presume of their own strength, as
that they refuse the aid of friends. The Romans although after their
victories against Annibal, at what time they began the Macedonian war, they
were in their prime of strength, and most flourishing estate; yet required they
aid of the Carthaginians, of Masinissa, and of the Aetolians, and others
against Philip King of Macedonia. And dear it cost Perseus the King of
Macedonia, that for sparing of money refused the aid of thirty thousand
Gauls offering to serve him against the Romans. What hinderance it has been
to us, and what it may be that the Town of Antwerpe, and other parts of the
low Countries were not received when they were offered unto us in these
brawles against Philip of Spain, I know not, some doubt. It may be said, they
would not yield without conditions. But what purpose is it, to talk of
conditions, seeing they would have yielded themselves into any princes hands,
if they might have been received?

Further as we are to require aid of our friends; so we are to withdraw what
aid we can from the enemy. Many reasons teach us so to do, which common
practice does teach us to be true. as the body in the distemper of the parts:
so the state in the disagreement of the members, is greatly weakened, and
easily dissolved. The Romans therefore as they were masters in other military
documents, so did they diligently practice intelligence with the enemies
friends, and subjects. Before they transported their forces into Afrike, they
dealt with Syphax, and assured themselves of Masinissa kings of Numidia. Before
they charged Philippe king of Macedonia, they caused most of his partisans in
Greece to revolt from him. And Caesar by the help of part of the Gauls, which
he drew to his side, did subdue the rest, and them also afterward.

Pompey purposing to abase the power of Caesar, did first draw from him two
legions or regiments, and afterward Labienus one of Caesar's chief friends,
and commanders. Of this only practice great effects are wont to ensue.
Caesar by disioyning and separating the forces and causes of the Gauls,
overcame them all. By his intelligence with the ancient Britons, he
understood the estate of the country, and had great help to atchieue his
purpose against it.

While they of the city of Phil. Comin.
Dinant suffered themselves to be disioyned from their associates of Liege,
Charles Duke of Burgundy did easily overcome them. If Lewis the xi. of France
had not separated, and broken the league, first between the Duke of Burgundy
and the Dukes of Britain, and Normandy, and afterward betwixt king Edward the
fourth, and the Duke of Burgundy: he could not have escaped with so little
loss, nor vanquished his enemies with so great gain. We have also domestical
examples of the same but too many, and which I cannot without some grief
remember. not with dint of sword, nor open force, but with secret practices
with our associates and friends in France, the French took not only
Normandy, but also Gascoyne and Guienne from the English nation. And never
omitting any opportunity to trouble us, they wrought much woe unto this land,
in the days of King John, by furthering and procuring the revolt of the
Nobility.

Neither can any estate continue, that has his parts divided. For (as one
says) it falls out, that while every man looking to his own present safety
Dum pugnant singuli, vincuntur omnes. Tacit.
suffers his friends to fight single, all are overcome. By this means the
Spaniard has so much prevailed in the Low countries, and the people have hurt
themselves. For disioyning their counsels and forces, and refusing the
Resusans le secours des estrangers. Hist de troubl. de Fran. lib. 1.
aid of strangers, they are for the most part a spoil unto the enemy. And if
we would have used greater force, and more diligence in withdrawing from the
Spaniard his associates, and subjects of Portugal, of the Islands, and of the
Low countries; he would have been long ere this very gentle to deal withal.
But some wise men, as they say, have not only not sought to cause his subjects
to revolt, but have refused, and still refuse to receive them, that hold out
their hands, craving help of friends and long since are weary of the Spanish
tyranny.

As for those, that suppose the Spaniards to have such hold of all the
countries which now they possess, and of the inhabitants thereof, that we
should but loose labor in attempting their revolt, they seem to be ignorant
not only of the state of his countries, and of the Spanish government, but
also of the nature of things. It is well known with what coffeehouse, and
grudge both the Portugals, and those of the Low countries do serve the
Spaniard. The Portugals were ready to receive us at our last expedition
thither, and would have declared themselves further, if they had perceived,
that we had been able to defend them against the Spaniard.

The state of Milan is holden more by force, then by love, or good title. They
of Naples and Sicile have by many signs declared their great coffeehouse of
the Spanish yoke. The Indians would revolt, if they knew which way. In all
countries there are ever some, that either for hope; or hatred desire change of
state.

Annibal after that he had once, or twice beaten the Romans in Italy: did
afterward maintain the wars for the most part with the aids of that
country. And Caesar used the strength of the Gauls, against the rest of the
nation. Upon the first overthrow which Scipio gave to the Carthaginians in
Affrike, he caused most of the country to turn enemy against them.

Neither may we think that the state of Spain is in this point, better then
other nations, especially seeing the stirs in Aragon, and Grenade beside many
other offers in Castile, do declare, that there are among them many
mal-contents. The Spaniard doubts not to find many such among us, but it
were to be wished, that we would rather make trial first, whether there were
any such to be found in Spain. When the French made their expeditions into
Guicciard. Hist.
Naples, they found great aids in the country, some also beside exspectation.
Why then should Spain differ from Italy?

But while we seek to augment our forces with the succors of our associates
and friends; we are not so to rely upon them, but that we prepare sufficient
forces of our own nation, both to resist the enemy, and if need be to
command our associates. therein following the wise proceedings of the Romans,
that never would admit a greater number of associates, then they had of their
citizens in their army; and had always an eye, that they practiced not with
the enemy. In this as in (...). Epicharm.
other points, to distrust, is a great point of wisdom. The Scipioes did
trust but too much to the aids of the Celtiberians in Spain. For being
abandoned by them, they were exposed naked and unprovided to the mercy of their
enemies. Liu. 1.
Tullius Hostilius did deal more wisely. For although he had the succors of
the Albans with him, yet had he force sufficient to vanquish his enemis
without them. If not; he had far worse speeded. For in the mids of the
battle, he was forsaken by them. The Guicciard. Hift.
Switzers that came in aid of Lewis Sforza sold him into the hands of Lewis
the xij, at Nouara, and did not only forsake him. And of late years, the
Protestants that eame out of Germany under the guidance of the Dukes of
Bouillion, were in their greatest need forsaken of the Lansknights, that came
to aid them. I need not labor inueh to prove this, seeing the great
expenses, that by the French and others hane been wasted upon the Almains of
late time, do teach us how little use, or hope there is of the aid of that
nation. Of all those that follow our ensigns, and join together with us those
are least to be trusted, that are lately revolted. Good it were to try such,
and then to trust them. Two Guicciardio.
Spaniards feining them selves fugitives in the wars betwixt the Spaniards
and the Venetians attempted to kill Aluian the Venetian General. The like was
attempted by certain Turks against Scanderbeg. The Numidians that revolted to
the Romans, a little before their battle with Annibal at Cannae, made a great
flaughter among the Romans, after the battle ioyued. Maureuell that runagate
pretending to forsake the enemy upon some displeasure, would have slain the
Admiral: but when he saw how that could not be done without evident danger,
he slew Mouy a valiant gentleman, and so returned again to the enemy. Never
any did wholly rely upon his associates, especially such as were newly come unto
him, without loss, or danger. Good it had, been for us not to have looked for
so much at the Portugales hands, as we did, it may be they would have assisted
us, if we had been the stronger, but every one treads on those, that are
thrown under foot, and thrusts forward those that are falling.

To assure us therefore of our associates, the safest way is to stand upon our
own strength, and to trust more to our selves then to them: the next is by
hostages, such as are well accounted of: another means is by gages of towns.
King Froissart.
Edward the third by seasing of Cherburg for pawn, assured himself of the
king of Nauarres loyal dealing. The like course is taken in assuring the
contract made between us and the low countries. I would we were in like sort
assured of the towns we hold there, as he was. The reasons we have to fear
are diverse: but these in show open; that the town^^ men of Vlishing and Briel,
and the rest being armed, and in number passing our ^arrison, and giving them
victuals and munitions from hand to mouth, may force the same either to yield,
or de^^rs ^t pleasure. That they have not yet attempted it, the fear of the
Spaniard (...) cause. If that scruple were removed, I fear what will full^^^,
without extraordinary diligence, and better order, and more force: but to
assure our selves of our associates there is no be^^^^ course then to do them
justice. The same Amici officio and fide partuntur. Salust. bell. Iug.
both procures friends, and ^^inreineth them in devotion. For who will adhere
(...) them, which wrong them, and oppress them? Thucid. 1. and Cic. offic. lib.
1.
Pausanias and (...) by ruling their associates with rigor, and extremity,
caused them to ^^e part the Lacedemonian army discontent. The like effect did
the covetousness of the Athenians, that respected only their own profit,
work in their partisans in the Peleponesian war. They must also be defended
against their enemies, if we look to have their help against our enemies.
This reason moved Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Caesar to hazard himself in the succouring of the Boians at Gergouia: and
Joshua to come in aid to the Gibeonites, although fraudulently they had caused
him to enter into league with them. The Romans not sending aid to the
Sag^ntines besieged by Annibal in time, lost not only them, but the favor of
all Spain. And vainly did we look for the help of Portugal, being not
provided to defend the Country against the Spaniard. To stand Haec ratio nec
amicos parit nec inimicos tollit. Liu.
aloof when our neighbors require aid, is a course neither to help our
friends nor hurt our enemies. Besides the same is most dishonorable (for who
does not despise those, in whom they see no help) yea and unprofitable. for
the enemy is thereby strengthened, and we weakened.

Of the conditions and contractes of association, I shall have occasion to
speak in the treatise of peace. For the ends of wars, are not only the
beginning of peace, but also of associations, and friendships for the most
part. Thus much only may serve in this place, that some are only offensive,
some offensive, some with equal conditions on both sides, some with respect to
one side. and as great diversities there are, as of diverse states, and
conditions of things. Anniball and Philip of Macedonia, joined in league upon
these conditions, that Liui. 23.
Philip should waste the coast of Italy with his Na^i^^, and make war upon
the Romans by sea and land, until such (...) ^s they had brought Italy in
subjection, which should then belong to the Carthaginians: that the wars
being there ended, Annibal (...) pass over with his army into Greece, and
help him to subdue that Country, and the Lands adjoining, which should re^^
(...) ^o Philip. They of Locrensibus iussu Annibalis data pax. Societas eo iure
stabat, vt Poenus Locrensem, Poenum Locrensis pace, ac bello i^^^ret. Liu. 24.
Locres conditioned with Annibal, that (...) help other both in war, and
peace. Many special m^^er^ ^ know, (...) and comprised in articles con^^med
on both ^^des by (...), and sometime by oath. And therefore whatsoever articles
are agreed upon, they are diligently, and loyally to (...) ^erforme^. It is a
sure course to win us credit among our neighbors, and to link them in
^^^ine good wi^^ toward us.

CHAP. IIII.
Part 1. Of the General, and the parts and qualities required in him.
HItherto we have spoken of such preparatiues as are to be made often times in
time of peace, but always before the wars: now we are to speak of that
which is the beginning, and first care, or at least act of wars. I mean the
musters, and choice of captains and soldiers. This among the Romans belonged
to the Generals, which upon the first Prima belli cura agere delectus, reuocare
veteranos. Tacit. 18.
moving of wars, called all the people according to the tribes or divisions,
into a place appointed, out of them to take such numbers, and such men, as were
most fitting. And most reasonable it is, that the General that should lead
men, should have the oversight, and chief, if not only direction in the
choice of them. For who can better make choice of instruments, then such
artificers as use them in their works? When the Generals themselves were
otherwise busied, yet did Coss. dum ipsi quaestionibus impedicbantur, T.
Maenium delectui habe^do praefecerunt. Liu. 39.
they commit the matter to men of great authority and wisdom. Caesar Caesar
per legatos M. Silanum, C. Antistium, C, Sextium delectum habere instituit.
Caes. com. bell. gal. 6
employed therein his counsel of wars, which also in his absence were his
lieutenants. First therefore we are to speak of the General, then of
inferior commanders, and thirdly of common soldiers. In the discourse
concerning the General, we are to consider, first, what qualities and parts
and sufficent General ought to have: secondly, what instructions or council
he is to use: and lastly, with what commission and power he ought to be
furnished wichall.

The principal care that a Prince or State that enters into wars is to have
is, that there be choice made of a sufficient General. I know that the place
is for the most part granted either for respect of Nobility, or kindred, or
favor. The Kings of this land in time past employed their children and uncles,
which notwithstanding proved not the worst. Richard the 2. Froissart.
in the wars against the Nobility, made ye Duke of Ireland a fauourit of
his, General; but he was not followed. The French kings may impute most part
of their had success in their wars to ye insufficie^cie of their Generals.
In the wars of Naples Charles the 8. named Montpensier f^tto luego tonenge
delre, piu stimato per la grandozza sua, and per esser del sangue reale, che
per proprio valor. Guicciard. lib. 1.
Montpensier his lieutenant in respect of nobility, rather then sufficiency:
Lewis the 12. in his wars of Guicciar. hist.
Lombardy, made Chaumont his minion General of his forces. But nothing did
more hasten the overthrow of the French causes there, the^ their
insufficiency. Lewis Sforsa passing over diverse men of account, reposed all
his trust in Guicciar. lib. 4.
Galeaz Sanseuerin, a man of small desert. Leo the 10. for kindred sake would
needs employe Lorence Medici in his wars with the Duke of Vrbin, both which
spedde alike. Which examples with diverse other of our time, which I will not
mention, least any man might think himself interessed thereby, may move us to
have more care what Generals we do employe in such services. In other matters,
albeit favor may take place: yet sure least ought it to swaye in choice of the
General. Nothing is more dangerous, then the evil success of wars. What
reason therefore have Princes to choose Summo periculo summus quaerendus
imperator, vt summo periculo summus gubernator. Liu. lib. 24.
weak men Governors of greatest matters in wars, seeing as in Sea causes
men in greatest dangers are wont to make choice of most skillful Masters and
Pilots? Or what impudency is it for a man to take charge of a Ship, that
cannot see, but by others eyes, nor judge, but by others direction? And why not
likewise may they be Impudentem and gubernatorem and imperatorem esse, qui cum
alienis oculis ei omnia agenda sint, postulet sibi aliorum capita ac fortunas
committi. Liu. 26.
accounted shameless, that take upon them the charge of men's lives, and
goods, which have no judgment, but by others report and direction? Of the
weakness of Generals, proceed contentions betwixt the chief commanders,
delays, needelesse expenses, disorders, disgraces, and the overthrow of
Armies and States. And more shall an army of Hearts do, guided by a Plutarch.
Lion, then an army of Lions led by a fearful Heart. Caesar's Caes. comment.
bell. gal. 5.
invincible old soldiers were overcome by the cowardice of Sabinus their
leader. yet such was the skill of Caesar, that he could use young soldiers,
and obtain great victories by small forces. Marcellus with the relics of the
Roman army, overthrown at Can, gave unto Annibal a great repulse. The
Romans under the leading of C. Martius Coriolanus Volsci duce Martio
Coriolano, vincentes ostenderunt ducibus potius, quam exercitu rem Romans
supetiorem ^^sse. Liu.
overcame the Volscians, when the same man exiled upon displeasure against his
Country, took on him to lead the Volscians, they diverse times prevailed
against the Romans. Which shows what moment a skillful captain brings
toward the obteyning of victory. And in the wars which the Romans had
against the Latins, the forces being equal, yet the Romans prevailed by the
good direction of their General Fabius, whose government was such, that all
men confessed ( as Liu. 9.
Liuy reports) that what side soever should have had him for their leader,
the same must needs have prevailed. In the battle of the Romans against
Pyrrhus, non Epirotae, tomanos vicit. Fabritius Plutar. apophth.
Pyrrhus king of Epeirus (now Albany) Fabritius acknowledged, that they were
overcome only by the skill of Pyrrhus, more then by the force of his army.
And contrariwise, little account is to be made of an army, that wants
direction. Caesar feared not, as himself De bell. ciu. lib. 1.
reports, the old companies of Spain, although otherwise much to be
esteemed, because he knew their Generals Petreius and Afranius, to be men of
no merit, nor skill. I have my self heard some Spaniards greatly complain of
the defectes of the Duke of Medina Sidonia the General of their Navy, when
they came upon our coast. And although God was the author, yet I doubt not,
but that was some good means of their evil success. Wherefore if Princes
look for good success in their wars, let them without affection, and
partiality, make choice of a sufficient General, religious, skillful,
courageous, and adorned with such virtues, both for war and peace, as the
importance of the matters which he manageth requires.

In a General, first I require religion: for if the Gentiles did suppose that
those affairs succeeded best unto them, which they Ab Jove principium. Arat.
Phaenom.
began in Gods name; shame it were for Christians to have a worse conceit of
that matter. And if all other matters, sure the hazardes of war require
religion in the chief directors. God he is Lord of Hosts, and giver of
victories; and sure it is not probable, he will give it to those, that ask it
not at his hands. God prescribed certain exercises of religion to his people
in their wars; before them he would have the Priests to sound certain silver
Trumpets. Constantine had all exercises of religion in his camp, and so proved
most victorious. The Spaniards in their wars assign to every Tertio, or
Regiment certain Priests. What should I speak of those that make profession
of religion, seeing the Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
Greeks did seldom attempt any dangerous service, but their captains first
consulted with their gods? Cic. de Nature. deor.
Cicero does attribute the good success which the Romans had in their
wars, to the religious care they had of the observance of holy ceremonies,
and religion. Whatsoever mishap came unto their State, or Army, they ascribed
the same likewise to the neglect, or contempt of religion. They esteemed that
to be the cause of their overthrow at Liu. 5.
Allia by the Gauls, at Liu. 2.2.
Thrasimene by Annibal, and in diverse other unfortunate incounters, Machiauels
divinity, that thinks religion in men of war foolerie, and proposes that
impious Atheist Caesar Borgia for a pattern to a Prince, that aspireth to be
great to be followed, was detested even of the barbarous nations, which in
wars attempted nothing, but with religious ceremonies, as Tacitus and Caesar
declare in the Gauls and Germans, and Herodotus and Thucidides in the
Thracians and barbarous people. Wherefore let the General be religious, and a
mainteiner of religion, and forbid blasphemies, and other impieties too too
common in the common sort, if he expect the favor of God, and good success
in his affairs.

The General ought further to have knowledge, and judgment in matters of
war. The same is the special and most proper ornament of a General, in
(...). Arist. polit. li. 5. c. 9.
whom the same is more respected, then all other moral virtues. C. Fabritus in
the dangerous wars the Romans had against Pyrrhus, in laboring that Aul.
gel. l. 4. c. 8.
Cornelius a man rauinous, but very expert in war, might be chosen Consul,
or General, declares that the skill and experience of a valiant Captain
covers other faults. This knowledge and judgment has many branches: the
General ought to understand as well the enemies estate, as his own: he ought
to know what forces, and what provision of arms, horses, carriages, victuals,
and other furniture, and munition will be sufficient, and how he is to have
the same: he ought to take heed of the enemies trappes; to know how to
march, or Imperatorij muneris est castris locum capere, co^meatus expedire, ab
insidijs praecanere, tempus pugnae eligere, aciem instruere, subsidijs firmare.
Liu. 9.
lodge safely; how to fight with advantage, where to employe horsemen, where
shot, where other sorts of weapons, and to understand the advantages of all
sorts of grounds: he hought to understand the times when to fight, and
advantages of weather, and Sun: he ought not to be ignorant of any stratageme
of war, nor of treaties and conditions of truce, or peace: least as our
auncesters in time past did, he loose by sleight that which before he had won
by force: finally, in defending or besieging of Towns, in assaults,
escaladaes, drawing of trenches, mines, making of batteries, forcing or
defending of passages of rivers, or straytes: he may not be ignorant of any
point of war; proposing to him self the example of Julius Caesar, a man in
all faites of arms most skifull. Whose judgment was such, that Hirt. de bell.
African.
sitting still in his Tent in his camp at Ruspina, he knew what the enemy
would do, or could do, and prescribed what was to be done against him: And
deigned not to look out, when Scipio made show to assault his camp. This
knowledge brings with it consideration, and foresight. Both which ought to
be in the General: that, least he want things necessary; this, least he
run into the snares laid for him by the enemy. Of Aemilus Aemilius dies
noctesque intentus ea sola quae adid bellum pertinerent animo agitabat. Liu.
4.4.
Paulus it is reported, that being chosen General for the wars in Macedonia,
his mind was wholly bent on that service, so that he gave himself no rest,
neither night nor day. Captains in (...). Diodor. Si call.
wars must look both forward and backward, and every way whence any danger,
or advantage is toward. For in wars Non licetin bello bis peccare.
every error in mortal. Many do more matters by sleight, then by force.
Charles the fifth Froissart.
of France did more repress the force of the English nation by practice, then
by force. The Lacedaemonians when their leaders prevailed Plutarch.
against their enemies by counsel and stratagemes, sacrificed an ox; when by
open force, a cock onley.

The next virtue required in a General, is Virtutes imperatoris praecipuae,
labor in negotiis, fortitudo in periculis, industria in agendo, celeritas in
conficiendo, consilium in prouidendo. Cic. pro leg. Manil.
courage, and speed to execute that which is wisely determined. For vented
counsels, and vented wine, do forthwith loose all good tasle. And cowardly
captains discourage valiant men, that suppose the danger to be as great, as
their leaders, take it. Caes. bell. ciu. 1.
Domitius had no sooner determined with himself to fly away from Corfinium,
but the soldiers lost courage. The cowardice of Crassus the Appain. bell. Parth.
rich, gave occasion to the great overthrow, which the Romans had given them
by the Parthians. The faint heart of Titurius Sabinus, charged by Cas. bell.
gal. 5.
Ambiorix, made his soldiers faint. Contrariwise, resolute men give courage to
their soldiers, and restore battles almost lost. Caesar's courageous heart
occasioned the victory against Pompeyes sons at Munda. King Richard the
third, had almost hazarded the matter at the journey of Bosworth: if he had
but had three hundred men like him self, the field had been his. But because
his cause was not good, it pleased not God to give him the means. Iugurtha and
praelio strenuus erat, and bonus co^silio, quod difficile est. nam alterum ex
prouidentia t^morem, alt^rum ex audacia plerumque temeritatem efficit. Salust.
bell. Iugu^.
Iugurtha is by Salust commended both for prowess, and counsel. Nothing does
more avail in wars, then the example of the General. He is a cowardly
companion, that dares not to do, as he sees his General do. Valerius
Coruinus used no other encouragement to his soldiers then this, that they
should Facta mea non dicta sequi volo, nec disciplinam, sed exemplum a me
petere. Liu. 7.
imitate not his words, but his deeds, and do as they saw him to give them
an example. Not that the General ought lightly to hazard his person, (for that
were great temeritie) or vex himself with labor, (for that were vain) but
that he ought to show himself always courageous in dangers, and forward in
labors. No laws, nor precepts can do herein more, then the Generals example.
The Romans followed Lucan.
Cato through the dry and hot sands of Barbary, and shame made Xenophons
soldiers march up the hill, seeing him go before them. Neither has any thing
more animated the French Kings soldiers of late, then the example of so
valiant a Prince leading them.

They that have skill and resolution in matters of war, cannot choose (if God
be pleased) but have good success, and authority. For what man wisely laying
his plot, and resolutely executing the same, can fail of his expectation, or
want an honorable reputation both with his own men, and with the enemy.
Foelicitas rerum gestarum exercitus beneuolentia^ imperatoribus, and res
aduersae odium conciliant. Caes. de bell. ciu. lib. 7.
And therefore what need precepts of these matters, which is deed are rather
in the power of others, then of our selves, and follow of those virtues which
before I have spoken of?

There are also other virtues required in a General, which although they be
not so necessary as the former; yet for the execution of matters, are very
requisite and profitable; as namely justice, liberality, courtesy, clemency,
temperance, and loyalty. Justice is an ornament both in war and peace, well
beseeming all Governors, but especially the Governors of armies. It is
profitable to retain the good wills of our associates, necessary for the
winning of the good will of our own soldiers. The same has use as well in
respect of enemies, as friends. The Faliscians besieged by Camillus, moved
rather with the opinion of his justice, that sent back unto them the
Schoolmaster, that delivered into his hands the youth of the City, then by
force, yielded their City unto him. Pyrrhus did never offer to treat of
peace, before the Romans had sent him back that traitor, that offered for a
certain sum of money to empoyson him. Just non minus, quam fortiter bella
gerimus. Liu. lib. 5.
Wars are to be governed not by cruelty, but by justice. When Cic. offic. 1.
Pausanias in the Peloponnesian war dealt rigorously with his associats, they
al forsook him. Which also happened to the Athenians in the same war for
like cause. And who does not hate the Spaniard that seldom suffers men of
quality, that come in his power to escape, and has devised a kind of
proscription, by which he offers wages and rewards to such as will kill or
empoison princes, or others whom he maligneth and proscribeth? without justice
the discipline of war cannot be maintained: neither has the valiant reward
without it, nor the coward punishment. Therefore had the Romans especial regard
of justice. And justice had in their camps a special That place was called
Principia. Ius dicebat in principiis. Liu. 28.
place, where it was administered.

Little needs it, that I declare how necessary liberality is in wars, that
both in peace, and at all times has such efficacy to attract men's favors.
The soldiers dare adventure any thing, where there is large reward. Magni
animi magnis honoribus fiunt. Liu. 4.
Nothing does more stir up valiant minds, then great honors. Eo impenditur
labor and periculu^, vnde emolumentum and honos speratur. Liu. 4.
Every man bestows labor where he looks for profit, and reward. Therefore
had the Romans most valiant soldiers, for that they were most liberal in
their rewards. Among them, as their General Decius said, the highest places
and Non generis, sed virtutis est praemium. Liu. 7.
honors were given to valiant men for their virtue and prowess, not to cowards
for their nobility, or gentry. They Militem iis artibus fecerat and periculi,
and laboris auidum. viz. By liberality. Liu. 9.
by their liberality made their soldiers forward in labor and danger. The
Captains of the Romans although poor themselves, yet enriched their
soldiers. Publicola, Valerius, and Menenius Agrippa were in their time great
co^manders, yet did they not leave behind them so much, as to discharge their
funerals. But they enriched the state, and left behind them a fame of virtue,
that will never decay. Caesar Caes. bell. ciu. 3.
with his great liberality had his soldiers so obsequent, that in those civil
wars, which he had against Pompey and others, few or none could be allured by
any promises to forsake him, whereas infinite of the enemies did daily revolt,
and fly unto him. The Turks in wars are most venturous, for that they know
they shall have great recompense for well doing. He that first mounted the
walls of Constantinople, was afterward made Bascha. And Ochiali of a poor
mariner for his valiant service was made Admiral of the Turks navy, and one
of his counsel.

The hope that the Spaniards have of their increase of pay, which they call
Ventaias, and of preferment to higher places does much encourage them to
adventure. And what is the reason, that so few do hazard themselves in these
days but this, that the reward of hurts and long service is, for the most
part, disgrace and beggarie? the General has no means to reward the valiant:
pillars and spoilers wax rich, and purchase: valiant soldiers die naked, and
are used as abiects. If a pot of gold were offered unto them, they would not
refuse it, as did Cic. offic. 1.
Fabritius the Roman captain, but some would rather sell their father, their
country, yea and soul, rather then forgo it.

Nothing is more hurtefull to the proceedings of wars then miserable
niggardise. Although a captain were endued with all other virtues, yet this
one fault would either suppress them, or disgrace them. They would but (...).
Thucid. 2.
serve him to make all things more saleable, as said Pericles. Praeceps
Annibalis in auaritiam animus ad spolianda inclinans quae non poterat tueri
foedum consilium dedit cum inceptu, tum exitu. Liu. 26.
Annibal, for that through covetousness he fell to spoil his associats, did
alienate al their good wills. Perseus the king of Macedonia sparing of his
money Liu. 44.
lost himself, and his kingdom, where if he would have been at any charge,
he might have had the aid of thirty thousand Gauls most valiant men to serve
him against the Romans. Phi. Commin. 5
Frederike the emperor the last of that name was of every one contemned, and
abused, for that they knew that he would rather incur any disgrace, then
spend any money. Constat potuisse conciliari animos militum quantulacunque parci
senis liberalitate. Tacit. lib. Hist. 17.
Galba the emperor might have retained the good will of his soldiers with any
small cost, or expense bestowed upon them: but it was a death to him to spend
money. Therefore was he forsaken of his soldiers, and slain of his enemy.
While men either have not money, or will not spend it upon necessary provision
before hand: captains want souldies, soldiers want arms, victuals, munitions
of war, and all things necessary. Nay they want will, and courage. For what
courage can men have when there is no hope of reward? By this Auaritia fidem,
probitatem, ceterasque bonas arts subuertit, pro his superbiam, crudelitatem,
does negligere, omnia venalia habere docuit. Salust. coniur. Cat.
means all military discipline is disordered, soldiers famished, forward men
impouerished, the honor of military profession stained, and unworthy persons
and greedy gulles that lie fatting and purchasing at home, enriched with the
spoils of their country. This was the first occasion of the ruin of Rome,
that all things were there set to sale: it was the overthrow of the state of
the Largitionis, praedaeque and dulcedine priuati co^modi, sensus malorum
publicoru^ adimebatur. Liu. 1. de Gabiis.
Gabians, and I fear will be the bane of England, if it be lawful here also
to do as others did, without controlment.

The General would likewise be courteous, clement, and gentle. Nothing does
more please the common soldier. This was a special commendation of Charles the
fifth, but borrowed from antiquity. Caesar Cic. pro Marcel.
among other his virtues had this commendation singular of affability and
courtesy to his soldiers, of clemency to ward his enemies. Vest habituque
vix a gregario mili^e discrepans. Tacit. 18.
Vespasian by this means obtained the favor of his soldiers, and Titus Tacit.
21.
his son was their special delight. Germanicus circumire saucios, vulnera
intuens, alium spe, asium gloria, cunctos alloquio, and cura sibique and
praelio ^irmabat. Tacit. annal. 1.
Germanicus with his care for his soldiers, and his courteous speech bound
them to love him. The savage minds of mutins are Obsequio mitigantur animi.
Liu.
oftentimes mitigated with fair words, when no rigor could otherwise tame,
or pacify them. Contrariwise, nothing does more hurt sometimes, then the
untimely rigor, and austerity of the General. Charles Duke of Burgundy in his
latter time grew so austere, and peremptory, that no man durst council him any
thing, or contrary him. The same as Philip Phil. Com. li. 7.
Commines testifies was his utter ruin. Liu. 4.
Posthumous for his rigor was stoned to death of his own soldiers: which
also happened to Cinna, whose untimely austerity was the ruin of their
affairs. Alexander if to his great valiantness he had joined affability and
clemency, he had not in the end grown odious to his own soldiers. Who does
not detest Annibal for his great cruelty?

Temperance is a virtue that shines in peace especially, yet has it no small
use in the midst of wars, and being wanting in a captain does make him
want so much of perfection. For how is it like, that he can govern others
well, that cannot rule himself, nor his affection? or who can look for
modesty and sobriety in the soldiers, where the Captain is given to wine or
women, and spends his time in riot, and excess? let this virtue therefore be
added to the garland of an absolute Captains perfections.

Liu. 25.
Scipio by restoring a fair woman to her husband Allucius, won to himself
the heart not only of that man, but also of the woman's friends, and diverse
Spaniardes. And Xenoph. paed. Cyr.
Cyrus bound Abradata unto him, for sparing his wife Panthea. Quint. Curt.
Alexander is renowned among posterity for his continency toward the wife, and
daughters of Darius.

Like commendation, though in another subject, does Plutarch. in Epaminond.
Epaminondas deserve, who when his citizens did feast, and riot, walked soberly
about the wall of Thebes, to see that the enemy made no attempt against the
city. Nothing does more hurt or hinder the proceedings of wars, then riot and
intemperancy. Annibals soldiers were overcome with the delights of Capua, whom
the Romans with force could not subdue. Antiochus in the midst of his
preparatiues falling in love, spent a winter in making of a match, and so lost
time, and opportunity to transport his army into Italy, as Annibal advised
him. The French grew odious to them of Sicilia by reason of their insolences,
which gave them cause to rebel, and to murder them al in one evening. The
intemperance of the enemy gives many opportunities to those that be watchful.
Liu. 8.
Cales was taken while the citizens lay drunken in a solemn feast. The same
was the destruction of Troy. Marcellus perceiving the negligent guard which the
Syracusans made on a feast day at night, surprised the town by escalade. The
Alphons. de Vlloa.
Turks took Zeresana a strong town in Sclauony upon Shrouetuesday at night,
when the townsmen after their manner of their carneuall being drunk, were
careless and secure. Much more therefore behooves it the General to watch, to
be sober, temperate and careful. These virtues are singularly commended in a
General; yet may I not forget desire of true honor, love of the country, and
loyalty toward the Prince and Which unless a General have, al other
excellencies do rather make him suspected, then commend him. For who can trust
him that has intelligence with the enemy, or receives pensio^ from him: The
French men do merrily scoff at some great men of our nation, that have been
pensioners of the French Kings, Philip Comin.
and whose acquittances are extant in their Eschequer. I would to God the guise
were now every where left. C. Fabritius dwelling in a smoky house refused a
great mass of gold presented unto him by the Samnites. How much more then
ought they to have care of their honor, that dwell in the sight of the world in
gorgeous houses? that great men for a paltry pension, should sell their honor,
it is intolerable. For the love of their country diverse in time past devoted
themselves to death, as the two Decii, as Curtius, as Mutius Sceuola, as
Codrus, as Leonidas, and infinite others. Is the race of them now extinct, that
so few of that sort are in our age and country to be found?

If we consider ancient times, we shall find that those great men, whose
memories continue unto our times, were endued both with these, and many other
virtues. Sueton. in vit. Caes. and Plutarch.
C. Caesar in his actions was most consideratiue, in hazard and danger most
resolute, in executions speedy, oppressing his enemies often times before the
news of his coming were heard, painful in labor, in dangers watchful, in
diet sober, a liberal rewarder of valiant men, a good iusticer where need
required: if al his virtues were in a General, what should be wanting beside
religion? This General I propose to all those that desire honor to imitate, so
near as they can. The honorable parts of Camillus, Valor. Coruinus, (...)
Scipio, are no less to be set before the eyes of Capteins. Annibal among ye
Africans deserves special price. He was in his time subtle, cautelous,
skillful in all faits of arms. He was very skilful that could escape his
snares. Laborious he was and watchful, and speedy, and a strict obseruer of
military orders. Of Cato parsimonia, and vigiliis and labor, cum vltimis
militum certabat. Liu. 34.
Cato it is reported, that in parsimony, watching and labors he contended to
pass the common ^ouldiers. Of the younger Cato Monstrabat tolerare labores.
Lucan.
Lucan gives this testimony, that in the painful march through the deserts of
Affrike he by his patience, and example showed what others were to do. These
things were in the old Roman captains, and as I suppose in those that
succeeded them. Acer militae, anteire agmen, locum castris capere, noctu diuque
consilio, ac si res posceret, manu hostibus obniti, etc. Tacit. annal. 18.
Vespasian is commended for a man of courage in fight, skill in incamping, and
taking the advantage of the ground. Night and day he broke the enemies
purposes, often by counsel, sometime by force, in diet and apparel he was
moderate, and scarce could you know him from a common soldier, comparable with
antiquity, if covetousness had not blemished or rather defaced his other
virtues. By such men the Roman empire grew great: by wants, and vice of the
Generals the same received many overthrows. Claudius, Polyb.
who being captain the Romans were overcome at sea in the first wars with
Carthage, was a contemner of religion, ignorant of matters of war, simple and
cowardly. Flaminius that was slain with his army by Annibal at the lake
Thrasymene was irreligious, rash, unskillful, impetuous, improvident. Varro that
occasioned the great slaughter of the Romans at Cannae, was a man of no merit,
nor judgment, wilful, and inexpert in matters of war. Crassus the rich
seeking too greedily after spoil, was not aware in what country he marched,
before be saw himself enclosed by the enemies. Look the latter emperors,
you shall not find in many of them any thing worthy commendation. Maximinus a
cruel tirant, in matters of war and state was unskillful. Such were most of
the rest. E cubiculo and lectulo iubebat quicquid hosti conduceret. Tacit. 20.
Such captains he calls Ignaua animalia.
Ordeonius that was overthrown by the Germans, being in danger, like a
sluggish beast took his bed, and (as Tacitus says) did thence give forth such
direction, as made most for the enemy. Wherefore seeing so many virtues are
required in a captain, and so small faults lay him open to the enemy: it is
no marvel, if perfect Generals be so rare, and hard to find. Philip king of
Macedonia wondered, that the Athenians changed their leaders so often, as having
great choice, seeing that he in all his time, could not find any more then one
that was excellent, or answerable to his mind; and that was Parmenio. The more
rare they are, the more care all wise Princes, and states ought to have, that
unto such as they commit their armies unto, they adioyne for a supply wise and
experimented counselors. Yea, though the General be never so wise, yet may
he not want his counsel of wars. Of this the order of our discourse leads
us now to speak.

CHAP. IIII. Part. 2. Of the Generalles counsel of wars.
IT were a principal point of wisdom for Princes, and states, that take
wars in hand, to make choice of such a General, as has such parts and
virtues, as before are described: if they will not be persuaded, but will
needs for favor, or kindred, or nobility commit their affairs to men young
in years, and green in experience, and destitute of merit, the next remedy
is to join with them Captains wise, and experimented in matters of war. If
they will do neither, then shall the woeful events of wars teach them, which
no counsel nor reason could persuade them, that wars are managed by
wisdom, value, and experience, and not by favor, nobility, nor great
countenance. In the late troubles of France, Hist. de troubl. de Fr. li. 3.
when Charles the ninth made his brother Henry de Valois his lieutenant
general, to supply his want of years, and experience, he assigned unto him
for his counsel the Dukes of Nemours, and Longueuille, the Marshall Cosse,
Tauanes, Martigues, Carnaualet, Losses, and others which were men of wisdom
and value.

King Edward the third sending his son governor of his army into France,
joined with him diverse experimented heads to assist him. Yea, Consilio cum
legatis, and quaestore communicato etc. Caesar omnes copias castris eduxit.
Cas. bell. gal. 4.
although the Generals themselves were men of worth, and great experience: yet
both among the Romans and other nations had they their counsels with them.
Many eyes see more then one, and soldiers do more willingly execute that,
which they see by wise counsel to have been determined wisely before. Prius
quam incipias consulto, and vbi consulueris mature facto opus est. Salust. de
coniur. Catil.
Before any enterprise be begun, it is wisdom to consult, and after
consultation speedily to execute. (...) Thucid. 1.
It is never good to presume upon the enemies disorders, as if they would take
an evil course, but we ought to consider and foresee in counsel, all that may
happen, as if they did all that which they ought to do, says Archidamus. But
this cannot be done sufficiently, nor orderly without a counsel of wars.
Therefore had the Romans their Legatos, i. bellici consilij auctores, and
muneris prouincialis ministros. Cic. in Vatin.
legates, lieutenants, or counselors assistant unto them, to give counsel and
to speed such matters, as were committed unto them, more or less according to
the importance of affairs in hand. L. Furius in his wars against the Gauls
had five: Caesar in his wars in France had ten: Pompey in the wars
against the pirates had fifteen legates. These served the General for
counsel, in his absence they supplied his place: in any service they had the
charge either of some part of the army, or some wing, or some regiment.

The Lacedaemonians sent Thucid.
Brasidas, and others to assist their admiral. Cnemus in the government of
sea causes. When Commius, Iis delecti ex ciuitatibus attribuuntur, quorum
consilio bellum administraretur. Caes. bell. gal. li. 7.
Virdumarus, Eporedorix, and Vergasillaunus were made Generalles of that army
which the Gauls sent against Caesar, they had also certain wise men assigned
to them out of every state, by whose counsel they were to proceed in the
administration of the wars. Where there is no set counsel, yet is it not
good to do matters without counsel. The Romans used commonly to call a
counsel of their chief officers, colonelles, and others about them. Camillus
before Omnia ibi summo consilio and ratione acta sunt. Fortuna etiam vt fit,
secuta est. Liu. 5.
he charged the Gauls, he set down in counsel how every thing should be
performed. And therefore no marvel (says Liuy) if good success ensued,
seeing all thing were done by order, and deliberation. Ser. Galba being beset
by the people coming down from the mountains on every side, called a
counsel of his chief men, and Concilio celeriter conuocato, sententias
exquirere caepit Galba. Caes bell. gal. 3.
asked advise, what every man thought best to be done in that case. The same
did Caes. bell. gal. 5.
Cotta and Titurius besieged by Ambiorix, though not with like success. Curio
Concilio conuocato de summa rerum deliberare caepit. Caes. de bell. ciu. 2.
calling his counsel about him after his coming into Affrike, deliberated how
to proceed in his matters. Good it had been for him if he had used like
deliberation in all his affairs. But if at any time, sure before the joining
of battle counsel is necessary. Before that Liu. 27.
Scipio brought forth his army to fight with Asdrubal, he called his chief
men to counsel. (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr.
Cyrus before he began the battle with his brother Artaxerxes, called the
colenels, and chief commanders of the Greeks to counsel. There they set down
by common consent what course they were to take for the obtaining of the
victory. And so precious a thing is good counsel, that not only chief
commanders, and men of authority, but also every one that speaks reason is to
be heard. (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 3.
Xenophon, to hear those that brought good intelligence, gave order, that his
familiars should awake him if he were on sleep. He refused not to hear the
counsel of any private soldier.

Let us now see into what calamities they have fallen, which refusing to hear
counsel did al things rashly, and upon their own head. Charles the Duke of
Burgundy deserves the first place, who presuming of his own wisdom, and
refusing to hear all counsel, overthrew himself and his state. He refused to
hear one that came to discover unto him the treason of Campobacho. The
presumption of Guicciar. li. 19.
Lautrecke that would hear no counsel, nor follow any devise but his own,
brought the forces of France before Naples to ruin. It had been good if
Richard the 2. would have followed the advice of his uncle. It is reported that
Charles the 5. was opinionatiue and did many things of his own head; and the
rather, for that he would seem to imitate Caesar. But the matter I think is
mistaken. for neither did Caesar, nor Charles the 5. things without counsel,
nor can any prosper, that do proceed without advise.

Those things standing thus: yet I know not how it comes to pass, that in
great enterprises taken in hand in these times, there is seldom any sound, or
set counsel appointed. If any be: yet are they the Generals familiars, or men
of no great merit, or judgment. And which is very odious, and greatly
offends brave men, Princes and Difficulta gra^dissima d'entrar' nelle camere
and nudientie del re fe ce i Francesi odiosi. Guicciard. lib. 1.
Generals chambers are close shut, and hard it is for a man to come to their
speech whatsoever they have to say. Often times the counsel is divided, which
causes slow resolution, weak expedition, and venteth al good counsels: a
matter much to be avoided. Lib. 16.
Guicciardin says, that the contrariety of Clement the 7. his two counselors
made him ridiculous, slow, and unhappy in all his enterprises. yet was he
otherwise subtle, and worldly wise. Where there is emulation, and contention
betwixt those of the counsel, there is nothing agreed upon, until all
opportunities be passed. Now and then the General, although good counsel be
given, yet least he Ne alienae sententiae indigens videretur, in diuersa ac
deterioca transibat. Tac. 15.
might seem to want or need counsel, he will rather take a worse course.
Which was the case of the Roman captain, through whose folly the Romans were
overthrown by Vologeses. Some men also there are which mislike all counsels,
but such as themselves devise: of which nature was Consilii quamuis egregii,
quod non ipse afferret inimicus. Tac. 17.
Laco the governor of Galba the Emperors guard. which was his own overthrow,
and the overthrow of his Prince. Such are to be excluded from all counsel. Some
there are that in counsel resolve upon every light rumor, and report. which
causes them often times ridiculously to revoke their decrees, and
determinations. This lightness Caesar notes in the Rumoribus and auditionibus
permoti, de summis saepe rebus consilia ineunt. Caes. bell. gal. 4.
Gauls; and the Negauit senatus ad rumores a priuatis consictos
Senatusconsulta facienda. Liu. 35.
Senate of Rome with great gravity reproved, where they show, that the Senate
might not determine matters upon rumors of private men, that lightly prove
counterfeit. Of all others Liu. 44.
Aemilius Paulus most hated those, that would talk and prate, and busy
themselves with matters, which they understood not. And in deed it is an
odious sort of men, that does forge false rumors, and take upon them to
prescribe the Generals what to do. But most dangerous counselors are those,
which are hired of the enemy. A matter not new nor rare, but sure very
scandalous. Guicciardine notes it in the counsel Sono venali spesso i
consigli di principi. Guicciard. lib. 1.
of Charles the 8. of France. The same man declares what Jn molti poteuano
assai i donatiui and le promise de Francesi. Guicciar. lib. 16.
sway French Crowns did also bear among the counselors of Charles the 5.
Philip of Comines reports that Lewis the xj. of France bestowed 16. thousand
Ducats in pension upon the English that followed Edward the 4. into France,
which brake the force of that journey. When the treaty of association was made
betwixt Spain and England, against France in the days of Henry the 8. the
Cardinal and others would not agree, before that the Emperor Charles had given
them caution for the Guicciar. li. 15.
payment of 20. thousand Ducats pension, which they received of the French
king, and were loath to loose, howsoever the common wealth might gain by it.
These men call themselves Pensioners, but their true name is Traitors, hired
for a little gold to betray their Prince and Country. These do ruinate all
enterprises against those that hire them, and therefore deserve not on ely to
be thrust out of the counsel of wars, but also out of their country. These
do make many good counsels known to the enemy, and therefore are no way to
be trusted. Last of all through fear, or delay of resolution, or execution,
many occasions of service pass, which are not always offered unto us, and
when they come, not easily to be pretermitted. It is not wisdom to resolve
rashly, true: no more is it wisdom to consult so long, that the occasion
passes. rash men therefore, and slow proceeders are fitter for other places,
then places of counsel in wars.

The remedy of these disorders is easy, where the General is a man of
judgment, and execution; where otherwise, it is a matter difficult, and almost
not possible. In which case it is necessary, that one be appointed with special
authority next to the General. Men of judgment can soon discover treacherous
counsels, and will easily correct their contentions, and whatsoever other
faults are common in their proceeding.

Wherefore seeing nothing avails more in wars, then counfell: next unto the
choice of the General, regard is to be had of the choice of a sufficient
counsel of men of knowledge, experience, secrecy, loyalty and other good
parts fit for that place; that, as it was among the Romans, may both advise,
and help the General. And if by the law of arms, no soldier may reveal
any counsel to the enemy, much less ought such abuse to proceed from the
counsel. I need not declare how they should proceed, nor how they should
cover their enterprises by contrary pretenses, as Exped. Cyr. 1.
Cyrus did going against his brother Artaxerxes, and as the Spaniards do
daily; nor how they should speedily resolve, and presently execute. They do
not deserve to be named counselors, that in those points want counsel. Now
least contrariety of opinions which hinders both counsel, and execution,
should arise of the diversity of counselors affections, I will show that the
sovereign authority in wars, is to be committed to one alone.

CHAP. IIII. Part. 3. Wherein is declared, that the sovereign commandment in
matters of wars, is to be committed to one alone.
AS in a state well ordained, so in an army well governed there may not be any
contrariety in the chief commanders. The army by Iphicrates the Athenian is
compared to a body, whereof the General is the head. Wherefore, as it is
unnatural and Resp. been constituta quod vnu^ tantum est corpus plura capita
habere non potest. Tyberius apud Tacit.
monstrous for one body to have two heads, so it is inconvenient, for an army
to be encumbred with diverse heads of contrary disposition. Which mischief,
seeing it can be no otherwise remedied, then by giving the soueraintie to one:
the Prince is diligently to see, that the soueraintie in the army be not
divided amongst many. The Romans albeit they had ordinarily two consuls: yet
in their greatest dangers they appointed one Dictator, or General with
absolute authority. The sovereign commandment of one is a help and means to
dispatch matters quickly, to take opportunities, and use the time of war.
(...). Olinth. 1.
Demosthene does plainly declare the same by the example of Philip king of
Macedonia. While one commands, he both understands better what is wanting,
and how it is to be had: his care is greater; his proceeding more formal, and
equal: his counsel more speedy, and secret. Therefore did the Romans send but
one Governor into their Provinces, and employed for the most part but one
Consul in the gouerument of their armies. If both: yet where they proceeded
orderly, the one gave In exercitu Romans cum duo essent Coss. potestate pari,
quod saluberrimum est in rerum magnarum administratione, summa imperii
concedente Agrippa penes Quintium erat. Liu. 3.
place to the other. A matter most requisite for the dispatch of weighty
matters; as it is evident in the fact of Agrippa yielding the chieftie to his
fellow Quintius. The Athenians for that their state was popular used yearly to
choose many captains, yet in their greatest dangers all the rest yielded to be
governed by one. In the Marathonian field against Darius, the supreme
commandment was in Miltiades, in the battle of Salamine against Xerxes in
Herodot.
Themistocles, all the rest submitting themselves to be commanded by him.
Seldom has any wise nation done otherwise: if they did they paid for the
most part the full price of their folly. The Romans were ruinated by the
Gauls at the encounter of Liu. 5.
Allia, partly by the disorder of the chief commanders being diners, and
having equal authority. Those three Tres duces delectu habito profecti sunt
Veios, documentoque fuere, quam plurium imperium bello inutile esset. Tendendo
enim ad sua quisque consilia, cum aliud alii videretur, aperueru^t ad
occasionem locum hosti. Liu. 4.
captains that besieged Veij having all equal power may be a document unto us,
how unprofitable the commandment of diverse Generals is, for the government of
wars. For every man driving all matters to his own ends, while one man
thought one way, an other otherwise, they gave occasion to their enemies to
hurt them. By the discord Liu. lib. 5.
of the captains while one refused to succor an other, the Romans were
foiled before Veij. The Aequians observing the disagreement between the Liu. 4.
Roman captains, although in force inferior to the Romans, yet prevailed
against them. Neither was there any greater cause of the ruin of the Thucid. 6.
Athenian army in Sicile, then the contrariety of opinions, and discord of
the three captains sent thither with sovereign commandment. The original of
all the disorders that fell out in the army of the Protestants in Germany, and
of the victory of Sleidan.
Charles the fifth, was the diverse opinions of the Duke of Saxony, and Lantgraue
of Hesse. When the Lantgraue would have foughten, the Duke was of another
mind, or percase was not ready. What the one did profitably determine, that
the other did frustrate. From the time of this discord the affairs of the
Protestants went to wrack. The French were driven out of the kingdom of
Discordia di capitani fa perdere Napoli a Francesi. Guicciar. lib. 3.
Naples by a small force, by reason of the dissension of the captains
Montpensier and Percy. The envy and contention, that fell out betwixt the
French, and Hungarian captains gave an easy victory to Amurathes the Turk at
Nicopolis. It had not been possible for Caesar Guicciard. li. 5.
Borgia to escape the hands of so many Princes confederate against him, but
that the captains of the adverse army did weaken their force by their own
disagreement. The Venetians were ouerthrown at Ghiaradadda only by the
plurality of commanders. For while Guicciard. lib. 8.
Bartholomew Aluian which was one of their Generals determined to fight, and
the Count Pittiglian which was the other, commanded the army to march, the
enemy charging them in this instant of their irresolution, obtained a great
victory.

The sovereign authority both of matters by land, and by sea is to be given
only to one. otherwise there can be no good correspondence in both places.
While Lantreck Guicciard.
commanded by land, and Philippin Doria by sea: the siege of Naples was
discontinued, and the town victualled, which happened by reason of the
dissension of the Generals. It has been no small hinderance to our affairs in
the Low countries, that those that have commanded at land, have not likewsie
had the government at sea. For by this means the enemy has had greater store
of victuals, and our own men greater want, when the ships and passages were
in others keeping. Nay, where the commandment is part in the General, and
part in the States, things are yet more confused. For the States often times
victual the enemy, yea and coutinually trade into Spain, while our soldiers
fight against the Spaniard. I will not say what inconveniences come of this one
point neglected otherwise, for that it would couch some men more particularly,
then my meaning is. For remedy of this mischief the Romans gave to their
captains power both in matters by land, and sea. Scipio as he had an army by
land, so he had a Navy by sea both in the expedition of Spain, and Afrike.
Neither could Marcellus ever have prevailed against the city of Syracusae, if
he had not besieged the town, both by sea, and land. Caesar was enforced to
go to sea before he could subdue the sea towns of France. But what need I
use more words in a matter so plain? both reason, and experience teaches us
that many (...).
commanders in matters of war are not good. And therefore let there be but
one sovereign commander both by land, and sea: with what authority he ought
to be furnished, rests now to be discussed.

CHAP. IIII. Part.4. Of the authority, and Commission of the General.
ACcording to that opinion which Princes and States have of their Captains,
and sometimes respect had to the danger of the times: their use is to give unto
them more ample, or more strait commission. But if they purpose, that their
affairs shall succeed well, of two things one is necessary: to wit, that either
they furnish them with means sufficient, or give them commission to furnish
and help themselves: and that either they do direct them sufficiently, which
is scarce possible: or else give them leave to take order according to the
occasions offered upon present view, and variety of times, or things. For
neither can he do service upon the enemy, that wants either convenient
force or means; nor may he, or dare he take the advantage of time, and other
circumstances, that is brideled and bound by his instructions. The Romans
although most expert in deeds of arms, whose Senate consisted for the most
part of such as in their time had been commanders, and altogether of men
exercised in arms; yet did not at any time prescribe their Generals what to
do; and what they should not do; much less how they should do, or when
they should do it. Much more absurd therefore it is, that men that never saw
enemy, nor know the train of wars, should take upon them to direct Generals
what they should do at land, or sea: and very strange it seems to me, that
Generals to whom armies are committed should like schooleboyes take forth such
lessons, as these ignorant pedants and scriuanoes should prescribe. Wars are
not made by indenture, neither can any covenant with his enemy to do this, or
not to do it. Nor can any man conceive, what is best to be done, but such as
are present. And therefore the ordinary limitations of some commissions, do
nothing else, but bind the hands of our captains, that they shall not use
opportunity, or percase further and help the enemy. Herein therefore it is
good to imitate old warriers, at least to come so near them, as difference of
times will permit. The Roman captains had authority most large, and means
sufficient. Their forces were great, their furniture and provision plentiful.
least they should exact any thing of their associats, they were furnished with
all things Liu. 25.26.
necessary, even to their Magistratus mulis tabernaculisque, and omni alio
instrumento militari ornabantur, ne quid tale imperarent sociis. Liu. 42. and
44.
mules, tents, and carriages. That which was wanting, or might more easily be
had otherwhere, they had authority to supply. All which consisted, and was
given them in one word. Now captains have many words in their commission, and
little scope, or authority. Under this one word imperium, they comprised al
authority necessary for the government of the wars. By the same they had
power to leuy men, to lead them, to employ them, as appears by the Demus
imperium Caesari sine quo exercitus haberi, res militaris administrari non
potest. Cic. Philip. Decreui imperium exercitum habenti. Quid est enim sine
imperio exercitus? Cic. Philip.
commission given to Octauius Caesar, that afterward was called Augustus In the
Province where they made wars, they might beside the number they brought with
them, leuy other soldiers, and impose upon the people necessary charges for
the defense of the coutry. Caesar Prouinciae qua^ maximum potest militum
numeru^ imperat. Caes. bell. ^al. 8.
to resist the attempts of the Heluetians, which threatened to pass through the
Province of France subject to the Romans, levied as many men, as he could, in
his government. Fuluius understanding that the Fuluius quia armare inuentutem
Celliberos andiret, and ipse quanta poterat a sociis auxilia co^traxerat. Liu.
40.
Celtiberians gathered new forces, he also in his government, procured what
help he could of his subjects, and associates. From their associates and
subjects in their government, they had power to take victuals, carriages,
ships, and necessary furniture of war, as is evident in the wars that
Scipio made in Spain and Afrike, Caesar in France, Sylla and Pompey in Asia,
and other Countries. They had also power to do justice as well to their
associates, and subjects, as to their owue soldiers: otherwise they could
neither have encountered with treachery of men evil affected, nor defended their
favorers, and friends. The defense of the Province, and their M. Messala and
L. Pisone Coss. Senatus censuit, vti quicunque Galliam prouinciam obtineret,
quod commodo reip. facere posset, Aeduos ecterosque amicos populi Romans
defenderet. Caes. bell. gal. 1.
friends both against seditious mutins, and foreine invasion was likewise
committed unto them, and per consequent, power given them to leuy power, and
use all means for the maintenance of their associats, and for the government
and execution of wars, without which they could not be defended.

Good it had been for our Generals likewise in the Low countries, and other
where, that their authority had been also enlarged. For while they had neither
victuals, nor lodging, nor ships, nor cariages, nor artillery, nor munition,
nor other furniture of war, but at the pleasure of the States, some whereof
were too respective of their own profit, nor could execute any man of those
Countries for treason, without their consent, it is no marvel, if their
proceedings were slow, their executions slender, their wantes great.

Further the Romans gave their Generals power both to make wars by sea, and
land. Do doubt they had also sufficient means, without which all power is
frustratory. Our Captains in the Low countries, as they have been weak by
land, so they depended on others pleasures, for matters at sea.

In later times also the same course has been taken. When Corbuloni reges
praefecti praetores parere iussi; potestas data qualis Pompelo bello Pyratico,
Tacit. annal, 15.
Corbulo was sent by Nero against the Parthians, he had power equal to that
which Pompey had granted unto him in the wars against the Pirates. Kings,
Governors of Provinces, and the Officers of the Romans were enjoined to obey
him. It is the use of all Nations both to furnish their Generals, and to
authorize them sufficiently. What authority Annibal had, it is partly evident
by his actions (for it is not to be presumed that he did matters without
authority) and partly by the words of Fabius persuading the Romans to choose a
captain equal to Annibal, a leader (says he) of great authority by reason
of his continuance, and not restrained by any limitation of times, or laws so,
but that he might do all things, according as opportunites of war should
require. Herein Demosthenes Olynth. 1.
declares, what great advantage Philip king of Macedonia had above the
captains of the Athenians: for he was not limited by any Superiors
commandment, nor restrained by terms, or time, as were they. Which thing
(says he) is very effectual for dispatch of matters. Those captains (says
Duces summi liberi impedime^tis omnibus, dominique rerum te^porumque trahunt
consilijs cuncta. Liu. 9.
Liuy) that have absolute authority, and are free from impediments, and have
power over things and times, do work great effects with their counsels.

Whosoever therefore for envy, or fear, or other cause goes about to persuade
Princes to pare their Generals authority, and to bind them with strait
conditions, has an evil mind himself, and as much (...) in him lies,
ruinateth the affairs of his Prince. For what service can they do that are
not only pinched in their provisions, but also bound fast by their
commissions? The Le commissioni di Caesare, haueuane espressa o tacita
condition, di gonuernarhi seco^do la varieta di tempi. Guicciard. lib. 17.
commissions which Charles the fifth gave to his captains, had this condition
either expressed, or employed, that they should proceed according to the
variety of times, and occasions notwithstanding any thing in them contained.
And some very expert, and wise men have not doubted, seeing a manifest
advantage to go against their Princes commission. Il Triuultio anchora che la
commessione del refusse che prima s' attendesse all cose de Genoa, prese il
Bosco nel contado d' Alexandria. Guicciard. lib. 3.
Triuultio although by his directions, he was first to have care of the
affairs of Genoa: yet doubted not to take Bosco, a fit place in the territory
of Alexandira. And albeit that Lewis the 12. gave his Captains express
charge, that they should not fight with the Spaniards: yet seeing their
weakness, and their own manifest advantage, they fought with them, and foiled
them at Cirignola. Where for their defense is alleged, that the commandments
of the King being far off, and not seeing the state of things, were rather I
commandamenti delre essendo lontano, erano piu ricords, che precetti. Guicci.
ard. lib. 5.
remembrances, then precepts to be followed. Trimoille seeing the danger of the
state of France assaulted by diverse enemies, and also by the Switzers, made
Accorda co i zuitzeri senza commessione, and salve la Francia. Guicciar. lib. 5.
peace and compounded with them, although he had no commssion so to do. Of
which act Guicciardin guieth this testimony, that by that accord he saved the
realm of France out of a mauifest danger. And very absurd it were, if a man
might not do his country service without commission. The Salus reip. ^^prema
lex.
safety of the state, and honor of the Prince are warrants, and exceptions of
a most high nature. And for a man to doubt, to take the enemy at advantage for
fear of violating his commission, as the Spaniards say that the Duke of Medina
did in his voyage for England, is nothing but to spread a cloak to cover his
own cowardice, or insufficiency.

Yet may not the General do against his commission rashly, or without
apparent cause, or sufficient order: neither may he do all things without
commission. He may not proclaim wars, or invade any nation that is out of
commission: only if his enemy fly into an other Country, he may follow
him. For in that case Liuy.
Manlius auoweth his wars against the Gallo-grecians, and Liuy.
Fabius his voyage through the wood Ciminia. Also all such as invade his
government, or his friends, or associats, he may prosecute without his
government. He may not make peace, or treat of peace with the enemy: for he
is sent to make wars. He may not dimisse his army without commandment: nay
he may not proceed against the laws of Arms. The Dictator optima lege
creatus, summum imperium belli, pacis, paenarum, sine prouocatione habebat.
Pompon. in l. 2.. popul. ff. de orig. iuris.
Roman Dictator, although he had great authority, and could determine
matters of life and death without appeal: yet did not he execute or judge
any, but by the laws of Arms. That which in common terms some call executing
by martial law, when innocent men are hanged without for me of law, or cause,
may better be called martial force, then martial law. For this has only
place in wars, and redresseth disorders against military proceedings. Si
quid fraudulenter dux secerit, de eo tenebitur. L. in personam. generabile. ff.
de reg. iur.
Finally the General, whatsoever his commission is, may not deal fraudulently
in his charge, nor proceed contrary to military profession, and practice: in
which case every General is subject ff. ad leg. Iul. may. l. 1. and 2.
to the law.

Very necessary therefore it is, that Generals should have their commissions
large, both in respect of their provision, which by this means may in some
sort be supplied, and in respect of the expedition and Imperator libere ad
summam imperri consulere debet. Caes. bell. ciu. 3.
execution of wars, which ought not to be hindered, nor can conveniently be
prescribed. And without large authority, neither can our own soldiers, nor
associats be well governed. The experience of the service in the Low
Countries, and disorders at sea, which for want of power have not been
redressed, do minister unto us sufficient proof of this matter. Some will
say, that it is dangerous to commit so large power into any man's hands,
especially if he should deal disloyally. But what a reason is this, because
men may abuse their power, not to give them sufficient power for those matters
which are committed to their charge? Those that mean disloyally toward the
State, although they should have never so strait limitations in their
commissions, would not stand upon terms, and words of law. And rather it
gives them occasion of coffeehouse, when they see themselves distrusted,
then bridleth any evil purpose, if they should do against their allegiance.
And why should any man without cause suspect any noble man, that he will deal
against his Country, having so many pledges of his loyalty? but if any should
be so evil disposed, yet may we not think, that all his army would follow
him, rebelling against his Country. And if they should, yet is it not the
force of one army, that can prevail against a whole kingdom that is well
governed. And therefore for fear of disloyalty of some; let no man fear, or
omit to make sufficient provision; and rather let loyal men be sought out
with diligence, and disloyal men removed, then that the necessary provisions
of war should be neglected, or the proceeding hindered for want of authority.

CHAP. IIII. Part 5. Of the choice of Colonels, and Captains of companies, and
other officers of the army, and their qualities and office.
Diverse other points concerning the place, charge, and office of the General,
deserve also to be particularly handled; as namely, who has authority to
appoint Generals, in what case the Prince himself is to come in person into
the field, how far the General ought to hazard himself, and generally what
belongs to his office: but ye same may partly be understood, by that which
has bin spoken already, and shall more evidently be declared in this treatise,
(for ye execution of al these matters appertains especially to ye direction
of ye General.) And now we haste to speak of such matters, as concern rathe
the managing of war, then questions of right.

It is sufficiently known, yt the power to make war or peace, is a mark of
souerainty, and belongs to the sovereign magistrate, and to those to who^ he
shall Quintio liberum arbitrium pacis, ac belli permissum, Liu. 32.
commit it. The nomination likewise of the General belongs to those yt have
sovereign power in the State. As is evident by the histories of the Romans,
Greeks, Persians, and all nations, L. Martius was chosen General by ye
relics of Scipios army in Spain, but that was in case of necessity, and
endured no longer, then unto such time, as they had other captains sent them
from Rome. To take upon him a charge without commission, is within case of
treason, and sauoureth of rebellion. The Prince is not to hazard his person,
nor his honor upon every light occasion. King Henry the 3. of France, returning
out of Poland, received a scorn at the siege of Liuron, a paltry Hamlet in
Dauphine, for yt being present in person, and that being his first attempt
after his return into his kingdom, he could not atchieue it. The French since
their King was taken by the English, do not easily suffer their kings to come
in person into ye field. But if the Si status imperij, aut salus prouinciarum
in discrimine vertatur, princeps debet in acie stare. Tacit. lib. 4.
state or crown come in question, as in the wars betwixt Henry the 7. and
Richard the 3. betwixt Otho, and Vitellius: Vitellius and Vespasian, then is
the Princes presence required in the army.

The third point, by yt which has bin spoken already may be resolved. For in a
General, wisdom and courage would be so tempered, that neither he hazard his
person further then reason, nor doubt to execute good counsel for fear. The
taking of Francis the French king by the Spaniards, and king John by the
English, put the Realm of France in great hazard. The death of Gaston de Fois
at Rauenna, of Cyrus in the expeditio^ against Artaxerxes, who died by their
rashness in ye midst of their victories, turned to ye loss of both their
armies. Yet may not a General hide himself from danger, as did ye coward
Tacitus.
Vitellius. The whole office of ye General consists in the speeding, and
direction of all matters of war; of which we have occasion to entreat in
this whole discourse. And therefore for these points this may be sufficient.

Now for that the General cannot do all himself, but must use colonels,
captains, and officers, for the execution of his commandments; we are to show
what pains, and care he is to have, that they be well chosen, and do their
duty sufficiently. Colonels would be chosen of such noblemen, knights, and
gentlemen, as for their years, service, experience, discretion, manhood, and
other virtues do best deserve those places. The place of a colonel does very
well answer unto the tribunes office in the Roman army. whose orders also we
might do well to observe in ours. By an old custom says Veteri instituto ad
tribunatum nemo admittebatur nisi qui alam duxisset. Veget.
Vegetius, none was made tribune, or colonel, but such as had lead a company
of old soldiers before. Hadrian the Emperor expressly forbade In vita Adriani
Lamprid.
beardles youths to aspire to that charge. Arian. Alex, exped.
Alexander in his expedition against Darius, made choice of such for captains
of thousands, as for their continuance in his fathers service, had their hair
graye, and their judgment ripe. These are employed often times in some special
service, as in the keeping of a Strait, or of a Fort, or conducting of
victuals, or munition: and therefore would have great skill in all proceedings
of war; especially in the government of such things, as are committed unto
their charge. Among the Romans the Tribunorum munus fuit castrorum and
exercitus curam gerere, ne sine munimento, aut custodiis sint, per vigiles
excubias iubere, milites dicto audientes habere, ad exercitationes ducere,
vigilias circumire, frumentationibus interesse, querelas militum audire,
frumentum probare, delicta leuiora coercere, valetudinariorum and sauciorum
curam gerere, milites iuramento adigere. L. officiu^. officium ff. de re milit.
Tribune office was, in seeing to the defenses of the camp, placing of gards,
setting the watch, keeping the soldiers in order, exercising them, going the
round, leading forth the soldiers to fetch in provision, seeing the soldiers
victuals to be holsom, hearing of the complaints of soldiers, correcting
smaller faults, looking to th sick and hurt, providing for them, and taking
their oaths at their first entrance. Now these offices belong partly to ye L.
Marshal, or masters of the camp, partly to the serieant mayor, partly to such
inferior captains and officers, as have that special charge imposed upon
them, and partly as other good orders, so these offices of colonels also are
either omitted, or slenderly exercised. Now this only belongs unto
colonels, that they have their regiment and the captains and soldiers thereof
in order, that they lead the same in service, and do such special services,
as are committed unto them.

Centurions, or captains of companies, would be chosen of ye most strong,
valiant, discreet, and active soldiers: such especially as both know the
train of wars, and are of body able to endure labor. Their office is to
lead, and govern their men, to look that their bodies, arms, and clothes be
in order: that they have victuals, and things necessary, and execute such
special commandments as are given them. There is no certain rule of their
office to be prescribed. For as there are more or fewer companies together; so
they do more or less. Where there are but 2. or 3. companies together, the
captains do all, as chief co^manders in an army: where an army stands
together, they should be the first men of their companies: out of array they are
to attend ye general officers commandments. One had custonie some have, yt
they finger their soldiers pay, and some of the^ hardly refinger it, or
deliver it where it is due. But ye worst of all is, that under color of bad
dealing of some, neither captains nor soldiers are well paid. The custom was
borrowed first from the Italians: and is corrected by the Spaniards, as many
things else in the captains office, which we might do well likewise to reform,
especially ye confusion of weapons, and marshalling of ye captains, and their
officers: which if it be not otherwise then now it is, in great armies would
breed great co^fusio^.

These Honoris augmentum non ambitione, sed labor, ad vnumque^que conuenit
peruenire. Nee debet quis ad dignitate^ suffragio, sed laboribus atque ordine
numerorum prouehi. L. contra Pub. C. de re milit. lib. 12. and l. 1. and 2.
Cod. de offic. magist. offic.
honors are to be departed according unto men's deserts, not won by ambitious
suite; by labor, not by letters, and request: but this may rather seem a wish,
then a precept in these times, when as places have bin sold at the pleasure of
barbers, and scriuenoes, and some given for ye love of ladies. The abuse is but
too ancient, yet never so far inured as now. Tully at the Cic. ad Attic.
request of Brutus, bestowed a colonels place upon Scaptius which he refused.
And writing to Caesar in the favor of Huic ego neque tribunatum, neque
praefecturam peto. Cic. ad Caes. ep. fam.
Trebatius, he shows, ye such places were sometimes granted of favor but
seldom without desert. He obiecteth against Centuriatus palam vendidit,
ordines per seruu^ assignauit. Cic. in Pison.
Piso as a great reproach, that he sold the places of captains, and other romes,
and inferior offices, at the request of his scribes, and slaves. Caesar in
Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Affrike dismissed certain of his colonels and captains, with this speech to
disgrace them, that they had gotten those places for favor without desert.
Afterward when the centurion began to take money of the common soldier for
absence, and redemption of other disorders, of which Tacitus Per sordes and
auaritiam Fonteius Capito adimebat, and assignabat militiae ordines. Tacit. 17.
complains; the centurions place began to be also set to sale: which was a
great cause of the corruption of military discipline among the Romans, and
cannot choose, but also work bad effects among us, if it be continued. There is
none that buyeth his place, that willingly does hazard his carcass, or has
other respect then of gain. And no marvel if ye common soldiers be pilled,
where ye captains at their entrance are so pinched.

The places of Populus tribunos ad 4. primas legiones dixit, reliquos coss.
Liu. 27.
colonels were sometime given by the people of Rome, but most commonly, and
with greatest reason, by the Generals. For otherwise if it were, how could they
reward those that best deserved? Therefore did Aemilius Liu. 42.
Paulus make request, that he might bestow those places upon men of greatest
worth and merit: which said he, is for the honor also, and profit of the
common wealth.

Centurions were always chosen by the Generals, and by them advanced for their
Virtutis causa in superiores erant ordines huius legionis traducti. Caes. bell.
gal. 6.
virtue. Caesar preferred Scaeua to ye highest centurions room in in the
legion, for his noble service at Dyrrachium. Among Exped. Cyr. 2.
the Greeks, those that were next in degree, succeeded in their places that
were next about them, if any thing came at them.

The officers of companies, namely lieutenants, ensigns, sergiants, corporals,
are chosen by the captains of companies. But much better it were, if as some
do, so all did choose them of their most able and valiant soldiers, without
respect, or favor.

Other officers, are chosen some for the government, others for the provision
of the army. Of ye sort are the campmasters or marshals with their serieant
mayor, and field coporals, colonel general, lieutenant general of the horse,
scoutemasters, trenchmasters, quartermasters, and such like. Which all tend one
way, and are but parts of the Generals duty, which in time past he executed
by his legates, or lieutenants and tribunes. The master of the Ordonance, and
captain of Pioners are likewise but of a late invention, since ye use of
artillery came in, and soldiers through sloth began to refuse the labors of
war. The judge and provost marshall succeed also in a part of the Generals
care for deciding and executing matters of justice. The mustermaster likewise
is of a late stamp, namely since captains began to pay the soldiers, and
Princes began to be defrauded of their numbers, and their treasure. Of the
second sort are all Commissaries for the pay of soldiers, for victuals, arms,
munition, carriages, and whatsoever other provision necessary. For good choice
whereof there is but one general rule to be observed, to wit, that all
partiality and affection laid aside, such be placed in government as be
skillful, loyal, valiant, diligent, and have respect of honor, not of profit,
and in offices of provision, such as have knowledge in such matters, and will
deal faithfully. Such as ambitiously, or greedily sue for such places, are not
lightly to be heard: and although they be once placed; yet if they be convicted
of insufficiency, or negligence, or fraud, they are exemplarly to be
punished, or at the least removed.

CHAP. IIII. Part 6. Of musters, and choice of common soldiers.
THe Generals chief care, is about the choice of his chief officers,
colonels, and captains of companies: yet may he not neglect ye choice even of
common soldiers. A matter in our times either not at al, or very little
regarded. For when occasion is offered of service: then for the most part order
is given either to the officers of every Parish, to take up roges, or masterles
men, or inhabitants of prisons, such as if they had their deserts, they were to
be sent rather to ye gallows, then to the wars for the most part: or if a
greater number must be taken; to the officers in the Country, men for the most
part ignorant of warlike actions, and such as have no other respect most
commonly, then to disburthen ye Parish of rogues, loyterers, pikars, and
drunkards, and such as no other way can live. Among yt which there is no honest
man, but would be loath to be numbered. If any other be chosen, it is for some
private respect or grudge. And of those yt are chosen, if they have either
friends, favor, or money, most of the^ are dismissed. And sure when I
consider how in foreign nations men are sent to ye slaughter, few in number,
unprovided, unfurnished, unpaid, and pilled of their governors, contrary to
all order of service; I must needs say, these men are the fittest to be sent.
But if Princes mean to have their honor and country defended, or their
estate maintained, or service done upon the enemy, they must have more regard
to choose men of more strength, honesty, and ability; such as have reason to
fight for their Country, and have care of their honest reputation, and are
ashamed of villeny, and lewd doing. For how can captains encourage those to
fight for their country, lands, goods, and honor, that have neither house nor
home, nor respect of honesty or shame, nor care though all were fired, so they
might hook somewhat? and yet forsooth the Generals and commanders, that of
late time have bin employed have bin blamed, that they have not observed the
rules of military discipline among these men. As if it were possible to keep
famished men from snatching of victuals, or drunkardes from drink, or to
master men that are masterles, or to keep rogues in order, or to make
loyterours to work, or pilferors to march in array and keep order, or to
preserve them alive that have neither pay, nor provision in time, nor one penny
to help themselves in their need. If they will therefore have order kept, let
them choose out men capable of government, and soldiers, not rascals. With
great care this abuse ought to be reformed: for it is a point very material.
Lib. 1. de re milit. c. 7.
Vegetius doubted not to place both the strength of the Roman army, and the
foundation of the Roman Empire, in the first choice and trial of their
soldiers. Therefore were the Generals either present themselves at the
musters, or else did they employ men of knowledge, gravity, and honesty, as
has bin already declared. Those yt through covetousness or favor did corrupt
their orders for musters, were detested and punished. Motus senatu Pedius
Blaesus ob delectum militarem pretio and ambitione corruptum.
Pedius Blaesus for this cause was ignominiously put out of the Senate. Such as
sought gain by this shameful practice, are taxed by Delectum Batauorum
onerabant ministri auaritia ac luxu, senes autinualidos conquire^do, quos
pretio dimitterent. Tac. 20.
Tacitus, as doing a thing rare, and not tolerable.

When this disorder grew great, they forbad by express law, all men to take
money, either for Neque ob militem legendum dimittendumue aes accipiat. ff. ad
leg. Iul. repetund. l.
choosing, or dismissing of soldiers. They that answered not to their names at
musters among the Romans, were taken and imprisoned, and their goods sold, as
Liuy witnesses. In the time of Val. Max. li. 6. ca. 3.
Traianus the Emperor, one that made his son unable to serve in the wars,
was banished his country. So were it to be wished, that men of honor and
skill, deputed by the General, were present at the musters, and that all able
men would offer themselves to do their country service: that such as choose
men unable to excuse others, or else do dimisse sufficient men for money, were
themselves dimissed and severely punished: and finally, that such were chosen
that have somewhat in their country to loose, and to carry with them for
maintenance of themselves, if need be. But this is only to be wished, in such
service as for good order, and sufficient number is like to prove honorable,
and when men shall be better provided and paid, and more account made of them.
(...). Pericl. Thucid. 1.
Now some make account of money, and no account of men, like to the Athenians,
that lamented the loss of their goods, and not of men's persons, which are
infinitely more in value. In these disorders it is not fit, that others should
be employed in wars, then such as now are. which some call pressed men, for
that they go as willingly to service, as to hanging or pressing; and money
imprested comes either rarely, or is taken from them. My only hope is, that
one day there will be better provision, and proceeding in wars, at what time
these rules may better be put in execution. In the mean time we may learn
what has been the practice of times past in the choice of soldiers, and what
rules ought now to be practiced.

In the choice of soldiers, we are especially to respect three things: first,
the strength of the body: secondly, the vigor and virtues of the mind: and
thirdly, the manner and trade of the parties living. Vegetius, and certain idle
Italians, give precepts concerning the climate, country, and diverse situations
of regions, which they would have in the choice of soldiers to be respected:
but experience teaches us, that often times valiant men are found in Cities, and
fruitful Countries, yea under hot climates which they condemn, and cowardes
in hills and rocks, and Northren Regions, which they commend. True it is,
that Northren people are commonly more valiant and venturous, then those of
Asia and Afrike, that are from us far East, and south. But what does that
consideration help us, that make our leuies of soldiers not in Asia nor
Affrike; but here in England, and Ireland, and thereabout? whether therefore
soldiers be brought up in the city or country, or bred in hills or valleis,
or champaine country, in the north or south of England, I respect not: but if
they have strength of body to endure labors, and a mind vigorous and
courageous, and an honest disposition, and have lived such a life, as has
been tried sometimes in labor, I refuse them not wheresoever they have been
bred. Nay I wish to have such. Contrariwise cowards and weak persons, and men
of lewd conditions, or which have been tenderly brought up, I would refuse
although they come from the north or hilly countries.

Pyrrhus gave orders to his commissioners for mosters to choose big and
corpulent men. Marius made choice of men of great stature. But if I might be
heard, I would neither wish such men to be sought for: (for seldom are great
and big men able to endure travel) nor men of a mean or short stature to be
refused, if they have strong and active bodies. Men of mean stature are for
the most part more vigorous and courageous; they do more easily endure labors,
and commonly excel great bodied men in swiftness and running, which is a
matter in a soldier very requisite and commendable. (...).
Achilles was much commended for that he was swift of foot, and He was called
Cursor.
Papirius took his name and commendation of running. Vtilius est fortes esse
milites, quam grandes. Veget. lib. 1. c. 6.
Vegetius says, it is bettet to have stout and strong, then huge and big
soldiers. Such Caesar commonly did choose. and experience shows us, that men
burdened with flesh can neither endure labor, nor hurts, whereas the mean
stature and habit of body endures both.

For trial of the strength of a man's body, we are not only to look upon the
lineaments, and outward proportion of the parts, but rather what the party can
do in running, leaping, wrestling, and such like exercises. For oftentimes an
euill-fauoured body may have a quick strength, and tall and big persons may
prove weak, dainty, and sickly. By the outward appearance, we may
notwithstanding make a probable conjecture of a man's strength. For they that
have a likely body, and a sharp countenance, and hard flesh and sinowy arms
and legs, rather then full or fleshy, are likely to prove strong men. Yet do not
orders of war admit old men past 46. unless they be old soldiers, for that
their strength is decaying, and their bodies less apt to labor: nor youths
under 20. unless it be some that by trial declares himself to have
strength, for that as yet they are not come to their full pitch and strength.

But that which specially commends soldiers, is the vigor of the mind, and
good conditions, coniectured by the visage and outward behauior, but known
only by their conversation; which is to be learned of others. If the man be a
known coward, or of a dull disposition, or mutinous, or given to drink, or
theeuery, or other disorders, howsoever his body seem answerable, yet for his
lewd manners he proves for the most part unprofitable: and is therefore to be
repelled, or blotted out of the roll. In a soldier therefore I require first,
Vt audaces sint and animum habeant and considentiam militarem. Veget. lib. 1.
c. 8.
a vigorous and present mind, and that he be not afraid of danger, nor drawn
swords: nor that he despair in trouble, or think of death before it
comes, nor yield though cast down, so long as by any possibility he may
hope to rise again.

Constancy also and resolution is much by De bell. ciu. 3.
Caesar commended, and the only thing that atchieueth great enterprises. For
many are the hazards of war, and things succeed not always at the first.
Without obedience and observance of military orders, all other virtues are
without effect. Let the soldier therefore be obedient, and quiet. Those that
(...). Plutar. in Agid. and Cleo.
are most obedient to laws, prove for the most part most valiant against the
enemy. It is a principal mark of a valiant soldier, if he dare do what he is
commanded by his superiors. Contrariwise they that are mutinous against their
governors, and are ever bragging, as if wars consisted in words only, are
seldom good soldiers, or brave men in trial. Soldiers would likewise be of
quiet behauior, and temperate in their diet. There is no use said (...).
Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 2.
Clearchus of an army that is riotous, and out of order.

I would likewise wish that soldiers were religious, and think it very
requisite, if it might be obtained. The very Pagans did nothing before they had
consulted with oracles, or sought to know the pleasure of God by Nil nisi
auspicato gerebant. Xenop. exp. Cyr. 2. Cic. de nature. deor. 3.
birds, or entrals of beasts (for that was their ignorance) and believed that
al evil success in their wars came to them for neglect of religion, and Gods
worship. How much more then ought Christians to be religious? There is nothing
that more confirms the soldiers mind, then when he is persuaded that God
favors him, and the goodness of his cause. nor works more assured resolution
to die, then when men understand they go to a better life. Contrariwise men of
a bad conscience are always timorous and doubtful. I know blasphemers,
swearers, and Atheists, will laugh at this rule. But what wonder when they laugh
also at God and religion? these men will one day weep for their laughter. I
pray God that others suffer not for their Atheism, and contempt of religion.

Finally, soldiers would be more desirous of praise the^ of gain. Such does
Xenophon report Cyrus his (...). Xenop. exped. Cyr. 1.
soldiers that followed him against Artaxerxes to have been. And no small
commendation is it in soldiers, to be afraid of reproof, and desirous of
honest report. Men of honest condition and shamefast, while they Honestas
idoneum reddit militem, and verecundia dum prohibet fugere, facit esse
victorem. Veget. lib. 1.
are ashamed to fly, win the victory, and win to themselves the reputation of
good soldiers. Swearers, the eues, rogues, whoremongers, drunkards, do better
become the jail then the camp. And our Non ca constantia gladiatoribus ad
praelia, quae militibus. Tacit. 18.
great cutters and hackers, in the streets of London, are seldom great hackers
of the enemy.

The third point which we are to respect in the choice of soldiers, is the
trade of their living, although not in equal degree with the other two. For
many to win themselves a living, are oftentimes driven to follow base
occupations, that otherwise are courageous, and of a liberal disposition, and
have bodies fit for labor. So that although the Spartans and Opificum vulgus
and sellularii minime militiae idoneum genus. Liu. 8.
Romans refused such for soldiers, as exercised manual occupations, and kept
shops, yet do I not think they deserve generally to be refused, but only such
of them as be weak, tender, and effeminate. All those that are hardened with
labor; as Ex agricolis viri fortissimi. Cato de re rust. Veget. lib. 1.
husbandmen for the most part, and those that can sufferraine, heat, and cold,
and use to fare hard, and lie hard, and sleep little prove brave men. Our
young gentlemen and seruingmen, are easily trained, and made fit for the wars.
But of al others the old soldier, if such may be had, of what trade soever he
is, deserves the first place. They are so far to be praised above young
soldiers, as artificers excel their apprentises. A handful of tried soldiers
has often put to flight multitudes of men not exercised in wars: and
contrariwise seldom do young soldiers abide the chamaillis, and hammering of
arms. Caesar's old soldiers were invincible. And Annibals tried soldiers of
Affrike, of which nation now no reckoning is made, did give diverse foiles to
the Romans; these being unexercised, those having bin long indurat in wars. It
were therefore to be wished, yt more account were made of valiant men, yt have
long served their prince, and country: in ye choice of yo^g soldiers it is
sufficient, if the former rules be observed.

CHAP. IIII. Part. 7. Of the Oath of a soldier.
Soldiers enrolled, armed, and furnished, would in case orders of war were
observed, be charged with an oath, that they should come to the place and at
time assigned, and faithfully serve their Prince and country, living in
obedience to their governors and superior officers, and those military laws
which are by the General and his counsel, or the estates of the realm ordained
for the good government of the army. This was used by the Romans, Athenians,
and other warrelike nations in time past, and is not now in our times thought
inconvenient. The Licurg. in orat. aduersus Leocrit.
Athenians when they came to military years, and were enrolled in the moster
rolls, did swear that they would neither dishonor the profession of arms,
nor forsake their array, but would defend their country and enlarge the honor
of it to their uttermost power. The same is reported yet more particularly by
In Demost. ora. (...).
Vlpian, who shows the place, the manner, and effect of their oath, and that
in the temple of Agraulos they came and swore having their arms on, that they
would fight for their country. The words as Pollux has them are in effect
thus much: I will not (said he that swore) dishonor the profession of arms, I
will not forsake my Captain, I will fight for the religion, and laws of my
country, in array and alone: I will sail whither I shall be appointed; I will
obey laws and not suffer them to be abrogated: I will observe the religion of
my country, and so let God help me and defend me. Gellius out of Cincius his
books of war describes the form of the oath of the Roman soldiers in
these words: Cum delectus fieret and milites scriberentur, in iusiurandum eos
tribunus militaris adigebat hoc modo: in magistratu C. Laelij C. F. Cos. L.
Cornelij C. F. Cos. in exercitu, decemque millia prope furtum no^ facies dolo
malo, solus neque cum pluribus: pluris nu^mi argentei in dies singulos, extra
hastam, hastile, ligna, pabulum, vtrem, follem, faculam, si quid ibi inueneris,
sustuleris quod tuum non erit, quod pluris nummi argentei erit, vti tu ad C.
Laelium C. F. Cos. L. Cornelium. P. F. Cos. sieve ad quem eorum alter iusserit
proferas, aut profitebere in triduo proximo quicquid inueneris sustulerisue
dolo malo, aut domino suo cuium id censebis esse, vti quod recte factum esse
voles, etc. The sum and effect of which oath is, that no soldier should
steal, or take any thing from any other soldier, and that whatsoever they
found, except it were for ye use of wars, as weapons, or provision for
themselves, or their horses or such like, they should bring it to the General
or to the officer thereto deputed if it were more worth Nummus argenteus Romans
was a piece of coin somewhat more then our vi. pence.
the^ 6. d. Finally they swore that they should come at the day appointed,
unless lawful causes did stay them, and not depart without license. Liuy also
mentions a form of oath, which the Romans at first did voluntarily swear,
afterward they were driven to do it of duty. The effect of it was, Vbi ad
decu^iatum aut centuriatum conuenissent, sua voluntate ipsi inter se equites
decuriau, centuriati pedites iuraba^t, sese fugae aut formidinis ergo non
abituros, neque ex ordine recessuros, nisi teli sumendi aut petendi, aut hostis
feriendi, aut ciuis seruandi causa. Liu. 22.
that they should not fly away for fear, nor go out of their array, unless it
were to take up a weapon, or to strike the enemy, or to save their companion.
Beside this oath which commonly they took when they were first enrolled, they
sometimes swore, that they would not return to their tents without victory.
This oath Marc. Flauolenus took, as the Romans were to join battle with the
Liu. 2.
Hetruscians. And Caes. de bell. ciu. 3.
Labienus, and Pompeys soldiers in the encounter betwixt Pompey and Caesar in
ye fields of Pharsalia swore likewise: but al did not perform it. Some fearing
the revolt of their soldiers have used to bind them by special oath not to
abandon their leaders, which as Caesar reports, was practiced by Petreius,
and Afranius Caes. de bell. ciu. 3.
in Spain. Samnitium milites adigebantur iuramento, diro carmine in
execrationem capitis familiae and stirpis composito, nisi issent in praelium,
quo imperatores duxissent, and si aut ipse ex acie fugisset, aut si quem
fugientem vi disset, non extemplo occidisset. Liu. lib. 10.
The Samnites being oftentimes foiled by the Romans, did swear, that they
would follow wheresoever their captains did lead them, and that neither
themselves would fly out of the field, nor suffer others to fly, but would
kill them presently: if otherwise they did, they cursed themselves, their
family, and lineage. The Romans placed such religion in the oath of a soldier,
that some of the^ thought it not lawful for others to fight with the enemy,
then such as had taken the solemn oath of a soldier. Cato desired Aemilius
Paulus General of the Roman army in Macedonia, that either he would send away
his son, which together with the regiment wherein he served was cassed, or else
would minister a new oath unto him. Negabat ius esse, qui miles no^ sit,
pugnare cum host. Cic offic (...)
For that he thought it not lawful for him that was no sworn soldier, to
fight with the enemy. The effect of this oath howsoever men make now account of
oaths, yet to them must needs be great, that esteemed Famae ac sidei maiora
sunt damna, quam quae aestimari possunt.
the breach of promise, and loss of their good name irreparable. When the Duke
of Sancho de Land,
Alua went about to reform diverse disorders in the Spanish soldiers, among
other points it was ordained that every soldier should at their entrance take
a solemn oath, to serve the king faithfully, and to be obedient to their
captains and officers, and not to depart the army nor from their colors
without license in writing. The words of the ordonance are these: Que todos los
soldados despues de ser elegidos por sus capitanes, con las circu^stantias que
en tal'election se requiere al tiempo de ser admitidos por los officiales del
sueldo con iuramento solenne se obliguen a seruir bien y fielmente a su magd, y
a sus capitanes generales, a obedescer a todos sus superiores, a no partir se
del'exercito, ni de sus compannias sin licencia en escrito de quien se la
pudiere dar. This oath is now also most necessary, when all bonds of military
orders are little enough. But unless the soldier have his pay, and things be
governed according to the due practice of war: to minister an oath to every
poor soldier, were nothing else, but among other miseries, to bind poor men's
consciences with plain perjury.

CHAP. IIII. Part. 8. Wherein is proved, that soldiers chosen of our own
nation are far to be preferred before strangers, and hired men.
THe great dangers that have befallen diverse Princes, and states by foreign
forces, that have come in their aid, have given me occasion, as before I have
showed, what other qualities I thought requisite in soldiers; so now to
declare of what nation I would have them chosen; least using foreign forces,
we might incur like danger. The soldiers therefore that are to be employed
in defense of this realm, I would have chosen out of the natural subiectts of
this realm. Be they English, or Welsh, or Irish, so they be subjects, it
skilleth not. When I compare the people of this land with other nations, I see
no reason, why I should prefer any before them. And although my testimony
may seem partial: yet the steps of our ancestors prowess, as yet remaining
in France, Flanders, Spain, Portugal, Scotland, and other countries cannot
lie. If then those orders by which our ancestors obtained such glory, or else
the rules of war were restored; who sees not that this nation would match
any other? neither ought any man to esteem the forces of this country, by
that which has passed of late in France, Portugal, or the Low countries, where
our soldiers have been for the most part on the weakest side, destitute of
horse, unprovided of carriages, and wanted victuals, and arms, and munitions,
and many things necessary. But seeing they have done such things at such
disadvantage, they may think, our men would have done much more, if the party
had bin equal, or our men better provided and furnished. Beside this,
soldiers chosen of this nation, are bound with a straiter bond to their prince
and country, then any stranger. They have more reason to fight, having not only
the defense of their prince and country, but also their religion, laws,
liberty, wives and children committed to their hands, they are more patient in
adversity, and have less cause to revolt. Wanting of pay or part of their pay
(which God wot they may percase do often times) they notwithstanding continue
constant, and loyal. If they offend having their wives, children, lands,
goods, and friends behind them, they are more easily corrected. Finally, less
pay does content our soldiers, then any foreign nation. I doubt not, but if
that money which has bin cast away upon the Dutch, and French had been employed
upon our poor country soldiers, the country had been better stored with
money, and the people better provided for wars, and greater service done upon
the enemy.

Let us now compare strangers unto the subjects of this land. There is at all
no trust in them. Infidas ven^lesque manus, ibi fas vbi maxima merces.
Their hands are saleable, their hearts faithless. They account that cause
best, where they may have most hire. It is folly (says Polyb. lib. 2.
Polybius) and want of judgment to put trust in strangers being more in
number, and strength then our own nation. The first time that ever the Romans
used mercenary soldiers was, when the two Scipioes were governors of their
forces in Spain. Those two being together with their army betrayed, and
ruinated by the Celtiberians, that forsook them in their need, may be an
evident Liu. 24.
document never to trust strangers, unless we have force to command them,
and constrain them. Annibal Liu. 23.
abandoned by the Spanish and Numidian horsemen was greatly weakened. Liu. 23.
Mutines forsaking the Carthaginians, in whose succor he came out of Numidia,
disordered all their affairs in Sicile. The Romans giving themselves to
pleasures and ease, and using foreign forces of Germans, and Gauls, ruinated
that huge Empire, which was left them by their ancestors. Which (as Tacitus
says) were invincible so long as they used their own soldiers. The Gauls
Qua nihil in exercitu Romans firmum nisi externum. Tacit. 3.
revolted from the Romans, because they saw no strength in the Roman army,
but that which was of strangers. Of whom they presumed, that they would not
join with the Romans against them. The Thessalian horsemen forsaking the
Athenians in the battle of Thucid. 1.
Tanagra, occasioned the victory to the Lacedaemonians their enemies. The same
had happened to the Thucid. 4.
Lacedaemonians by the treachery of the Macedonians, that forsook them when the
Thracians charged them, had not the resolution of Brasidas remedied the
disorder. The departure of Guicciar. 15.
6000. Grisons, that left Francis the first of France before Pauy, was the
beginning of his weakness. 2000. mercenary men leaving Maximilian the
Emperor, broke his enterprise against the Venetians. Guicciar. 2.
Fabritio and Prospero Colo^na although highly advanced by Charles the 8. of
France, yet in the end revolted to Ferdinand. In the days of Ed. the 3. Rich.
the 2. Hen. the 5. and 6; the greatest Froissart.
losses we had in France, happened by the revolt of the French, which our men
without cause trusted. When al was lost, yet did we retain Caleis, until it
was taken from us by force, for that it was kept, and peopled by the English
nation. Yet the same was almost betrayed by an Italian, to whom Edw. the 3.
gave it in guard. How the Germans that came into France of late in aid of the
Protestants, under the Dukes of Bouillion, and the baron Donaw behaved
themselves, I report me to the memory of those poor gentlemen, that by their
disloyalty and treason, were left as a spoil to the enemy.

Often times strangers not only forsake their friends, but also join with the
enemy, and oppugn them. The Liu. 21.
Gauls in the 2. wars with Carthage, flew the watch of the Romans by night,
and fled, and joined themselves with Annibal. The Dutchmen that Charles the 8.
of France, left in the kingdom of Guicciar. lib. 3.
Naples for the defense thereof, corrupted with money took part with the enemy.
The Tacit. 20.
Romans betrayed by their associats, at one time were slain both by them, and
by the enemy. The ancient Britons using in time past the help of the Saxons,
were by them driven out of their native country. The like happened to the Caes.
bell. gal. 1.
Sequanians long before. For requiring aid of the Germans against the Heduans
their neighbors, they were driven out of their own possessions by those that
came to succor them. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
Iugurtha by the treachery of certain Thracians, that served the Romans in
Affrike, entered the Roman camp in the night, and made a great slaughter
therein. The Turks are now in possession of Constantinople, in aid whereof
they first came out of Asia. Strangers are never satisfied with any pay, and
yet seldom do they any service. The Dimissi Galli pecuniam ingentem sine
labor ac periculo partam retulerunt. Liu. 10.
Gauls hired by the Hetruscians, carried away their money without doing any
service against the Romans. When the French had foiled the enemy, then the
hired Switzers, and Dutchmen crying for money hindered their victory. They took
money (says Guicciar. lib. 2. and 12.
Guicciardin) of al hands, and did service to none. It is not possible (says
he) to manage the Impossible a manegiar li Suizzerisenza denari infiniti.
Guicciar. lib 9.
Switzers without infinite treasure. It is long to report al ye discourses of
their insatiable covetousness, and treasons. Of king Edw. the 3. purposing to
recover his right in France Froissart says, that with great sums of money he
hired the Dutch to join with him, but he got no aid of them, nor other
advancement, but a vain title of Lieutenant to ye Emperor. Not long since the
Hie duitch, or Germans.
Dutch calling for money when they should fight, gave the victory to the Duke
of Alua their enemy, and betrayed their General the Prince of Orange.

There is nothing more cowardly then strangers, when they come to service. They
are Non fide, non affectu tenentur. Sine pudore flagitii fugiunt. Tacit. in
vit. Agric.
not retained by affection nor regard promise, and shame not to fly to save
their skins.

Nothing can be devised more disorderly, nor rauinous. The Switzers took
their own Captains prisoners in Lombardy, and kept them as pledges until they
had money. They rebelde against Lewis Sforza, and sold the Guicciar. li. 13.
poor Duke for Crowns. The mercenary soldiers of Laurence Medici, and
Frances Maria did spoil the Marquisat of Ancona worse, then if they had been
enemies. For these causes the French king Guicciardin.
Lewis the xii. said, it was better to be without Switzers, then to have them.
And in the end Francis the first trayning 7. legions, or regiments of his own
people, determined to use no other soldiers, then of his own nation. the
troubles of that kingdom, I think, are cause that the order was left off.

Those therefore that would employ money upon French or Dutch, rather the^ upon
their own soldiers, should but dishonor their nation, hurt the state, or
affeeble their people, and bring (...). Arist. polit.
the Prince in distrust with his subjects without cause. Such me^ in time past
were thought to have tyrannical conceirs, and wish that neither the native
soldier should rise in honor, nor wealth, nor any subject become better
practiced in wars: and all to the end that they may grow rich them selves
and swallow down the spoils of their Country, without fear of accounts, or
controlement. And many do think, that if the English had but had that treasure
and favor, that the Hie Dutch have had, this State had been better assured,
and the enemy better cooled, and more honorable service performed.

CHAP. IIII Part. 9. Of the soldiers pay.
But forasuiuch as neither strangers, nor subjects can be long maintained
without pay, and because it will avail us nothing to leuy soldiers, unless
we pay them, and maintain them: therefore before we pass any further, let us
put those, that have ye government of wars committed unto them, in mind,
that some order be taken for the payment of the soldiers. For want of pay many
disorders be committed, many opportunities pretermitted. It is not possible,
considering first the poverty of the common soldier, and then their small
number, that either they can live of themselves, or win any thing from the
enemy. For want of pay they spoil their friends, and associates, yea their
companions, and commit many outrages. and who can execute justice upon them,
that either must famish, or live upon spoil. For want of pay they sell their
arms, their clothes, they grow sick, weak, and vnprofitabe.

Contrariwise, if they had their pay, justice might with more reason be
executed, and their persons, arms, and clothes be kept in better estate, and
many enterprises executed, that by weakness and want of the soldiers are
broken. Lautreck riding post, came in good time himself to have settled the
affairs of Guicciar. li. 14.
Milan, if the 300. thousand Crowns, which were promised by the French king
to be sent presently after him, had likewise come in post. For want of pay
the soldiers disbanded* for want of pay, occasioned by I know not what
frivolous delay, the Duchy of Milan was lost by the French. Soldiers are not
paid with promises, nor words. The slow provision of money was the cause
likewise of the rash enterprise, and overthrow of the French at the Tardita di
proueder denari, causa de larotta de Francesi a la Bic^cca. Guiccia. 14.
Bicock in Lombardy. The miserable niggardise, and slow dispatch of the
Cardinal Guicciar. 3.
San. Malo Treasurer to Charles the 8. of France, which deferd necessary
paymentes beyond all reason, set all the affairs of the French in the kingdom
of Naples in disorder, as Guicciardin testifies, and the very things
themselves declared. A very slow Gente d'arme ^ardi di pagamenti caminauon^
lentamente. Guicciar. li. 3.
march it is, that soldiers without pay do make. Guicciardin speaking of the
enterprise of Naples by Lautreck says, that the same was hindered by nothing
more, then by delays of pay; while such sums as should have been delivered
before hand were paid him by piecemeale and out of time. A man cannot in this
kind use too great expedition and diligence. nothing can be more hurtful herein
then avarice and delay.

Further many mutinies and disorders proceed of this only cause. I need not
confirm it by examples, seeing there is none that has followed the profession
of arms any time, but knows it by his own experience. Contrariwise due pay
does bind the soldiers hearts to the General, as Liuy declares in the
example Annibal large partiendo praeda^, stipendia praeterita cum fide
exoluendo, cunctos ciuium suorum, sociorumque animos in se sirmat. Liu. 21.
of Annibal.

Without pay soldiers can neither do service, nor maintain them selves in
strength, nor scarce live. With their Hinc vestes, arma, tentoria. Tacit. 1.
and in Polyb. 6.
pay they find them selves victuals, clothes, arms: with the same they
succor them selves in sickness, and when they are hurt. This was the use in
ancient time, and is now practiced also.

For this cause all warlike Nations have had due care that their soldiers
might be orderly paid. Liu. 2.
Porsena when the pay day came, sat by, while all his soldiers one by one
received their pay. For that end they appointed Tacit. annal. 11.
Tresurers to attend on the General, and to pay the army. That Generals should
then attend the pleasure of Tresurers was as a thing monstrous in nature. When
the Romans could not otherwise provide for their soldiers, the Senate
decreed, that the Aurea and argentea templotu^ ornamenta quae Numa
consecrauerat, ne militibus stipendium deesset, conflata sunt. Val. Max. l. 7.
c. 6.
ornaments of gold, and silver which Numa Pompilius had consecrate, should be
made into money, that they might be paid. This was iu the time of Marius. When
the common wealth of Rome had no money, the charge was laid upon rich men Liu.
24.
proportionally. The Nobility and Gentry brought in, and lent sufficient. Some
of the wealthiest in the need of the State served without pay. The Hirt. de
bell. Alexandr.
Alexandrians in the wars against Caesar, by assigning to every man of
ability certain soldiers to be kept, maintained the wars against him. And
generally such order was taken among all nations for pay of the soldiers, that
in all stories Greek and Latin I scarce read of any one mutiny for want of pay.

Some will percase reply and say, that there is no comparison betwixt the
people of Rome, and us. And that it was an easy matter for that great Empire
to pay their soldiers, which to us is so hard and grievous: some conceive that
their soldiers were content with less pay, and others deem that the charge
of wars is now greater then in those times: matters utterly mistaken. For
not only the Romans, but also the Athenians, Thebans, Samnites, Aequians,
Volscians, Hernicans, Sabines, and many other small States in comparison of
this kingdom, maintained, and paid great armies many years. Yea when the Liu.
li. 9. and 10.
State and Territory of Rome was not the third part of England in bigness, yet
did the same maintain one army against the Samnites, another in a contrary
quarter against the Hetruscians, and the third at home against such of their
neighbors, as were not perfectly to be trusted. The pay, all things
considered, was then rather bigger then lesser in respect of our times. The
December in dies assibus anima and corpus aestimatur. Tacit. 1. It is a Roman
soldiers speech there.
pay of the Romans was for every day a piece of money which they called
Denarium, for that it contained decemasses. Although I confess that afterward
the value of that Coin, was enhaunced. that wayeth of our money vii.d. or
thereaboutes, as both Budey testifies and I have tried, by waying diverse of
the Coins, which I have seen in Italy, and other where.

The pay of the Athenian soldiers amounted to a piece of money which they
called (...), for every day. So that both the pay of the Greeks and Romans
came to one reckoning. for Denarius Romanus, and the Athenian Dram, by
Alciat. de ponderib. and mensur.
account both of Merchants, and Physicians weyed alike, and was of one value.
That the Athenian pay amounted to so much, as I have said, Thucidides shall
witness, who says, that the garrison of (...). Thucid. 3.88. Steph.
Potidaea had every man one Dram for himself, and another for his esquire,
that waited on him, daily. Consider the prices of things now, you shall find
that their pay was greater then either ours which give commonly viii.d. a day,
or the Spanish pay, which is iii Ducats a month for a man, beside their
Ventajas, as they call them.

That the charge of wars is now greater, then in time past; is but an
improbable surmise. For wherein arises the charge of an army now, but in
victuals, arms, clothes, horses, cariages and such like, which were no less
chargeable in time past, then now? powder we have now, and artillery, which
in time past was not found out, but the charge of their engines, and the things
about them, which now we need not, nor use, was no less chargeable to them.
So that if we had that order and proceeding, which they had: there is no doubt
but we are as well able to maintain an army, as they.

Why a sufficient army should not be maintained and paid, I see no reason but
want of military discipline. For seeing this land mainteineth so many millions
at home, there is no reason, but the same should maintain 30. or 40. thousand
of the same number abroad, if right discipline of arms were practiced. The
charge of an army is most in meat, and apperell. But in these things men spend
no less at home, then abroad. I do think that albeit this land wanted money,
yet if the army were well supplied with victuals and clothes by ye Princes
Officers, that a great army might sufficiently be paid. For that money that
should be delivered to the soldier, would most of it come back for victuals
and clothes, of which this land (God be thanked) has no want. The expenses of
munitions, and arms, and other matters are in respect of this charge, nothing.
But what should I talk of this course, when there wants neither money, nor
other thing, but good orders well executed? The revenues of the Crown, the
contributions of the subjects, and aid of our friends, are not so simple, but
that there may be found maintenance sufficient, if men's good wills and loyal
dealing were not wanting. Besides these if our army were sufficient to fight
with the enemy, I would think, there were want of skill, or good order, if
the same did not as well live upon the enemies spoils, as the Princes pay.

Clearchus (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
maintained his soldiers, by the contribution of the cities of Hellespont,
where they lay. The Romans transporting an army into Asia, so wisely did the
General proceed, that he maintained the same with the spoils of the
Country, and writ back to the Senate, that for that year he needed neither
Liu. 40.
provision, nor pay. for the victory gave his army sufficient. But before
Princes bring such a matter to pass, many disorders are to be redressed: men
desirous of honor are to be appointed Officers: the rapines and filcheries of
former times, and hereafter to, by strict Auditors and Commissioners are to be
sifted out, and severely punished, as matters that disorder all armies.
Auaritia di commessarij regij fraudando il re, ne pagamenti di soldati cagione
della rotta di Garigliano. Guicciar. lib. 6.
Guicciardin shewerh it by the confusion that was in the French army at
Gariglian, by the default and fraud of the kings Officers for pay. If those
that kill a woman or a child of no great reckoning deserve death, what do they
deserve that are the cause of the death of many valiant soldiers, and betray
the Realm and their Prince into the hands of the enemy through their fraud,
filcherie, and delays? the abuses in musters must also be redressed. Wherein I
understand that Governors of late have been careful, and set down many good
orders, but all comes to this pass, that the Captains shall pay their
soldiers: which does promise no good effect in this matter. It is a notorious
abuse to give the pay of the common soldier to the Centurion, or Captain of
every band; never used by the Romans, nor other nation. It first came in among
the Italians about two hundred and fifty, or two hundred years agone in their
scambling wars among themselves. The reason was, for that the Prince that had
wars hired the Captain out of some other State, and the Captain he hired
such soldiers, as he could get. So that the Prince dealing with the Capatine
must pay him, and the Captain must pay his soldiers. Which reason now
ceasing, there is no cause why the abuse should continue. Further there are
certain dead pays allowed to the captain, under color whereof I doubt not
but they will pass many dead men, or such as never were in mosters. It is
as much as if he should be allowed to defraude a Prince a little, so it be but in
six dead pays. But better it were and more honorable, if the Prince did
allow the Captain an honorable and sufficient pay, and make others the
paymasters. It is not possible now that matters should in these cases be
redressed, seeing such as have interest in the gain, are made controllers of
the offense.

Were it not better to pay every soldier by the poll? better I say for the
Prince. For if the soldiers acquitance, moster book, paymasters and
controllers accounts agree, he cannot lightly be defrauded, either of his
money, or of his numbers: better for the common soldier: for he shall have his
due. Yea better for the Captains, for they should not be so condemned, as they
are of the country, nor of their soldiers, and some very wrongfully: and who
would for so small gain, incur the loss of his honor, or reputation? but
thus they shall neither live themselves, nor be able to reward their
soldiers: As if I wished them not larger pay, and w ih honester conditions.
And as if they did use to reward their men, or that belonged to them. it is the
General, that should do it upon their report, and not they.

When Citati milites nominatim, stipendium ad nomen singulis persolutum. Liu.
28.
Scipio paid his soldiers in Spain, every man received himself his due
pay, man by man. Which was the continual practice of the Stipendium praesens
omnibus militibus dabatur. Liu. 23.
Romans. That I likewise confirmed by the example of Porsena the captain of
the Hetruscians, who stood by Liu. 2.
while every man received his stipend. Guicciardin disputing and weying the
causes why the Frenchmen in the expedition of Charles the 8. into the kingdom
of Naples so easily prevailed, alleges this for principal: that the Kings
soldiers were paid by the kings Officers, and not as the Italian use was, by
the Captains. For which cause now at length also the Spaniard weary of this
abuse, appoints certain Officers to pay every soldier according to the They
call them Pagadores.
moster roll; and diverse controllers of these paymasters.

This I think to be the best means to remedy the want of pay, the fraud of
Officers, the disorders of soldiers, and coruption of false mosters: whereby
many Princes have been greatly abused, and are like to be further, if order be
not taken. Before Pauy the Guicciar. li. 15
French king Francis had not half the number of soldiers that were upon his
moster books, which was the principal cause of the ruin of the army, and of
the taking of the king, as Guicciardin affirms. The same was the ruin of the
army of Iulio the 2. before Guicciar. lib. 9.
Gemuolo, and causes many to presume further then reason, thinking their
strength greater, and diverse to detest wars; the disorders are so great. This
I thought necessary to speak concerning pay: more perhaps then some will like.
But the commiseration I have of poor soldiers, and detestation I had of
disorders, that have happened upon this cause in the service where I have been,
and fear of worse have extorted these complaints from me, yet not to hurt any
particular (God is my witness) but generally to do my country good, if I could;
and to admonish those whom it concerns, to look better unto it hereafter.

CHAP. IIII. Part. 10. Wherein is declared, that there is no hope of good
success in wars, without a full army, and force sufficient.
THose that know with what difficulty, and misery Officers are wont to pay 4.
or 5. M. men, have good cause to think it a matter very difficult to maintain
30. or 40. M. and many percase will wonder, what I mean, to persuade the leuy
of a full army, seeing the unwillingness, and vnreadines of this age in sending
forth, and furnishing any small number of men. But notwithstanding the
imagination of the first, or wonderment of the second; both the laws and
practice of arms, does teach us that to obtain victory, and to subdue our
enemies a just and full army must be employed; and that small numbers of men
do rather feed the wars, then end them, and rather anger the enemy, then
hurt him. The Lacedaemonians before the Peloponnensian war consulting with ye
oracle, by what means they might best prevail against their enemies, received
this answer, that the means to overcome, was to use (...). Thucid. 1.
their full strength. For if an army be a perfect body, as the Athenian
captain Iphicrates was wont to say, it must have the just proportion of
parts, and just complement, or else it will be monstrous, and not able to do
the actions exspected of such a body. The Romans therefore as in other things,
so in this excelled, that they never dealt with any enemy, but with a full
army. If the power of the enemy were great, they employed a Consulare army
consisting of 4. legions of citizens, beside the aid of their associates, if
less they used but two legions, with the aid of their friends. The greatest
force that they usually employed were two Consular armies joined together. The
number was diverse, as the legions were greater or lesser, full or imperfect:
but their greatest force amounted not past to 50. thousand, their middle to 24.
thousand, their least to 12, or 15. thousand, or thereaboutes. Less number I
do not read that they used in any service, and therefore proceeding with
sufficient force, I marvel not, if their success were according.

It is the use of all nations, neither the French in their expeditious into
Italy, nor the Spaniard into France, or Italy uses to send less then a just
army. The Duke of Alua beside 12. or 13. M. Almaines and those of the Low
countries, brought with him 9000. Spaniards and Italians when first he came
into that country. It is no good nor profitable course, to send 4. or 5.
thousand against what soever enemy. If to famish, they are too many: if to
fight, too few. Double that number is neither able to keep the field, nor to
besiege any city, nor almost able to do any enterprise of war, unless it
be to defend some place for some few days, and in the end to give it over
being in despair of succor. Our proceedings in France and Flanders, if mother
reason will pes wade us, may teach us, that this number is too little the
effects do declare my speech to be true. The Thucid. 1.
Lacedaemonians so long as they sent small numbers of men against the
Athenians, could do no good against them, but did hurt to themselves. Small
force does rather nourish and kindle the wars, then extinguish them; even as
a few drops sprinkled on the fix, does make the same to burn more bright.
and as much water powered on the fire does quench the same, so a sufficient
army makes an end of brawles, or at least brings them to trial. Nay
further, a sufficient force does not only work greater effect, but also is
less chargeable, then wars made by these slender supplies. It may percase
seem a paradoxe to some, but reason and experience does prove it true.

These wars of our times, they have no end; but where a sufficient army
goes, there is an end, either one way or other. There is no end of charge in
lingering wars: in these, if the army prevail, the victory mainteineth the
same; if it be overcome, then is there an end of that army and charge. The
burden is only in the setting of the same out, and mainteyning of it in the
mean while. But will some say, the hazard were great. Let them therefore fight
valiantly, and not suffer themselves to be skinned. They that forecast what
winds will blow, seldom sow, or set sail in time.

Further, a small force must needs lie in Towns, and hide their heads, where
the enemy is stronger. Against ye enemy they have neither strength to fight,
nor means to enterprise, and still the Prince is at a continual charge: and
without pay ye soldiers famish: but where a full and sufficient force arriueth
in any Country, they command the same, unless an army be presently opposed
against the^. They enrich themselves with spoils. the fruits they lay up for
their own store. Many confederates, some for fear, others for other causes
join with them, and either yield money, or victuals, or munitions. Whatsoever
corn, forage, or other provision is without walled Towns, that is theirs. It
must be a Town of some strength that dare resist them. When the army is
great, the wars mainteyne themselves, as said Cato. Scipio with the profit
that he drew out of the Country of Spain, maintained his army there diverse
years. Sixteen years did Annibal maintain wars in Italy, at the charge of
that Country almost without supply of men, or money from Carthage. With the
riches of France, Caesar maintained his army 9. years in France, and enriched
himself, and his country. Besides the charge of the army defraied, many Roman
captains have brought in great sums of money into the public treasury.
These are the fruits of victory: but victory cannot be obtained without an
army.

If therefore any man hope for the end of wars, or good success in France,
Flanders, or other Country; let him wish that sufficient means were employed.
There is neither honor, safety, profit, nor hope of good hap in the course of
wars commonly taken. If you will not believe me: then examine the proceedings
of the small companies that have bin employed in service of late time: examine
the ancient and latter histories of foreign nations, that have had good
success in their wars. If you see nothing but disorder in the one, and
reason in the other: then let captains never for shame on this sort loose
their men, expend their money, trifle the time, dally with the enemy, contrary
to reason, and all good proceeding; but let them as in other points, so in this
also return to the true discipline, and practice of war.

CHAP. IIII. Part. 11. Of the exercise and trayning of young soldiers, whereby
they are made apt, and ready for the wars.
A Wise General having once enrolled his soldiers, will not loose any one
hour of time, but will either exercise them, or employ them in service. There
is nothing in wars more precious then time, which once passed, cannot be
recalled. And whether the army be idle, or well employed, the pay and charge
still runs on. But because it is dangerous to bring young soldiers into the
face of the enemy, before they be both fashioned by exercise, and also fleshed
by light encounters with the enemy: he ought both diligently to exercise them
at such times, as ye enemy gives him leisure, and also to harden them by
skirmishes and other light enterprises against the enemy, before he hazard to
fight with his full forces. Therein what example can I set before him better to
follow then that of Scipio, that overcame Annibal, and in all deeds of arms
showed himself most vigilant and skillful. He before he drew forth his army
out of new Carthage into the field, when as yet the time of the year was not
proper for service, did continually diverse days exercise his men, as well in
fight at sea, as at land. The first day he caused all his regiments to run in
array and order of battle 4. miles: the second day he appointed every man to
make his arms clean and fit: the Tertio die in modum iustae pugnae sudibus
interse concurrerunt. Liu. 26.
third day he caused them to divide themselves into two parts, and in order of
battle to fight the one against the other with cudgels, and blunt darts. The
same course he took in Sicile, before he transported his Liu. 29.
army into Afrike. He caused his soldiers in order of battle to march and
run armed, and set his ships in array within ye harbor in such good order, as
if he were presently to fight. The Intentior qua^ vnquam ^nte a muniendi,
exercendique militem cura ducibus Volscorum erat. Liu. 4.
Volscians having bin oftentimes foiled by the Romans, and determining to set
up their rest, took great care in arming and exercising their men, as if that
were the only means to harten and harden their soldiers. And sure much good
does exercise and teaching, as well in war as other arts, where the leaders
are skillful. Tit. Liu. 23.
Sempronius by exercising his young soldiers, taught them to follow their
ensigns, and keep ranks both standing, and fighting in array of battle, and
obtained by them diverse victories against the enemy. Liu. 34.
Cato likewise in his voyage into Spain, took no small pains in exercising
of his men, before he brought them to see the enemy; whereby he so fashioned
them, that he gave diverse repulses to the enemy. Tullus Hostilius, when the
minds of the Romans were mollified ky long peace, in the days of his
predecessor Numa, yet by exercise obtained so much, that they durst encounter,
and were not inferior to old soldiers.

Epaminondas by framing and excercising the Thebanes, made them of a base
nation, the most warlike people of Greece, and with them ouerthrewe the
Lacedaemonians, which from their youth up were trained up in the exercise of
arms. In the first wars with Carthage, the Romans perceiving that for want
of skill in Sea causes, they were inferior to the Carthaginians, practiced
their men in imaginary Sea fightes, and so long exercised them therein, that
at lenghth they overcame them as well by sea, as by land. Liu. 24.
Statorius the Roman teaching the soldiers of Syphax to follow their
leaders, and to keeperankes, and other orders of wars, in short time made
them of nouices so expert, that after that Syphax doubted not to encounter the
Carthaginians. This caused Tissaphernes the Persian, to make such reckoning of
Phalinus, a Grecian, for that he was (...). exped. Cyr. 2. Xenoph.
skillful in ordering of men, and teaching them to fight in arms. Of English
men Philip of Comines gives this testimony, tha although when they first come
into France they have small skill, yet with exercise they first come into
France they have small skill, yet with exercise they become good soldiers: and
therefore seeing most of our soldiers are young, and of small experience in
wars, by reason of our long peace, they are diligently to be exercised before
that they see the enemy. Cassius quantum sine bello dabatur, reuocat priscum
morem, exercet legiones. Tacit. 12,
Cassius the Roman according to the old guise of the Romans, exercised his
soldiers at all idle times, albeit many of them were expert in wars.

Much more therefore ought we to exercise our young soldiers, and that first
in fat^tes of actiuities, as running, leaping, throwing, wrestling; secondly in
the use of their weapon, and that both singly by themselves every man, and also
in company: thirdly in marching and keeping of ranks, and other exercises of
war.

By these exercises, the soldiers obtain three commidities: the body is first
made active, and strong, and fit for labor; soldiers also learn to march in
their arms, to carry some weight, to run, to work in trenches, and other
necessary fortification; without which neither can the soldier rest safely in
his camp, nor so easily prevail against the enemy in the field. Caesar did
no less prevail against ye Gauls with the mattocke and spade, then with the
sword. In a short time he made huge trenches and mountes, such as the Cae. bell.
gal. 2.
enemy wondered at. Now because we have forgotten the true practice of war,
our soldiers refuse to work, and Princes use the help of pioners, insomuch
that hardly we see that brought to pass in a month, which Caesar could effect
in few hours. The Romans from their youth exercised their bodies in running,
leaping, wrestling, swimming. Coruinus the Roman captain in his youth, in
these exercises was In ludo militari cum velocitatis and viriu^ certamen esset,
ceteris par. Liu. 7.
equal to the best. By this Ferebant dimidiati mensis cibaria and vallum. Cic,
Tuscul. qu. 2.
exercise they were made able to carry beside their arms, half a months
victuals, and certain stakes.

Secondly, every soldier is made acquainted and cunning with the weapon,
wherewith he serves. The shot learneth to charge and discharge redily, and at
mark. The piquier how to use his pike, both against footmen and borsemen: the
halbardier understands the use of his halberd both to defend, and to strike
his enemy: the targetter how to manage his sword and target; and every one
learneth ye use of sword and dagger, for that they are common weapons. Without
skill men often times weary themselves, break their weapons hurt not their
enemy. The Discebant Romani tractarescutum, and obliquis ictibus venientia
tela deflectere. Veget. l. 1. c.4.
Roman youths learned first to use the target, or shield and sword, (for that
was their most common arms,) and how with slent blows to break the force of
their enemies weapons, or darts.

Afterward they practiced ye use of all other sorts of weapons. And as absurd
it is for a soldier to take on him yt name, not knowing the use of his arms,
as for an ignorant person, to call himself an artificer, and yet not to know
the use of the tools of his occupation.

Lastly by learning and understanding the arrayes, and just distances of
horsemen, and footmen, and the standings of all sorts of weapons, and the
differences in marching, fighting, retiring, according to diverse sorts of
grounds, and how to march to ye assalt or defense of a Town or place, (which
may be showed them by those that are good leaders,) Soldiers may learn how
to place themselves upon an instant, and not as I have seen done, run away,
or run up and down like men amazed; they may also understand how to cake
advantage of the enemy, how to rally themselves being disordered, and in what
place every kind of weapon is to be sorted, and employed with most advantage.
In sum, array and order may both better be kept, and more easily repaired;
without which (...). Arist. polit.
arms have no use. And as well can an army march or fight being out of array,
as a body do the functions of the body, having the parts out of frame. There
is certainly nothing (...). Xenoph. oeconomic.
more beautiful in the eyes of friends, then an army set in order, neither
is any thing more fearful to the enemy. But this cannot be done without
instruction and exercise: of which I hope our governors will have more care
hereafter. But (may some say) what need so many words in these matters:
especially if we consider both the charge, and labor that has bin spent in
trayning of soldiers within our Realm of late time? men able (as some think)
to encounter the most florshing army in Christendom? against whom I have no
purpose to speak. Nay I wish with all my heart, they were so strong, and ready
as is imagined. Only I thought good to show first the defectes in our
trayning, which I would wish were supplied, and our men better instructed; and
next how little trust there is to be put in trained men, that never saw
enemy, unless there be many old soldiers mingled among them. In trayning of
soldiers therefore in places where I have bin, these wants I have observed.
First, the soldiers are not always best chosen: secondly, their bodies are
not exercised as they should be: thirdly, they are not taught the use of their
several weapons. Few teach soldiers the right use of the piece, and none the
use of the pike, halberd, and sword, and target. Fourthly, the men are rather
wearied in marching up and down, and wheeling in ringes, and filing of ranks,
which are to no use in fighting, then instructed how to take their places in
marching, in fighting, assalting, retiring, or other deed of arms. Fifthly,
there is seldom or never sufficient company brought together, so that men may
conceive the reasons of the places of every sort of weapons: horsemen are
seldom seen in traynings of soldiers. So yt hardly can any conceive how
things should stand, by any thing yt is showed. Lastly such for the most part
upon some commendation of some great man's letters, are employed in teaching our
soldiers, as either never went to the school of arms, or know very little
themselves. So that I see no other effect of training men, then expense of time
and powder. And for mine own part, I wish rather to have men never exercised,
then in this sort trained. But were they better trained then they are, yet are
we not to put too great trust in them. The Venetians making reckoning of the
trained men of their state (which are such like, as ours are) were abused (
says Guicciar. lib. 8.
Guicciardin) and overthrown. And Confidauano Piu Chenon si doueua, ne fanti
d'ordonnanza del su^ dominio i Fiorentini. Pero non si prouedeuan di soldadi e
sercitati. Guicciar. lib. 11.
evil were the Florentines apaid, trusting in their trained soldiers. The
same being appointed to the guard of Prato, a Town of their dominion, seeing
but two Spaniards to mount upon a little breach, threw down their weapons, and
ran as fast as they might out of the Town.

Generally there is no trust in young soldiers. A small Pluris facienda est
parua veteranorum manus, quam indocta, and expers belli multitudo. Veget. l. 1.
c. 1.
company of old beaten soldiers, is better then a multitude of people
without knowledge, and experience of wars. Young soldiers that have not heard
the noise of battle, nor seen the slaughter of men, nor felt knockes, will
hardly abide them at the first. If not in trained soldiers, much less in
tumultuarie forces ought we to put any confidence. The Liu. 8 and 9.
Latins and Hetruscians seeing the Romans range their country in no great
number, came forth by multitudes against them, thinking to swallowe them up.
But the first were no sooner slain, then the rest fled. 500. old soldiers
put all the rascal route of Tacit. 3.
Tacfarinas in Affrike to flight. At Liu. 21.
Annibals first coming into Italy the country people seeing the spoils he
made, had thought to have cut a certain out wing in pieces. But in be ginning
the execution, 35. thousand were put to flight by a very sew. The Spaniards at
Puente de Butgos in Galicia, assembled together in great numbers, fled from
us upon the first approach of our men. And so it is commonly in all young
soldiers. Wherefore the best is to use old soldiers, the next to mingle
new, and old together, and diligently to teach them, and train them, before
we hazard our whole state upon them. For albeit much is in man's natural
courage, yet the same is much increased by skill and exercise, and that not
feyned, but in fight with the enemy.

CHAP. V.
Part. 1. Wherein is declared, what things are especially to be considered of
those, that lead an army by land, or by sea, into a foreign country.
Uncertainty, and irresolution, as in other actions, so in the proceeding of
wars, works no good effect. Time may not be spent, nor money wasted
vainly. A wise captain therefore purposing a journey into an other country,
will before hand resolve, first what time is fittest to set forward, secondly
what things be necessary for his service, that he may have them ready against
that time; and thirdly what place is fittest both to make his provision, and to
assemble his troops in. The consideration of the time is very material: for
neither is it convenient to enter in the depth of Winter, for that at that time
forage for horses is very hard to come by; nor in the heat of Summer, for that
the time is hurtful for men's bodies to travel in, Caesar entering into France
in the midst of Winter, was driven to great extremities, and albeit he had
good help of friends to relieve him with victuals, and other nacessaries: yet
were his soldiers and horses almost famished. Then it is hard to lie without
doors: the ways then also are very troublesome. The duke of Lancasters army
arriving in Froistart.
Portugal, in the days of king Richard the 2. in the heat of Summer, suffered
no less through heat, then the other through cold. Much also did the He
himself in that journey took that sickness, whereof he died.
black Princes army suffer in Spain through the heat of Summer. Neither did
the heat of the Country in our late voyage of Portugal further our
enterprise. The most convenient time to enter any Country with an army is,
when the same may find greatest store of victuals for men, of forage for
horses, and is most temperate: so that men may endure travail best, without
endangering their health. Of this Caes. bell. gal. 2. and 3.
Caesar had respect both in his wars in France, and Affrike, and other
places. And evil did it befall those, yt without consideration of time rashly
adventured to go in foreine services. He that considers not the time, must
make his provision the greater.

The place also would be chosen, and certainly resolved upon, where both our
provision is to be made, and our soldiers are to be appointed to meet. The
Romans in their wars in Greece, assembled their forces at ye port of Vti
omnes ^^uenirent Brundusium idibus Maijs, Liu. 36.
Brundusiu^, sailing into Affrike against the Carthaginians, they made their
provision and rendeuouz at Lilibaeum, which say right over against Afrike, as
the other port was commodious for those yt sailed into Greece. Cato in his
journey into Cato ad Lunae portum conuenire iustit. Liu. 34.
Spain chose the port of Luna, as lying directly against Spain. Annibal Liu.
21.
purposing a voyage into Italy, assigned new Carthage for his men to meet at.
When Caes. bell. gal. 5.
Caesar intended the invasion of this Island, he appointed his men to meet, and
his provision to be brought to Caleis and Bollein. For that neither the time,
nor place of meeting, was appointed certain, I report me what hinderance it
was to us, in the enterprise of Portugal. But greatest care would be had, first
that we carry with us force of our own, sufficient: and secondly, that we have
provision of arms, victuals, munitions, and all instruments of war with us.
For in vain looks he for help of others, or of the country where he goes,
that is not strong of himself. Machiauel. discors.
Banished men do make those that go in their succor believe, that they have
great parties in the country, and that the enterprise is easy; but there is
no wisdom to give them futher credit, then such men deserve. In Portugal we
may remember, how we were abused, or rather abused our selves to think that
the country would revolt before we had beaten the Spaniard, that kept the
people in subjection: and too late it is to look for supply from home of men
or victuals, when we are presently to use them. The Romans although they sent
diverse times succors to other nations, as to the Greeks oppressed by the
kings of Macedonia: to the Sicilians invaded by the Carthaginians: yet never
sent they less then a sufficient army, furnished with all things necessary.
Caesar for that he was driven to leave a great part of his army, and
provision behind him, both in his De bell. ciu. 3.
voyage against Pompey, and against Scipio in Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Afrike, was driven to great extremities, and omitted many opportunities before
the rest of his army came at him. He that has his men, and all things ready
with him, oppresses the Country, before provision can be made against him.

Yet may not the Prince that inuadeth others, so provide against the enemy,
that he forget to cover and defend his own Country and Coast, and frontier
Towns against all sudden enterprises. Annibal marching toward Italy, before
hand provided one Partiens curas inferendi and arcendi belli. Liu. 2
army for the guard of Afrike, another for the guard of Spain. And Caesar
pursuing Pompey into Greece, committed the Caes. bell. ciu. 3.
guarde of Italy, and the port towns thereof unto Antony If Liu. 29.
Syphax going out of his country to war against the Romans,had had like
care, his country had not been taken from him in his absence by Masinissa and
Laelius. He is not wise that seeking to strike his enemy, lies open himself.

But because wars spend both men, and victuals, and other provisions,
especially where there is made great resistance: we must not only think to
send sufficient at the first; but also cause the same to be supplied in time.
Nothing did cause Anniball to Negando supplementum vos retraxistis; said
Annibal to the Senate of Carthage. Liu. 30.
leave his hold in Italy, but want of succor, and supply. The slownesse of
Hist. de bell. Afric.
Caesar's supplies after his army transported into Afrike made him loose many
advantages, and sustain diverse losses. I will not say what hurt want of
supply did us in the Portugal action, whhen it may be imputed rather to
presumption, that we went forth unfurnished; then to want of care, that we
had no supply in time. For where to could supply have served, where the whole
was through want disordered before? for guarde of ships of carriage, and
assurance of the army, the whole navy where the passage is by sea, is to be
furnished, and to sail in warrelike sort. Caes. de bell. ciu. lib. 3.
Caesar for that he was driven to pass his army in certain Merchant ships
without guard of ships of war, lost diverse of his soldiers sailing into
Greece.

King Edward the third passing his army into France sailed in that warrelike
sort, that encountering the French navy at Scluce he obtained a famous
victory. If the passage be not cleared by ships of war keeping the seas, it
is to be feared least the enemy lying in wait intercept diverse of our ships
and men passing between; as has often happened in the passage between
England, and the Low countries within these few years. And as at sea, so by
land likewise the way is to be cleared, that no enemy be left upon our
backs.

The Generrall being ready to set sail with all his company; either by ticket
sealed, or else word of mouth, he is to declare to what port he will have his
company to bend their course; to the end that such as by tempest are severed
at sea, may yet afterward meet at a port. Caesar tabellis signatis solebat
dicere quem in lo^^m petiturus esset. Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Caesar used tickets. Liu. 29.
Scipio sailing into Afrike calling two of every ship, declared what he would
have them do, and whither to set their course. Cato having all his ships and
men together, and being ready to set sail for Cato nauibus contractis edixit,
ad portum Pyrenei sequerentur. Liu. 34.
Spain caused proclamation to be made, that all his ships should direct
their course to the port near the Pyreneies which I suppose was Emporia.
Because Caesar gave not like direction in his voiages into Albany against
Pompey, and Afrike against Scipio, he sustained diverse losses. And in the
voyage of Portugal such as lost sight of the fleet either returned, or went to
Rochel, being uncertain whither to go. That the navy fail not of the port,
every ship is to have a good pilot.

The better and more certainly the General understands the state of the
enemies country, and the ports, and defenses thereof, and proceedings of the
enemy: the more certain direction he shall be able to give. And therefore as at
all times he ought by his espialles to understand what the enemy does, and
what he prepares: so in this time especially when he goes about to
transporte an army into his country. For this cause Caesar antequa^ in
Britanniam traijceret, Volusenum qui omnia exploraret praemittit. Caes. bell.
gal. 4.
Caesar sent Commius, and Volusenus into this Island, the one to understand the
state of the people, the other to view the coast, and sound the Ports. Cato
before he went against the enemy in Spain, sent his espialles to understand
the number, the place, and proceeding of his army.

After the arrival of the navy in the enemies country, the first care of the
General ought to be, to seize upon some commodious port town, or harbor, and
to fortify the same, that both his shipping may be safe there, and that both
succors, and victualles may safely come thither: and last of all, that both
from thence he may safely proceed in his action, and have a safe retraite in
a storm. Caesar landing his men in Afrike fortified Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Ruspina, and by trenches and banks made it both a good harbor for ships,
and a safe lodging for his army. The same was practiced before of Scipio, who
landing near a point of land in Afrike, did first make fortifications in that
place. But afterward perceiving that Vtica thereby was more commodious, he
took the town, and made that a Eandem sedem ad cetera exequenda habitu^us
erat. Liu. 29.
castle of retrait from the land, and an access for his ships from sea; and
a place commodious for dispatch of other marters. The reasons that moved Scipio
to take new Carthage in Spain were these, that he might have a conueient
port for access of his ships, and a commodious storehouse for his
provisions of war.

Annibal made many attempts against Liu. lib. 23.
Naples and Nola, that he might use them for the same purposes lying
commodiously for those that come out of his country. Neither had Edward the
third other respect in his long siege of Caleis, but that he might have a
commodious port for his shipping on that side. These causes at this present
have moved the Spaniardes that lately have set foot in Brytaine, to fortify
Hannebon and Bluet. Little did the Macedonians understand the practice of
war, that taking Liu. 31.
Chalcis a very opportune port for their wars in Greece, left the same
without fortification, or garrison.

That the navy be not idle, the General after he has landed his men, is to
employ the same in ranging the coast, fetching in of victualles, and annoying
the enemy both by land and sea. Unless the same be at sea, the enemy will
deprive him of succors, and victualles. Therein let him follow the precedent
of Scipio in Spain, of Caesar in Afrike.

Those that invade the enemy by land, likewise are to seize some town near
the enemy which may serve them for a fortress whither to retire, and whence to
sally out. The (...) Thucid. 1.
Persians inuading Greece, used the town of Thebes as a retraite, and
propugnacle against the Greeks.

The Lacedaemonians to strait the Athenians fortified Eleusis a bourgh in the
territory of the Athenians. Oringis arx fuit Asdrubalis ad excursiones circa
in mediterraneos populos faciendas. Liu.
Asdrubal used the town of Oringis in Spain, as a fortress, from whence he
made roades into the midland country thereabout. Sulpitius the Roman Consul
in the Macedonian war seizing a Praesidium ibi imposuit. Nam erat oppidum
opportunum ad impetus in Macedoniam faciendos. Liu. 31.
town that lay fitly against Macedonia, did put garrison in it, and from
thence made diverse attempts against the Macedonians. Antiochus Liu. 45.
purposing to invade Egypt furnished Pelusium, which is the kay of that
country, with sufficient garrison.

Yet before the army be brought in sight of the enemy, the same is to be
refreshed certain days, whether it be of their travails by land in their
march, or iactation and disease at sea. Liu. 21.
Annibal before he brought forth his army to fight with the Romans in Italy
caused the same to refresh, and rest it self diverse days after his wearisome
journey through the Alps. And likewise returning out of Italy into Afrike to
defend his Country against Scipio, he Paucos dies ad reficiendum militem ex
iactatione maritima sumpsit. Liu. 30.
refreshed his men certain days of their travail at sea, before he marched
against the enemy.

Whether the country be known to the General or not, yet ought be not to march
without dilligent discouerers sent before, at any time: least of all when he
comes into a strange country all enemy. Wherefore after he has settled his
matters in the town, or port which he has seized, and refreshed his men, let
him then send forth espials and discouerers, to understand the site of the
country, and proceedings of the enemy. Annibal consulis consilia atque animum,
and situ^ regionum, itineraque explorauit. Liu 22.
Annibal before he incountred with Flaminius the Roman General, sent before
him certain men to espy his purposes, and to view the situation of the
country, and the ways which he was to travail. It is the practice of all
wise Generalles. The Romans neglecting to make this discovery were enclosed at
Caudium by the Samnites, and shamefully overcome, and Annibal himself trusting
an ignorant guide, was almost intrapped at Cales by Fabius. Curio Caes. de bell.
ciu. l. 2.
marching in the sands of Afrike without knowledge of the enemies power, or
the disadvantage of the country being dry, and plain, was overthrown
together with his whole army by the Numidian horsemen of Iuba. Appius Appius
Boiorum agros populans inexplorato, riullisque stationibus sirmatis, caesus cum
legionibus. Liu. 31.
spoiling the country of the Boyans without espiall sent before, and guards
placed in convenient distances; was himself slain, together with his company.
The means to escape these trappes, and ambushes is viligent espiall, and
discovery.

If our army do march far up into the country; then is diligent heed to be
taken, that the enemy do not cut between us, and our succors or victuallers.
For favor whereof we are to assure our selves of the passages, and to place
garrisons in convenient distances. Caesar distributed ten thousand Caes. bell.
gal. 7. quo expeditiore re frumen^^ria vteretur.
Heduans in diverse towns, and fortes upon the way, that his victualles might
come to his army with safety. He took Vellaunodunum that lay upon the way,
lest the enemy might stop the passage. The town of Liu. 28.
Astapa in Spain was taken and ruinated by L. Martius, for that the garrison
of the enemies there, did spoil the confederates of the Romans, and intercept
the victuallers that came to the army. The same course did Caes. de bell. ciu.
lib. 3.
Caesar take for the brideling of the enemy, and assurance of his victualles in
his wars against Pompey.

But because nothing is more to be feared of an army transported into a strange
country, then want of victuals: therefore must the Generals mind be intentive,
and careful, not only for the (...). Xenoph. Cyr. paed. 1.
present, but also for the future time. He may not think that he shall
always find corn and provision in the country, especially if the enemy
understand the train of wars. Caesar found the same by experience in his
wars in France, when the enemy burned the country before him. When the
Persian king understood the intention of Cyrus, to be to deprive him of his
crown: he sent (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
horsemen before to burn all things, that might profitably serve the enemy.
And in the invasion which Annibal made in Italy Fabius caused all the provision
that might serve for an army to be either spoiled, or brought into strong
towns in all places near where Annibal, and his company passed. Therefore is
it requisite, that store of horses, and carriages go along with the army for
carriage of victualles, munitions, and other necessaries.

Cyrus Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
had four hundred wagons laden with provision, beside those that belonged to
particulars. When in the country nothing is to be found, then may this serve.
Further for fetching in of victualles, the army ought to have a sufficient
strength of horsemen seconded with troops of footmen for their retraite.
Annibal at one road in Italy beside infinite cattle took four thousand
horses, notwithstanding the strict commandment of the Romans, that all
things should be brought into strong holds. Whatsoever provision may be found,
the same is to be saved, and conveyed into those places, that best may be
defended and serve fittest for the provision of our army. Salapiarn frumentum
ex agris Metapontino and Heracleens^ comportat Annibal. Liu. 24.
Annibal brought all the corn and provision, which he found in the territory
of Metapontus, and Heraclea into Salapia. After that Liu. 29.
Scipio in his expedition in Afrike, had taken Vtica, he caused all the
provision, and corn that could be found in the country to be carried thither,
and to be laid up in store. The same course did Quintius take in his wars
against Nabis the tyrant, and Caesar in his invasion of this Caef. bell gal. 4.
frumentum comportat.
Island.

If the country where our army passes do not furnish us with victualles, the
same is utterly to be ruinated, and burned. Which if the country people do
perceive, either for fear or for hope, they will succor us. Liu 38.
Manlius inuading the Gallogrecians, forced all those countries where he
passed to compound for fear of spoil, For like dread the Frenchmen where the
English army Froissart.
passed in the days of Edward the third did supply the same with necessary
provision. It is a shame (says Cyr. paed. 1.
Xenophon) for him that has a sufficient army not to be able to get
victualles, and things necessary for the same. If the enemy shall spoil one
country as looking for our forces that way, yet shall it be hard for him to
spoil the whole, unless he mean to famish his own people also. The Romans
against the Quo expeditiores commeatus essent, and incertior hostis qua
venturum bellu^ foret, Fabius per Soranum agrum, Decius per Sidicinum legiones
duxit. Liu. 10.
Samnites led forth their armies diverse ways, whereby the enemy being made
uncertain of their coming, could not prevent them, nor deprive them of
provision.

Finally, it is not possible for an army to enter any country, but the same
shall find some weary of the present government, and desirous of innovation,
which may be induced to help to furnish it with necessary provision. Caesar
in his wars against the Heluetians, and Ariouistus, had his provision from
the Heduans, in his journey into Belgium from those of Rheimes. Arriving here
in Britain he found both partisans, and provision sufficient. Neither are the
times now changed. In all estates there are some malcontents, and many
desirous of alterations. If desire of innovation work nothing, yet if our army
have good success, the same shall procure us friends and means. After
Annibals victory at Cannae most of the subjects of the Romans revolted, and
took part with him. When the Frenchmen invaded the Guicciar. lib. ^. and 15.
kingdom of Naples, the country either followed them, or took against them,
as they had prosperous or bad success. And if that our success in Portugalll
had been good, there is no doubt, but that all the country would have revolted
from the Spaniardes.

The General above all things is to have regard, that he spend no time
vainly. Opportunity to do great matters seldom offers it self the second
time. By all means the enemy is to be provoked to fight, while our army is
strong, and his soldiers young and unexercised. Annibal had more pain at the
first to bring the Romans to fight, then to overcome them. If the enemy refuse
to fight, he is to be pursued into some town or strait, or else by besieging
of some strong place driven to come to succor the same. All the country does
follow the success of the chief city. yet forasmuch as it is not sufficient
to take, unless we keep the same: there is no less care to be taken in
fortifying and furnishing a town taken, then in taking the same. Unless we
mean to loose our prize, as the Guicciard.
French did Nouara in the days of Lewis the twelth for want of provision, and
good order.

Those that have followed this course, have done great matters, as is evident
by the examples of Caesar, Scipio, Annibal: the rest either failed of victory,
or could not maintain their conquest. I will not specify it by our
expeditions into France, Portugal, Flanders. For that might be odious. Although
those that are wise, by that which we wanted, may see what we ought to have
had, and done. But I will rather use foreign examples. The enterprise of
Guicciard,
Lautrecke in the kingdom of Naples was broken by niggardly expenses, slender
preparatiues, slow proceeding, covetousness of officers, disorder, and want
of care about victualles, and other provisions. The like disorder in the times
of Charles the eight of France, made the French to loose the kingdom of
Naples, which but lately before they had won. Some of the chief governors
spent their time in pleasures, others minded nothing but spoil: they furnished
not their towns with victualles, nor with soldiers, they pursued not the
enemy so, but that they suffered him to gather strength again. Neither may we
impute the loss of Normandy, Gascoigne, and Guienne to other causes, then to
disorders in wars, want of succor and supply, and too much credulity in
trusting the French, and presumption, in hoping for success without means.

But, may some say, to what end tends all this discourse, seeing me^ now a
days are so far from inuading their enemies: that some can be content to
leave their friends languishing for want of help, which are joined near unto
them both by bond of religion, and covenant? and what hope is there that such
shall give the charge on others, seeing they suffer the fire so near their
own doors? true it is, that governors have not been so forward, as some
would have wished, and percase as some think their honor and the profit of
their state required: yet have not matters been so carelessly neglected, as is
surmised. But suppose they had; yet I hope the same course will not always be
continued, nor that the discipline of arms shall forever be neglected of
commanders.

There are yet a number left of the posterity of those, that have made the
name of the English nation famous in France, Flanders, Spain, and other
countries: and many do now begin to mislike, and condemn former disorders.
If at any time such men may be heard, or followed, I doubt not, but that this
discourse may be put in practice, and such aduertisements heard, and accepted
more gratefully. To annoy our enemies, and procure our own safety, there is no
better course, then to translate wars from our own doors into the enemies
country. Whatsoever will be performed, I thought it myduety not to conceal,
that which I thought not only profitable, but necessary for my countries
honor: as, God willing, by many reasons I shall show unto you.

CHAP. V. Part. 2. Wherein is proved, that it is far better for the English
nation, things standing as now they do, to invade the Spaniard, or any other
enemy in his own country, then to receive their assault, and invasion here at
home, or to stay until we do see the enemy on our own coast.
MAny there are, I doubt not, of a contrary mind; but especially those that
enjoy honor, wealth, and ease. These commonly vesire peace, and detest wars,
and against such enterprises allege these reasons: they say we have neither
town, nor port in Spain to receive us: that the way thither is long, and
uncertain by reason of contrariety of winds, and that it will be hard to
remedy any disorder that shall fall out in our army by reason of the distance
of the place: they allege further that we have no friends nor confederates
in the country: and that it will be more difficult to subdue the Spaniard in
his country, then abroad, for every man does Ante ora patru^ ante alta moenia
Troiae, The Trojans were most venturous. Virg.
fight most valiantly when his wife and children, and his own lands and
goods are in his sight. Lastly, they suppose that the number of the enemies
will be such, as that an army shall be wearied with killing them. On the
other side, if we attend the Spaniardes coming hither (say they) they shall
have all obese things to make against them; and we all things favorable for
us; men, municious, and victuals sufficient; our wines, children, and country
in our sight, safe places to retrait unto. As Anteus wrestling with Hercules,
so often as he touched the earth received new strength after his fall: so they
that in their own country do^ fall, rise again very easily. A Tit. Quintius
used this similitude to dissuade the Achaeans from foreign wars. Liu.
snayle so long as he keeps himself within his shell, is defensed; when he
puts out his head, he lies open to danger. So they that in their own
country may live safe, by making enterprises abroad often times receive blows,
and always lie open to danger. The Thucid.
Athenians were utterly overthrown in Sicile, that before that were well able
to defend them selves at home. And diverse great armies of Germans and Gauls,
invincible if they had been in their own countries, were ruinated attempting
to invade foreign countries.

Which reasons howsoever they seem plausible in the ears of those that in
matters of wars proceed like snayles, and care not for any disgrace or
future danger, so they may enjoy present ease; yet are built on false grounds,
and matters mistaken. For if we might safely rest at home, I think him not
wise, nor sober that would seek trouble abroad. But seeing we can not have
peace the Spaniard having begun wars, and threatening the destruction of our
state: the question is, whether is better for us to stay until he come upon
us, or to begin with him and seek him in his own country? I say this is
best: my reasons are these.

He that first charge his enemy, has many advantages, it is his great folly,
if he be not well provided of soldiers, mariners, arms, ships, horses, and
all provisions for the wars: he may make choice where to charge the enemy,
and proceeds simply if he do not there begin, where he finds his enemy
weakest, and most unprovided. He may make likewise choice of his times, and
take opportunities. Con le preuentioni and diuersioni, si vincono le guerre.
Guicciar. lib. 1.
Victory is obtained by prevention, and by the same wars are often times
diuerted, as Alphonsus king of Naples said, but practiced not. For if he had
not lingered matters, and had met the enemy in the way; he had not so easily
been driven out of his state.

No man obteineth better conditions of peace, then he that first strikes.
Contrariwise dangerous it is to let the enemy come upon us. as Malum nascens
facile opprimitur. Inuereratum fit plerunque robustius. Cic. Philip.
diseases, so the attempts and proceedings of the enemy at the first are easily
stopped, and both in time are strengthened and confirmed. And often times of
light beginnings as Tacit. annal. 4.
Tacitus says, great troubles arise. If thou Veterem fe^e^do iniuriam inuitas
nouam, Liu.
suffer one injury, thou do but give thy enemy courage to offer thee
another. The enemy does often times try our patience, and seeing us patiently
to endure injuries (as Liu. 1.
Ancus Martius said) does contemn us. And to Latinos quasinihil non
concedentibus Romany ferociores fecit. Liu. 6. (...). Thucid. 1.
yield in one thing does give the enemy courage, to ask more. Nothing does
procure more enemies, then patience and Liu. 6.
contempt. War is like a fire: if it proceed, it embraces whatsoever is
near, as the Campamans said. If Liu. 7.
Alexander king of Epeirus coming in succor of the Lucanians, had had good
success: the Romans should have felt his force, therefore did they use at the
first to prevent matters. Understanding that Philip king of Macedonia made
preparations to come over into Italy, they took pains to meet him in his
own Country.

Likewise did they prevent the attemptes of Antiochus. Which course if they had
taken when Annibal first besieged Cunctati Saguntinis opem far de Italia
dimicauimus, said a certain Roman Senator.
Saguntum, they had derived the wars into Spain, and escaped the storm,
which Annibals army brought into Italy. Those that fear to assail the enemy
upon Cauete ne spe pacis perpetuam pacem amittatis. Cic. Philip. 7.
hope of peace, loose often times peace for ever. Tully feared it seeing the
Romans proceed so coldly against Antony; and the issue proved it true.

The object ons that are made are of no moment. for admit we neither have Port,
nor town, nor friend in the Spanish Dominions: yet arms and victory procure
all these. The coast can never be so well guarded, but that an army may always
have access to some Port, or landing place or other.

The Romans landed diverse times in Afrike during the wars with Carthage, and
spoiled their towns and country: nay Caesar landed his army in Epeirus, when
the enemy with an army prepared held all the Port towns.

The Athenians made diverse descentes into Peloponesus, notwithstanding the
diligent guard, that the enemy made. Who sees not then how easy it is to
sease a Port, or to land in Spain the country being almost without guard of
soldiers? if any man doubted before, yet since the voyage into Portugal, I
think there is none will make question of that matter. Neither did Scipio
doubt for want of Ports, or friends to sail into Afrike, or the Persians
into Greece, or other to invade his enemy. For arms procure friends, and
win Ports. so that had we no friends in Spain, yet what resoluce man would
refuse to go against such enemies? much more therefore now, seeing the
Portugals are discontent with the Spanish government, and Spain is so stored
with men of foreine nations, and diverse malcontents.

As for the distance, it is nothing, where there is no resistance by the way.
And what reason have we to account Spain far, when the Romans doubted not
to transport their armies not only into Afrike and Spain, but also into Asia
which is a far longer cut. If wind and weather serve, in three days and
three dightes the voyage may be perforified.

The difficulty of supplies may easily be helped with provision made
beforehand. If the army go into Spain well stored, there is no such haste of
supply, but that it may come in good time. Why not into Spain from England as
well as from Rome into Spain, Afrike, Asia, yea and Britein?

But the Spaniards are valiant at home, and will not give ground fighting for
their Country, wives, and children. As if the Romans a more warrelike and
valiant people, did not give ground to Annibals army in Italy; and as if the
Gauls were not vanquished in diverse battles by Caesar, and the Spaniards in
time past by the Carthaginians, and Romans, and since that by the Goths and
Mores, yea and by the Portugales also their neighbors. And not only our
ancesters in the days of Edward the third, and Richard the second, but we our
selves also have had trial of that enemy both in Galicia, and Portugal. He
that Mayor spes est maiorque animus inferentis vim, quam arcencis. Liu. 21.
comes to invade others fights with greater courage, then those that are
invaded, by the testimony of Annibal, and proof of experience. Illis ignauis
esselicet qui receptum habent, vobis necesse est fortibus viris esse. Liu. 21.
They that have no hope of life, nor escape but in victory, can not choose, but
fight valiantly. Contrariwise they that have refuge, and hope another time to
fight more happily, which is the case of every man in his own country, will
not fight so resolutely.

The Gauls in their own country gave ground, and fled before Caesar, and
other Roman Captains, that in Italy had often foiled the Romans. And those
Africans that in Italy were victorious, could not withstand Scipio in Afrike.
Alexander entering into the midst of the Persian Empire, ouerthrewe the same
utterly.

Further it stands with the Spaniard now, as sometime it did with the
Carthaginians, and does with all that use mercenary soldiers. For so long as
they may enjoy their country and revenues, and therewith hire most valiant
soldiers of other nations, so long they are strong. but if they be invaded in
their own country both their revenues will fail, and their own people not
being exercised in wars, will make but slender resistance. So that suppose the
Spanish army in the Low countries be strong, which notwithstanding has been
dealt withal by our people, yet are we not to look for such soldiers in
Spain.

The Athenians inuading Sicile were overthrown by the disagreement and
insufficiency of the Captains, the disorders of the soldiers, and want of
things necessary. which may be remedied by diligent foresight, provision, and
government. But suppose some did miscary in foreine wars, shall we therefore
condemn that course? there is no reason, seeing as wars at home are not
condemned because many nations have been subdued and vanquished in their own
country. Betwixt the Athenians or the Achaeans, and this kingdom there is no
comparison in force or greatness. But if the city of Athens could subdue all
Sicile except one only city: it is no such difficult matter to invade the
Spaniard, as is supposed.

Finally some in trembling manner demand, what if such an army so far carried
away should miscary? which is a very ridiculous point, for men to care more for
those men's lives that dee willingly offer themselves to the adventure, then
they do themselves: Seeing they dare venture nothing themselves, yet let them
not envy, and hinder others that will. But suppose the army should miscary:
yet would the loss be far less, then if so many should be lost at home. For
here the sequel would be great, there would be only loss of men: which God be
thanked this country may well spare. But what simplicity is it to talk of
loosing, where men go with a resolution rather to win then loose? neither
Annibal going in Italy, nor Scipio into Afrike cast any such doubt.

Suppose now on the other side, that the Spaniard should do, that which he
once attempted, and God, more then our own force would not suffer him to do;
and that an army of Spaniards were provided to invade us: these things would
fall out: not knowing where the enemy will land, all the coast must be
furnished with soldiers. For to think, that our trained men would be trained
together in time to make resistance, is simplicity. And if any port be left
open, as good all should be disarmed. But this would be double the charge of
leuying and furnishing an army for Spain. and the longer the enemy holds us
in breath, the greater would the charge arise. and all this for any thing that
I can see without effect, seeing it is neither possible to keep an army from
landing, nor safety to fight without great advantage immediately upon the
enemies landing.

If the enemy should land, as well he may coming with great force, we neither
have strong towns, nor many great rivers to stop his proceedings, nor any
way to resist, but by force of men in open field, and how dangerous it is to
oppose young soldiers and almost tumultuary forces against a puissant army of
old soldiers, the victories of Annibal in Italy, of Scipio in Afrike, of the
Greeks in Persia, of the English in Spain, and infinite Histories declare.

If the enemy be suffered to take breath, who sees not how he will fortify
him self? if he be suffered to range without fight, who considers not the
wrack and spoils of the country that will follow?

When the country is all in trouble, the revenues both of the Prince, and
private men either will cease, or at least be greatly diminished. Ferdinando
king of Naples in the invasion of his State made by the French, found it
S'annihilauan, l'entrate. Guicciar. lib. 1.
true. And reason may teach us, that where the husbandmen part by the rapines
of the enemy, and part by the spoils of our own soldiers can not enjoy the
fruits of their ground, their rentes can not be paid. and if rentes be not
paid, how will our soldiers be paid? suppose then, that the charge of an army
in a foreine country be great: yet may it well be borne, being equally
divided, so long as men enjoy their livings peaceably: if that may not be; how
shall we maintain twice so many soldiers at home?

If when the enemies invade us, malcontent persons should discover themselves,
then as the number of our enemies, so the heap of our troubles would increase.

But suppose (for what danger in such a case is not to be forecast?) that our
army should receive some check: what towns have we, or straits to arrest the
enemy? the country people being unacquainted with wars, what laws cankeepe
the^ in order? help can we look for none, our friends being either not
able, or not willing to help us, for some seem offended with the spoils of
their ships, others bear us in hand, they will remember our slender help
aforded to them, which notwithstanding is more then they deserved.

Other secret wounds may not be opened, neither needs it, seeing as every man
may perceive by these reasons, which already I have brought, how easy, safe,
profitable, and honorable it is to invade the Spaniard, and how disaduatageous
it will be to this land, if either we stay with our hands folded together, or
else defer to charge the Spaniard with full force until such time, as he
shall come to cut our throtes at home.

Hiero Liu. 21.
king of Sicile, when the Romans were invaded by Annibal, gave them counsel
to transport an army over into Afrike, the happy success of Scipio doing the
same fifteen years afterward, and by that means making an end of the wars,
does confirm that counsel to have been most excellent. If when Philip Liu.
24.
king of Macedonia joined in league with Annibal, they had not sent an army
into Greece to find him occupied at home; hardly could they have made
resistance against the force of two so mighty enemies united together. The
experience of the wars with Annibal in Italy made them more wise afterward,
and speedy. For hearing of Philips of Macedonia, and Antiochus his preparatiues
to transport their armies into Italy: they eased them of the pain, and met
them in more then half way. But what need examples of foreine nations, seeing
it has been the use of our ancesters to seek their enemies always abroad in
their own countries? this course is most honorable, most safe, yea and (that
which is now most accounted of by some) most profitable, and least chargeable
for us also. Nothing can be more honorable then to defend our religion, laws,
and country against those that seek to oppress us: no course more safe, then
so to hazard, that the loss do not endanger our state: no way more profitable
then by keeping the enemy far off, to maintain the revenues of the Crown,
and every man's private living, and trade at home.

Wherefore refusing the pernicious counsel of those, that babble of I know
not what peace; let the Spaniard rather feel the effects of war in Spain,
then be suffered be to draw his insatiable sword in England. his malice is
not less then it was. But hither. to God has broken his purposes, and crossed
his designements. But if he be suffered quietly to possess Britein; the longer
we differ our wars, the more dangerous we shall find them, and our selves
more unable to resist. Now that he has a strong party against him in France,
and that the Low countries either stand against him, or are weary of his
government, and that Portugal is malcontent with his new tyranny, is the time
to hurt him, and prevail against him. If we suffer him to settle his own
affairs, and this good opportunity to pass, I fear, we shall often wish for
the like, and hardly find it.

CHAP. V. Part. 3. Wherein certain aduertisements are given to our soldiers,
that are sent in aid of foreine nations.
THe best counsel that I can give my countrymen, is to assail the enemy in
his own country: but seeing that I cannot (I fear) persuade them to that is
best, and safest; the next good that I can do them, is to admonish them, that
being sent in small numbers to succor our friends oppugned by our common
enemy, they proceed not rashly.

First therefore wisdom requires, that they go strong. for that in foreine
countries they are no less to fear the practices of double hearted friends,
then the force of open enemies. The Romans when they sent aid to their
friends, never sent less then a full army, sufficient to encounter the enemy.
In sending less, either they should not have pleasured their friends, or else
have endangerd their own men. Besides this, it would have been dishonor to the
name of the Romans, if either they had not been able to overcome the enemy, or
willing to see their friends long languish in fear, or their soldiers
ouermatched, and not able to look out into the field. For this cause being
required aid of the Campanians against the Samnites, of the Latins against the
Volscians, they sent their Consuls and Generals forth with a mighty force, not
only to drive the enemy from the towns, but also to fight with him in the
field. And taking upon them the protection of the Sicilians against them of
Carthage, they sent thither sufficient strength both by sea, and land.

Caesar going in aid of the Heduans, and other the confederates of the Romans
in France, oppressed by the Heluetians, and Germans led with him a most brave
army furnished with all things necessary. Neither was it the use of the Romans
only, but of all nations that understood the practice of arms, yea and of ours
also.

The Black Prince in the days of Edward the third going into Spain in
succor of Don Pedro de Castile, led thither a most flourishing army, where with
he overthrew the power of Spain, and restored the Ring to his seat. Likewise
the Duke of Lancaster in his expedition into Portugal, did not rely upon the
aid of that nation, but carried with him a gallant army of English men. And
when Edward the fourth went into France to aid the Duke of Burgundy, be carried
with him such a power, as the hearts of the French trembled to see it, and the
king rather by money and rewards, then by force sought to cause them to
return. If the Romans had sent three or four thousand in aid of their
friends in Sicile, or Greece, or Asia, and so supplied them by little and
little: the opinion of their wisdom and forces would never have grown so
glorious. Neither could the Prince of Parma of late times, if he had gone into
France with a small force have delivered his confederates from danger, or else
broken the purposes of his enemies in that sort he has. If then we will not
follow the ancient rules of war, yet let us not show less judgment and
value in our proceedings, then our enemy.

Whosoever therefore means to win honor in succor of his friends abroad,
let him as much as he can endeavor to carry with him a sufficient force. Small
numbers are neither esteemed of enemies, nor friends. Into the field they dare
not come, for they are too few and too weak, being penned up in cities they
famish. If our friends be stronger then our aid, then are they commanded by
them. If any of their leaders want government, our men that are put to all
hard services, pay the prise of their folly. If any calamity happen to their
army, our people first feel it. They shift for them selves being in their own
country; ours are slain both of enemies and friends, and if victuals wax
scant they sterue first. I need not show this by other examples, then by our
proceedings in France, and the Low countries.

But suppose that by our aid, our friends should be able to overcome, or make
peace with the enemy, yet are not our people more assured then before. When the
Protestants in the first civil wars by the means of our forces had obtained
that they would, or at least tolerable conditions of peace, they joined with
our enemies, to besiege us in Newhauen, and sent us away without reward or
thanks. The Spaniards that had restored Guicciar. li. 16.
Maximilian Sforza to the Duchy of Millan, the wars being ended for their
reward, had like to have had their throats cut. But they stood so much upon
their guard, that the practice of Hierome Moron, and the Marquis of Pescara
could take no effect. In ancient time how often have our people been deluded
by the Dukes of Britain, and Burgundy, in whose aid they went to venture
their lives? and do we think that the people of the Low countries, if once
they be delivered from the fear of the Spaniard, will not turn out our
garrisons, and use us in like sort? they will be able to do it, and others
have done so before. Why then should we think our selves privileged?

To assure our selves therefore of our friends, the only means is to have a
force sufficient to master them, and correct their disloyalty. The same is the
only course to prevail against our enemies, to help our friends, and
maintain our selves.

If that may not be obtained, I see not how our people can maintain their
honor: but the next course to assure them selves, is to have cautionary towns,
or hostages, or both delivered into their hands. towns, that they may assure
them selves of retraite, in case of bad dealing; hostages, that they may be
assured of their good dealing. Without towns their case is desperate, if the
enemy prevail. The Fro^ssart.
French that came to aid Galeazzo Duke of Millain, under the leading of the
County of Armignac, being scattered in the siege of Alexandria, were slain by
the Pesants of the Country. The like happened to those poor Lanceknights,
that were defeated at Anno 1569.
Moncontour. Neither were the Spaniards better used, that came in aid of the
Leaguers, being defeated by the present french king near Dreux, anno 1589.
This town that is given in caution, is to be guarded with a sufficient force of
English, furnished with victuals and munitions, in the guard of the garrison,
and not as in Vlissingen, in the keeping of the townsmen, unto whom whosoever
trusts, shall assuredly be deceived.

Thirly, let those that have the government of our men, see that they both
march, and lodge united, and strong, that they be not either disturbed in the
night, nor betrayed under color of frie^dship. Strangers that stragle are a
spoil not only to the pesants, but to their secret euil-willers. And those
that lodge without defense, or suffer any to come within them in the night, are
open to every enterprise of their enemies.

That they may both lodge, and march hard together, order is to be taken, that
they may have victuals delivered them always before hand; and that they be not
driven to seek abroad for them. To conclude, the only means of safety is,
neither to trust enemy, nor friend: for none are abused, but they that trust
dissoyall people.

If that our men can neither have towns, nor hostages, nor victuals, nor good
usage, what should they be sent among such people? or why should they trust
others, being not themselves trusted? or why should any succor be sent, but
such as may command, and punish the dissoyall, and have strength to stand upon
themselves?

Those therefore that are governors (I trust) they will maturely consider of
this point. if not, let them look for this issue: if the enemy be stronger,
then are our men either to be slain, or famished by the enemy: if by our
forces our friends prevail, then for their reward shall they either be
turned out of the country with disgrace, or be famished, or cut in pieces, by
their friends.

These things considered, let us now consequently proceed to declare, how an
army, after that it is exercised and furnished, and that the Generals have all
due considerations both therein, and in all other provision, and proceeding
required before the march of the army, may march orderly, and safely.

CHAP. VI.
Part. I. Of the order and array of an army marching toward the enemy.
THe first care of him that means to march safely in the enemies country, or
where an enemy is near, ought to be, that his troops observe good order, and
array: and the nearer that he approaches to the enemy, the greater ought his
care to be. The neglect of this point only, has been the overthrow of many
armies. It gives opportunity to the enemy to assail us, and confounds young
soldiers, when they are ignorant how to come in order to defend themselves.
Easy it is to be observed of men that are willing, and understand reason: and
sharp effects and correction it works on the stubborn, and wilful. That
the General, or his officers may put the army in good order of march, first
they are to understand what is the array of the whole army, considered together
as one whole body. Secondly, the places of every part, as of horsemen,
footmen, and of footmen, of the diverse sorts of weapons. Thirdly, the just
distances of soldier from soldier, according to every man's quality and
weapon. Fourthly, the places of the General, and other chief Commanders.
Fifthly, of the great Ordonance, and munition. Lastly, of the cariages and
baggage, and boys and servants that attend upon it, and likewise of merchants,
and victualers, and others that follow the army for other causes, then to
fight.

The army consists of three parts commonly, considered especially as it
marches. for in fighting, the orders, and parts do much differ. The first
part that marches we call vantgard; the second the battle; the third, the
arier ward. Every one of these ought to be a perfect body of it self, having
both his small shot, and great ordonnance, and his horsemen, and his pikes,
targets, and halberds placed in good order. Often times, I know, it is otherwise,
and that either horsemen, or pikes, or targets are wanting in some part, or
other. But how much of these they want, so much they want of perfection, and
due proportion in a just army. For we speak not of 6 or 7 thousand (which
cannot observe this order, but had better to march united) but of a full army of
24 or 30 thousand, which number marching in this order, so that one part may
succor an other, I account, does march orderly, and strongly. If one part go
far before an other, it may fall out, as it happened to the Protestants in
the plains of S. Clear anno 1569, that one part shall be in route, before the
other can come to succor. The Romans marched distinguished by legions, whose
numbers were diverse, and which seldom were complete: but in effect the array
was one; save that the Romans commonly made but two parts of their army, and
placed their baggage in the midst, as did Caesar marching against the Neruians.
In the order of the parts, and placing of horsemen, and footmen, and sorting
of weapons, the same reasons have place for the most part among all nations.

Before the auantgard, light horsemen by ancient prescription may challenge the
first place. If they be seconded with some shot and targetters lightly armed,
they may be the bolder to come near the enemy, and to abide his charge. These
are called auantcoureurs, and serve for discovery of the enemies proceedings,
and of the situation of the Country, and intercepting of the enemies espials,
and diverse other uses. Upon the front of the auantgard march small shot and
musketeers, after them follow the armed men with the ensigns in the midst, or
rather somewhat toward the first ranks. On either hand, and behind the armed
men, are other companies of shot to be ranged; and without the shot somewhat
auanced forward argoletiers, and then lances take their place. If the enemy
make countenance, as if he would charge some part of our army with his horse;
they are to be drawn toward the side where the enemy threatens to give the
charge. but if the enemy do fly before us, and shun to fight, the horsemen
of the whole army would be joined together, and sent to charge him on the
sides or back, and to stay his march: as Caesar practiced first against the
Caes. bell. Gal. 1.
Heluetians, then against the Caes. bell. Gal. 2.
Aduaticans, and lastly, against Petreius his Caes. bell. ciu. 1.
army in Spain. By which means he ouertooke those that were far before
him. But this has use where we are stronger then the enemy in horse. How
many horsemen, or shot, or pikes, or targets, and other weapons shall march in
a rank, I refer to the judgment of a good Sergiant mayor, according to the
breadth of the ways, and approches of the enemy. The more do march in a
rank, the less pain he shall have to set them in order, when he would place
them in order of battle, and the stronger the array is. Guicciar. lib. 9.
Ten thousand Switzers in Lombardy, in the wars betwixt the Spaniards and
French, marched four score in a rank hard by the French army, which seeing
their resolution, durst not charge them.

The same course is to be taken in the array of the battle, and arierward
marching, save that these two parts following without any great distance
between, need not light horsemen or auantcoureurs, especially where the
enemy is before. Neither have they such use of shot or horsemen, as the
auantgard, where they are used for supplies, rather then to fight in front.

In the placing of horsemen and footmen, and in sorting and employing of
diverse weapons, so that every sort may do best service, consists the
special judgment of a wise leader. For therein are infinite differences,
according to the diverse strength of the enemy, and our own forces; and
likewise according to the diversities of grounds, and times. Yet commonly in
marching this order is observed: first the light horse seconded if need be,
with shot and targetters, especially where the country is rough and wooddie,
serve for auantcoureurs. Caliuers and musketeers are not only to march on the
front, but also on the sides and back of the armed men. Lances and men of
arms are ranged, the outmost on the sides for the most part. Next to the shot
march the pikes of that part of the army; these would be ra^ged rather in
battaillions according to the fashion of the Romans, that the shot and other
light armed men might save themselves, and again make head within the
distances, then all in one front joined together. But this is where the
plainness of the ground will give leave. In every battaillion the ensigns are
to be placed somewhat toward the first ranks, guarded with good store of
targetters and halberds well armed.

In placing and sorting of weapons, the General is to consider, that the
charge of horsemen against shot and targetters is mortal, if they be not
either guarded with pikes, or have the vantage of ditches, or hedges, or woods
where they cannot reach them. In which case the shot gauleth the horse, if they
come within the level of the piece. Shot and targetters against pikes work
good effects: pikes joined close, and standing firm together, do break the
carriere of horsemen: especially where they have their musketeers, placed
near by them. Archers, where they have a defense before them, do good service
in the field against horsemen. These things let the General have so in mind,
that he may rather take the advantage of weapons in the encounter, then give it
to the enemy.

In marching, the distances of every rank from rank, and of every soldier
from his companion by him, are greater then when they stand ranged in battle
ready to fight. It skilleth not much what the distance be, so they may bear
their weapons commodiously, and march seemly: yet that every man might know
what distance is sufficient, and what is most seemly, it were good that one
rule were observed. Shot, although in fighting they observe rather a course
then array, and are to stir up and down to epsy where they may hit the
enemy: yet that they may with more ease and speed be drawn to service, are
to march in distance from rank to rank five or six foot, from shoulder to
shoulder one foot, or a foot and a half. Argoletiers or Pistoliers, in march
from horse to horse on the side, are distant two foot, from rank to rank a
yard and a half, or thereabout. The Lancier without bardes rides in the same
distance.

Pikemen from their fellows side by them, are distant a foot and a half, or
two foot, from the pikemen behind and before, by reason of the length of their
pikes twelve foot. Their march to their corpse de guard, when they hold their
pikes upright, which the Italian calls inalborar, is out of this rule. Of
their distances in charging, or receiving the charge of horse or foot, we
shall speak when we come to the place.

Halbardiers march a foot and a half from shoulder to shoulder, and seven
foot from rank to rank. The targetter may observe the same distance from
shoulder to shoulder, but he needs not such distance from rank to rank.

The General, as he has the commandment, so he ought to have the care of
all, and therefore ought to be in all places. But because he cannot be in all
places at one time, therefore does the practice of war require, that he
assign the guiding of his three battaillions, to three of his chief officers
and commanders, that are men of judgment and experience, to see and command
in his absence all men in their battaillion to march in order. Himself may
march with the battle, unless for some cause it shall please him to march in
the vantgard, or arierward. The Romans over every legion or regiment of five
or six thousand, placed a principal commander, they called him Legatum: the
same was of the Generals counsel, and in his absence one of his lieutenants.
Every several troop of horsemen are to have their several commanders, and
every compaine of shot likewise. All which ought to be obedient to the General
of the horse, or Colonel of the footmen, which know the Generals counsel.
The several troops also of armed men, are to have their several commanders:
provided always that no one company have more then one commander for
avoiding of confusion, and that every of these hearken to their superiors,
which under the General have the chief government of every battaillion. The
Serieant mayor, and corporals of the field his officers are to acquaint every
commander with the Generals direction, which the same is to execute.

These are therefore suffered to go up and down to see things in order. For
others it is not good they should leave their araie, unless it be for
necessary causes, as sickness, the necessities of nature, and such like. The
commanders of every troop are to march in the head of their troops, their
lieutenants behind the same. All other colonels, captains, lieutenants and
serieants, are to keep their rank and araie wherein they shall be placed. For
although over their private companies when they are single they command; yet
in the army united together, they are commanded, and only to see those that
follow them where they march to do their duties. which consent unless it be
observed, these inconveniences will ensue. By contrary commandments, there
will fall out confusion and contention: and many captains, lieutenants, and
serieants will walk out of order, and much time will be spent in setting of
men in their places, which every soldier ought to do of himself.

The great ordonance being parted betwixt the vantgard, battle, and rereward,
sometime is drawn in head of the So was it at the battle of Moncontour, and
in the battle betwixt the Conte Egmont and Thermes by Graueling.
pikes of every battle: but for that it must needs trouble those that would
march on to fight with the enemy, far better it were, if all the great
ordonance were drawn on the sides of the vantgard, as often as the enemy made
show of charge, and then drawn upon some hill, or some other place of
advantage. In the field it does more trouble then service: the effects of
it, is but noise and foolerie, only that small towns should not make
resistance, it is drawn along, and also for the use that it has in sieges,
and batteries.

Concerning the baggage, and those servants and boys that attend upon the
same, and such as follow the army, as merchants or victualers, rather to gain
then to fight: this rule is generally to be observed, that the same be placed
between the bataillions, so that in a charge the same may best be defended,
and yet not trouble the araie of the army. The same is to be placed where
there is least danger. The Greeks returning from the battle betwixt Cyrus
(...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 2.
and Artaxerxes, being coasted and pursued by the enemy, placed their cariages
near the river along which they marched, and their armed men toward the
enemy. Caesar marching Caes. bell. gal. 2.
against the Neruians, after three parts of four of his whole forces placed
his baggage, being guarded with the other fourth part following behind. At other
times when there was less suspicion of the enemy, every legion marched by it
self, and the baggage thereof after. Praecedunt cohortes, sequitur prima
legio, and medijs impedimentis sinistrum latus, 19. legio etc. Tacit. 2.
Germanicus after certain chosen troops, placed the first regiment or legion,
and after that he caused the baggage to follow guarded on either side, and
behind with the rest of the army. If our baggage and impediments be great, so
much as may be spared is to be left in some strong town. Or if the enemy be
behind, The Caes. de bell. ciu. 3.
baggage together with our hurt men is to be sent before into some place of
safety, as Caesar practiced in his retraite from Dyrrhachium.

This is the common course, which is I think also best, for an army to use in
marching. But if the enemy make countenance, or rather do begin to charge any
part of the same: then that part which is nearest him, is to be made the head
or vantgard, the other two parts of the army are to be drawn, the one on the
right hand, the other on the left. If the enemy come on front, then the ranks
of the auantgard are to be doubled, or multiplied according to the capacity
of the ground. The battle and rierward are to be drawn up, the one toward the
left hand, the other toward the right, or else one part is to be drawn up
until the same be equal of front with the auantgard, and the other being
divided into battaillions, to serve for supply where need is. The shot is to
be placed part in front, and the rest on the sides, and without them ought
horsemen to take their standing expecting their advantage, and the
commandment of their leaders. But if our horsemen be few, and not able to
match the enemies cauallerie; let them not be to far advanced, unless they
be seconded, with shot and half pikes armed ale legiere: but rather let them
be reserved to chase the enemy being foiled by the footmen, and placed
between either ground of advantage, or battaillions of pikes. And this if it
be done of those that have skill, ye shall neither hear noise, nor see
confusion, nor time spent about it. The soldiers of Caesar being suddenly
charged by the Caes. de bell. gal. 2.
Neruians, as they were newly come to their lodging, did every man presently
set himself in array to fight. And Annibal had so taught his soldiers, that
every one issuing out of his lodging, could fall in array of himself, either
being ready to fight or to march. And why might not our soldiers also be so
instructed, and exercised, that they might do the like? but some want care,
some skill, and some both.

Some percase will ask, Who gave me authority to prescribe? which are very
simple not to see, that I prescribe nothing of mine own, but only declare the
ancient practice of war, and proceeding of most famous warriers. The Romans
used this course, and so did the Greeks and Carthaginians. First marched the
light horse, then the light armed, after them the armed men. The baggage was
placed in the midst of the army. This order did Caesar oserue in his march
against the Caes. bell. gal. 1.
Heluetians, Caes. Bell. gal. 2.
Belgians, and in Caes. bell. Ciu. 1.
Spain against Afranius, and Petreius. The same did Liui. 21.
Annibal practice in his marching all along Italy. The same course for the most
part is observed of those that have skill in our times, but that the
differences of grounds, and diverse conditions of men's armies make them alter
some circumstances. Metellus Metellus cum expeditis cohortibus, item funditorum
and sagitta^iorum lecta manu apud primos erat. in postremo C. Marius cum
equitibus curabat. in vtru^que latus auxiliarios equites, and permistos velites
dispertiuerat. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
marching against Iugurtha, placed first certain choice companies of slingers
and archers, and after them troops of armed men, without impediments or
baggage: there himself commanded. C. Marius followed with the horsemen, upon
both sides he placed horsemen, and light armed of his associats mingled among
them, guided by certain captains of horse, the legions marched in the midst.
Xenophon, for that a square battle in straites is easily disordered, did
divide the square into (...) Xenoph exped. Cyr. 3.
companies (which knowing their places in the square, marched few in a rank in
straits: and in open ground, came into their array again.) His horse and
slingers he cast out on the front, and sides. Corbulo so Corbulo viae pariter
and pugnae composuerat exercitum, latere dextro 3 legio, sinistro, 6 incedebat,
medijs decumanorum delectis: recepta inter ordines impedimenta: te^gum mill
equites tuebantur: in co^nibus pedes sagitta^ius and c^tera manus equitum ibat.
Tacit. 13.
marched in his voyage against the Parthians, as was both for the march, and
fight most safe and fit: in the right side marched the third Regiment, the
sixth on the left, and the tenth in the midst, the carriages were placed
between the Regiments, a thousand horse followed for guard of the Rierwarde,
upon the wings were the rest of the horse placed, and by them the archers and
light armed footmen, When the black Froissart.
Prince marched into Spain, his army was divided into three parts, upon the
wings marched the horse, the archerie being then well armed made the body of
the battaillions.

The weakness of the armies of our time proceed of contempt of military
arayes, and orders. The French among their footmen, have few or none armed.
Before the encountre at Rocheabeille Anno 1569, Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 7.
the Protestants marched thus: the horsemen made the Auantgarde, on either side
marched certain troops of shot, seconded by horsemen: after the vantgarde
followed a battaillion of lansquenets, and in front of them were drawn eight
field pieces: after them followed diverse Regiments of shot representing the
battle, and on the side thereof another battaillion of lansquenets with some
other pieces. That which was the strength of the army, that is pikes, and
halberds, and targets armed was wanting, and shot placed, where if they had
been charged, they could have done no service. Often times the Vantgarde
marches, and lodges so far from the rest of the parts of the army, that it
is no hard matter for a vigilant man of war to cut one in pieces, before the
other can come to succor. This Hist. de troubl. de Fr.
was the death of the Prince of Conde, and overthrow of his auantgarde at the
battle of Cognac. And the same was the overthrow of Appian. de bell. Parth.
Crassus by the Parthians, for his son was so far auanced before the rest
of the army, that before he could be relieved, he and his troops were
defeated. And in our times some great commanders, albeit they had but five or
six thousand; yet would they needs make three parts forsooth, which is the
cause of the weakness of the whole: the Captains, lieuetenants, and
sergiants, which are a good part of the strength of the army, stand for the
most part out of rank, and will all take upon them to be leaders: because of
contrary commandments no man can tell where to go: while commanders strive
together, there is great contention and noise made. And finally a great matter
made of nothing: and nothing made of all their service, and matters very easy
made difficult. For if the army be a body, then every soldier ought to be
taught, that he may know how to stand in his place, as every member is placed
in the body. But we have said enough of the array, now therefore let us talk
of the proceeding of an army.

CHAP. VI. Part. 2. Wherein is declared by what means an Army may march safely
in the enemies country, and overcome all difficulties, whereby either in
champion, or wooddie grounds, or else in the passage of rivers, or hills and
straites, the same may be disordered, or hindered.
BEside the common array of the army in marching, which we are as nere as we can
to endeavor to understand, and keep: if we mean to march assured, we are
also to learn the estate of the enemy, the site of the country, where we do
march, and how the ordinary array is to be changed, according to the diversity
of the grounds, to the end that we may both in champion, and in woody
grounds, and also over rivers, and hills pass safely.

Chabrias the Athenian captain, Plutarch. Apopth.
said he deserved not the name of a General, that understood not the estate of
the enemies. And of Liuy 22.
Annibal Liuy gives report, that he understood what was done in the enemies
camp, as well as themselves. The enemies purposes and estate we understand
partly by the examination of prisoners taken: partly by the report of such as
fly from the enemy unto us: but most assuredly by our own espials, and
discouerers, which either go disguised among the enemies, or else in warrelike
sort approach his lodging, or army to see what countenance he has. The
situation of the country is understood, partly by cards truly representing
the hills, straits, and rivers, and partly by report of the country people
examined severally, but most exactly, by men of judgment from some hie place
viewing it. Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
Xenophon enquired, and learned of such prisoners as he had taken, both the
estate of the enemies, and the diverse ways whereby he might return into
Greece: by the same also he understood the situation of the countries, and
manners of the people, by which he was to pass with his company. Ring Edward
the Froisart.
third being in pain to pass the river of Some in France, by the instruction
given him by one of his prisoners understood of a foord. The Romans by the
examination of diverse prisoners taken in Afrike, understood all the proceedings
of the enemies. Yet must not we give too great credit to such: for subtle
persons do often dissemble, and desperate villeines will not stick to lead us
into trappes. Diverse of them therefore are to be examined severally and
streitly, and not to be believed unless they consent, and speak probably.
Caes. de bell. ciu. 2.
Curio lightly examining a prisoner concerning the force of the enemy, was
greatly abused, and pursuing the enemy upon his report, was himself, and his
company overthrown.

Many things are likewise understood by relation of those that fly unto us
from the enemy. By such kind of men the Per transfugas cognitum est, quos
leuitas ingeniorum ad cognoscendas hostium res in omnibus bellis praebet. Liui.
31.
Romans discovered the preparatiues of the king of Macedonia against them.
Annibal partly by such, and Annibalem nihil eorum quae apud hosts gerebantur
fallebat and perfugis multa indicantibus, and per suos explorantem. Liui. 22.
partly by his own diligence, searching out matters continually by his
espials, understood whatsoever the Romans did. King Edward the 3. by Robert of
Artois, that upon some displeasure was driven out of the Court of France,
understood diverse secrets of that state, as also by Godefry d'Harecourt, and
the earl Momfort that fled to him out of Britain. Yet may we not give light
credence to all their words. Percase they understand not matters well, or else
deal doubly. Transfugis non fidens Syllanus, speculatores ad hoftem misit.
Syllanus therefore in Spain beside the report of those that fled from the
enemy, sent his espials to see what the enemy did. And Annibal used to keep
them diligently that reported any thing, that if the reports were found untrue,
they might be punished. The Liui. 6.
Roman Consul having received news, that some of his company would be
defeated without present succor, and not reteining the messenger, fell into an
ambush laid for him.

The most assured way of intelligence is by espials secretly sent, or
discouerers approaching the enemy. Annibal Liuy. 30.
returning out of Italy to defend his own country against Scipio, sent diverse
espials into his camp. Pro perfugis speculandi gratia in Caesaris castra
mittit. Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Scipio in the wars of Caesar in Afrike, sent two Getulians to epsy Caesar's
camp disguised as fugitives. But because such persons cannot long stay there
without being discovered: therefore sometimes under color of parley, and
sometime under color of buying, or selling, or other business, soldiers
disguised like merchants epsy out the enemies proceeding. Scipio while the
treaty of peace continued betwixt him and Liui. 29.
Syphax, sent diverse captains in slaves apparel, which wandering about the
enemies camp discovered the accesses, and issues of it, which being reported
to Scipio, gave him the means to charge Syphax in the night, being quiet and
safe (as he conceived) in his lodging. Scipio cum equitatu iaculatoribusque
expeditis profectus ad castra hostium, exque propinquo copias quantae and cuius
generis esse^t speculandas, obuius fit Annibali and ipsi cum equitibus ad
exploranda circa loca progresso. Liui. 21.
Scipio, this man's father, before the battle with Annibal at Trebia, drew
forth his horsemen and light armed, to view Annibals camp: Annibal for the
same purpose came against him with other horsemen. But because this manner of
discovery cannot be made without force, therefore did Equitatum omnem ad
numerum 4000 praemittit, qui videant, quas in parts hosts iter faciant. Caes.
bell. Gal. 1.
Caesar pursuing the Heluetians, send all his horsemen in number 4000, to see
what ways the enemies marched. The Histoir. de trou. de Franc. lib. 9.
Admiral of France having received some loss in the plains of S. Clear, anno
1569 for want of good espiall, sent certain horsemen to the number of
sixteen, which going nere and taking some prisoners, might understand the
enemies resolution. but because they were so few, they were beaten back before
they could see any thing, and returned without effect. Yet we think we do
much when we send forth six or seven horsemen badly mounted. for some do
rashly proceed without them: but both courses are contrary to the practice of
war.

The view of the country well described in cards both teach a wise General
many things. for there he may see the tract of rivers, the distances of
places, the rising of hills, and many such opportunities. The Mouerat senatum
maxim maris terrarumque regionis eius situm demonstrando. Liu. 32.
Romans in ancient time used, when they consulted of any action, to view the
situation of the country laid before them. The Count of Purlitia, in his
aduertisements to Ferdinand the Emperor, and Don Sancho de Londonno stand upon
the same as a necessary point. for by view of regions described, many things
appear, that otherwise cannot be conceived. But much better may the country
be discovered, if men of judgment go before with the horsemen to view the
same, and to follow the traces of the enemies. those that observe this course
both go, and return safely. Marcellus Explorato cunfirmisque praesidijs tuto
receptu praedatum ierat. Liu. 23.
searching out the lurking holes of the enemy, and placing strong gards in
places convenient, returned safely from forraging the country.

They that march forward blindely without either view of the country, or
knowledge of the enemies proceedinges, are subject to many mishaps. The Roman
army at the straits of Caudium compassed in by the enemy on every side,
complains, that like Non ducem locorum fuisse, non exploratorem, belluarum
modo caecos in foueam missos. Liu. 9.
brute beasts, going on without guide or espiall, they were carried headlong,
as it were, into a pit. Liu. 31.
Appius spoiling the country of the Boians, without either discovery, or
stands of men well placed, was drawn into an ambush, and slain together with
his army. This one point neglected, cost many of the Romans their lives, in
the wars with Annibal. Marcus Marcellus going himself with a small company
to view the country, was himself drawn into ambush, and slain. Vocula nec
aduentum hostium explorauit, eoque simul egressus, victusque Tacit. 20.
Vocula charging the enemy without knowledge of his forces, was as soon slain,
as he went fast out of his lodging to fight with him. The Count of Aremberge,
by the bravery of the Spaniard forced to pass the Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 1.
river, before he knew the strength of the enemy which seemed not great, was
defeated with his company by the Count Lodwike. The Admirals vantgard was
broken in the plains of S. Clear, an. 1569, Ibidem lib. 9.
for that the same did bluntly charge the enemy, of whose forces and number the
same was ignorant. The careless march of Mouuans and Pierregourde, that were
charged before they understood of the enemies approach, was cause of their
overthrow: and has also both unto the enemy and to us wrought many calamities
in the Low countries, which those that escaped narrowly may remember, and can
report. Dangerous therefore it is to march by night, especially in countries
unknown, and where the enemies proceedinges are unknown. Asdrubal Liu. 27.
in the night lost his guide, and his way, and wearied himself: and being the
next day forced to fight, was overcome by the Romans at the river of Metaurus.
Puygalliard in these late troubles of France, marching all night, most of his
troops lost their way: the rest the day following were defeated at S. Gemme,
by a very few Protestants. Those that escape by policy out of straits as
Annibal did at Cales, and Asdrubal in Spain, he driving away the corpse de guard
by fear of fire, the other escaping during parley of yielding; and likewise
they that have had good success charging the enemy at all adventures, have
been more happy then wise.

Those therefore that march against their enemies are to discover the country
and affairs of the enemy diligently, and to shun night marches. but if
necessity force them thereunto, yet wisdom admonishes them to understand the
enemies doings perfectly, to procure sure guides, and to keep them fast: to
march close together, now and then to make alta, that those that lagge, may
come up, by sure marks to know friends from enemies, and to give certain and
perfect directions. Which course while Liu. 25.
Martius did hold in Spain, and Scipio in Afrike, he overcame the
Carthaginians, and dislodged them twice, Liu. 29.
Scipio foiled Syphax and burnt his camp, and slew his people in the night.

The country, and proceeding of the enemy discovered, let us next consider the
differences of grounds. The plain champion country is to be chosen of those
that desire to fight, and are stronger then the enemy. Those that are unwilling
to fight, let them shun such ground, so much as they can. therein there is no
fear of ambushes, nor impediment to break the array of the army, which in this
ground is no less to be observed in marching, then in fighting. The champion
country being without hedges, or ditches, is aduantageous for horsemen, whose
force in that ground, without a hedge of resolute pikes, of no number of other
arms can well be sustained. Two thousand Cohortes 4 c^tratorum a Caesaris
equitibus in planitie deprehe^sae, concisae sunt. Caes. bell. Ciu. 1.
targetters, overtaken by Caesar's horsemen upon a plain, were all cut in
pieces; neither could Afranius their General succor them. Curio ex locis
superioribus copias deducens, a Iubae equitatu circumfusus occiditur. Caes. de
bell. Ciu. 2.
Curio Caesar's lieutenant in Afrike, leaving the advantages of the hills, and
descending down into the plains, being compassed about with Iubaes caualery,
was slain together with his army. Caesar having great advantage against
Afranius and Petreius in his horsemen, did force them for their safeguard to
forsake the plains. For how can can an army Eques leuisque armatura nunc ab
tergo, nunc ab lateribus occurrendo fatigabat morabaturque. Liu. 28.
march in the plains, so long as the enemy with his horsemen, and light armed,
charge the same now on the sides, and then on the back? Caesar marching in
Afrike where he was inferior to the enemy in horse, was much by their charges
encombred and hindered in his march. The Romans Equitatu melior erat Poenus and
ob id campi patentes quales sunt inter Padum Alpesque bello gerendo Romany
apti non erant. Liu. 21.
perceiving Annibals strength in horse, yielded to him the plains, and kept
themselves upon the higher grounds.

If therefore we desire to keep the plains, we must provide a competent force
of horsemen to match the enemies: if we be weak in horse, let us keep our
places of advantages. but if necessity force us to march through plain and
open countries, then must we make head against the horsemen with our pikes,
and mosquets, disposing our army so, that not only the footmen, but the
horsemen also may have succor of. the battaillions of pikes, and shot.
Caesar by this means repulsed the enemies horse in the plains of Afrike, and
charging them with some few horse seconded with half pikes, put them to the
gallop. If our horsemen be not too much inferior to the enemy: then if we
mingle some shot and half pikes lightly armed with doublets plated, or other
light armor among them, and second them with some battaillions of pikes, we
need not greatly fear to encounter the enemies horsemen. By this Liu. 26.
mixture and array the Romans overthrew the Capuan horsemen in the siege of
Capua, which before that they durst not upon even hand encounter. Afranius had
no other means to break the charge of Caesar's Caesaris equitatu Afranianos
premente, expeditae cohortes extremum agmen claudebant. Caes. bell. Ciu. 1.
horsemen pursuing him in Spain, but by opposing against them in the rierward
certain companies of half pikes lightly armed, and ready, not being laden
with baggage. By this only device Caesar with 2000 horse all weried and faint,
put 7000 of Caes. de bell. Civil. lib. 3.
Pompeyes horsemen to flight. for no horsemen will endure the point of the
halberd or half pike. The Prince Histoire de troubl. de France.
of Condey in the encounter at S. Denis, in these late troubles of France,
assigning to every company of horse a company of shot, which should discharge
when the enemy came to charge the Princes horse; by this device prevailed
against the enemy, which otherwise he was not able to encounter.

Woody countries, and thick bushes are not to be passed either with our
horse, or pikes before we have cleared them with our shot, and targetters, and
short weapons. for as in those grounds, horse for that they cannot there fetch
their carreire, and pikes by reason of their length are unserviceable: so they
are exposed to the shot of the enemy, which in such places commonly lie hidden.
The Tacit. Annal.
Romans taking the Germans with their long pikes in a certain woody
country, taught them that such grounds were not for them. Caesar pursuing his
enemies into Caes. bell. gal. 2.
the wooddes, would not follow them, before the ways were made, and the woods
cut down.

Hills and straits are yet more difficult to pass then woods: for in woods
short weapons and shot may do service. in hills and straits possessed by the
enemy, neither horsemen, nor pikes, nor any sort of weapons can do service, but
with great disadvantage. In surmounting whereof, these cautions are to be used:
first that we do not enter a strait, before we have assured our selves of an
issue either before, or behind, or at least on the sides. The Liu. 9.
Romans not using this caution, entering the strait at Caudium, were so
compassed in by the enemy on every side, that they could neither go forward,
nor backward, but must there compound for their lives. Cornelius the Liu. 7.
consul had likewise been entrapped and compassed about in a valley by the
Samnites, if that Decius a valiant man with certain troops had not taken the
hill above their heads, and driven them from thence, by his own danger,
opening a passage to the rest of the army. If we be not assured to force the
enemy before us, yet let us assure our selves of the highest grounds, both
behind and upon the sides of the army, and keep them until the passage
before be opened. Which course Annibal taught us by his example, passing the
Alps, and the Pyrenean mountains. Being Liu. 22.
brought into a strait by the mistaking of his guide, he forced the passage in
the night, and delivered his army safe out. Cyrus perceiving the danger of his
army in passing the straites and hills of Cilicia taken and kept by the enemy,
removed him thence by sending certain troops far about another way to
charge him on the back.

In passing of mountains guarded by the enemy, we are further to take heed
that our companies do not march up to the hill directly, before that our shot
and light armed, have either taken the higher ground (if any be) or else some
even ground either upon the sides, or the backs of the enemy. Annibal Liu. 21.
perceiving that the inhabitants of the Alps had seized the passages: in the
night time marching up with the lustiest young men he had, took the ground
above their heads, and so drove them from the places, which otherwise by
rolling down of stones might have hurt his men, and stopped their passage.
When Philip the king of Macedonia had lodged his army by the bank of the
river Aous, and at the foot of certain mighty mountains; the Roman General
by the direction of a shepeheard, understanding the site of the Deleri
exercitus Philippi potuit, sed equitem angustiae* ^ocorumque asperitas, peditem
a^morum grauitas impedijt. Liu. 32.
ground, sent four thousand targetters about the hills, and coming upon his
back drove him from his ground, and had utterly defeated his army, had not
the roughness, and straightness of the ground hindered the carriere of his
horsemen, and the weight of their arms, the speed of the footmen. The Persians
did drive Leonidas from the straites of Thermopylae by coming upon his back,
and taking the upper ground. which likewise was done by the Roman General
Acilius, when Antiochus kept the same straites, to stop the proceeding of the
Roman army. In all their expeditions through the mountains of Liu. 32. and
46.
Thessalie, and Athamanie, the Romans passed without any loss into Macedonie,
for that they always took the tops of the hills with their light armed, before
they suffered their army to descend into the valleis. Xenophon returning into
his country through the hills of the Carduchians, to pass them safely took
this course. (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 4.
His company he divided equally into two parts, whereof if the first were
stopped, the second auancing it self forward another way wanne the hill, and
drove the enemies from their ground: if the enemy made head against the
second, then did the first compass the hill while that part held the enemies
in breath. The araie of the army in passing of hills and straites, is diverse
from the common order of marching: for here not the horsemen, but shot and
light armed targetters, and short weapons march first, and serve to discover
the enemy: they also guard both the sides and back of the army: next them
march the horsemen and pikes, with the baggage and great ordonance in the midst.

Diverse are the dangers and difficulties, which an army is subject unto
passing of great rivers where there is no bridge, nor easy foord, no less to
be considered, then other impediments opposed against an army marching: for
here the enemy commonly makes head against us: here he lies in wait either
to charge us in front, or on the back, our forces being divided, and one part
not able to succor the other. If we be driven to fight in the river, or as
son as we come on the other side, our arms and clothes being wet, do hinder
us and tire us. If our army pass by boats, it is to be feared least the
enemy coming down the river with greater vessels and boats then we have,
do divide our company likewise, and take away our means to pass: bridges
are broken with great waters, yea with great barges, and pieces of timber sent
down the river, and falling overthwart them. Belgas nostri in flumine aggressi
magnam little partem conciderunt. Caes. bell. Gal. 2.
Caesar charging the Belgians as they passed a river, cut a number of them in
pieces. The Spaniards that forced to pass a river in the pursuit of Liu. 21.
Annibal, were likewise slain in the midst of it by his horsemen returning
back upon them, and finding them in disorder. When the Inopinantes and
impeditos aggressus magnam eorum partem concidit. Caes. bell. Gal. 1.
Heluetians were all passed the river of Soane save a fourth part, Caesar
setting upon them that remained, and looked for no such thing, discomfited and
killed the most of them. Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
Labienus suffering them of Treuers to pass the river betwixt him and them,
before they were half passed, set upon them, and overthrew them, before the
rest could pass. Those Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 9.
Protestants likewise, which for want of means could not pass so soon as
their fellows, were defeated at the passage of Dordonne, anno 1569. Hard it is
and dangerous to pass a river, where there is an army on the other side
ready to debate, and deny the passage. The Heluetij nauibus iunctis,
ratibusque compluribus factis, alij vadis Rodani perru^pere conati, operis
munitione, and militum concursu and ^elis repulsi. Caes. bell. Gal. 1.
Heluetians at foordes, and by boats, often attempted to pass the river of
Rone, but what with the height of the banks, and trenches made, and force of
men, they were repulsed. Therefore in passing of great rivers, the Generals had
need to proceed discreetly: and to look both forward and backward, that
whether he pass by foords or by bridges made for the purpose, or by boats, or
pieces of timber bound together, or skins blown full of wind, or howsoever,
he loose none of his company, nor be troubled, as men are, that are taken
unprovided. King Edward the third passed the river of Some at a foord,
notwithstanding the resistance made by the French: but if withal he had passed
over some thousand, or two thousand archers, which by appointment might have
come upon the back of the enemy, the passage of the river had been more
easy, and the defense of the enemy, and escape more difficult: for by that
means Annibal defeated the Gauls in the passage of Rone. For making she we to
pass by force, those companies that he had sent about an other way, came upon
their backs, and cut many of them in pieces. The Admiral of France anno 1569,
when he could not force the guard at Port de Pile, by reason of the Gabions,
and Barriquadals, under which the enemies shot lay covered: sought, and found a
passage a little above the place: which the enemy had no sooner espied, but he
left his stand without any great entreaty. The Prince of Orange anno 1568,
breaking the force of the stream of the river of Mosa, by placing horses
overthwart, found means to pass his army over, before the enemy knew
where he would pass. There is no river, but lightly higher or lower it may be
foorded. Xenoph. exp. cyr. 3.
Xenophon with his company, not being able otherwise to pass the river of
Tygris, yet marching up toward the head of it, found a foorde. Fossis Caesar
Sycorim auertens vadum fecit. Caes. bell. ciu. l. 1.
Caesar by deep trenches deriuing part of the river of Sycoris in Spain, made
the rest so shallowe, that the soldiers might wade over it. Where the enemy
does fortify the banks on the other side, and deny us passage; there some
part of the army is to be sent about some other way, to come upon the enemies
backs, and to open the passage for the rest.

Annibal, when the Gauls stopped him the passage of Rone, in the night sent
Hanno away with part of his army, which marching that night five and twenty
miles up the river, and finding no resistance, upon boats brought with him,
and timber bound together passed his men; which making a sign to Annibal, that
they were passed, came upon the backs of the enemy at such time, as Annibal
was ready to pass in front. Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
Caesar when by force he could not pass the river of Allier in France, the
enemy still coasting him on the other side: cunningly leaving two legions
behind a wood, and marching away with the rest of his army, when the enemy
followed him, those that remained behind, having boats, and things ready,
passed suddenly and made a bridge over the river, so that the rest of Caesar's
army returning, passed also at ease. Neither could the enemy remedy it, being
drawn so far from the place. Labienus magno tumultu aduersa Sequana partem
copiarum ducens, naues aliquot nactus in alio loco exercitum t^a luxit. Caes.
bell. Gal. 7.
Labienus by like practice passed the river of Seyne, notwithstanding the
enemies guard, and opposition. part of his army he led up against the river of
Seyne in the night with great noise: which the enemy hearing, followed,
thinking that all his army had been there. In the mean while certain chosen
companies left behind, passed the river in great silence in boats made of
purpose, which taking the bank, gave passage to their fellows returning.
Aemilius Paulus with a skirmish busying the minds of the Macedonians, at the
same time sent certain companies about the hills to pass there the river of
Enipeus, which coming on the enemies backs, caused them speedily to dissodge,
and leave the passage. Caesar at Nauibus ex leui materia and viminibus corio
contextis 22. millia denectis legione traducta collem occupat and munit,
pontemque facit. Caes. bell. ciu. 1.
another time when he could not pass the river of Sycoris at a foord, made
certain boats of twigs and light timber, and covered them with leather. In
those boats carried 22 miles off, in one night he passed a regiment, took a
hill, and fortified it, and there made a bridge for the passing of the rest of
the army. In the wars of Charles the 5, against the Protestants in Germany,
the Sleidan.
Spaniards pursuing the Duke of Saxony, passed with their horsemen at a foord,
and diverse of the rest swimming over the Elbe with their swords in their
mouths, seized the boats that were tied on the other side, and by that means
passed over their fellows. The Lusitani sine vtribus ad exercitus non eunt.
Caes. bell. ciu 1.
Lusitanians in time past did seldom go into the wars without girdles of
skins, which being blown full of wind, they easily passed any river. The
Germans when no way they could force Caes. bell. Gal. 4.
a passage over the river of Rhein, feined as if they returned into their own
country: but having marched three days journey, they rid back so far in
one night, and coming back upon a sudden, found the country peoples boats
tied at the river side, in which they passed themselves, and sent back the
boats to pass the rest of the company. Where the enemy makes no resistance,
there it is easy to pass by boat, yet the practice of war requires, that
either for quick dispatch a bridge be made, or else yt trenches be made upon
the river side both for defense of those that pass first, and for those that
stay last, and also that boats may pass, and repasse safely under the favor
of some pieces placed on the banks. How a bridge may be made Caes. Bell gal. 4.
Caesar has taught us by the example of that, which he made over Rhein. Take
two posts long or short according to the depth of the river, and couple them
two foot asunder, and so drive them down with a rammer, leaning somewhat
toward two other such posts so joined and driven down 30 or 40 foot above
them in the river, which fastened together with other timber below, and covered
with square beams are the foundation of the bridge. Upon diverse such couples
laying timber and covering the same, with planks, and hurdles, and straw the
army has means to pass. I think there is no carpenter, but he knows this
kind of work. and therefore the rest I refer to his occupation, and
workmanship. The bridge being made, great care is to be taken that the same be
not broken; as it happened to the bridge made by the Protestants over Garonne
Anno 1569, carried away by timber and wooden milles sent down against it. Which
had not happened, if either defenses had been made above, or else a broad place
left in the bridge for such things to pass. Sometimes bridges are made of
boats fastened with cables, and stayed with ancres. Such a bridge was made by
the Prince of Parma over the river of Scald, and also by the Protestants over
the river of Garronne 1569. At the siege of Poytiers the same year the
Protestants made a bridge over the water upon empty pipes bound fast together
with ropes. Mouuans to assure his passage over the river of Rone, dressed there
a little fort on the bank; where some artillery being placed, beat the fregates
that would have hindered the passage, and defended the fort against such as
would have disturbed them in passing, from the land. The same course was also
practiced by Montbrune, and diverse others.

But as the General is to have care to pass toward the enemy, so he is to
have care that he may repasse again. Therefore did Caesar passing over Rhine
build two forts, at either end of the bridge one, to assure himself a
passage. The Roman Emperor Crassus passing the river of Euphrates; if he had
had the like care, more of his army percase might have returned, then did. It
was likewise a great error in the Count Aremberge, that passing the river, he
had no regard to assure himself of the bridge, which being taken from him by
the enemy, he was slain with most of his company, and deprived of retrait.

The array of an army passing of rivers, is much according to the opposition
made by the enemy: if none be made, the common order is sufficient. If the
enemy she we himself, the great ordonance is to be drawn to the bank on the
sides of the army, and other shot likewise if they will reach so far, to the
intent the enemy may be forced to give place. If the river be gueable, let the
shot march on the sides, the targets in front seconded with pikes: the
horsemen may follow in the midst. And when the other side is assured: then are
the impediments, and great ordonance to be passed, the rest of the army
following afterward, the back being armed, as the front. If the river be not
to be passed at a forde, then a part of our army being sent about to win some
more easy passage, when that is ready to come on the enemies backs, certain
boats with some small pieces in the noses of them, and furnished with shot,
and targets are first to set forward with equal front, and after them other
boats laden with piquiers, are to follow: the ordonance and impediments must
come in the midst, and the rest of the army afterward.

But in passing of plains, woods, straites, mountains, or rivers there is no
course more effectual, then to use expedition and celeritie. In all practices
of war the same is most available. For by this means the danger is often
passed, before the enemy be ready to withstand us. Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Caesar by his expedition had wonderful success in all his affairs. He passed
the hills of Auuergne, before the enemy had any suspicion of his coming. He
passed his army in one day over the river of Soan, which the Heluetians could
not do in many. By the same he prevented Caes. bell. ciu. 1.
al Pompeyes preparatiues, and drove his enemies out of Italy, before they had
any respit given them to take breath. (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 3.
Xenophon taking the tops of the hills before the enemy looked for him, passed
great dangers with great ease. Montgomery in his journey into Bearne used that
speed, that before the enemies were assembled to resist him, he had passed all
the rivers, straites, and mountains which were in his way. No marvel
therefore, if they do nothing, that make such intolerable delays in all
things. Loyterers are taken in trappe, and made often to fly, because they
will not run. The army of Afranius in Spain, being nere to the hills, where
they might have escaped Caesar's hands, and marched safely; delayed time, and
suffered Caesar's army to come betwixt them, and their safety; which was the
ruin of that company. Yet if the heavens should be ruinated, some as it should
seem, would not mend their pace.

CHAP. VII.
Part. 1. Wherein is declared what trauerses, and oppositions the defendants
are to make, that thereby they may stop or hinder the progress, and march of
the enemy.
THis may be understood in part by that, which has been said already. For
seeing the difficulties that hinder the proceeding of an army, are either wants
and weakness in it self, or oppositions made by the enemy, that taking the
advantages of hills, or wooddes, or straits, or rivers, is always ready to
hurt, or hinder it: who sees not that the stronger our oppositions are, the
slower will the army be able to proceed?

The principal means to break the course of an army ranging up and down the
country, is want of provision. This was the course that Fabius used against
Annibal in Italy. To effect this, strait order is to be taken, that the Edictum
proponebatur, vt quious oppida, castellaque immunita essent, in loca tuta
commigrarent, ex agris quoque vti demigrarent omnes regionis eius qua Annibal
iturus esset, tectis prius incensis, ac frugibus corruptis, ne cuius rei copia
esset. Liu. 22.
people save themselves in places of strength, and that thither also they
convey their corn, provision and cattle. whatsoever cannot be carried away,
the same is to be burned, and spoiled all along where the enemy comes. Which
order Fabius caused to be proclaimed, and observed in the wars in Italy with
Annibal. Liu.
Philip king of Macedonia not being able to defend the towns, and country of
Thessalia, transported the people into other places, the towns and villages he
burnt, the corn he laid up safe, the cattle he caused to be driven into
places of strength. Pabulatione and commeatu Vercing etorix equitatu abu^dans
Caesarem prohibere conatus est. Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
Vercingetorix the captain of the Gauls seeing himself no way able to match
Caesar's army in open field, yet by spoiling the country, and burning whatsoever
might be commodious for the enemy, drove him to great extremities. and percase
had done more, if that the necessity of poor people, and hope to defend towns
of no strength had not spared much, that should have been spoiled. The Greeks
yt returned from the voyage of Cyrus into Persia, were by nothing hurt more,
then by the wilfulness of the people through whose countries they passed,
which burning their provision, which they could not save, made them go far
about, and suffer great want. The duke of Alua had not been so easily rid of
the army which the prince of Orange brought into ye Low countries, if he had
not without compassion spoiled the country, and forced him to return for fear
of hunger. The duke of Aumale likewise did spoil the country where the
Almaines that came to aid the Protestauts anno 1569 passed. If pity of the
poor, and favor of friends will permit us to execute this without respect,
there is nothing more au^^lable against a strong enemy, for whatsoever
provision the euemy brings with him; yet if he find no supply in the
country, he cannot long continue there. Adeoque inopia est coactus Annibal* vt
nisi tum fug^^ speciem abe^ndo tim^isset, Galliam repetitu^us suerit. Liu. 22.
Fabius by following this course brought Annibal with his victorious army into
those straits; that had it not been for shame and danger, that would have
followed him by flying, he would have returned back into France.

Lest the enemy range too far abroad, he is to be restreined with strong
garrisons placed in cownes defensible, and with a power of horsemen, these will
intercept straglers, and garrisons sallying upon outriders will keep them in
order. It is not the point of a wise General to leave the enemy upon his
back. Repressus and remotus Lucterius quod intrare intra praesidia periculosum
putabat. Caes. Bell. Gal. 7.
Lucterius the French captain would willingly have spoiled the country of the
Romans in France, but he stayed himself, fearing to enter among the garrison
towns; which he could not do without apparent danger. Caesar Vellaunodunu^
ne quem post se hostem relinqueret oppugnare instituit. Caes. Bell. Gal. 7.
besieged Vellaunodunum that lay in his way, for fear the garrison of the
enemy left there, might do him some annoyance. The army of the Protestants,
anno 1569, retiring out of Poitou into Gascoigne, and thence into Dauphine,
received many algarades of the enemies garrisons in the country where they
passed. but nothing does keep the enemy straiter, nor more hinder his march,
then a power of horsemen galling him continually on the sides, and watching all
opportunities. By them Caes. Bell. Gal. 7.
Vercingetorix kept Caesar's forragers very short. Cassiuellanus with his
Pabulatores essedarijs aggressus, ne latius vagarentur, continuit. Caes. Bell.
Gal. 5.
essedarians that fought in charets, kept the Romans from going far on
forraging the country. and Frumentatum exeunti Annibali diuersis locis
opportune aderat. Liu. 22.
Fabius with his horsemen meeting at every turn with such as Annibal had sent
out to fetch in corn, and other provision, made them return many times short
home. So long as horsemen do hang upon the sides and tail of an army, they
make but a slow march. Caesar sending his horsemen before to charge the enemies
last troops, did so trouble them, that he ouertooke ye Caes. Bell. Gal. 1.
Heluetians and Omnem equitatum qui nouissimu^ agmen moraretur praemisit. Caes.
Bell. Gal. 2.
Belgians in France, and Afranius his army in Spain, although they had gotten
far before him. himself and his army were so molested by the horsemen of
Hirti. de bell. Afric.
Scipio in Afrike, that in four hours he could not march much above an
hundred paces, being driven to stay and receive every charge, and stir. as
also befell the Romans an other time Ad crebros ^quitum and velitum tumultus
signa consistebant. Liu. 28.
encountering the enemy in his march. The French horsemen that coasted the
Almaines, that anno 1569. came in aid of the Protestants of France, kept them
from straggling: but if they had bin more, and durst have charged them; they had
stayed them longer in their journey. For if the first march, while those that
are behind fight, then are these left to the butcherie, as it happened to the
Caes. de bell. gal. 2.
Belgians pursued by Caesar.

Further, such straites and hills, as the enemy is to pass, if he mean to
enter further into the Country are to be guarded, and the ways to be trenched,
that both our men may have a cover, and the enemy more difficulty in forcing
the passage. Leonidas to stop the Persian army, kept the straites of
Thermopylae: which was also practiced by Antiochus against the Romans. Philip
Liu. 32.
purposing to stop the Roman army at the strait of Aous trenched the passage,
and on the higher ground placed archers, and slingers, and the rest of his army
in convenient places. But it succeeded not, for that he suffered the enemy,
not only to take the higher ground, but also to come on his back. Which also
was the ruin of Leonidas, and Antiochus. Those therefore that keep hills,
and passages, are to take heed of three dangers: the first, that they suffer
not the enemy to take the higher ground: the second, that they do not so lie
open, that the enemy may come on their backs: and thirdly, that their company
be not unable to abide the enemies force, or to defend the ground committed
to their charge. For in this case those that seek to stop other, are often
taken in trappe themselves: especially if they lie not strong, nor look well
to their guard.

If the enemy enter into a strayte, which has but two or three issues, take
those issues, and guard them strongly, and thou have the enemy enclosed, as it
were in a net. So were the Romans enclosed at Caudium, and compassed in
before and behind, and on the sides. But take heed, that thy guard be strong,
and watchful, least ye same be forced, and all thy labor frustrated, as
happened to Fabius having enclosed Annibal at Cales, by the weakness of the
corpse de guard placed on the hill Calicula.

If the king of Macedonia had placed strong garrisons in ye straites of
Athamany, and Thessaly, and showed himself in head of the Romans, they could
Ne Romani abnuunt se magna clade pugnaturos. Liu. 42.
never have issued thence without great slaughter, and loss. There is no
greater trial of a captain, then in the taking of the advantage of grounds.
And therefore let him proceed wisely; and cause his men to work diligently,
that his trenches be sufficient and well furnished with stones and shot, and
all things necessary. And especially that he be not enclosed, nor beaten from
the higher ground.

Woods are a good cover for any enterprise: and therefore wise captains
therein do place such companies of soldiers, as may either charge the enemy
passing through, or by them. Yet let them take heed that they have a place of
retrait there, that going about to hurt others, they be not cut in pieces
themselves.

The surest defense against the enemies proceeding, is a river not to be forded
over: but the bridges are to be broken, and the botes to be taken from the
other side, and ye banks where they are most low and easy to be raised with
earth, and fensed with stakes, and the same to be guarded with a competent force
both of horsemen, and footmen with their sconces in convenient places. By this
means Caes. bell. gal. 1.
Caesar kept the Heluetians at a baye, and stopped them from passing the river
of Rone, notwithstanding their diverse attemptes both by night, and day: and the
Praesidia disponebant quibus locis videbatur pontesque rescindebant fluminu^.
Liu. 22.
Romans stopped the outcourses of Annibal. Which course if the French king had
taken, the Protestants had not so easily retired from the battle of S. Dennis,
Hist. de troubl. ^e Fr. l. 3.
anno 1567, nor had they passed so many Rivers, nor taken so many Towns so
easily. But neither were the Towns guarded with soldiers, nor the bridges
broken, nor the banks guarded. In garding of Fordes, great care is to be taken,
first that the enemy pass not over some other way, and so come on our backs,
secondly that he force not our guard. This is prevented by good fortification,
and that by diligent watch, and sufficient number of men. He that looks not
to these things, is fitter to keep goslings, then the passages of Rivers.

By these means an army is slopped, or at least hurt, and hindered. But for
that men are hardely induced to fire their own goods, and few men can endure
ye lamentable flames of his country: and without a sufficient force of men,
all other means to stop an enemy are nothing; let there first be a
sufficient army levied, and opposed against the enemy, not that I would have
the same to hazard lightly, or come to the trial: but for that he that has an
army ready, may take all advantages of Hills, Straites, Woods, and Rivers, and
cut off such as wander abroad, and execute that which private men will not do
in spoiling where the enemy is to pass, as the practice of Arms requires.
L. Portius Licinius per loc^ alta ducendo exercitum, cum modo insideret
angustos saltus, vt transitu^ clauderet, modo ab latere aut tergo carperet
agmen, ludificatus est Asdrubalem omnibus belli artibus. Liu. 27.
L. Licinius though inferior in force to Asdrubal in Spain, yet taking the
advantage of hills and straytes, and now charging the enemy on the sides,
then on the backs, practiced on him all the precepts of war: for which he
deserved great commendation. The proceeding of Monsieur the French kings
brother and lieutenant, that disbanded his soldiers, and sent them into
garrison, when he should have resisted the Almaines that came to succor the
Protestants anno 1569. and kept the field, does contrariwise deserve
reproof, as contrary to the practice of war, and profit of his Prince. For
if that Poytiers had not arrested the Protestants, and sustained the siege
contrary to expectation, there had ensued great loss to his party. In the
mean while what reason had he to suffer the enemy to spoil the country at
his pleasure?

CHAP. VII. Part. 2. Wherein he speaks of forraging, and stopping the enemies
forragers.
How the whole army may march assured, and what the same is to fear in
marching; I have already spoken sufficient. The same rules may also serve for
direction to those that are sent forth to spoil the Country, and to fetch
in corn and forage. For whatsoever the General is either to observe, or to
fear in his whole army: the same is he that leads a part thereof out to
forage, to observe, and to fear. He must see, that his company keep good
arraye, that they straggle not from the gross of his troops. He is further to
have good intelligence, and espiall upon the enemies proceeding. In passing of
Plains, Woods, Hills, Straytes, and Rivers, he is to use more diligence, for
that his strength is the less. Likewise he is to consider, that as he goes
safely forward; so he may also have a sure retraite, if necessity force him,
to return backward.

Further he is to make appointment where to meet with the rest of the army,
that the same be not divided, when the enemy is ready to charge. Caes. bell.
gal. 4.
Caesar charging the Germans, while their horsemen, and some troops of
footmen were gone abroad upon spoil, found them far more easy to be
dealt withal. Caes. bell. ciu. 3.
Domitius sent by Caesar upon forage, if he had not met with the rest of the
army upon an instant could not so well have escaped out of a manifest danger,
the whole enemies power being at hand ready to charge him.

That he may do that wherefore he goes, he is to carry with him sithes,
sicles, hooks, axes, and all necessary instruments, and to bring that he
finds safe away: he is also to have with him store of horses and carriages.
For what avails it to find corn and provision, unless the same be carried
away to our uses? And little deserve they to have things necessary, that will
not fetch them. The Socordia and neglige^tia Campanorum in vehiculis
contrahendis ad frume^rum comportandum, rem ab Ha^none compositam turbauit,
famemque quae secuta est fecit. Liu. 25.
Capuans being in distress for want of victuals, and being willed by Annibal,
to send carriages to fetch sufficient, did send so few, that it was nothing
to relieve their need. Afterward they wished like opportunity to be offered
again, but in vain. For within short time after, they were forced by famine
to yield up their City.

That his men be not disturbed in their work by the sudden assaults of the
enemy, let him place gardes in places convenient for befence of those that go
abroad and work. In this respect the proceeding of Marcellus explorato, cum
firmisque praesidijs tuto receptu praedatum ierat. Liu. 23.
Marcellus that wise leader deserves well to be followed: For in no place did
he go before he had diligently discovered the same, and assured his retraite,
and those that wrought by stands of men fitly placed. Appius Appius cum
subitarijs legionibus ad popu^andum Boiorum agrum, nec explora^o, nec
stationibus firmis profectus cum legionibus caesus est. Liu. 31.
ruinated himself and his army, for that without search of the country, and
order used in such cases, he suffered his men to wander up and down more
mindful of spoil, then of their own safety. The Liu. 42.
forragers of the Romans marching without suspicion, or order, or sufficient
defense, were easily overthrown by Perseus king of Macedonia. This has been
the ruin of many armies, not only of small companies, and will be, if better
order be not taken. It is a common course of the enemy with hope of spoil, to
bring the army into distress. Therefore let no man be so greedy of spoil, but
that he see before into the danger; and albeit there appear no danger, yet let
him keep most of his troops in arms, that he be not overwhelmed with sudden
danger.

The provision that is to be found, is diligently to be saved, and laid up in
those Towns that we do hold; as in part before has bin declared. By this
means Annibal mainteyned his army by others labors. And much more we might
have done then we did, if in our journey into Portugal, we could have saved
that we found in Galicia. The cattle may he driven along with the army, and
ought to be distributed frugally, as our need requires.

But as he is to spoil his enemy, so he is diligently to take heed, that he
couche not his friends, and associates; which wrought Annibal much woe. But
what law against necessity?

Seeing then that those that march in the enemies country, if they proceed
wisely, may not only hurt their enemies, but also maintain themselves at the
countries charge: it behooves the General to be watchful, to keep order, and
never to say, had I wist. For he that is entrapped, hardly breaks the snares.
To avoid danger, nothing is better then celeritie, and expedition: of which I
will now speak more particularly.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is proved, that nothing in wars is more aduantageous,
then expedition; or any thing more hurtful, then delays.
I Have showed this in part already. But the detestation that I have of the
delays of our times, and daliance commonly used in martial affairs by those
that want skill, together with the exceeding losses and dangers, that Princes
have incurred, and shall further incur thereby, it there be no redress, has
so affected me, that although I have spoken much, and often thereof, yet I
suppose I can never say enough. To number all the commodities of expedition, or
the hurtes of delays in matters of war, it is not possible, though I should
speak of them continually: those which come to my mind presently, I thought
good to lay down in this place.

Through expedition, the enemy is taken unprovided: those places that are
opportune for us, are seized: where the enemy is most open, there have we
commodity to charge him: the malice of the enemy is prevented, our speed
gives us all leisure to provide: our confederates and friends, that stand in
fear of invasion are assured: matters are spedde with little charge, and good
success. Caesar Caes. bell. gal. 2.
hearing of the conspiracy of the Belgians, by suddein coming upon them,
disordered all their counsels, and remedied the mischief, before it was ripe.
Another great conspiracy of all Caes. bell. gal. 7.
France he dissolved, by his speed in taking the heads single, before their
forces were joined. Neither the deapth of Winter, nor height of the mountains,
nor cold of ye weather did stop him. Unless he had used incredible celerity,
he could not so easily have driven Pompey and his faction out of Italy, having
the power of the Roman Empire in his hands. But he took him all unprovided,
and came upon him before he looked for him: and would not suffer him in any
place to gather head. Annibal Magnis itineribus ita vt famam praeueniret ad
Herdoneam contendit. Liu. 26.
with great iourneys, and speedy marching coming upon Flaccus, upon the sudden
ouerthrewe him at Herdonea. Claudius Nero in Liu. 27.
6. days marched from Canusium to Sena with 6000. footmen, which distance our
armies march not in 16. By which expedition he help his companion Liuius to
overthrow Asdrubal, and took from Annibal all hope of succor. Celeritate sua
hostem imparatu^ aggressus est. Liu. 28.
Syllanus by no other means vanquished his enemies in Spain, then by inuading
them unprovided, which opportunity his quick speed did yield him. If the
Romans had succored Saguntum in time, they had kept Annibal occupied in
Spain and avoided the waste of Italy. The smart whereof made them more quick
in the wars against Philip of Macedonia, against Antiochus and Perseus. For
they no sooner heard of their preparatiues, but they caused an army to be
transported into their countries, to meet with them in the beginning. Wars,
as Guicciar. 1.
Alphonsus king of Naples was wont to say, have good success where we prevent
the enemy. In a small Puncto saepe temporis maximarum rerum momenta vertuntur.
Liu. 3.
time there happens great alteration of things, and therefore it is not safe
to loose any moment of time. Oftentimes also In co victoria vertitur, si and
loca opportuna and socij praeoccuparentur. Liu. 35.
victories are made more easy, by seasing of opportune places, and joining of
confederates unto us to help our cause. The Romans for their expedition in
martial affairs, deserve eternal honor above al others. A certain Ptolomeus
in Egypt was surnamed (...) or lightning, for his quick dispatch. Another was
surnamed (...) or eagle, for his swiftnes. But they were but words of vain
flattery. This praise it was deserved in the Romans. Scripio in one year
subduedal Afrike to ye walls of Carthage: Paulus Aemilius in a few months
subverted the Empire of the Macedonians. Quintius hostibus caesis 9. oppidis
captis vicesimo die quam creatus erat dictatura se abdicauit. Liu 6.
Quintius levied an army, overcame his enemies in open field, took 9. walled
towns, and all this in one 20. days. In the second wars of Carthage the
Senators of Rome were continually in ye Senate to hear the desires and reports
of their Generals, and to grant dispatches. When Scipio heard ye cowardly
determination of Metellus, and his companions to forsake their country after
their overthrow at Cannae, he drew his Agendum, non consultandum esse dixit.
Liu. 22.
sword, and entering among them, forced them to swear, that they would not
forsake their country. Which quick resolution saved his country. And true it
is, yt Consilium tutum celeritas, temerarium saepe mora facit. Liu. 27.
Claudius Nero said, that expedition does make our counsels prove safe and
sure, when as delays make the^ prove rash and dangerous. The Maturauit Romanus
ne praelio vno cum Latino, Volscoque conte^. deret. Liu. 2.
Romans having diverse enemies, making haste fought with them one after another
singly, and so overcame them: and I would to God the longer we differ to
fight with the Spaniard, we do not find him the stronger. A Malum nascens
facile opprimitur, inueteratum sit plerunque robustius. Cic. Philip. 5.
mischief in the beginning is easily remedied; in time it gets strength.
That which commonly is objected, that speedy Celer poenite^tia sequitur
praecipitata consilia. Liu. 31.
repentance follows rash counsel, makes nothing against our purpose. For
great difference there is betwixt speed, and temeritie. Temeritie is in
counsel rashly followed, speed is in quick execution after mature counsel.
My meaning therefore is not, that any should proceed without mature counsael:
but that after resolution there should follow Primum co^sulto, postea mature
facto opus est. Salust.
speedy execution. Contrariwise both co^sultation without resolution, and
Tardae and lentoe deliberationes perniciosae. Tacit.
resolution without speedy execution are pernicious in martial causes.
Counsels Cunctando senescunt consilia, Liu. 35.
drawn in length by delay, wax naught in the end. And being vented are no
better then (as I said before) wine yt has taken vent. Belli necessitates non
expectat humana consilia. Liu. 4.
Sometimes the necessities of war so urge us, that they will not suffer us to
attend men's counsels. When the enemy is coming upon us, and the Dilatione^
pati bellum vicinum non potest. Li. 1.
wars are at our doors, nothing is more pernicious the^ delay. The Romans
delaying to meet with Annibal in Spain, were afterward forced to fight for
their own home, and country. The delay of Mora eius diei satis creditur
fuisse saluti vrbi and imperio. Liu. 22.
Annibal that after his victory at Cannae brought not presently his army before
Rome, was the ruin of his cause, and first beginning of his decay. Likewise
the delays and slow proceeding of the Carthaginian Senate in sending money and
supplies to Post victoriam Cannense^ cuncta segniter, and otiose gerebat
senatus Carthaginensis. Liu. 23.
Annibal after his victory at Cannae, gave heart and leisure to the Romans to
repair their strength. Flaccus primos hostis conatus per dissimulationem
aluit. Tac. 20
Delays and dissembling after yt once we understand ye enemies practices, does
help the^, and minister favor to their proceedings, as Tacitus declares by
ye example of Flaccus. Bellum aluere quum si institissent, egregium titulum per
se liberatae Graeciae habere potuere. Liu. 32.
Attalus and the Rhodians having some vantage against Philip of Macedonia
followed it not: which delay gave him leisure to repair his forces, and made
them to be accounted the nourishers of those wars, which if they had urged,
they might have had the title of deliuerers of Greece themselves. Asdrubali
quod celeritate intineris profectum erat, id mora ad Placentiam, dum frustra
obsidet magis quam oppugnat corrupit. Liu. 27.
Asdrubal by staying about Placentia, lost whatsoever commodity he had before
won by his speedy march. I will not say what harm our stay both here in
England, and at Coronna, did unto us in the voyage of Portugal.

The Lauinians proceeding flowly in sending succors to their associates, were
scarce out of their city gates, when they heard news that the Romans had
overthrown them. For which small journey one of ye company told them, that the
Pro paulula via magna^ mercedem. Liu. 8.
Romans would make them pay dear. Delays of times used by Cecinna, Tacitus
Per varias moras prima prodidit hostibu^ tempora belli. Tac. 18.
calls becraying of opportunity. Inutil i cunctatione agendi te^pora
consultando consumpsit. Tacit. 19.
Fabius Valens going against Vespasians army, with hurtful delays spent times
of service in unprofitable consultations. The Athenians not stopping the
proceedings of Philip of Macedonia at the first, suffered him to grow so
strong, that all Greece could not in the end withstand his force. I pray God
that delays of Christian Princes to resist Philip of Spain, do not work
like effect in our times. Delays are not good in any time of service. The
times of Non expectant belli tempora moras and dilationes imperatoru^. Liu. 31.
war do not attend upon the captains, or counsels pleasures. Occasion Si in
occasionis momento cuius praeteruolat opportunitas cunctatus fueris, nequicquam
mox amissam queraris. Liu. 25.
presents it self unto them upon a sudden, but if thou embracest it not, it
passes without returning, though often thou wish for it again. All which
notwithstanding, in our times deliberations in matters of war are flow, the
arrestes uncertain, the executions vain. They are like the globe of Saturn
that finisheth his course but once in 30. years. That which others in time
past called loosing of time, some call winning of time: and yt which proceeds
either from fear, or covetousness, that they begin nothing: that will they have
to proceed from wisdom, and maturity. Fabius complained that the year
passed, while the Nobis in apparatu ipso, ac tantum inchoantibus res annus
circumagitur. Liu. 24.
Romans were in their preparatiues against Annibal, what would he say now if
he lived to see some men neither prepare, nor begin any thing? To excuse
themselves they bear men in hand, that they stay to see how matters will fall
out, and when the king of Spain will die. Unto whom I say for answer as one
of ye Athenia^s said sometime, that they that look for the Qui euentus
expectamus, praeda victoris erimus. Liu. 32.
eue^ts of war, are commonly a spoil to the conqueror. This course is that
which as Pontius the Samnite said, neither wins friendship, nor does hurt to
the enemy. Those yt are slow to help others, must look for slow friendship
at others hands in their need. But say they still, stay. It is not good to be
too rash. Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Ennius.
Fabius by his stayed proceeding, restored the Roman Empire to the ancient
estate, that was shaken by others hasty, and heady rashness. Then which
example there is nothing can worse fit them. Fabius in his time was a wise, and
resolute co^mander, ripe in counsel, speedy in execution. Annibal could turn
nowhere, but he was by him, al his devises he speedily prevented. Only for
this he was accounted flow, that he would not rashly venture the Roman
Empire upon one battle. Yet when his colleague Minutius was in danger, he was
ready to succor him. He differred not to provide an army, nor to furnish it,
he would not suffer the enemy to do what he list. What these men are, and what
they do; I list not to report: neither is it necessary being so well known. I
pray God, that as in other things: so in this also, they be not unlike Fabius.
For he restored that which was shaken; these are rather like to shake that
which is sound by their cold delays.

CHAP. IX. Of orders to be observed for the good government, and assurance of
the camp or lodgings of the army.
AS in diverse other points, so in the lodging of our army we are far
declined from the true practice of arms. The name of Camp remains, but the
thing is quite decayed, and gone. Seldom does the army lie in the field,
unless it be in the sieges of towns. Wherein notwithstanding we bestow so
many as we can in houses, and villages. In marching for the most part, the
companies are distributed in diverse villages, and that three or four miles
asunder; if not more. The lodgings are seldom fenced, unless it be with a
barriquade, or barrier, or small trench overthwart the ways. The watch is not
so strong, nor so diligent as it should be: the confusion and noise is great:
the provision of things necessary very small, and seldom other then the
soldiers can find. The which disorders make the army to lie open to
camisadoes, and many enterprises, if the enemy be strong and judicious. For
avoiding whereof the practice of war requires, that the army do rest in no
place but united, nor without sufficient defense, and guard. Before that the
practice of arms was brought to perfection, the army lodged, as now it does,
without trenches or defenses. Pyrrhus seeing the default therein, began first
to fortify his camp by entrenchment. Which the Romans receiving from him did
in short time excel their master. Only barbarous people commonly lay as
before, open and without defense: which gave the Romans such advantage against
them. And I doubt not, but if the right order of encamping were recalled by
any man of judgment, that he should have like advantage against these of our
times. Many are the commondities that an army receives by their lodging well
fortified. They fight not, but when they list, and see their advantage: they
sleep soundly without fear, and rest safely without danger, such Casta
victori receptaculum, victo persugium. multi exercitus victi eruptione
pugnantes hoste^ pepulerunt, Liu. 44.
defenses are a receite to the conqueror, a refuge to the vanquished, and a
port and harbor to return unto in a storm. Many armies (says Paulus
Aemilius, he that vanquished Perseus) being foiled in open field, have retired
into their camp, and saved themselves, and afterward fallying out upon their
enemies, have prevailed, and vanquished them. Therefore would he no: fight
with the enemy before he had entrenched his camp. Caesar albeit the was
charged upon the way by the Heluetians returning back upon him; yet had no
less care to fortify his camp, then to sustain the enemies charge. And
therefore having set his army in order, Sarcinas in vnum locum conferri, and
cum ab ijs qui in superiore acie constiterant, muniri iussit. Caes. bell. gal. 1.
he commanded the baggage to be brought into one place, and the same to be
entrenched by those that stood last, and on the highest ground while the
vantgarde, and the rest fought with the enemy. And such was Caesar's care
therein, that where the enemy was near, he would not suffer his chief Ab
opere singulisque legionibus, singulos legatos Caesar discedere, nisi muni^is
castris vetuerat. bell. gal. 2.
commanders, and counsel to depart from legions or regiments before the work,
and fortification of the camp was finished. Neither could the countenance of
Afranius his army in Spain, making show as if the same would sight, deter
him, but that he Cas. bell. ciu. 1.
fortified his lodging, keeping the rest in arms to receive the enemies
charge. The barbarous Gauls by their many losses perceiving the advantages
that the Romans had upon them in this point, at length by the counsel of
Vercingetorix their leader, began to Caes. bell. gal. 7.
fortify their camp, as they saw the Romandes do. He that does not so lie
entrenched, goes oftentimes out of his may to seek ease for his soldiers,
lodges with his army disioyned, loses time and labor: and lastly may not,
if he be wise, lodge near an enemy as strong as himself, that has the
vantage of ground and trenches. He that charge an army that lies well
entrenched, receives seldom honor of his rashness. The Frenchmen because
they understood not so much before, were taught it of Prospero Colonna at the
Bicocke in Lombardy. For aduenturing rashly to fight with Guicelardin.
Prospero and his company, that lay strongly fortified within certain banks
made for the keeping of the river within the channel, they were tumbled into
the ditch as fast as they came up the banks, and many of them slain. That
such fortification may be made orderly, and strongly, diverse rules are to be
observed, and some provision like wise is to be made more then ordinary. First
a convenient place in the way where the army marches is to be marked and
staked out by the Quartermaster general, which would be a man of judgment:
with him also may be sent other men of judgment. All these with a guard ought
to go Centuriones, exploratoresque praetermittit Caesar, qui locum castris
idoneum deligant. Caes, bell. gal. 2.
before, that at the coming of the army to the place every man may know the
gates, and the sides, and the places of the camp. Within that presently they
may begin to work, and every man may know where to pitch his tent, or make
his caban, and to discharge the impediments and baggage, and where the
ordonance is to be placed. This may seem intricat at the first, but with
practice it may be made most easy.

Further to the end, that our men be not disturbed when they are at their
work; good espialles, and discouerers would be sent before, to see that the
enemy lie not in ambush near that place, where we mean to lodge. Which
happening to Caesar in the expeditio^ against the Belgians, did more endanger
him, then the enemies, open force. For his men Caes. bell. gal. 2.
having laid down their burdens, and being scar^e^ed to fetch stakes, earth
and stones, ^odainly the enemy appears out from under a hill there by and
charge him. The same was the ruin Liu. 10.
of Fabius his ^ieutenant. For going to take a hill already possessed by the
enemy without espial; he was there slain in the place with all his comany. For
defense of those that work, one good part of the army would be kept in arms;
especially where the enemy is near. And those that work are to have every man
his sword and dagger girded to him, and his other arms fast by him. Which not
only Caesar, a master in these matters, but all the Romans generally observed.
There is no time, more p^oper for the enemies assault, nor more dangerous for
us, then when we are newly, come to our lodging. For then most are secure, and
put off their arms, and either rest themselves or run about to seek things
necessary.

The Castra ponentes Romanos Poeni aggressi sunt, turbassentque munientes, ni
abditi post tumulu^ opportune ad id positi a Scipione equites in effusos
incurrissent. Liu. 28.
Romans as they were pitching their tents were charged by the Carthaginians
in their wars in Spain: and had been soyled, had not Scipio fearing such a
matter, run through the^ with his horsemen, which very opportunely he had
covered under a hill in the way as they came to the charge. At that time also
Caesar was set upon by the Neruians, and lost diverse brave men. The Venetians
were no sooner arrived in their Conte de Purlilia ad Ferdinand.
lodgings at Trent, and disarmed, but the enemy observing his time comes upon
them, and forced them to seek an other lodging. Yet not all: for many were
left behind to take up their lodging in that place for ever.

The place most commodious for lodging, is where our company may not only
have wood, water, good air, and for horses forage, and if it may be some
relief of victualles for our men: but also advantage of the ground fit to be
wrought, and hardly to be taken from us by the enemy. Wood may not be wanting
for fire, stakes, and ^abans; and less, water for our men and cattle. A river
also does oftentimes ease our men of travel. Especially if it be deep: For
that the camp is well fensed on that quarter. Good air is necessary for the
health our soldiers, especially when me lie long in a place. The advantage of
ground, is requisite for the defending of our lodging. Which opportunities,
those that have wanted have been driven to great extremities. Caes. bell. ciu.
1.
Afranius his army was driven to yield to Caesar in Spain for want of water.
And by like necessity Caesar forced the relics of Pompeys army which he
Caes. bell. ciu. 3.
besieged on a hill, and excluded by trenches from the water, to fly to his
mercy. Himself in Hirt. de bell. Alexandr.
Alexandria had been driven to great extremity for want of fresh water, had
he not by digging of pits found store.

In hie and dry countries water is hard to be found, unless it be in valle is
and deep botcomes that show signs of moisture. Lautrecke in the fiege of
Naples lodging his army in the low grounds brought great contagion among his
people: and of New haven and other places want of water, and the filthy keeping
of our lodgings, which cannot be kept too clean, bred the pestilence among our
men, and wrought the victory to out enemies. The disadvantage of the ground at
Landresie not considered by the French, had sike to have taught them a
lamentable lesson. For being lodged in the lower ground, they were continually
amoyed by the artillery of the imperiall^s placed upon a hill, that comnt^^ed
the French camp, and almost forced them to fight with great disadvantage. The
Italians and Spaniardes were by the French forced to fight against their wills
at Guicciard.
Rauenna, in Lewis the twelft his time, for that being lodged in the lower, and
open ground they were beaten with the enemies great ordonance, that continually
stroke among their horsemen. Which inconvenience could not be remedied so, but
that is was the occasion of their overthrow.

But howsoever the place be chosen aduantageous, yet there is always some part
that lies open, which is to be assured with trenches and palissadaes. The
less advantage that the nature of the ground yields: the more labor our
soldiers are to take in working, and trenching the same. And that with a
trench and bank sufficient, if not such as the Romans used, yet such as may
cover the defendants, and hinder the ascent of the assailants without ladders.
Caesar in the Castra in altitudinem pedum 12. vallo, fossaque 18. pedum
muniuit. Caesar. bell. gal. 2.
wars against the Belgians environed his camp near Soissons, with a bank
twelve foot high, and a ditch eighteen foot broad. If the danger were great
the Romans used to make their banks higher, and trenches deeper. It would be
incredible, if I should report, all those banks, trenches, and works which
Caesar made about Alexia in France, and at Dyrrhachium in the wars against
Pompey, and other places, and how he cast trenches of great depth ten or
eleven miles compass. Which was also the use of all the Romans: Whose works
yet remaining in England in diverse places, because it seems incredible they
should be done by men, are called diuelles ditches, and supposed by them to be
cast.

That this fortification may be made with more ease, and greater speed: every
man is to work either with mattock, or spade. I know our men will at first
refuse it, and discharge themselves upon pionniers: but why should they
disdain to do that which the Romans did, and why should any refuse to
work to save his life, and the lives of their company: Let them consider how
such idle fellows, that would not fortify their lodgings have been used.

Castra procos* habebat nee loco satis tuto posita, ne^ praesidiis firmata. hac
negligentia fretus cum incautum Annibal opressit. Liu. 27.
Fuluis the Roman Proconsul neither for place, nor defense, nor guard lay
strongly enough with his army, which was no sooner brought to Annibal, but
marching thither with his army, he took him at vnawres, and ouerthre we him,
and all his company. La Love and his company lying secure, and careless
without trench, or barriquade, had their throats cut by the garrison of
Montpellier in the night being asleep in their lodging, Anno one thousand five
hundred sixty and nine. Neither did the company that under Napoleon Vrsini
Guicciard.
came to the succor of Florence besieged by the Prince of Orange in the days
of Charles the fifth escape better cheap; to teach others percase to make
better barriquades, and trenches, and to keep better watch. If the
Protestants durst have charged Charles the fifth before his camp was fortified
at Englestat, they had Natal. com. l. 1.
no doubt foiled him. Neither is it sufficient to trench the ways, if we lie
open on the sides. Every way must have some defense. Strossi Hist. de troubl.
de Er. li. 7.
stiffely defending a certain valley by Rocheabeille Anno one thousand five
hundred sixty and nine, fensed only in front with a weak palissade was
invested on the sides, and forced by the Protestants. In which disastre
himself was taken, and most of his troops distrouped, and slain. If his
defense had been strong in all places, he had saved himself, and foiled his
enemy.

Q. Cicero Caes. bell. gal. 5.
one of Caesar's lieutenants, by the fortifications of his camp, abode diverse
assaults of the whole power of France, and held out until such time as Caesar
succored him. And well befell it Prospero Colonna that his lodging was strong
at the Bicocke. For otherwise he and his company had been drawn out thence
not by the ears, but by the legs. There is none so small a fortification,
but it may do us favor in such a case. The Spaniardes making a trench
between themselves and the French at Guicciard. li. 5.
Cirignola, and bordering the same with their shot, made them to this day
remember what danger it is to pass a trench resolutely defended.

In these late braules of France captain Granry Hist. de troubl. de Fr. li. 6.
lodging in Esse a village upon the river of Vienne, gave the enemy a rude
welcome coming to see him in his lodging in the night. His safety was in a
double barrier, and trench made by him at the ends of the streets. Yet let
every man take heed how he presume upon every small defense, and rather let
him cause his men to take more pains.

It is no base labor that is undertaken for the defense of our lives: and
little does he deserve his life, that will not dig a few turfes to save it.

Ludouike of Nassau the brother to the Prince of Orange presumed too much upon
a little bad ditch betwixt him, and the Duke of Aluaes army. If it had been
but six foot deeper he had repulsed the enemy with great slaughter. This
happeued anno 1568.
For idleness and want of skill, he and his company were overthrown and
driven to take Embden for their succor. And yet not warned herewith when he
brought a supply out of Germany to aid his brother, Mich. ab Islael^.
lying in a village without sufficient defense he was charged by the enemy,
and there slain, and with him Christopher the Prince Palatins son, a Prince
unworthy that disastrous death, and with them most of the company,

That the camp may with more ease be trenched and fortified, the work is
equally to be divided amongst the company. That equity the Romans taught us,
and Singula latera castrotu^ singulis attribuit legionibus munienda. Caes. bell.
gal. 1.
Caesar practiced, dividing the ground among his regiments to be wrought. And
shame it is among us, seeing as the use of wars teaches us the great profit
of labor in banking and trenching, that we put it over to a sort of men
called Pionniers, unknown among the Romans, whose works were always They
are commonly termed Opera militum.
done by soldiers. This is the cause of the great charge of Princes, and slow
proceeding and slender effects of wars. Therefore they that will not work and
take pains; rather then die shamefully: let them die. But let not the
idleness of such prejudice the state or the safety of brave men. But let such
defend themselves, as well with banks, as with weapons, and not follow the
slouthful pride of athers.

The form of the camp is much according to the site and lying of the ground.
Among the Romans it was made for the most part four square. But it skilleth
not though it be three or five square. So the banks would be made ten
Less depth and breadth will serve, but this makes the banks sufficient.
or twelve foot hie, the ditch sixeteene or eighteen foot broad. The deeper
the ditch, and higher the bank is, the more assured is the defense. At every
corner especially toward the enemy there would be made a little bulwark or
platform somewhat auanced from the cortine of the camp for the placing of the
great ordonance, for defense of the ditch and cortaine, and clearing of the
ground without the camp. In the sides there would be left two great
passages, or issues for the army to enter and issue; and two lesser on the
outsides for the necessary uses of the camp.

The compass is according to the number of the army, allowing ten foot
square for every horseman, and four foot square for every footeman or
thereabouts. There are to be left four broad streets in the place, for the
passing and repassing of soldiers; and for the commodity of victuallers, and
Marchantes a market place.

The General ought to pitch his tent in the midst of the camp, about him are
his Gentlemen and guard to be placed, if there be not place sufficient for
them in his tents. The horsemen are to be quartered in the midst of the camp,
for that they are most unready if any sudden assault should happen; but in
some convenient square for the beauty of the camp. The shot and archerie are
to have their tents next to the ring of the camp round about the same: within
them are the halbardiers, targettiers, and other short weapons to have their
quarter assigned: and betwixt them and the horsemen the pikes. So that every
man may know both where to lodge directly, and what place to go unto, if the
enemy do charge us. The waste places remaining are to be assigned to the
carriages, and the boys, and servants that follow the camp. For flaughter of
beasts and necessities of nature there are two places to be assigned, either
in some out place of the camp, or without the camp. The whole distance and
compass is rather with the judgment of the eye, then with Geometrical
instruments to be cast out. Yet must the quartermaster take heed, both that
his compass be not too great (for that is hardly defended) and that it be not
too little. For in that case the army shall be straited.

That soldiers may be commodioussy lodged in the field without going out of
the way to find towns or villages, it is necessary, that every company have
their (...). Xenoph. paed. Cyr. 2.
tents assigned to them of public charge, and carried with them in carts.
For to lodge without cover in cold, rain, or heat is very intolerable, and
wood to make cabbanes sufficient in few places can be found: and if it could,
yet were it a matter long, for one nights lodging to make a cabbane of
boughs. Contrariwise tents are easily pitched, and not heavy to be
carried, nor very chargeable to be bought.

That the soldiers may finish their work with more speed, it were necessary
likewise, that every company had their spades, mattocks, axes, and other tools
carried along with their tents, and baggage, that every man presently upon view
of his lodging staked out, might know where to work.

For ease of the soldiers a judicious Quartermaster will choose some place
near a wood or a river, or some hill, that with the natural situation of the
place a small fortification may serve.

If the Quartermaster do choose some Villages to lodge in, yet f^^ greedines of
cover for his men, let him take heed how he do divide separate the army far a
sunder. And further let every part forti^^ the quarter where they are lodged.
The cause of the overthrow of the Prince of Conde at Cognac, in which encounter
he lost also his life, was the distance of the lodging of the auantgarde and
battle: which was so great, that the one part being charged by the enemy the
other could not come to succor it, before it was too late. Histoir. de (...)
bl. lib. 4.
Dandelot dispersing his companies in Villages, was surprised on the sudden by
Martigues and put to flight: himself hardly escaped, most of his company were
defeated: which, if his troops had been together could not have happened. For
his forces were four times greater then those that overcame them. La Love
might have been succored when the enemy charged him, but that he Hist. de
troubl. lib. 12.
lodged so far from help, yt before the same could come, he and his men were
dispatched. The cause of ye overthrow of ye Baron Donaw, and his Almains was
for that they lay dispersed, and without defense. Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 3. and 4.
Xenophon, although necessity forced him in his return from the battle against
Artaxerxes to lodge his company in diverse Villages: yet whenever the enemy
made show to approach, he drew them all together into one place. If so be that
necessity drive us likewise to lodge our army in Villages: let us know first
how upon need we may bring them together; and next how every part may sustain
the enemies assault, until help come to it. This I say is wrought, first by
traversing the ways, then by trenching places of easy access. The ways are
to be trauersed by deep ditches and banks for defense of our shot, next by
palissadaes, and bars placed overthwart: the sides are to be viewed, and
either with trenches, or walls to be fortified. Those ways that lead us into
the Village on the backside are to be dammed up, and where there is greatest
show yt the enemy will assault us, there gretest store of shot are to be placed
in the chambers looking that way. The carts and baggage conveniently placed,
may break the force of the enemies horse, and make the access for footmen
also more difficult. The Heluetians Caes. bell. gal. 1.
had no other defenses of their lodging: neither do the Germans at this day use
any other defense or encamping, unless the place naturally aforde it. But
nothing is more weak nor vain, where the enemy comes resolutely to the
charge. Scipio, his father that overcame Annibal, being foiled by the
Carthaginians in Spain through the treachery of the Celtiberians that forsook
him, thought to shroude him self and his Liu. 25.
company under the carts, and packs, and such things as he could bring together
to make a defense on. But it served for nothing, but to linger the enemies
victory a little. For in such defenses there is no strength. If therefore we will
neither fortify our camp, as did the Romans; nor bar the Villages where we
lodge strongly, as is the use of wise Captains in these days: I will neither
warrant our troops, nor by my will keep among them lying so open. The Philip.
Com.
French king and Duke of Burgundy lying in the suburbs of Liege without
trenche or barriquade, escaped very narowly in a certain sally of the
townsmen by them besieged. Besides the fortification of the camp, or lodging;
it is requisite for the assurance of our company, that we place not only
sentinels and scoutes within, but also good gardes at all the gates. For there
is no defense nor fortification such, but it may be passed, where there is none
to defend it, and guard it. Before our soldiers disarme and every man go to
his lodging, both gardes and sentinels would be placed, and not as some use
afterward. those that offend in either of these points do for the most part
receive sharp penance. The Ardeates Camillo duce castra Gallor^m intuta
neglectaque ab omni part nacti inuadunt, nusquam praelium, vbique caedes. Liu.
5.
Ardeatians led by Camillus, and finding the camp of the Gauls, that a little
before had sacked Rome, without either watch, or sufficient defense, slew them
down right, without any resistance. Philip king of Macedonia lying before
Apollonia, without either watch or good guard, was forced to raise his Liu. 24.
fiege, and had diverse of his men slain by a very few sallying out of the
town in the night. The negligent watch and guard of Syphax gave opportunity
to Liu. 29.
Scipio in the night to enter his camp and fire the same, and to make a great
slaughter of his men. The like security in Nabis his camp gave entrance to
Philopoemen captain of, the Achaeans, who fired the tents, and slew his men,
before they could make head, or well understood their danger. The Liu. 41.
Romans that lay in camp in Istria without fear, and therefore neither kept
good watch, nor guard, were suddenly surprised by certain Gauls, and driven
to run for their lives. The army of the Capuans resting in their lodgings
quietly, were slain by the Liu. 23.
Romans that invaded them in the night, and took them without trenche,
sentinel, or corpse de guard. The like advantage Curio using against the Caes.
bell. ciu. 2.
Numidians that lay dispersed without defense or watch, fell upon them in the
night, and slew them. Neither is it now less dangerous then in time past. Don
Pedro el cruel king of Spain was slain with his company by his base brother
Froissate.
Henriques taking him in the night unprovided, and lying without watch, or
defense. The same negligence was the ruin of the Protestants at Donzerre An.
1569. and of the Spaniards at Corbueil An. 1590. and has occasioned and
brought to pass many surprises, which otherwise could never have taken effect.
The Guicciar. lib. ^.
Marquis of Mantoua, and other gentlemen for want of good sentinels were taken
by the Venetian stradiots at Scala, where they went to refresh them selves. It
is an easy marter to show this also by our own harms, but that I would we
should rather reform our disorders by calamities of others, then shame to
hear our selves reproved, and therefore defend them. The What is required in
assuring our lodging
means to assure our selves, and to deter our enemies from these
enterprises, are these: first good banks, trenches, barriquades, palissadaes,
and such like defenses: secondly strong gardes well placed, thirdly good
sentinels in convenient distances within the ring of the camp, and good
scoutes on horseback and foot without, fourthly good orders of the camp, yt
no stranger nor person unknown lurk in any lodging, or other place to
discover our secrets: nor that our company lodge disioyned far asunder: the
provision that is to be made, is of tents, and all instruments that serve us
for such fortification. Where the Captain is careful to see these things
done, and the soldiers willing to labor and take pains, and to do them: it
is not possible to hurt the army especially ^^ere the same is strong and in
good estate. But if the enemy be very ^^ong, and our company weak for number,
or otherwise, and no help can come unto us: then if the enemy do assault us
in our lodgings so violently, that we are not able long to defend them, our
last remedy is to draw our men together toward the issues of our lodging, and
so to sally out, and to charge the enemy upon the back, and in all places
where he makes resistance. The suddennes of this execution if it be done
resolutely, cannot but work great effects.

Ser. Subito cruptione omnibus portis facta, neque cognoscendi, neque sui
colligendi hostibus facultate^ relinquunt. Caes. bell. gal. 3.
Sulpitius being not able to defend his camp any longer against the multitude
of the mountain people, that assaulted it: sallied forth upon a sudden at all
the gates thereof, and surprising his enemies on a sudden made a great carnage
of them, and put the rest to flight. The same course did Caesar put in practice
at the siege of Alexia. where not being able to defend his trenches and works
against the multitude of the enemies, that in all parts assaulted him, at
length Caes. bell. gal. 7.
gathering his men together, fallied forth upon them, not giving them so much
as any time to take breath, much less to gather their forces together, and
slew infinite multitudes of them being every where dispersed, and seeking
rather to enter in, then to defend them selves without. But this is not but in
time of necessity to be executed, and when we have no other means of defense.
otherwise it is good safe fighting behind a bank, or other defense.

Wherefore as at all times, so especially in the nights, and careless times
of others, it behooves the General to be (...). Homer.
careful for his people. With care, watchfulness, and labor great
enterprises may be achieved, if want hurt us not; and without care and labor,
neither great nor little can be done with commendation, nor can any army either
march safely, or rest safely.

CHAP. X. Wherein is showed, that as the assaylants being entered into the
enemies country, are to seek that the matter may be tried by battle in open
field: so the defendants without great advantage, are to avoid the General
trial: and by what means each of them, may effect their several purposes.
HE that enters the enemies country without purpose to fight, and hazard, let
him henceforth keep his head (...) Homer. I^^ad.
warm at home, and interteine Ladies. Such adventures are for resolute and
hardy men, as courage does prick such valiant men forward: so their own
profit requires, and necessity forces them, so soon as they can, to come to
trial. The sooner, the better it will be for them, at the first their men are
strong, their munitions, and arms whole and good: of victualles and all things
necessary they have sufficient, if they have not; the greater is their error.
Further their men are courageous, and full of stomach: and contrariwise the
enemy is neither provided sufficiently of soldiers, nor furniture of war,
especially if he look not for it: neither is he so resolute to fight. And what
courage can he have, seeing his country flaming round about him? that this
ought to be the purpose of such as invade others, not only the example of
Annibal, who by all means provoked the Romans to come to fight with him, but
also of the Romans inuading the Macedonians, of Caesar warring in France, and
following of Pompey into Epeirus, and of our Kings transporting their forces
into France, and generally of all that ever knew the trade of war does
teach us.

To force the enemy to accept that, which willingly he would shun, the means
are these: first to pursue him, with all convenient speed. If thy horsemen do
once overtake any part of his army, either he must stay to succor his men, or
else must he leave them to thy mercy: if he have so many Eques carpe^^ do
nouis^imos premendoque iniquis ad transitum locis agmen detinuit. Liu. 8.
stays, thou can not choose, but overtake him. To depart far away from
thee, is to yield the country into thy hands: then which it were better to
hazard many men's lives. Caesar by Caes. bell. gal. 1.
this means drew the Heluetians back to fight with him, which they would
gladly have passed. and by the Caes. bell. gal. 2.
same he so galled the Belgians, that they were constreined to fight with
disadvantage. Caes. bell. ^iu. ^.
Afranius would gladly have recovered the hie countries with his army, but
Caesar did so trouble his march with his horse men, that unless he meant to
fly; he could not run from him without fighting. He that flies long before
thee without fighting, he abandoneth a great country without fighting, to be
spoiled of thee.

Secondly, if the enemy has any courage: by ranging, and spoiling, and firing
whatsoever thou can not save for thine own use, thou shall either draw him
forth into the field, or break his heart. By that means the Cos. vastand^^
maxim ag^is hostem ad confero^da propius castra, dimicandumque acie exciuir.
Liu. 2.
Romans forced the Volscians and others, to come down from the hills into
even ground, and to defend their country from rauage and spoil. And although
another time the force, and provision of the Roman army made the enemies to
shut them selves up within their walls, as most safe for them: yet when they
saw the spoils and Populatione agrorum and ince^d^js villarum coegit eos
eg^edi v^be. Liu 5.
flames of their country; they could not continue their former deliberation,
but were forced to come forth and fight. When Villages populando atque vrendo
rec^^ hostium sataque in aciem extra^^. Liu. 8.
are fired, and the corn, and the country spoiled, he must be either very
cowardly, or very hard hearted, that is not drawn forth to fight. Flaminius
the Roman Consul could not endure to see the fires which Annibal kindled in
Hetruria, but would needs succor the country, and fight with the enemy,
whatsoever it cost him. Who can endure to see the enemy to rage, and spoil
without restraint: or who can restreine him without fight: The Frenchmen
although always unwilling to deal with the English nation upon even hand, yet
have been diverse times forced thereto by us, what with indignity to see their
country spoiled, and what with fear of further loss, and what with
necessity to defend their country. Albeit Fabius could in his time endure to
see the rauage, and spoil of his country: yet all have not that singular
patience.

If neither by celeritie thou can overtake the enemy, nor by spoils of the
country move him to defend the same: yet will he never endure, until thou
have taken some of his principal cities. Shame and necessity will in the end
force him to come to their succor. When the Post quam Romulum castra ponere,
and ad vrbem necedere Veie^tes accepere, egressi sunt obuiam, vt potius acie
decernerent, quam inclusi de tectis moenibusque dimicarent. Liu. 1.
Veians being beaten before, refused to encounter the Romans in the field any
more: yet when they perceived that the Romans made toward their city, they
came forth choosing rather to try it in plain field, then to be pend up, and
fight for their houses, and walls. Metellus vbi se dolis fatigari videt, neque
ab host copiam pugnandi fieri, Zamam statuit oppugnate, ratus Iugurtham
subsidio suis venturum. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
Metellus forced Iugurtha to come into the field by besieging Zama a city
which he specially favored, albeit he knew him self inferior in strength to
the Romans. By like means Caesar in Afrike forced Scipio ad necessitatem
adductus dimicandi, ne per summum dedecus Thapsitanos rebus suis fidissimos,
and Virgilium amitteret. Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Scipio to bring his forces into even ground, least loosing a city of
importance that favored him, and a Captain of name, he should dishonor
himself. Philip de Valoys to raise the siege of Calais brought with him the
power of France. King Edward the third might have fought with him if he had
would, but he would not fight with him, but upon advantage. The Protestants
Anno 1567. by straiting the city of Paris of victuals forced the king to send
a power against them to fight with them. Unwise were they, that not
understanding this, had sent away a great part of their forces, which might in
that battle which was fought at Saint Denis, had greatly aided them to obtain
the victory. If the siege of Poytiers An. 1569. had continued any longer, then
it did: the King should have been forced to fight with the Protestants that
besieged it. But there was no need that a Kings power should beat them, whom
want, and so many disorders had beaten before.

But if the General of the enemies forces, be enforced to take a town for his
safegarde: much more behooves it them to come forth into the field, to relieve
him if he be besieged. The whole power of France came before Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Alexia to disengage Vercingetorix their General there besieged by Caesar.
Whosoever he is that can be content to loose a city, and refuses to come to
fight with his enemy, cannot long endure. The reason that the Prince of Orange
so long held out against the Spaniard, was the tyranny of the enemy, whom the
people could not endure, certain small supplies yt came out of England, and
the Princes good will to help such towns as were distressed the best he
could: and last of all the liberty of the sea, which the enemy could not take
from him.

On the other side the defendants taking a contrary course for the safety of
them selves and their country, ought as much, as they can, to linger and weary
the enemy, and not to fight without manifest advantage. This course the Romans
took, and found to be best, not only against Annibal; but also against other
Barbarous nations, that came to invade them. The same did experience teach the
Gauls, and Briteins to be best against Caesar. And the general practice of
war has now confirmed it for a precept to be followed in such cases. When
(...) Thucid. 2.
Sitacles King of Thracia invaded the Macedonians, the country people not
being able to resist fled into strong cities, and holds: and as occasion, and
advantage was offered, from thence issued to fight with him as they could. Many
Multa bella impetu valida pe^ taedia and mo^as euanuerunt, praesertim vbi non
est prouisum frumentum, nec maiores expecta^a copiae. Tacit. annal. 18.
wars that have been violent at the first brunt, by delays and tedious
lingering have come to nothing, says Tacitus. And therefore never is it good
to fight with those that want provision, and look for no further supply. When
the Gauls with great forces came into Italy, some would have had the Roman
General to fight with them forthwith: but the Dictatori neutiquam placebat
cum nulla cogeret res, fortunae ^o committere adversus hostem quem tempus
de^eriorem indies, and locus alien^s faceret, sine praeparato comm^atu, sine
si^mo munimento morantem: ad hoc ^js animis corporibusque, quorum omnis in
impet^vis esset parua eadem languesceret mora. his co^siliis dictator bellum
trahebat. Liu. 7.
General thought it more wisdom to protract time. His reasons were, for that
he dealt with an enemy, which every day waxed weaker, and by reason he was in
another country, had daily more and more hindrances coming upon him: further
neither had he provision, nor town of retraite, and therefore must needs be
wearied with delays, and decay of himself: and great folly, said he, were it
to fight with men when they are strong, when they may deal with them, when
they are weak and feeble. When Caesar sent Crassus into Aquitany with part of
his army to subdue the country; the enemy being taught by experience would not
come into open field, but Duces consuetudine populi Romani, loca capere, castra
munire, commeatibus nostros intercludere instit^unt, Romanos se rei
frumentar^ae inopia recipientes, impeditos agmimine and sub sarcinis insirmiore
animo adoriri cogitant Caes. bell. gal. 3.
began to take places of advantage, to fortify his camp, to keep Crassus
from victuals; when the army for want should retire, then he meant to charge
the same being laden with baggage, and out of array in the march. That which
Liuy says of the Boij gens ad morae taedium minime patiens dilapsi sunt.
Boyans, we find it true in many Northren nations: they are impatient of
delays, and if they be not fought withal, do scatter of them selves. Those
that fight with such enemies, are like to those, that hope to quench fire by
throwing on of wood; when as if the fire be not supplied with wood, it will go
out of it self. And therefore our ancesters, that have fought with the Scots
have done valiantly, but wisdom would have persuaded them, to let them
dissolve of them selves. The Romans by their haste in fighting with Annibal,
received three great overthrows, and brought them selves within very little of
their ruin. Pompey when he might have ruinated Caesar's army for want of
victuals, aduenturing to fight at the request of his army overthrew himself.

The way to weary the enemy without fight is, first with an army consisting
most of horsemen, shot, targets, and halberdiers lightly armed, to coast him a
far off: next to spoil the country where he passes, and to bring all the
cattle, corn, and provision that may any way serve his turn into strong
towns: thirdly to store the towns of war with provision, and assure them
with strong garrisons; fourthly to cut the bridges over great rivers, and to
sease all narow and strait passages. The army that coasteth the enemy,
although it may not join battle with him in even ground, yet has many
necessary uses; and without it all other impediments are easily passed: the
same does bridle ye enemies courses, that he dare not divide his army to send
the same on foraging: It keeps victuals from him, and him from victuals: it
defends the straits, and passages of rivers: it succoureth such towns as are
besieged: it is ready to charge the enemy upon all advantages. The Athenians
Thucid. 3.
not being able to fight with the army of the Lacedaemonians that came against
them, took this course for their defense, they brought their people and all
that they had into the city; placed gardes at passages, and cut of the
straglers with their horsemen. Which course Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Vercingetorix also used against Caesar in France. he burned the country,
drove away all the cattle, kept the passages of rivers. The Custodias ad ripas
Ligeris disponere, equitatumque omnibus locis ostentare caeperunt. Caes. bell.
gal. 7.
Heduans reuolting from Caesar kept the banks of Loyre with gardes, and in all
places where the Romans came, charged them with their horsemen. But of this
matter I have spoken sufficient, where I showed what trauerses made against the
enemy are most effectual. Now I am to show how the enemy is to be wearied
without fight: the means I have set down. But this caution thou must use
further, that thou keep thy self, and thy company always on the higher
ground, and take heed that the enemy do not entrap thee, nor compass thee
about. Fabius in the wars of the Romans against Annibal in Italy, and
Licinius in the wars against Asdrubal in Spain, have by their example showed
thee what thou art to do, and how warily thou art to guard thy self, and to
watch thy enemy.

These precepts have use in all countries, with whatsoever enemy thou dealest:
but especially where the country is full of hills, woods, straites, and great
rivers; and also where by force is near equal to the enemy. But if thy power
be slender, or if thy country be plain and open; then presume not to come
near the enemy: for thou can not avoid, but either thou must fly or fight.
The Fuga se longinqua ab hosse tutati sunt Galli. Liu. 6.
Gauls pursued by Camillus, seeing themselves unable to fight with him, had no
other means to avoid fight, but to fly far from him. Neither could Asdrubal
have escaped from Liu. 27.
Scipio, but that he fled with his army from him into the utmost coast of
Spain. After that Vercingetorix ne contra suam voluntatem dimicare cogeretur,
magnis i^ineribus antecessit. Caes. bell. Gal. 7
Caesar had once passed the river of Allier, which was between him and the
enemy, Vercingetorix was constrained to go far before, least he might be
constrained to fight against his will. For where the armies come near each to
other in eauen ground, it is hard for the one to avoid fight where the other
seeks it. Antonie forced Cassius to fight at Philippi; albeit he avoided it
what he could, and had the vantage both of ground and trenches. The Hist. de
troubl. de Fr. l. 9.
Admiral at Moncontour would willingly have passed the day without fight: but
being near the enemy, he could neither pass the river without disordering
his army, nor retire without manifest danger of being utterly broken, and
ruinated.

Philip of Macedonia albeit he was encamped upon the bank of the river Aous
very strongly, and had most high mountains for his defense upon his back: yet
being charged suddenly from the upper ground, he was both driven to fight
against his will, and foiled by Tit. Quintius.

Wherefore considering the loss and calamities, that come of suffering the
country to be burned and spoiled, the hazard that to wnes besieged by the
enemy without hope of succor stand in: the discouragement of our people, that
see and enemy in the country whom they dare not encounter: I hold it a rule
most certain, that no country nor state can well be defended against a strong
enemy any long time, unless the same either have, or can procure an army to
come into the field able to encounter him, and not unwilling also, if the same
may have any good advantage to fight with him. And therefore all valiant men
that love their country, are rather to endeavor to overcome the enemy by
force, then dull him and weary him by patience and delays, which bring with
them contempt of those that want an edge and force. That we may fight with
advantage, and proceed with reason; let us now examine and see what things are
to be foreseen and considered before that the General do bring forth his
army into the field to fight.

CHAP. XI. Containing special matters to be well considered, before the
General bring forth his army to fight with the enemy in open field.
Many things in war are executed by force and strength of men; but seldom
does force prevail much without counsel and direction. Counsel in all
deeds of arms chalengeth a principal place, but especially in joining
battle with the enemy. To refuse good counsel therefore in this case, is a
brutish folly oftentimes severely punished. The Constable of France peeuishly
refusing the good counsel of Coucy, that dissuaded him at that time to fight
with the Turks, was the cause of the miserable slaughter of Christians at
Nicopolis.

The Frenchmen detest in their histories the pride and insolency of a certain
Duke of Bourbon, who Froissart.
being General in a certain enterprise against the Saracens in Afrike,
overthrew the action by disdaining to hear any man speak, and refusing all
counsel, but his own; A man wise enough to ruinate any enterprise. Wise
captains therefore, as they will consider many things themselves: so I trust
they will not disdain to understand the experience and advise of others.
Before a General does resolve to fight with the enemy with all his force,
he is first diligently to understand both the strength of the enemy, and the
numbers and strength of his own men, least presuming too much of his own
power, or contemning the enemy, he do that which afterward he may repent.
Guicciandin.
Francis the first of France not knowing how much he was abused by his moster
rolls, and supposing his strength to be greater then it was, accepted of the
battle of Pauie, where himself was taken and his army discomfited. Caes.
bell. ciu. ^.
Curio not knowing the great strength of the enemies horsemen, did rashly leave
the advantage of the ground, and fight with him, that in the plains was to
strong for him, which was his ruin.

Cassius in the battle of Philippi not understanding the victory of Brutus
his companion, desperately slew himself, and was the cause of the
discouragement of his side, and the victory of the enemy. If therefore he
shall understand that his enemy is too strong for him: let him keep his
advantage of ground, and avoid fight: if his own power be greater, let him not
delay it: for it is no less dishonor to let slip an opportunity, then to
adventure rashly.

Young soldiers are not rashly to be brought into the field against an army
exercised and beaten with long practice of war. The Romans found this true
by their own practice in the wars with their Veterani exercitus tobore rex
Romans vicit. Liu. 1.
neighbors, and with Annibal. Where their army was well trained, they
prevailed, their fresh soldiers could not endure the force of Annibals beaten
men. Caesar's old soldiers were invincible.

With the men that Philip of Macedonia had exercised in many wars, Alexander
overthrew the Persian empire. For it is not Veteres non tam numerosos exercitus
habere voluerunt, quam eruditos. Veget. l. 3. c. 1.
number that prevails, but experience and skill. The Philip. Comin.
gallants of Charles Duke of Burgundy, bragged that they would do and
venture; but when they saw their enemy, they forgot their words, and ran
away in the encounter with Lewis the eleventh at Mont le herie. Therefore did
Caesar wisely, that carrying over with him diverse young soldiers into Afrike,
Noluit conuulncrari exercitum tyronmen. Hirt, de bell. Afric.
would not put them to the trial, before he had made them better acquainted
with wars.

Soldiers likewise when they are faint, weary, hungry, or thirsty, fight but
faintly. And therefore as there is no trust in young soldiers, so there is no
strength in soldiers that are faint with labor, or want of victuals. Do not
therefore rashly encounter the enemy, when they men are either wearied with
long marching or watching, or faint for want of meat or drink. The Inde cibo
corpora firmare iussi, vt si longior esset pugna, viribus sufficerent. Liu. 27.
Romans before they entered the battle, refreshed their men with victuals and
rest, that if the same continued long, yet their strength might continue.
Syllanus ante pugnam militem cibum capere iubet. Liu. 28.
Syllanus being ready to charge the enemy, commanded his soldiers to dine
first. The principal cause of the overthrow of the Romans at Trebia was, that
Annibal brought forth his men to fight, fresh, having well dined, warmed
themselves, and rested: where as the Roman Liu. 21.
General brought forth his army fasting, and cold, by reason they passed a
river; and weary, for that they stood many hours in arms before the battle
began. Aemilius in the wars against Perseus in Macedonia, albeit his
soldiers desired to fight with the Statuit Aemilius lassitudinem and sitim
sentientes milites integro hostinon obijcere. Liu. 44.214.
enemy so soon as they saw him, yet considering, that by their long march
they were weary, thirsty and faint, would not fight with the enemy that was
fresh and lusty; but deferred it to the next day. Yea, although advantage be
offered: yet if our Furius lassitudini militum timens, occasionem rei praeclare
gerendae omisit. Liu. 31.
soldiers be faint and weary, it is more safe to pass it. (...) Xenoph.
Clearchus seeing his soldiers faint and hungry, would not charge the enemy,
albeit good occasion was offered. The prince of Conde bringing his men that had
watched for the most part all the night, into the field before Saint Denis,
anno 1567. found what faintness watching works.

Asdrubal being charged at Metaurus, when his own soldiers were weary and
sleepie by the reason of his nights march, and his enemies fresh and lusty,
was overthrown with a mighty slaughter. The Sitis and calor hiantes caedendos
capiendosque Gallos praebebat. Liu. 27.
Gauls gaping for thirst and heat, and being wearied with travel and
watching, were slain or taken. Puigalliard in these late troubles of France,
causing his troops to march continually two days and two nights, thinking by
his speed to surprise the Protestants at S. Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 13.
Gemme, was himself the cause that his men were cut in pieces by la None, not
being able for want of sleep and rest, to do any service.

But least cause has he to venture, whose soldiers stand in fear of the
enemies forces. Caesar therefore would not begin his journey against Caes. bell.
Gal. ^.
Ariouistus, and the Germans, before he had resolved his men that stood in
fear of them, to fight. And having had evil success in one or two encounters
at Dyrrhachium, which much dismated his soldiers, he removed from thence, and
would not fight until such time, as his soldiers were confirmed. He that
doubts any such thing in his men, is first to confirm them with hope, and
report of their former valiant actions, and with declaration of the enemies
wantes, and weakness, and disaduantages: he is to encourage them with promises,
and hope of reward, to fear them with shame, and plainly to declare unto
them, that there in no hope but in victory, and therefore, that if not for
their honor, yet for Virture pares, necessi^ate superiores. Liu. 21.
saving of themselves, they ought to fight valiantly. Necessity Nusquam nisi
in virtute spes est milites, Liu. 34.
enforces men to fight, and the example of their Commanders ready to abide
with them in all danger, makes them ashamed to fly. Much did it encourage
Caesar's soldiers, when they saw him in the battle against the Heluetians,
put his horse from him, ready to take the common hazard with them: and a very
coward he is, that neither with persuasion, nor example will be encouraged.

The soldiers for their persons, strength, and courage being such as they
should be, the next consideration of a General, that purposes to fight, is,
that they have their arms fitted, and all baggage and impediments, that may
hinder them removed. Alexander before he fought with Plutarch.
Darius, forgot not so much as to give order that the hair of his soldiers
heads, and beardes should be cut, lest the enemy might take hold by it.
Small matters you will say: but in this, not the smallest matters are to be
contemned.

But yet nothing is more to be respected, then the ground, where thou purposest
to abide the enemy. There is great advantages in hedges, ditches, and the
higher ground. Caesar's Milites e loco superiore pilis missis facile hostium
phalangem perfregerunt. Caes. bell. Gal. 1.
soldiers throwing their iauelins from the higher ground, and following the
same, did easily break the ranks of their enemies troops. Pharnaces aduersus
collem subiens detruditur, and vincitur. Hirt. de bell. Alexandr.
Pharnaces leading his men against the hill where Caesar's army stood ranged,
was presently thrust down, and vanquished. Caesar wondered at his rashness. The
enemy having seized a hill by Rome, the Consul Temere aduerso Ianiculo
Seruilius ad castra hostium aciem erexit, soedeque inde pulsus est. sed
interuentu collegae ipse exercitusque seruatus est. Liu. 2.
Seruilius moved with the indignity of it, did rashly cause his troops to
march up the hill against him, which advantage the enemy taking, had
overthrown him, and his army; had not his Colleague come in the instant, and
favored his retraite, Marius Plutarch. in vita Marij.
ouerthrewe the Germans and Danes more easily, taking them mounting up the
higher ground. Certain of the Admiral of France his companies foolishly
striving to win the hill, near the plains of S. Hist de troubl. de Fr. l. 9.
Clear, were driven back with loss, and had utterly been defeated, if the
Almanes below had not kept their ground, and arrested the foremost of the
enemies, that pursued them. A small Exiguum loci ad decliuitatem fastigium,
magnum habet momentum. Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
advantage in the vneauennes of the ground, is much (says Caesar) in the
furthering of the victory. At Auaricum, albeit he had the victory in his
hands, and had foiled the enemy: yet would he not follow them up the hill
for fear of the discommoditie of the ground. At Gergouia he lost many brave
soldiers, that contrary to his commandment would needs pursue the enemy up
the hill. him self was never in greater danger to loose the field, then at
Munda in Spain: which happened by the forwardnes of his men, that needs would
Hirt. de bell. Hispanic.
charge the enemy, standing on the higher ground. That care that a General
has in the first charge of the enemy, the same he ought also to continue in
the pursuit of his victory, that his men descend not down into the lower
ground, nor be too eger following them up the hill. The Romanus cedentem hostem
effuse sequendo in locum iniquum pertractus acie fusus. Liu. 6.
Romans following the enemy without order, and being drawn into a low
valley, were discomfited and slain, the enemy turning back upon them. The
Corinthians not looking before them in their retraite, fell into a (...).
hollow bottom of ground: which the Athenians perceiving, and that there was
no issue out, compassed them round about with their light armed, and slingers,
and stoned them all to death. The Romans entering the strait of Caudium, were
entrapped by the Samnites. Annibal Liu. 21.
sustained many losses by the people of the mountains, that took the tops
of the hills, and rolled down stones upon his soldiers, marching along the
sides of the hills. Which difficulties. Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 4.
Xenophon also proved in passing the mountains of the Carduchians. All
difficulties which hinder the army in marching, as woods, hills, straites,
rivers, and such like, are far more dangerous, if they be objected against us
in fighting. And therefore let the General take heed, that he be not charged
in passing of rivers, or straites, or at any like disadvantage.

Further, let him diligently view, and search the Country, that the enemy have
not bestowed some part of his army in some wood, or beyond some hill behind, or
on the sides of the place, to charge him with advantage, when the battle is
begun. By which means Annibal ouerthre we the Romans at Trebia, and the
Thrasimene lake.

Neither is it sufficient for him only to provide, that the enemy have no
advantage, nor his own soldiers any disadvantage: but he must consider also,
if he may take the enemy either in trap or at any disadvantage: and that
either in vneauen ground, or in straites, or passing of rivers, or any place
where his army is disordered, either in lodging, or marching, or fighting. If
the enemy be beaten out of the field by force, it is in part the soldiers
praise, if he be entrapped by the Captains policy, that is his hondur.

In the joining of the battle, the General is likewise to endeavor to take
the wind, and to have the Sun (and Moon, if the fight be in the night) upon
his back. The wind being favorable drives our darts, arrows, and
whatsoever we throw against the enemy with greater force forward; and being
contrary does diminish their force, and stops the soldiers breath, and
fills their eyes full of dust. In the battle betwixt Theodosius, and Maximus
the tyrant, nothing help the Histor. Ecclese ast. Theodoret.
side of Theodosius, more, then the wind that drove back the darts, arrows,
and stones of Maximus his soldiers. The Poeni auersiterga tantum afflante
vento, in occaecatum puluere a Vulturno vento hostem pugnabant. Liu. 22.
Roman soldiers in the battle at Cannae, having the wind against them, had
their eyes and throats filled with dust, which favored the Carthaginians
blowing upon their backs. The Sun with great heat frying the bodies of the
Gauls, made them Sol ingenti ardore torrebat minime patientia aestus corpora
Gallorum. Liu. 35.
very faint, fighting on a certain time with the Romans. Vespasians soldiers
having the Tacit. l. 19.
Moon on their back, when they fought in the night with Vitellius his army,
seemed greater then they were, and did see to strike more directly. The same
advantage had the Sicilians against ye Athenians, in that nights encounter,
wherein they ouerthrewe them near Syracusae.

The season of the year also, and the weather is to be considered, before we
range our army to fight. Northren people endure cold better then heat. And
therefore as they are to avoid fighting in the heat of the day, and summer
season, so they are to choose the cool morning or evening, and of the times of
the year the Spring, or dry Winter, which Southren people can not brook. The
Romans protracting time until the heat of the day, did then charge the Liu.
9.
Gauls, when with heat and thirst, they were of themselves ready to faint:
which occasioned unto them a great victory. In rainie weather shot cannot do
almost any service: that time therefore is fittest for armed men, targetters,
and such like, to charge them.

Finally, whatsoever makes for the encouragement of our soldiers, or
discouragement of the enemy, the same ought a wise General to devise, and
practice. The strength of the enemy is in words to be diminished, the goodness
of our cause, and strength of our army to be amplified. Whatsoever Fama bellum
conficit, and parua momenta in spem metumque impellunt animos. Liu. 27.
reports may hurt the enemy, or help us, are to be spread abroad. Reports
often times prevail as much as truth, and small matters make men in that case
both fear, and hope, as said Claudius Nero. The report of a succor coming
did daunt Tacit. 19.
Vitellius his army, and confirmed the enemy. Which also happened in a certain
encounter betwixt the Romans, and Samnites. Words also cast out in the time
of the battle, as that their General is slain, or that part of the army
flies, and such like, profit much. Therefore if at any time, here especially
the skill, and judgment of a Captain is to show it self in taking
advantages, avoiding disaduantages, preventing of mischiefs, laying ambushes
for the enemy, and using all manner of stratagems, and devises of war.

Now having spent thus much time in considerations, and preparatiues of a
battle, let us come to the ranging of our battles, and to the action it self,
in encountering, and vanquishing the enemy.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein is discoursed what array, and course is best in charging the enemy.
THe array of an army placed, and prepared to fight, is diverse, according to the
number and qualities both of the enemies, and our own forces; likewise
according to our strength in horsemen, or footmen, in shot or armed men; and
last of all, according to the difference of grounds, and places. To part a
small number into so many parts, as we do a full army, were rather to break
it, then orderly to part it; and a matter in show ridiculous. If the enemies
force be greater on the corners then in the midst, we must have consideration
of that in framing and ranging our army. Horsemen in rough ground, in woods,
straits, and hills are unprofitable. If the enemy be stronger then we in
horse, we are to change the place of our horsemen, and to auance our footmen.
Where the ways are strait, we cannot spread our army, as in open field. This
and other circumstances being referred to the judgment of the General; let us
now consider what array is best in open field, our army being full, and having
all the parts thereto required. This I have touched already where I showed
before how an army marching is suddenly to be drawn into order; by what rules
the same may be exactly performed, remains now to be declared.

The whole army considered without horsemen, or shot, consists of three
parts in the front: I call them the That word comes nearest to the sense,
though not to the proper signification of the word.
right corner, the middle battle, and the left corner: (the Romans called
them Dextrum cornu, mediam aciem, and sinistrum cornu) and of two or three
parts from front to the back. The first I call the front, the second the
supply: the third, if there be a third, the last hope. The Romans divided
their array, as it was considered in depth, or from front to back in hastatos,
principes, and triarios. The shot I would have placed both before, and on the
sides, and behind every of these parts divided into several troops, and
guided by several leaders. Without the shot, the horsemen would be placed on
the wings, unless some special cause move us to the contrary.

The three parts of the front may either stand joined together, or with some
distance separated: and either may they be framed, as one body with ranks
continued, or else every of these parts may consist of diverse battaillions or
squares of armed men; very commodious for the several use of them, and also
for the retrait of shot within the distances. The breadth and depth may be
greater, or lesser according to our number, and the ground where they stand. As
the front is divided: so likewise is the supply, and last hope in like sort.
The supply would be near so many, as the front. but it is sufficient, if the
last hope be half so many. The distances of the supply would be greater, then
of the battaillions in front, which charging the enemy, are to join close
together, and being wearied may retire within the distances of the supply.
which two parts joined together, do then make one front. if both be foiled,
then are they to be received within the distances of the last hope, which are
largest, and all the parts to unite their whole forces together. If any doubt
of the confusion that may arise in the retiring of the first and second battle
back to the third, then may the supply, and last hope be drawn up upon the
sides: which will work the very same effects.

In the midst of every battaillion or square, somewhat toward the first ranks,
would the ensigns be placed with their garders well armed, and furnished with
short weapons.

Every battaillion would have his several leader, which would be the first man
of the right hand in the first rank of the square. for that the inferior
leaders in a maine battle should stand out of rank, is contrary to practice
of wars. If in every battaillion there were some part targetters contrary to
the modern use, there might be good use made of them, when the armies come to
join, both against shot and pikes.

Ante signa modico interuallo velites eunt. Liu. 38.
Before the front of the battle are certain troops of shot to take their
standing, which may not only defend the head of our army: but also anoy
whosoever offers himself to the charge. If they be pressed with horsemen or
targetters, their retreit is within the distances of the battaillions, if the
ground afford them no other defense. From thence they are to be drawn
eftsoone again, and employed where their leaders shall perceive they may do
most service. A rank of mosquetiers under the first rank of pikes may do
good service, if they be drawn into the distances when the enemy comes to
the charge.

The horsemen, if they be not strong enough to encounter the enemies horse,
would be seconded with certain troops of shot and half pikes. but diligently
are they to take heed, that they go not directly before the front of their
own footmen, lest retiring thence, they fall upon their own pikes. The great
ordonance, if there be any hill in the place, either on the right hand or left
hand of the army, is there best placed, both for seeing of the enemy, and for
fear of disordering our men, either going to the charge, or retiring back. If
the ground be even, it is placed in the head of our army a little before our
troops of shot. which after the same is discharged, auance themselves, while
that is drawn within the distances either of the battaillions, or of the
midbattell and corners. For defense of the artillery there are good gardes to
be appointed, wheresoever it stands.

If this order cannot be observed: yet this rule is generally to be respected,
that every weapon, and soldier is there to be placed, where he may most anoy
the enemy, and best defend himself. The parts are so to be placed, that one
may succor another, and one retire to another. Horsemen may not come within
the ground of the footmen, nor shot within the ranks of pikes, but both either
on the sides, or behind the battaillions. He is most judicious, that can bring
most men to fight, and stop the way to the enemy, that he can not extend his
men to hurt him. There is no company to be sent forth to join with the enemy,
but with some to relieve them again, and again, and to receive them retiring,
and stop the enemies pursuit. Horsemen may not charge pikes, nor come in ground
where they cannot fetch their carriere. Other rules in their special places
shall be prescribed.

Shot in marching and standing observe order. The distances before I have
showed. In fighting they observe no order, but every man marking his enemy
right before him, and shooting at him takes his best advantage. yet if they
observe not a certain course where the shot are many, they soon fall in
disorder. Archers for that they shoot and fight standing in rank, observe
better array. their distance from shoulder to shoulder is one foot, from rank
to rank four foot. Some now a days do little esteem this weapon: yet if
our archers were armed with plated iackes as in time past, neither shot could
abide them in even ground, nor pikes without shot. Against horsemen, where
they may find defense of hedges, or ditches, or stakes, or rough ground they
do very good service.

Pikemen against a charge of horsemen ought to stand close with the blunt end
of the pike in the ground, the point bent upon the horse breast. Rank from
rank stands not more then three foot asunder, that many ends of pikes may
guard the first rank. That the pikes may be commodiously bent and crossed, the
first ranks are to bow their bodies. that they may the better break the
charge of the enemies horse: before them they are to have a rank of
mosquetiers, as has been said already.

Where the pikemen go to charge other pikes, between shoulder and shoulder,
there would be a foot distance; betwixt rank and rank so much, as charging
with the pikes above hand, and breaking the same they may use their swords,
and daggers, and either in striking auance forward their right legs, or else
receiving the enemies blows draw back the same. Six foot I think for that
purpose to be sufficient.

The halberdieres, bilmen, and targetters would have likewise betwixt shoulder
and shoulder one foot, betwixt rank and rank five foot. In pikes and short
weapons this is generally to be observed, that they stand as close together as
may be, so they may have room to manage themselves, and their weapons. the
less room may serve, considering that I would have all soldiers to strike
with the point of their weapon: and every man to succor his fellows before
him, and on the sides.

The horsemen go to the shocke with equal front so near as they can, and
run so close side by side as they may without hurt each to other. If horse be
distant from horse two foot, and rank from rank seven foot, when horsemen go
trotting to the charge, the proportion is good. The array of the Frenchmen that
charge with single ranks is of no strength: neither the orders of the Reiters
that go to the charge in a ring. for so soon as they are invested with
lances, they are broken. and therefore I think the former array better, as used
both by antiquity, and the Italian and English caualery, which gives ground at
this day to no other.

The ancient leaders of time past, which for their skill in arms are famous to
posterity, howsoever in some circumstances they departed from these rules; yet
never did they neglect the General reasons of them. neither ought they to be
neglected of any, as I will make manifest by particulars.

Scipio in the encounter betwixt him and Annibal in Afrike according to the
Roman guise divided his army from front to back into three parts placing
first those which they called hastatos, next principes, last triarios. All
these albeit at the first their arms were different, yet when the Roman
empire was come to the height, were armed much after one sort with plated
iackes, which they called Loricas, morions on their heads, a shield on their
left arm, a sword well poynted, and sharp by their side, and a iaueline which
they called pilum in their right hand which they threw at the enemy when they
joined battle, and then fought with their sword and target. Some had also
defenses for their thighs, and legs, and shoes plated in the soles, that
they might not be pierced with nails. The light armed by them called Velites
which stood not among the armed men had only a head piece and a target, and
sword, or else if they were slingers only a head piece, a sting, and a sword.
The Triarij that stood last were the oldest, and most tried, and best armed
soldiers, and next them Principes that stood before them, the hastati were
youngest and of least experience, first in place, but last in account. The front
where the hastati were placed, Scipio made not of Regiments joined together and
placed before the ensigns, but of companies of two hundred made into little
battaillions or squares distant one from another some space, that the Elephants
of the enemy received within these distances might not disorder the array. He
placed Laelius with the Italian horsemen without on the left corner, Masinissa
and the Numidian horsemen on the right corner. The distances between the
battaillions, he filled with the first troops of the light armed which were
arches and slingers, commanding them, when the Elephants came forward on them,
either to retire behind the first battaillions, or standing fast to the sides
of them, to give the Elephants way, and to throw their iauelins at them as they
passed. Liuyes words I have set down for the satisfaction of those that
understand the tongue: which course I have also in other examples out of him,
and other authors observed. If my translation answer not word for word, yet
does it answer the Roman use of war. The words I could not translate
precisely, if I meant that any should understand me. the terms of war then,
and now being so different.

Liu. 30.
Instruit deinde primos hastatos, post cos principes, triarijs postremam aciem
clausit. Non confertas autem cohortes ante sua quamque signa instruebat, sed
manipulos aliquantum inter se distantes, vt esset spatium, quo Elephanti
hostium accepti nihil ordines turbarent: Laelium cum equitatu Italico ab
sinistro cornu, Masinissam, Numidasque ab dextro opposuit. Vias patentes inter
manipulos antesignanorum velitibus compleuit, dato praecepto vt ad impetum
Elephantorum, aut post rectos refugerent ordines, aut in dextram laeuamque
discursu applicantes se antesignanis, viam qua irruerent in ancipitia tela
belluis darent.

Annibal placed first his Elephants: then the Ligurians, and Gauls hired to
aid the Carthaginians. Among their troops and before them he placed slingers,
and archers which were Mores, and of the Islands of Maiorca, and Minorca. In the
second battle he set the Carthaginians, and Africans, and Macedonian Regiment
joined in one array. and after them a little way distant, he placed his last
hope, or third battle consisting of Italians. The Carthaginian horsemen were
placed on the right wing, the Numidians on the left. His error (if any error
may be thought to have been in such an expert Captain, and not rather in the
execution of his directions) was this, that not making any distances in his
second battle, for the first to retrayte into, the first battle being
repulsed was for the most part slain, and returning back upon the
Carthaginians standing in the second battle, had almost disordered them.
Percase he thought that seeing no place of retraite, they would have fought
more desperately. But what can wearied, and hurt men do? or who can animate men
altogether discouraged? Scipio contrariwise drawing back the hurt, and wearied
men of his first battaillions, auanced the second battle where those stood
which the Romans called Principes on the one hand, and the third battle,
which they termed Triarios on the other hand, and so jointly charging the
enemy on front with his footmen, and on the back with his horsemen, he
foiled Annibal and his army, which before that had always been victorious.

Liui. 30.
Annibal primum Elephantos instruxit: deinde auxilia Ligurum, Gallorumque,
Balearibus, Maurisque adiunctis: in 2 acie Carthaginenses, Afrosque, and
Macedonum legionem: modico interuallo relecto subsidiariam aciem Italicorum
militum instruxit: equitatum circumdedit cornibus, dextrum Carthaginenses,
sinistrum Numidae tenuerunt.

At Trebia Annibal brought into the field first his archery, and slingers of
the Islands of Maiorca, and Minorca, about 8000. men: then his armed men: ten
thousand horsemen he disposed by the right, and left corners of the first
battle, and without them his Elephants divided equally into two parts. When
the Roman legions urged the light armed, he drew them back lightly into the
spaces, betwixt the midbattell, and the right and left corner. Afterward,
having foiled and put to flight the Roman horsemen, the archers and slingers
came forward, and charged the Romans upon the flanks of the armed men.

Liui. 21.
Annibal Baleares leuem armaturam, 8 ferme millia hominum erant, locat ante
signa, deinde grauiorem armis peditem: in cornibus circumfundit december millia
equitum: ab cornibus in vtramque partem diuisos Elephantos statuit: Balearibus
cum maiore robore resisterent legiones, diductae propere in cornua leaves
armaturae sunt: Baleares pulso equite iaculabantur in latera.

The army of the Romans and Carthaginians at the famous encounter of Cannae by
Liuie is thus described. On the right corner stood the Roman horsemen, and
within them footmen: the horsemen of their associats were ranged on the left
corner, and within them footmen: in the midst were placed the Roman legio^s
divided after their usual manner into three parts: hard before them and joining
with them were archers and slingers placed, and before them other archers, and
slingers and other light armed soldiers, of which consisted the first range of
the battle. Annibal set his slingers, archers, and light armed foremost on the
front of the battle, the Spanish, and French horse he placed on the left wing
against the Roman horsemen, the Numidian horsemen on the right. The midbattel
he strengthened with footmen, placing the Africans equally divided in the
right, and left corner, the Gauls and Spaniards with their array in form of a
wedge auanced somewhat forward being in the midst. The charge was begun by
the archery and light armed, afterward did the left wing of the Gauls and
Spanish horsemen meet with the right wing of the Romans: then followed the
encountre of the armed men.

Liui. 22.
In dextro cornu Romanos equites locauit, deinde pedites: laeuum cornu extremi
equites sociorum, intra pedites; ad medium iuncti legionibus Romany tenuerunt
iaculatores. Ex caeteris leuium armorum auxilijs prima acies facta. Annibal
Balearibus aliaque leui armatura praemissa, Gallos, Hispanosque equites laeua
in cornu aduersus Romanum equitatum, dextrum cornu Numidis equitibus datum
media acie peditibus firmata, ita vt Afrorum, vtraque cornua essent,
interponerentur his cuneo aliquantum prominente medij Galli, atque Hispani.
Pugna leuibus primum armis commissa: deinde equitum Gallorum, Hispanorumque
laeuum cornu cum dextro Romano concurrit, deinde peditum coorta pugna.

Scipio fighting against Asdrubal in Spain, did thus dispose his army: he
strengthened both the corners of his battle (divided from front to back after
the usual manner) with Roman soldiers, his associats he bestowed in the midst,
his horsemen and light armed he sent out against the corpse de guard of the
Carthaginians placed in the gates of their camp, and in convenient places
near. When the Carthaginians came forth against them, he received his
horsemen and light armed within his battaillions, and dividing them into two
parts, placed them behind the corners of the battle. Perceiving where the
enemy was weakest, he there began the charge, with that part of his army
that was strongest. The first battle of the enemies being discomfited, he
charge the midbattell with his Regiments of Romans on the sides, with his
associats that were Spaniards in front, and on the backs with his horsemen, and
so put the same to flight.

Scipio cornua firmat Liu. 28.
Romano milite, socijs in mediam aciem acceptis: equites and leuem armaturam in
stationes Punicas immisit: egredientibus Poenis equitatum, and leuem armaturam
in medium acceptam, diuisamque in parts duas in subsidijs post cornua locat.
Cum cornibus vbi firma eius erat acies, Poenorum infirma pugnam incipit, ea
acie fugata mediam Poenorum aciem ipse a latere, equites a tergo, Hispani a
front adorti fuderunt.

Scipioes father encountering the same man, their armies were then thus ordered:
the front of the Roman army stood upon three parts: the footmen after the
manner of the Romans, were part before the ensigns and part behind: the
horsemen stood beyond both the corners of the Auantgard or first battle:
Asdrubal placed the Spaniards in the midst, in the right corner he ordered the
Carthaginians, the Africans and other mercenary soldiers in the left, his
Numidian horsemen he placed fast by the Carthaginians on that wing where they
stood, the rest of his horsemen in the other corner.

Triplex stetit Liu. 23.
Romana acies, peditum pars ante signa locata, pars post signa accepta, equites
cornua cinxere. Asdrubal mediam aciem Hispanis firmat, in cornibus dextro
Poenos locat, laeuo Afros mercenariorumque auxilia: equitum Numidas Poenorum
peditibus, caeteros Afros pro cornibus opponit.

Scipio, he that subdued Annibal encountering with Syphax, used the usual array
of the Romans making his army triple in breadth, and in length; the Italian
horsemen he placed by the right corner of the first squadrons, the Numidians
led by Masinissa by the left. Syphax and Asdrubal opposed the Numidian or
Barbary horse against the Italian horse, the Carthaginians against Masinissa.
The Celtiberian footmen they placed in the midst opposite against the
squadrons of the Roman Regiments.

Liu. 30.
Romanus have atorum prima signa, post principes, in subsidijs triarios
constituit. Equitatum. Italicum ab dextro cornu, ab laeuo Numidas,
Masinissamque opposuit. Syphax Asdrubalque Numidis, aduersus Italicum
equitatum, Carthaginensibus contra Masinissam locatis, Celtiberos in mediam
aciem in aduersa signa legionum accepere.

In a certain encounter in Spain the Liu. 29.
Romans perceiving that the enemy had left spaces between the midbattel, and
those squadrons that made the corners, purposing to send out his horsemen by
those spaces, preventing him, filled those spaces first with their horsemen,
which both made the enemies horse unserviceable, and help to disorder his
footmen. Their other array was ordinary, save that the horsemen made not the
outmost wings, but the footmen: as appears by these words of Liuy following.

Cornua, dextrum Ilergetes, laeuum alij Hispani, mediam aciem Ausetani tenuere.
Inter cornua, and mediam aciem interualla patentia fecerunt satis lata, qua
equitatum vbi tempus esset, emitterent. Romani cum inter cornua loca etiam
patentia fecissent, hoc vicerunt, quod primi equites inter interualla miserint,
quod hostium equites inutiles fecit, and turbauit hostium pedites.

Yet was not the array of the Romans always the same, as appears by that
encounter which ye Roman Proconsul and Praetor had with Mago in Liguria. The
Pretors legions made the front of the army and first squadrons, the Proconsul
placed his legions behind for supply. The twelfth legion being almost cut all
in pieces, the thirteenth was auanced forward to relieve it. Mago against this
legion opposed fresh men, reserved behind for supply: the Elephants coming
overthwart, the first ranks of the eleventh legion being drawn forth, fought
with them with their iauelins.

Liu. 30.
Praetoris legiones in prima acie fuerunt: procos. suas in subsidij tenuit.
Duodecima legione magna ex part caesa, decimatertia legio in primam aciem
inducta, Mago ex subsidijs Gallos integros legioni opposuit. hastati legionis
vndecimae pila in Elephantos conijciunt.

Furius fighting with the Gauls in Liguria, placed his army in this sort. The
soldiers of his associats, he divided into Wings were so called, for that they
were placed on the sides of the battle, yet were they not so always.
wings, and of them made the front of the battle. Two regiments he placed
behind for a supply. When the right wing was almost oppressed, bringing up the
two regiments on either side of it, he guarded the same, and with his horsemen
he charged the enemy upon the side of his battle.

Liu. 31.
In alas Furius diuidens socialem exercitum eum in prima acie locauit, in
subsidijs duas legiones, oppressae dextrae postea alae duas illas legiones
circumduxit, equites in latus hostium emisit.

When afterward the Roman Empire was enlarged, and that the Romans began to
have diverse nations in their armies, although the general order was still
observed, yet there happened in their armies by reason of this mixture more
variety. In the battle betwixt L. Scipio, and Antiochus in Asia, there were
two legions of Romans, two other of Latins their associats. The Romans were
ordered in the midst, the Latins in the corners of the battle. Those parts
of the legions which they called hastatos, Principes, and Triarios, made the
front, the supply, and last hope. On the right side of this army, the Consul
ranged in squadrons 3000 footmen of other nations, that came to the aid of
the Romans, and without them somewhat less then 3000 horsemen. Upon the left
side which was guarded with a river running along, he placed only four troops
of horsemen. Two thousand Macedonians and Thracians were left behind in the
camp to guard the baggage. Antiochus his army stood in this order: first,
16000 of the kings ordinary soldiers, called They were armed men, so called
of their array, which was a squadron containing sometime 8000, sometime more,
sometime less.
Phalangitae, divided into x squadrons, took their place: between every
squadron two Elephants were placed. From the front backward, the battle
contained 32 ranks of armed men. By the right side of these were placed first
1500 Gallograecians: next to them 3000 men completely armed, they call them
(...): thirdly, a wing of a thousand horsemen, and certain Elephants behind
to second them. In the fourth place, the kings Guard, and by the same 1200
archers on horseback Dahians: And fifthly, 3000 light armed men: in the
uttermost corner were 4000 slingers, and archers placed. By the left side of
the kings ordinary soldiers, were likewise 1500 Gallograecian footmen
ranged, and 2000 Cappadocians, having like arms, and beyond them 2700 others,
all sent in aid of the king. After them 3000 horsemen all armed, and one
thousand other horsemen were ranged. Before these horsemen were placed charets
with hooks, and Arabians upon Camels. And lastly, like number of horsemen,
targetters, archers, and Elephants, as was on the right corner.

Liu. 37.
Romanorum duae legiones, duae socium and Latini nominis erant. Romani mediam
aciem, cornua Latini tenuere. hastatorum prima signa, deinde Principum erant,
triarij postremos claudebant. extra hanc iustam aciem a part dextra
auxiliarium tria millia peditum Consul instruxit. vlira eos equitum minus 3000
opposuit: a laeua qua flumen claudebat, quatuor tantum turmae oppositae: 2000
Macedonum and Thracum praesidio castris relinquebantur. regia acies erat primo
16000 phalangitae in parts december diuisa, inter singulas parts bini erant
elephanti, a front introrsus in 32 ordines armatorum acies patebat. ad latus
dextrum phalangitarum 1500 pedites Gallograecos posuit, his 3000 peditum
loricatorum (cataphractos appelant) adiunxit: addita his ala mill equitu^:
continens his grex elephantorum positus est in subsidijs. ab eadem part paulum
producto cornu regia cohors erat: Dahae deinde equites sagittarij 1200: tum
leuis armatura 3000: extremum cornu claudebant 4000 funditores, and sagittarij.
ab laeuo cornu phalangitis adiuncti erant Gallograeci pedites 1500, and
similiter his armati 2000 Cappadocum, inde auxiliares 2700, and 3000
cataphractorum equitum, and mill alij equites: ante hunc equitatum falcatae
quadrigae, and cameli quibus Arabes insidebant sagittarij. inde alia multitudo
par ei quae in dextro cornu erat equites, cetrati, sagittarij, elephanti.

Cerealis in his araie did somewhat digress from the ancient orders of the
Romans. The squadrons which were sent from the associates in his aid, were
placed in front, and by them on each side his horsemen: in the second battle
he placed the legions: and last of all kept by himself certain choice men to
supply where sudden need required.

Tacit. 21.
Cerealis equite and auxiliarijs cohortibus frontem explet: in secunda acie
legiones locatae, dux sibi delectos retinuerat ad improuisa.

The army of Caesar ranged ready to fight with Afranius, was divided into
three battaillions. The first consisted of 4 squadrons of the 5 legion, which
was seconded by the other squadrons of the same legion, the three squadrons
remaining were placed for the last hope in the third battaillion. Other legions
were ranged in like sort. The archers and slingers were placed before the front
in the midst, the horsemen were placed in wings on the sides.

Caes. bell. Ciu. 1
Caesaris acies triplex, primo 4 cohortes ex 5 legione, has subsidiariae
ternae, and rursus aliae totidem, suae cuiusque legionis sequebantur.
sagittarij and funditores media continebantur acie, equitatus latera cingebat.

I may not forget the order of Caesar, and Pompeies armies in that famous
encounter in the Pharsalian fields. In the left corner of Pompeies army were
two legions placed: Scipio had the midst with his regiments that he brought
out of Syria: the regiment of Cilicia and squadrons made of the relics of
Afranius his army in Spain, were ranged together in the right corner:
certain other squadrons he placed in the distances betwixt the corners and
midbattell. All his horsemen, archers, and slingers he placed side by the left
corner of his army. Seven When the legion contained 6000 foot, every
company consisted ordinarily of 600, but seldom were they complete*
companies he left to guard his camp. Caesar ordered his army in three
battles, and according to the custom of the Romans; strengthened every
battle with three supplies (the front accounted for one which is not properly
a supply, but the front or first araie.) He made a fourth battle of Iustie
young men well armed and furnished with half pikes against Pompeies horsemen.
Finally, two companies he left behind for guard of the camp.

Caes. de bell. Ciu. 3.
Erant in sinistro cornu (Pompeij) legiones duae, mediam aciem Scipio tenebat
cum legionibus Syriacis, Ciliciensis legio and cohortes Afranianae in dextro
cornu erant. reliquas cohortes inter aciem mediam, and cornua interiecerat:
cunctum equitatum, sagittarios, and funditores in sinistro cornu obiecerat, 7
cohortes castris praesidio reliquit. Caesar triplicem aciem instruit, and
tribus promore Romano firmatam subsidijs: quartam aciem instituit contra
equites Pompeij: duas cohortes castris praesidio reliquit.

Neither is the victory of Caesar against Scipio in Afrike, less famous, or
the araie of their armies less remarkable. Scipio in the front of his army,
placed his legions, the Numidians he ranged behind them for supplies. On the
right and left corner in equal distances be ordered his elephants, after which
he marrialled the light armed, and aid sent him out of Numidia: all his
horsemen he placed on the right corner of the battle, and beside them an
infinite number of soldiers light armed (as archers, slingers, targetters
without corslets) all this in the space of a mile: the left side of his army
was close joined to the town of Vzita. Caesar in the left side of his army,
set the 9 and 7 regiment: the 30, 29, 13, 14, 28, and 26. in the midbattell:
certain companies of those legions together with certain regiments of young
soldiers in the right corner: certain other regiments newly levied, he placed
in squadrons behind for a supply. The last hope or third supply or battle,
he translated into the left corner of his battle, where also he placed his
horsemen, and the fifth legion which seconded his horsemen. His light armed
disposed in squadrons, he ranged among the troops of his horsemen.

Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Scipio collocabat in front legiones. Numidas in subsidiaria acie, elephantos
dextro, sinistroque cornu aequalibus interuallis: post illos armaturas leaves,
and Numidas auxiliares substituerat, equitatu^ vniuersum in dextro cornu
disposuit, and iuxta leuis armaturae infinitam multitudinem mill passuum
spatio, sinistrum cornu oppido Vzita claudebatur. Caesar habuit legionem 9 and
7 in sinistro cornu, tricesimam, vicesimam nonam, decimam tertiam, 14, 28, 26,
in media acie, aliquot cohortes earum legionum, and vna tyronum legiones in
dextro cornu, tyronum legiones in subsidijs, tertiam aciem in sinistrum suum
cornu transtulit, ibi equitatum collocauer at, and quintam legionem quae
equitatui subsidio esset, leuem armaturam inter equites interposuit.

And thus enough of the Romans and perchance (as some will say) too much,
seeing the orders of wars are now so diverse (as they think) from antiquity.
But these men must consider, that the reasons remain always the same, and
that the use of horsemen, and footmen is now the same that was in times past,
and that our shot answer to their light armed, and that always one part is to
succor another, and that the army must take heed, that it be not compassed
round. The Greeks, yea and barbarous nations moved with the same reasons have
in effect kept the same array. When Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
Clearchus was to fight with Artaxerxes, he placed his own soldiers in the
right corner, and those of Meno in the left, the rest were ranged in the midst.
Without the corners stood the light armed, and then the horsemen equally
divided utmost.

In the encounter of the Greeks Arrian. exped. Alex. lib. 3.
and Persians at Arbela, Darius on the wings placed his horsemen of diverse
nations, and some pretty distance before them his charets with hooks: within
them his archers and light armed: and in the midst the Greeks and Persians,
which were the strength of the army. The same array did Alexander also observe
in the front of his army: but fearing least he should be compassed about by
Darius his horsemen, he also provided another battaillion, which if need be
might make head that way also. I need not bring many examples, seeing in all
these matters there is one general course. Let us therefore now compare the
arayes of late time, and you shall then perceive, that either they are like to
former proceedings in former time, or else far worse.

The Frois^art.
black Prince in the fight with Henry the usurper of Castil, divided his army
into three parts, himself led the battle, the duke of Lancaster the
Vantgarde, and the king of Maiorca the rest, the horsemen were sorted on the
sides: the same array was observed by the enemy.

When the duke of Burgundy was to fight with Lewis the 11, at Montlehery, he
placed his archers first: but because his caualery was not placed on the sides,
but behind: the same, going to the charge, ouerranne his own men, and killed
diverse of them, and few or none of the enemies. In which disorder if Lewis had
charged him, he could not have failed of the victory.

The Prince of Conde Anno 1567 remaining at S. Denis, and understanding the
Kings determination to drive him thence: resolved in the fields between Paris
and S. Denis to receive the charge in this order: he divided his horsemen into
three parts, and did second every part with shot: with the rest of the shot
Ienlis began the charge. Footmen armed which are the strength of the army he
had none. The parts were so far sundred, that one part could not succor
another. So that if the armed men of the adverse party had come on: both the
horsemen, and footmen of the Prince had been driven to a poor retraite. The
Constable having 16000 footmen, brought few or none to the encountre. Of this
number 6000 Suitzers were there planted in the field, like so many stakes,
without giving any one blow that day.

At Moncontour the Admiral placed first his They are the most part Pistoleers
on horseback.
Reyters, and side by them certain lances: both these he fensed on the sides
with shot: behind these he placed a squadron of Lansquenets flanked likewise
with shot, and seconded with some few horsemen, all which made the Auantgard.
The battle consisted of shot which was likewise flanked, and seconded with
shot. In the head both of the battle, and Auantgard were certain shot placed,
as enfans perdus (we call them the forlorn hope) in which array there was
neither order, beauty, nor strength. There wanted armed men in the battle.
Horsemen could not, being so placed come to the charge, but they should run
over their own men. In some they were so placed, that not the hundred person
could come to fight. But percase the Admiral either could not do as he
would, or else carried away with the error of the French, that put all in
shot, had more of that weapon, then could do service.

The enemies Auantgard at the same time stood upon 4000 Suitzers, flanked with
certain Regiments of shot: before the Suitzers were 8 field pieces placed,
and before the pieces the forlorn hope: beyond the shot were ranged certain
lances. The battle being drawn up, and ranged in equal front with the
Auantgard, in fashion differed little, or nothing from the same. Much like
course, sure no better has been used in all the battles that have been fought
since the invention of artillery. So that we see how all wise captains, do go
about in their arayes to resemble the proceeding of ancient time, but there is
not now the like union of the parts, nor the like strength of the whole body,
nor that orderly proceeding, that every weapon may do his office, nor that
proportion of the front, nor order of supplies, that were among ancient
warriers. And by reason of uniformity in proceeding now wanting, hard it is to
set men in order: hard to bring many to fight, and hardest of all to restore an
array once broken. this is the cause of the weakness of the armies of ourtime:
in disorder no army can fight, nor resist.

Wherefore of two things in this point considerable, let us doubt neither. If
the enemy be in disorder, neither let us doubt to charge him; nor if our army
be in order, let us fear to sustain his charge. Auxilia Iubae impedita ac
perturbata, quod nullo ordine essent, and sine timore iter fecerant, in fugam
se conjiciu^t. Caes. bell. Ciu. 2.
Iubaes men being without order, were no sooner charged, but they fled. Cato in
his expedition into Dum Hispani trepidant acie instruenda: Cos. iam paratis,
ordinatisque omnibus incompositos aggreditur. Liu. 34.
Spain taking the enemy at like advantage, and charging him as he ran up and
down to set his forces in array, did easily drive him out of the field. If the
Liu. 22.
Romans as they passed the river before the battle of Trebia, had not been
charged by Annibal, they could not so easily have received so great an
overthrow. Annibal himself albeit a most expert leader, and of an army most
expert in war, yet received loss being charged by Marcellus, in that instant
when he drew his men out of the camp, to set them in order. and if by long
practice his men could not have taken their standings themselves, they had that
day quite been overthrown by their Toto passim campo pecorum modo incompositos
se fuderunt. Liu. 27.
disorder. The like had also happened unto Caesar's army charged by the Caes.
bell. Gal. 2.
Neruians, when it was dispersed, and disordered about the fortification of the
camp, but that the skill of the soldiers, that could every man fall in array
of himself, remedied the disorder. The Germans a long time using to charge
their enemies with more Dirigu^tur acies pari vtrinque; spe, nec vt olim apud
Germanos vagis incursibus, aut disiectas per cateruas, quippe longa aduersus
nos militia insueuerant signa sequi, subsidijs firmari, dicta imperatorum
accipeic. Tacit. annal. 2.
violence then order, and assailing them by squadrons severally, rather then
with an ordered army; were overthrown by the Romans often times: but when by
long use they had learned the Roman array, and observed it, they prevailed
against them. Those that come rather furiously then orderly to the charge, as
did the French at Cressy, and Poitiers, and both French and Spaniards at
Aliubarota in the confines of Portogall, where our ancesters of the English
nation obtained great victories, are easily overthrown. Sustain the first
brunt, and presently they are cooled.

Those therefore that go to charge the enemy, let them observe this What is to
be especially considered and performed before our army begin the charge.
course: first let them set their men in order, that every man may know his
place: secondly, let them give certain direction, that every commander may
know both what to do, and in case he cannot perform so much, where to retire.
Annibal not thinking of this, when he fought with Scipio in Afrike, occasionned
his own overthrow. for when his first battle being wearied, would have
retired to the succor, there was no place left to retrait into: so that the
same not being received into the second battle, began to fight with their own
fellows, and what by the enemy and by friends was most part slain. The French
horse at the battle of Poitiers, not knowing where to retire, fell among their
footmen, and help to set them in disorder.

Thirdly in giving directions, let the General take heed, that he employ all
sorts of weapons, where they may do most service (this I mean particularly to
declare in the chapter following.) if he send horse against pikes standing
fast, or against shot being fenced with a trench; he ruinateth his horse. if he
send shot against horse in open field, or pikes against shot, he uses the
matter with no judgment.

Fourthly, let him never order either his whole army, or part of it without
supply. Many casualties may at the first discourage our men; which being
opportunely succored, may take courage again, and begin a fresh charge upon
the enemy. Ex secunda acie subsidiarijs cohortibus in pugnam inductis suos
accendit, hoste^ fudit. Liu. 34.
Cato in his wars against the Spaniards, relieuing his wearied men with a few
fresh companies encouraged them, and overthrew the enemies. When Caesar's men
began to give ground in their battle against the Germans, Crassus tertiam
aciem laborantibus nostris subsidio misit, ita praelium restitutum est, atque
omnes hosts terga verterunt. Caes. bell. Gal. 1.
Crassus by supplying them with a fresh company, not only restored the
battle, but made all the enemies to run. Where all the force of the army is
employed at the first brunt, and no order is taken for supplies, as in a
certain battle betwixt the Romans and Volscians: the success Primo praelio
non subsidijs firmata acie etc. concursum est. ideo Romani a Volscis premuntur.
Liu. 2.
seldom is good. Among other matters objected against Fuluius accused as
principal causer of the overthrow of the Roman army by Annibal at Herdonea;
this was chief, that he did not well order his army, nor strengthen the same
with supplies, nor succors.

Fifthly, look with what part of the army himself is strongest, let him there
begin to charge the enemy, where either by good intelligence, or view of the
array, or disadvantage of the ground, or quality of the weapons, he shall
perceive that the enemy is weakest. Caesar in the Caesar a dextro cornu, quod
eam partem minime firmam hostium esse animaduerterat, praelium commisit. Caes.
bell. gal. 1.
encounter he had with the Germans, began to charge them with that part of
his army, that was ordered in the right corner, for that he saw, that the
enemies were there weakest. The same as Liuy testifies, was observed in a
certain battle, which the Romans had with the Carthaginians in Spain. He is
not wise, that when he may charge the enemy on the side, will go directly to
the front, where his greatest force consists.

Sixthly, after that he has set his men in order, let him not stand long in
arms, before he goes to the charge, if he mean at all to fight. By long
standing, the soldiers wax weary, faint, hungry, and a great part of their
courage is thereby abated. Liu. 27.
Asdrubal could not have done his men greater wrong, then to make them stand
so long in arms before the battle begun at Metaurus. Thereof proceeded
their faintness, and contrariwise the courage, and strenth of the Romans: for
those being faint, these came fresh to the battle. Liu. 22.
Annibal at the battle of Trebia would not bring forth his men to fight,
before he perceived the Romans to be hungry, and almost tired with long
standing. Which increased his own force, and abated much of the courage, and
force of the enemy.

Further, by no means let him suffer the enemy to prevent him in giving the
first charge. As in the beginning of wars, so in the Verti in co res
videbatur vtri prius arma inferrent. Liu. 2.
beginning of the battle there is great advantage. And as Pinarius said to
his men lying in garrison in Aenna a City of Qui prior strinxerit ferrum, cius
victoria erit. Liu. 24.
Sicile, so it falls out very often, that he that draws the sword
soonest, first obteineth the victory. They that first begin, seem to have
greater courage then those that stand still, as it were to ward their blows.
There is many advantages in beginning the battle. They may more easily take
the advantage of the wind, and Sun, of the ground, and of the sort of
weapons wherewith they fight, then those that stand still, which are forced to
turn, which way soever the enemy comes. They may there begin where the
enemy is weakest, and themselves strongest, and therefore the use of the
Romans was first to begin the charge, as appears both in the wars of
Scipio in Spain, and Caesar in France. A certain Lez consederez remanquet,
qu'en touts lez combus passez, ils ont mieulx fait chargeans lez premiers, que
quand ils, en^ attendu la desmarcke catholic. Hist, de troubl, de Fr.
Frenchman, albeit he understood not the reason, yet by observation understood
this point. For says he, in the wars of France, it has been noted, that
the Protestants did always prevail more charging the enemies first, then
attending the enemies demarche and charge. It appears both in the braule at
Moncontour, anno 1569. and diverse other skirmishes which they call battles.
Those that charge first, take the advantage of any disorder committed by the
enemy, which others let slip.

Whatsoever can be devised to encourage our own soldiers, or to discourage
the enemy, as at all times: so especially in the hazard of battle, is to be
practiced by cries, reports, shows, words spoken in the hearing of the
enemy, and whatsoever else can be imagined. If there lie any wood, or hollow
ground near the enemy, the same is to be seized, that in the heat of the
fight our men suddenly arising thence, may more amaze, and hurt the enemy. But
of this point we shall have better occasion to speak at large in the treatise
of stratagemes, and ambushes.

Least by flying of some cowardly companions, the rest might be discouraged,
order is to be taken, that whosoever in the fight begins to turn his back,
be presently slain. The Cohorti suae dictator dat signum, vt quem suorum
fugientem viderint, pro host habeant. Liu. 2.
Roman General by this strict commandment and execution, appointing
certain troops to execute it, made his army stand resolutely. Of Attilius it
is reported, that when his army began to give ground by Liu. 10.
killing the first with his own hands, he made the rest to make head against
the enemy: which Annibal likewise practiced in his battle with Scipio in
Afrike, albeit he had not like success. This is the case, wherein Clearchus
the Lacedemonian Plutarch.
said, that soldiers ought more to fear their own General, then the enemy.

Finally, when by his good direction, and the valiantness of his soldiers,
the General shall perceive the enemy to begin to shrink, and give ground,
then must he be most careful first, that he give him no time to recover
himself, or to supply that which is broken: secondly, that he keep his
souldirs from spoil, until such time as he has assured himself of the
victory. When the enemy begins to shrink, and to be dismaide, any little
force more makes him to run: in a small time he recouereth himself again.
Therefore Orant vt perculsos inuadant, nec restitui aciem sinant. Liu. 29.
then is he to be urged with the rest of our strength that remains entire,
and not to be suffered to escape. Scipio in the battle with Asdrubal in
Spain, when the Liu. 28.
Carthaginians disliking the party would have retired wholly together, did so
press them on all sides, that before they could recover any place of safety,
they were forced to change their pace, and every man to fly for his life.

In the Caes. de bell. ciu. 3.
battle betwixt Caesar and Pompey, when Pompeyes horsemen were driven out of
the field, by those half pikes that he had ordained for succor of his own
horse, with the same men he cut in pieces Pompeyes archers, and light armed
men. That done, with the same troops he charged Pompeies battle, that yet
stood firm, upon the back. And after he had driven the enemy out of the
field, yet rested he not, until such time as he had taken his camp, and
dispersed the relics of his army. Yet may some say, it is not good to press
the enemy too far, and that a bridge of gold is to be made to those that
fly away. Gaston de fois was overthrown and slain pursuing the Spaniards,
that retired after the battle of Rauenna. And diverse others driving the enemy
to despair, that otherwise would have fled, have hurt themselves. But this
is to be understood of an enemy that would so fly, as he would also yield
the victory and contend no more, in which case Themistocles persuaded the
Greeks that meant to dissolve Xerxes his bridge, to suffer the same to
continue, that thereby he might run away. Others that mean to fight again,
are to be pursued diligently with all our forces. Gaston de fois had not been
slain, but that he was badly followed, and too far auaunced. Neither could
the Spaniards have escaped, if they had been charged with shot, or taken at
advantage, and kept from victuals. The Romans had so certain an order in this
point, that they doubt not to accuse their Ex subsidiis quod tardius
successissent, and signum equitibus tardius datum, Cos. accusatus. Liu 35.
General of treachery, for that when the enemy staggered, he gave not the
word to the horsemen to charge, nor advanced his footmen in time to supply
those yt were weary. Victor equestri praelio rex paruo momento si adiuuisset,
debellare potuit. Liu. 42.
Perseus, for that having foiled the Romans with his horse, and having the
victory in his hand, he did not pursue the rest of their troops, and break
them, but suffered them to pass a River quietly; is condemned for a man of no
judgment in wars.

The same error was committed by the Carthaginians in Spain, who having slain
the two Scipioes and foiled their army gave them selves to rest, while the
Romans gathering head again, were able afterward to match them, and foil
them. Those that cannot thrust the enemy down that is already falling, will
be less able to do it, when he stands upright. And therefore let wise
captains pursue their enemy to the utmost, and not suffer him when he once
begins to look back, to turn head again, and take breath. And in any
case let him take heed, that his soldiers run not to spoil, before the
victory be assured, and the enemy wholly vanquished.

Turbasset vtique nouissimum agmen. Liu. 22.
Annibal pursuing the Romans after his victory at Trebia, had sure overtaken
them, and disordered their rierward, had not the Numidian horsemen turned aside
to spoil the camp of the Romans. And in the time of the Emperors of Rome,
the Germans had given the Obstitit vincentibus prauum inter ipsos certamen,
host omisso spolia consectandi. Tacit. 20.
Romans a mighty overthrow, if leaving them, they had not contended among
themselves who should first go to spoil. But how so ever it was in ancient
time, the disorder of soldiers in this point is such, that with no laws, nor
penalties they can be kept from following the spoil, which oftentimes
makes them a spoil to their enemies.

The French at Guingast had put the Dutch to flight, and were almost in
possession of the victory: but while they ran after the spoil, the enemy
rallied himself, and charging them afresh, did extorce the victory out of
their hands, and put them to flight. At Guicciar. li. 2.
Taro the Italians had foiled the French, returning out of the kingdom of
Naples, but that in the beginning of the victory they fell to spoil the
baggage, which was the cause of their own spoil and ruin. The same was the
cause of the escape of the Guicciar. lib. 8.
French, and loss of the Venetians at Treui. Gaston de fois at the taking of
Brescia made proclamation, that upon pain of death, no man should fall to
spoil before license given: yet could he not keep his soldiers fingers in
temper. The more dangerous effects do ensue of this disorder, the greater
care ought the General to have, to prevent it.

CHAP. XII. Part. 2. Wherein the use of horsemen, pikes, halberdes, and other
such weapons, also of targets, small shot, archers, and great ordonance is
declared.
THat which before I promised concerning the use of horsemen, and diverse
weapons, that is now to be performed. A matter of great importance, and
advantage, if it be well considered: and therefore not to be omitted. You that
know the train of arms, yield here the testimony of your experience to
this discourse, and if you hear any cavil against it, yet let not such as
never marched further, then out of the kitchen, or from the dresser into the
hall, or parlour, censure that which they understand not.

Horsemen among the Romans were al of one sort: barded horses with men all
armed mounted on them they used not. If they used any archers on horseback,
they were beholding to other nations for them. Now use of late times has
brought in diverse sorts of them, which according to their arms and furniture
have diverse names. Some horse are barded, others without bardes. The Frenchmen
of arms in time past used barded horses for fear of our arrows. Now since
archerie is not so much reckoned of, and bardes are but a weak defense against
shot, lanciers leaving their bardes, are armed much like to the Albanian
stradiots. Upon the borders betwixt us, and the Scots, horsemen have staves for
ye purpose, and for their arms iackes of male. The Dutch Reitres although well
armed for the most part, yet seldom use lances, or staves, or other weapon,
then pistoles, and mazes at their saddle bow. Beside these, there is an other
sort of horsemen lately come in use. We call them carbines, pedrinals, or
argoletiers, which use firelocke pieces on horseback, and are commonly armed
to the proof of their piece.

Horsemen in wars are most necessary in diverse respects. With them we range
and spoil the enemies country: with them we fetch in victuals for our selves:
with them we discover ye enemies proceedings: with them we bridle his courses,
and stop his forragers: with them we both help to foil him in open field,
and pursue him flying from us. Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Caesar by the enemies horse always coasting him, and ready to charge his
forragers, was driven to great extremity for want of victuals. In Hirt. de
bell. Afric.
Afrike likewise being a plain country, he suffered many algaradaes by the
enemies horsemen, often charging him and cutting off his victuals. If Pompey
had not rashly adventured to fight with Caesar: by his horsemen, wherein he
far passed him, he had famished his army. The Greeks in their return from
their voyage with Cyrus, by experience learned what incommodities follow them,
that march without horse in ye enemies country. And this is the use of
horsemen out of fight, to wit, to cut off the enemy from victuals, to keep
him short, to discover his proceedings, to cut off straglers; and to fetch in
victuals, and provision for our own army. Which he that is strong in horsemen
cannot want.

In fighting with the enemy, there are diverse uses of horsemen. If we charge
him on the sides, or back: we stop his march, as before I have showed. With a
few horsemen any number of shot taken in open field may be disordered. The
Protestants in the encounter at S. Gemme in Hist. de troubl. de Fr. li. 13.
Poitou, with a few horsemen, defeated diverse old companies of shot led by
Puigalliard. That was the ruin of the Prince of Parmaes aid sent to the Duke
of Main, by the horsemen of the present French king by Dreux an. 1589. No
number of short weapons can resist the carriere of horse in a plain ground.
The Sabines, says Ab equitibus repent inuectis turbati sunt ordines
Sabinorum. Liu. 1.
Liuy, were put out of their araie being suddenly charged by the Roman
horsemen. The Volscians and In media primum acie vinci coepti, qua praemissus
equitatus turbauerat ordines. Liu. 3.
Aequians after long fight, began to give ground after that the horesemen had
broken their array by charging them in the midbattell. The force of horesemen
for their violence is called a Procella equestris. Liu. 30.
tempest. The Roman Dictator immisso equitatu cum antesignanos hostium
turbaffet legionum signa propere inferri iussit. Liu. 4.
General perceiving the weakness of the enemies battle, by charging them with
his horsemen, did disorder all to the ensigns, after which entrance made, he
cut the rest in pieces with his armed men. The Corinthians in a certain
battle, having put the Thucid. 3.
Athenian footmen to flight, were accoyled, and overthrown by a few
horsemen. The reason that the horsemen prevailed so much in time past were two:
first they seldom used any long weapons, but targets and iauelins for the most
part: secondly they did then use to charge with their horsemen, when they saw
the footmen out of array, and not otherwise, if they did wisely, Reliquos
omnes equites nostri consecuti interfecerunt. Caes. bell. gal. 1.
This is therefore an other use of horsemen in the battle, to charge those that
are already disordred. The fourth and last use of them is to execute, and
Maxima pars ab equitibus in flumen acti sunt. Liu. 1.
pursue those that are put to flight. But those yt lead horsemen are to
proceed with great caution: they may not charge pikemen standing resolutely
together. The price of their folly that did otherwise, our men did somewhat
understand at Muscleborough field. Neither may they charge shot, or archers
that have a defense, either of a trench, or a hedge, or a wall, or certain
ranks of pikes before them. For in ye case they make them selves marks to the
enemy, whom they cannot come at. Further, they had better charge the enemy
disarrayed by shot, or other weapons, then when the army stands close
together. For against an army well empaled with pikes, yea with halberds close
set, and well backed with shot, horse cannot prevail, whatsoever a certain
Histoire de troubl. de Fr. l. 2.
French man in his glorious style vaunteth of the strength of the French men of
arms. Against men out of order in open field horsemen work great effects,
and so no doubt they have done in these late disorderly braules of France, and
did always among Arist. polit.
barbarous nations, which fought out of order. But against an army well
ordered, they can do but little. And any small impediment does make them
unserviceable. The Romans although their pikes were not half so long as ours:
yet did they not fear any numbers of horse. Against the Macedonian pikes, the
Persian horse could do no service. Neither will the French horsemen look upon
our pikes well backed with muskets, if they be wise, notwithstanding their
great crakes. Nay our archers at Agincourt field, found them not so rough in
handling as they would seem. Horsemen therefore in all expeditions I account
very requisite for the causes above rehearsed, and for that without them,
albeit we could foil the enemy, yet we cannot kill many, nor prevail against
him, that is swifter of foot then we, as Xenoph. exped. Cy. 2.
Clearchus both said, and proved by experience in the wars against
Artaxerxes. At ye bridge of Burgos in Galicia, where the Spaniards ran so
lightly before us, we felt what want we had of horse. Of horsemen I think it
requisite also to have some part lances, some light armed like to our
borderers, and some carbines. The barded horsemen both for their heaviness, and
great charge, I think not very needful. When Lucullus his men were much
afraid of Tygranes his barded Plutarch. in Lucullo.
horses, he willed them to be of good cheer, for that there was more labor in
spoiling them being so armed, then in foyling the^: they were so unwieldy. And
so it came to pass. For I never read yt ever they did any service: but in
diverse places, that they were foiled. Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 1.
Cyrus had diverse barded horses in his journey against his brother, but there
is not any mention of any service that they did. Darius had multitudes of them
in the encounter betwixt him and Alexander Arrian. exped. Alex. 3.
at Arbela, and Antiochus in the battle against Liu.
Scipio: but scarce did they give one blow to hinder the course of the enemies
victory. The armor of the Cataphracti inhabiles ad resurgendum humi
dilabentes caduntur. Tac. annal. 17
man and the horse is so heavy, and so boisterous, that if they fall, there
they lie, stopping the way to those that come after. Neither can they avoid
it, but many shall lie upon the ground, especially if the pikes stand close,
and be well flanked, or backed with mosquettiers shooting over their heads.

If we have few horsemen, or not so many, that we may therewith match the
enemy: we are then to follow the prudent devise of Caesar, both here in
Briteine, and in Afrike, and Greece, showed him by valiant men before him.
Before Capua, the Romans not being able to match the enemy with horse,
seconded their men with certain lusty young men armed lightly, and weaponed
with short pikes. Which while their men were at the charge, did so gall the
enemy with their pikes, that presently they turned visage. Caesar by reason
that his ships wherein his horse were, held not their course, coming into
this Island had only 30. horse, yet foyling the enemy with his footmen, with
those few horses, and the lustiest of his young men he so pursued them, that
many remained behind their company. In Afrike likewise he sustained the charge
of the enemies horsemen with his footmen, and after that he had made them
turn their backs, did so charge them with some few horsemen which he had,
that they had no desire to return thither again. Seconding his horsemen with
certain half pikes lightly armed, he not only repelled Pompeis horsemen in
Albany, and Scipioes in Afrike; but also vanquished their forces. By the same
Caes. bell. gal. 7.
devise before time, he foiled 7000. Gauls well horsed, with a very few of
his own aided and seconded by his footmen. Xenoph. exped. Eyr. 3.
Xenophon charging the enemy that would have fled from him with a few carriage
horses, showed unto us, that bad horses serve for a shift to follow ye chase,
and run better then good footmen. In the wars of Naples, 12. Italian
horsemen fighting in steccato, as they call it, with so many Frenchmen: ye
Italians Guicciard. 1.
prevailed by this means: In the place where they met, the Italians let fall
certain iauelins, which those that were first unhorsed, by the French took up,
and joining with their companions, and striking the French in the faces,
prevailed against them. The Admiral of France, at ye encounter of S. Denis by
Paris, being ouermatched by the enemy in horsemen, placed behind every
company, a company of shot, which following the horsemen going an easy trot to
the charge, upon the approach of the enemy auanced themselves forward, and
discharged so thick and full upon him: that all his company came not to the
charge, and those that came, were more gentle in handling, then otherwise they
would have been. This may serve those that are inferior to the enemy, in
horsemen. For this nation I trust this discourse is needelesse. For albeit we
have hitherto had great want of horsemen in our expeditions in France,
Flanders, and Portugal: yet there is no reason, that this land should want
hereafter, having such means. There only wants liberal minds, and good
order, that some part of that is now spent in surfeit, silks, golden laces, and
other vanities, may be employed in keeping horses for service.

Lances, and Carbines have like use in following the victory, and chase. But
while the enemy stands, lances are best employed against shot, and carbines
against pikes. But yet must they take heed, how they do inuest them. In
discovering the enemy, and fetching in of victualles, and brideling the enemies
forragers, both lances, and carbins, and archebuziers on horseback would be
joined together. But carbins, and argoletiers are to take heed that they come
not near the lances of the enemy, lest they make holes in their horses sides,
if no worse. Where the enemy is in disorder there al sorts of horsemen may do
service. At Cerisoles after that the shot had made way in the enemies battle,
the French entered with their horse among them, and overthrew them.

Pikes are the only defense of footmen against horsemen, if they be taken in
plain ground. Yet do I not think it good, that there should be such numbers
of pikes in our armies, as is used. For that use excepted, which I spoke of, I
see no other great profit they have. For execution is seldom done by pikes.
Sometime I grant pikes do charge other pikes, but it is not the piquier, that
makes the slaughter. In woods and shrubbie or brushie grounds, these kind
of long weapons are unprofitable, and unwieldy. The Germans by the
disadvantage of their long pikes, d being taken in such ground were overthrown
by Germanicus, and the Roman targettiers. In straites likewise when soldiers
come to lay hands, and have prize each on other, long pikes cannot a Longae
have (...) in syluis and inter virgulta, non tam aptae quam pila and haerentia
corpori tegmina and gladij. Tacit. 2.
not be Nec minor Germanis animus, sed genere pugnae, and armorum superabantur,
cum ingens multitudo arctis locis praelongas hastas non protenderet, no^
colligeret. Tacit. annal. 2.
managed; as the experience of the Romans fighting against the Germans, and
Macedonians armed with long weapons teaches us. Further the assailants in
assaults of towns, and forts have small use of them. For there is no use of
horsemen there greatly; against which pikes are good: neither do the defendants
greatly use them, save in the breach. Pikemen are too heavy armed to pursue
others, and without shot they cannot well guard themselves, either against
shot, or targets. At Muscleborough field a few shot opened the Scottish
squadrons of pikes, for those that following after invested them. And likewise
did the French arquebuziers at Cerisoles deal with the lancequenets, among
whose battelles making lanes, they gave entrance to the horsemen, that
presently charged them. And so little defense there is in that weapon, that not
only the Biscaine buckelers entered within them at the battle of In the days
of Lewis the 12. of France.
Rauenna, where they made a foul tailliada and slaughter, but also the Count
of Carmignola, dismounting himself and his company, entered among the squadrons
of the Switzers pikes, and cut them in pieces in an other encounter in
Lombardie. The Romans dealing with the Sarissae Macedonicae.
Macedonian pikes both in the wars with Philip, and Perseus kings of
Macedonia, and of Antiochus king of a great part of Asia, never feared to enter
upon them with their targets, nor made reckoning of that weapon. And not
without cause. For who sees not, the strength and effect of the pike being in
the point, that as soon as targettiers, or other armed men enter among pikes;
the piquiers throw down their pikes, and take them to their other weapons?
the Portugalles did perceive by the experience of that fight with the Moors
where Sebastian their king was slain, that fewer pikes would have served, and
other weapons done better effects.

The Switzers that are for the most part piquiers, will not march any whither
without their companies of shot attending on them, for their guard. At
Moncontour the Almaine piquiers abandoned of their shot, were miserably shot to
death most of them. For this cause I would have only so many pikes as would
serve for the defense of the army against the enemies horse. The Frenchmen have
but ten pikes to every company of shot, which is too little; yea and sometimes
they have no pikes at all. But he is abused that makes the French precedentes,
and examples to follow in any practice of war.

The first ranks of pikes would be armed with corsalets of caliuer proof on
the breast: from the twelfth rank backward and inward it is sufficient, if
they have any arms or iackes of male. Brassats, and other pieces of arms,
except the head-peece, gorgeron, and corsalet, I think to be more, then they
can either well march with, or fight with. The Frenchmen in time past had some
(called Cruppellarii co^tinuo ferri teg. mine inferendis ictibus inhabiles
dolabtis and securibus a Romani^ caeduntur. Tac. 3.
Cruppellarii by Tacitus) that were armed, as they say, de cap en pied. at
which the Roman soldiers laughed. For that they were unable by reason of the
weight of their arms, either to strike the enemy, or to defend themselves.
Therefore did they hew them down with bills, and pollaxes. The pike I would
have, if it might be, of Spanish Ash, and betwixt twenty and two and twenty
foot long, and by his side every piquier would have sword and dagger, and a
dagge at his girdle, especially in the utmost ranks.

The number of targettiers I would have increased. Not only of such as have
targets of proof, which are used of those that stand in the first ranks, but
also of those that have light targets. These would be made of wood either
hooped, or barred with iron. It would be three foot and a half in length,
(for that was the measure of the Roman shield) and two foot and a half in
breadth, in form ouall. A kind of arms now disused, but most excellent, in
all services, save against horsemen in the plain field. Against archers
targets are a sure defense, and dangerous to the enemy, after that men come to
close.

Liu. 27.
Scipio with his targetters cut the Carthaginian archers, and slingars in
pieces. Romani tela densatis excipiunt scutis. Liu. 28.
Targets are a good defense against stones in an assault, and whatsoever is
thrown from hand. The same are very effectual against shot. A small number of
targetters if once they come to reach shot with their swords, put great
numbers of them out of the field. Put case that some come short; yet sure not
many, considering that only the first ranks of shot can discharge, and that
all do not hit, and few mortally, especially if the first targets be of
proof, and the men march resolutely to the charge. Neither can shot retire
where many of them are in the field, nor save themselves in any place, but
targetters will come to them. Targetters also are mortal to the pikemen, as not
only the Romans dealing with the Macodonian and Germane pikes, but also the
Biskaines with their bucklers in the battle of Rauenna, and Cirignola declared.

Targettiers in execution are singular, and ready, and light, if their targets
be light, in following the chase. They may be used in all services and all
grounds. In assaults of towns, and in sallies: in fighting in open field, and
in streites, in woods and in hills: in retraites, and in chases there is use of
them. Pikes and horsemen of which the French make such reckoning, are but for
plain ground, and for some few uses: shot can do nothing in the crowde; for
that they want defensive arms, only targettiers armed have this privilege,
that in all places, and at all times they may be employed of judicious leaders.
The Romans with their great targets, and swords, and iauelins which they
called Pila subdued the world. Other arms as corsalets, and iackets plated,
and morions were common to others, these were proper to the Romans, and those
that followed their use of wars. Germani genere pugnae and armorum
superabantur. Tac. 2.
The advantage of their arms experience proves to have been great. The
Germans excelled them in strength of body and stature, the Britanni
inge^tibus gladiis, and breuibus cetris, a scutatis Agricolae caeduntur. Tacit.
in vit. Agric.
Brytaines, Gauls and Spaniards, were superior to them in number, and equal
in courage: but in their furniture, and arms, and manner of fight they were
inferior. All Roman soldiers both on horse, and foot for the most part used
a kind of targets. But the light armed wanted maled iackets, and had lighter
targets; as not only appears by their images in marble yet to be seen at
Rome: but also in their Hic miles tripedalem parma^ habet, and in dextra
hastas, quibus eminus vtitur, Hispaniensi gladio est cinctus, quod si pede
collato pugnandum est, translatis in laeuam hastis gladium stringit, Liu. 38.
and 31.
histories. So would I have our targetters, some armed with light corsalets,
and morions, and heavy targets, other only with light targets and plated
doublets sufficient to bear ye thrust of a sword. And if thereto some had
short half pikes also, the same would be effectual to throw at footmen,
and good to stand against horsemen.

Halberds and black bills, pertisans, borespeares, and pollaxes, and all such
like weapons to be used in hand, have one and the same use with swords and
targets. But neither are the men that use them so well defended against shot
and pikes, nor is that sort of weapon so effectual. If the enemy give ground
they are proper for execution; and may be employed in open field, in straites,
in woods, in assaults, sallies, and many services. Their arms are either
corsalets, and gorgerons, or plated doublets, or iackes with skirts for defense
of the thighs, and morrions on their heads. The Romans used few of these
weapons. The Dutch place diverse ranks of them among their pikes, and commonly
they are planted by the ensigns.

The shot is divided into mosquetters, caliuers, and archers. The use of shot
is diverse. In open field therewith we defend our pikes, and with the same
offend the enemies pikes. Where the same has a defense against the force of
horsemen, it is very profitably employed against them. In the defense of a
town, forte, or passage, it is excellent. Likewise for the assailantes
therewith to clear the walls while their armed men mount by breach, or by
scale. But the same must take heed of the force of the horse, and charge of
armed men, which without defense of pikes, or other natural wall, or bank,
the same cannot sustain. The force of shot is greater in skirmish, then in set
battelles. For shot if they be driven to stand thick have no use. As the
unprofitable number of shot at the battle of Moncontour, and Dreux: and other
incounters in the late wars of France, declare sufficiently. As often as the
enemies shot make countenance to charge our armed men, so often must our shot
encounter them: and driving away the enemies shot, are mortal, if they strike
right and thick, among the enemies pikes. For pikes against shot and arrows,
being heavy armed have no defense. As the disastre of the Thucid. 4.
Lacedaemonians at Pylos, of the Romans at Liu. 24.
Trebia, of the Thucid. 3.
Athenians compassed by the light armed Aetolians, of Titurius Sabinus and his
Caes. bell. gal. 5.
company at Vatuca of the Almanes at Histoir. de troubl. de Fr.
Moncontour, where heavy armed men destitute of shot and light armed were
compassed about and slain by shot, archers, and slingars, does declare. In
rainie weather they cannot do almost any service. Yet some say, that at
Rocheabeille firelockes did I know not what service in the rain. But neither
in rain nor out of rain are shot assured against horse, or targets, or armed
men, but where they have a defense and retrait. So that I marvel what the
French mean to bring into the field so many shot, and so few armed men. At the
encounter of Rocheabeille the Protestants had 14000. shot, and De long bois peu
ou point. Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 7.
scarce any pikes. But percase they could not otherwise do.

Archers in assaults, and defense of towns cannot do like service to
mosquetiers, and caliuers. For neither can they hit so right, nor so mortally.
In pight fields I think them nothing inferior to them. For being armed with
iackes, as they should be, when they come to gripes, they drive the shot to
his feet: and shooting many ranks one over an others head twelve arrows
shall fall before one boullet. For only the first ranks of shot discharge
unless they mean to pierce their fellows. Now then that the shot are
disarmed, and archers armed: who sees not that two thousand archers in open
field may prevail against three thousand shot? especially seeing as archers
may keep rank, and not shot, and archers may fight standing thick, but shot
cannot file their ranks, if they stand thick. Archers therefore in open field
may be employed against shot, and likewise against horsemen, and pikes. But if
against horsemen; they must have a defense of stakes, or trenches, or pikes.
And likewise dealing against armed men, they had need to have a front of armed
men.

The archers at Agincourt field, and at many other battelles have made the
name of this nation famous for the service they did against the enemy. But
then they had a defense of stakes and trenches. Xenoph. Cyr. paed. 2.
Cyrus in his array placed behind every dozen ranks of armed men certain
archers: by which devise when his enemies came to join battle with him he
prevailed against them, not being able to abide the arrows that coming over
the foremost ranks light in their faces, and other bare places. And therefore
whatsoever some say of the use of bows and arrows, which they have not seen
tried, I would that among others, our Generalles that go in service into
other countries would also employ some archers.

Great artillery against troops standing thick and in even ground works
great effects. But in other places, and against men ranged otherwise, the
sound is greater then the hurt. At Moncontour the Kings ordonance beating
among the horsemen ranged hedge-wise, did not in twenty shot hit once. Neither
did it any hurt to the footmen by reason of the vneuenesse of the ground.
For either it fell low, or high. If the same be placed in the front of our
army, yet can not the same be employed past one or two volies. For at the
joining of the battle, it cease. And if our men march forward it breaks
their arrayes. If the same be placed upon some hill, yet lying out of level
and shooting downward, it does no great hurt.

But let it do the utmost that it may, being employed by judicious gunners:
yet never was victory obtained by great ordonance in open field, nor the force
of the enemy coming resolutely to the charge thereby stopped. Guicciard. lib.
10.
Gaston de Fois sallying out of the Castle, took the town of Brescia
notwithstanding the number of great pieces that in every street were bracked
against him. And little did the Spaniardes that sacked Antwerpe Anno 1576.
sallying out of the cittadell esteem the pieces, that barked against them at
their first sally. The Frenchmen although they had two and twenty pieces of
ordonance in their camp at Nouara, wherewith they thought themselves safely
guarded, all the ways and accesses being by them flanked and beaten: yet
Guicciar. lib. 11.
were they broken and put out of their lodging by the Suitzers which came
against them without either ordonance, of shot. If then in streets, and ways
where artillery has greatest force, the same notwithstanding cannot repel the
force of a resolute enemy, much less use has it in open field. The Admiral
after the unhappy encounter at Moncontour with the relics of his army, Hist.
de troubl. de Fr.
trauersed the greatest part of France, without any one piece of great
ordonance. Neither did his company being diverse times encountered by the way,
therefore less service. Very troublesome it is in carriage, and no less
chargeable. Guicciardin reports that the breach of the wheel of a canon did
so long incomber the whole army, that it lost a good opportunity, by that
delay. The use of great ordonance therefore is first in gardeing of towns, or
passages: some little use it has in flanking the sides of our camp, or
defending the streets, if we lodge in villages: secondly in battering of
walls, or opening of passages. For without ordonance sufficient every petit
castle or town will scorn us, or brave us. In our battery at Coronna we felt
the want of it, but more at Lisbon. The last use is in the field either in the
front of the battle, or upon some hill upon the sides. Where if we can see the
enemies troops, and hit amongst them, we shall make them change the ground. The
great artillery of the French beating among the Italian horse in their camp at
Rauenna, made the^ come to fight with disadvantage. The which pain the French
themselves suffered in their camp at Landresie being beaten by the imperials
from a hill, where they had placed their great ordonance, as before I have
showed.

Thus you may see, how as al weapons may be profitably employed with good
judgment: so without judgment they serve for nothing, but to make a show.
Now forasmuch as Stratagemes do work as much as weapons, and make weapons
more effectual, and because the enemy makes least resistance, when he is most
suddenly surprised: let us speak of Stratagems, and ambushes, which tend also
to the obtaining of victory.

CHAP. XIII. Of Stratagemes and Ambushes.
STratagems I call those devises, whereby the General does either hurt, or
discourage the enemy, or help and encourage his own men: so called because
they proceed from the Generalles head and policy, whom the Greeks call
(...). Ambushes the Italians call emboscate, from whence both French and we
borrowe the word. The reason whereof is, for that in woods for the most part
such trappes are laid. The Romans do better term them insidias, and the
Greeks(...), for that we do not only lay snares for our enemies in woods,
but also in hollow grounds, and also beyond hills, and in valleis and
villages, and towns, and behind walls, and wheresoever we can cover our men,
in such sort that we be not espied until we come upon the enemy upon a
sudden. Stratagemes are infinite, and can not be comprised within any
certain rules. For what can be so exactly said, but that the wit of man is
able to devise more, and say more? some I will set down practiced by famous
captains in former time, that by them our Generalles of themselves may learn
how to invent others, and not always kill the enemy with downright blows.

One special and yet common Stratageme it is, to cover our counsels and
enterprises by contrary pretenses. For by this means the enemy looking, or
warding one way, is often taken and stricken mortally in an other place, and by
other means. Annibal taking his bed, and giving out, that he was very Liu.
25.
sick, which rumor flying to the Romans made them secure, in the night time
led out ten thousand men, and coming on a sudden surprised Tarentum. To the
intent that his enterprise might not be discovered, before it took effect, he
used diverse other policies. First he sent out diverse light horsemen to range
ye country, and to kill such as they met, least any should escape, and give
notice of his coming, and that the enemy seeing them might suppose, that they
were only certain outriders. having an intention to surprise Puteoli, he gave
out, that he went forth with his army to sacrifice at the lake of Ad lacum
A^uerni per specie^^ sacrificandi, re^^sa vt tentaret Puteolos, quique ibi in
praesid o erant descendit. Liu. 24
Aruerne. But in the night he turned toward Puteoli. Consul in Lucanos
ostendir iter cum peteret Gall. am. Liu. 27.
Claudius Nero caused a fame to flee abroad, that he went to the country of
the Lucanians, when in deed he went into the part of Gallia Togata, that is
now called la Marca.

Under color of treaty of peace, many practices of hostility are wrought.
Scipio sending men to entreat with Syphax of peace, caused some to espy his
camp. Liu. 29.
Which gave entrance to that enterprice, which afterward he executed in the
night upon the same. Metellus Salust. bell. Iugurth.
treating of peace with Iugurtha, did by fair promises corrupt most of his
folowers. Both which practices the Spaniards of late time have used against us.
When they entend any dangerous enterprise, then it is bruted, that either the
king of Spain or their chief Leader is dead, or sick. Under pretense of
wars against the Turk, An. 1588. he gathered great forces against us, and
now I understand that news is come of great preparatiues in Spain against
the Turk: that our eyes may be bleared, and not see his preparation against
France, or us. By the same devise he surprised the realm of Portugal after
the death of the Cardinal king. Under color of parley of peace at Dunkirke he
brought his Navy upon our coast before we looked for it; and I may say before
some were well provided for it. These pretenses though false, yet make show,
and are believed of some, and take simple people, before they be prepared. For
when Scipio had put men aborde, and provided many things, as for a siege: Vt ab
eo quod parabat, in alterius rei curam co^uerteret animo^. Liu. 29.
Syphax believed, that as the brute went, he meant in deed to besiege Vtica,
but being in the night invaded, and seeing his camp all fired; he learned
with the loss of his army one point of war, never to trust the enemy, when
he gives out such reports.

Some under color, and during the treaty of composition have wound them selves
out of danger. Asdrubal being taken by the Romans at an advantage promised,
that if he might be assured to depart out of that place, he would carry his
army out of Spain: but while the Romans were secure, thinking that he would
not stir during the treaty of composition, the man by little and little had
gotten out of the snare into a safe ground. The king of Macedonia sending
messengers to treat with the Romans for the burial of his soldiers, that
lay slain by their camp, in the mean time of the parley removed his camp
out of a strayt, and so escaped. The Massilians besieged by Caesar's soldiers
began to treat of composition. But when by diverse days vain talk they
perceived their negligence, and security, they sallied upon the sudden, and
burnt their engines, and works, which cost them much labor.

Under color of treaty of peace Liu.
Marcellus espied the walls of Syracusae: and another time entered the town of
Salapia, seasing a gate. Nothing is more commodious for dressing of enterprises
against a town besieged. The L. In the days of Q. Marie.
Gray by the treachery of the French entering the trenches, and ditches of Guines
during the parley escaped narowly a great danger.

Rumors of succors coming encourage our soldiers, discourage the enemy. The
Liu. l. 9. and 10.
Roman Consul giving out a report at the time of the beginning of the
battle, that another army was coming to charge the enemy upon the back, made
the enemy hearing it to doubt, and his own soldiers to fight more courageously.

Vain shows do often deceive the enemy. Caesar mounting certain slaves, and
horse boys upon carriage horses, and mules at Gergouia, and causing them to
show them selves a far off, made the Caes. bell. gal. 7.
enemy fear least a company of horsemen were coming upon them to charge them
upon the back. Which being practiced long before against the Samnites, Sp.
Nautius mulos detractis clitellis, alarijs impositis circumduxit, quod
Samnitibus terrorem attulit. Liu.
made them fear, and look about. Annibal not being able to force the guard
that kept ye passage of Calicula, binding fagots on the heads of oxen and
setting them on fire, driving them toward ye place, what through wonderment,
what through fear, made them to give way. Martigues seeing the inconvenience
of his lodging near Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 5.
Pampron An. 1568. at the shutting of the evening caused all his company to
displace, and went away safely, abusing the enemy with fires made, and pieces
of matches tied among bushes. which made the enemy suppose he had been there
still. The which practice he seems to have learned of Annibal, who fearing
least he should be charged as he removed his camp, left diverse tents
standing toward the enemy, and some soldiers and arms, as if the rest had bin
still there, which long before had gained ground, and were gone.

Words making for us coming to the enemies ears do often strike a terror in
them. Quintius the Quintius dicens Volscotum alterum cornu fugere pepulit
Volscos. Liu. 1.
Roman General crying out aloud, that the other corner of the battle of the
Volscians fled, made that where he stood to fly in deed. Valerius Leuinus
speaking aloud, and saying that he had slain Pyrrhus with his own hands,
help to discourage ye enemy. Annibal causing one of his own men in the Roman
Generals name to command the Romans to flee to ye hills next adjoining, had
done them some hurt, but that the guile was perceived. I have heard some say,
that a certain voice raised in the ears of the Scots at Muscleborough field,
how their company fled, made them both fear, and fly. False sounds also and
signs do often abuse those that are credulous. Annibal having slain ye
Roman Consul, with his ring scaled diverse forged letters, whereby he had
deceived some, if ye other Consul had not given ye cities round about warning
of it. Having taken Tarentu^, he caused one to sound an alarm after ye Roman
note, which caused diverse Romans to fall into his hands, and the Tarentines to
imagine yt the Romans meant to betray them. more harm it had done, but that
the trumpet sounded unskillfully.

Suborned messengers are dangerous, if credit be given unto them. A certain
Lucanian while Annibal warred with the Romans in Italy, led Sempronius a famous
leader among them into an ambush, promising him to bring him to ye speech of
his countryme^, of whom he feined himself to be sent unto him. Liu.
Annibal causing them of Metapontus to write letters to Fabius, as if they were
purposed to deliver up their city into his hands, had almost drawn him into
an ambush, where with his army he lay ready to welcome him to the town.

Men disguised like women, or like country people, or Danaum insignia nobis
aptemus. Chorabus apud Virgil.
armed like the enemies entering within their strength do now and then abuse
them, and give their fellows means of entrance. In Hist. de troubl, de Fr. l.
12.
these late troubles of France diverse negligent Governors have by these
practices been surprised.

Enemies pretending friendship play many odious parts, and therefore not
lightly to be credited. Before the battle of Cannae certain Numidians
suborned by Annibal, pretending coffeehouse, and seeming to revolt from him,
in the midst of the hurly burly charged the Romans upon the back, and
greatly prejudiced them.

Ambiorix under color of friendly counsel trained Titurius Sabinus out of his
strength, and taking him at advantage flew him, and most of his company. Such
was Metuo Danaos and dona ferentes. Virg.
Sinons counsel, who as Poets feign betrayed Troy. To avoid these traps,
these rules are to be observed: first no Inimicorum (...).
counsel is to be trusted that proceeds from the enemy: for who can believe
that he will counsel us well, that seeks only to do us hurt? secondly if
any revolt from the enemy, yet is he not to be trusted, nor suffered to remain
among us armed, especially if he may hurt us.

Sometime the enemy by a feined retrayt is drawn into blind trenches set with
sharp stakes, and covered with earth, boughs, and hurdles, or under walls, or
banks where our shot lies ready for him, or else into any place of
disadvantage, which was the ruin of Cyrus his army by Tomyris Queen of
Scithia, and diverse others, that like blind men follow where their enemies
lead them.

In sum, whatsoever tends to deceive, and abuse the enemy, or to encourage,
and give advantage to our own soldiers; the same ought wise leaders to devise,
and practice. Provided always, that they neither break oath, nor promise nor
offend against piety, or the laws of nations. Let such vile facts be practiced
of Turks, and Spaniards, that hire wicked men to kill Princes, and maintain no
oath or promise further then their profit requires. Such, Histories do feine
Persidia plusquam Punica.
Annibal to have been; and diverse of the Carthaginians; and Plutarch. Lysander.
Lysander among the Greeks, that took pleasure in deceiving of men with great
oaths, as some take joy to deceive children with small toys. The proceedings
of the Romans were far otherwise. They disalowed his fact, that would have
betrayed Falisci, and sent him bound to Pyrrhus, yt for money promised to
empoyson him. Neither did Val. max. lib. 8. c. 9.
Cepio the Roman win any credit, by hyring the Lusitanians to kill their
Captain Viriat. This practice of killing, the Spaniards learn of certain
bastardly Italians, a degenerate offspring and race issuing of ye vagrant
nations of Lombards, Goths, and Vandales, and of Liu. 41.
Perseus, that had murderers hired for wages to kill whom he should appoint,
and would have practiced his treachery upon ye Romans: a man of a base
disposition, and unworthy so noble a kingdom.

Those stragegemes commonly take effect, that are practiced in matters least
feared. That which no man cares for, is neglected, and least can that be Ad id
quod ne timeatur fortuna facit, minime turi sunt homines, quia quod neglexeris
incautum, atque apertum habeas. Liu. 25.
avoided, which is least feared, as says. Cyrus by diuerting the river, entered
Babylon a way that no man looked for him: and Scipio passing the lake, took
new Carthage.

Great are the effects that are wrought by devises and surprises, but they are
discreetly to be governed, least going about to deceive the enemy, we be our
selves abused, and intrapped by double practice, as the Tratato dop. pio.
Italians call it. So was Anno 1569.
Guerchy, and his company overtaken in the practice about the town of Bourges,
where diverse brave men lost their lives, while the enemy that knew the
practice, was ready to receive them to their loss. King Edward the 3.
understanding of a plot laid by the captain of S. Froissart.
Omar, for ye recovery of Calais newly by him won, turned ye same upon the
heads of those, that should have executed it, and surprised those that would
have surprised others.

Those therefore that in stratagemes and politic surprises follow the example
of others, let them see that their case be like, and their strength equal, and
that the matter be handled cunningly, and executed presently. And that ye times
be well measured, that they come neither too soon, nor too late; in which case
their enterprise vanishes to nothing.

Of ambushes.
Ambushes likewise well placed, and managed work the enemy great
displeasures, not only in cutting off straglers, and such as go on forraging,
but also in troubling an army marching or fighting. Annibal in passing the
Alps lost diverse of his soldiers by the incursions of the people of the
Mountains rising out of their holes, and charging his army upon advantages.
Sempronius as has been showed drawn into an ambush was slain with his
company. The like happened to Marcellus the Consul going to view the side of a
hill not far off. But of this point I have already brought examples
sufficient, where I discoursed of the danger of those that march in the
enemies country, without diligent discovery.

Ambushes well laid, that our soldiers may rise out of them, and suddenly
charge the enemy on the back, or sides as he is fighting, are ye more
dangerous, then those wherein he is charged marching, By ye same Romulus
overthrew ye Fidenians: for placing part of his men in ambush in certain
thickets, and under certain hills near the town, and provoking ye enemy to
come forth of the town; he drew him along after him until such time, as he
was against the ambush: Trahuntur ad locum insidiaru^: inde subito exorti
Romani transuersam inuadunt bostium aciem. Liu. 7.
Where turning back upon him, and causing those that lay in ambush to charge
him on the sides, he cut many of the Fidenians in pieces. Annibal before he
encountered the Romans at Trebia, hid certain Mago Numidaeque simul latebras
eorum improuida prouida praeterlata acies est, exorti a tergo, ingentem
tumultum, ac terrorem fecere, Liu. 21.
horsemen in the marshes, and bushes near to the places where the armies were
to join. Whence rising upon a sudden, as the army of the Romans passed by
them, they made a great tumult, and slaughter, and were in part cause of the
victory. With the like practice he entrapped the Roman army at the lake
Thrasimene. Behind the hills upon the side of the place, where he saw the
encounter would be, he placed diverse light armed: and beyond the plain he
caused his horsemen to lurk in the valleys. So that Flaminius was no sooner
come to the charge, but he saw his enemy in front, on his sides, and on his
back. Liu. 35.
Philopoemen charging the enemy with his light armed, and afterward causing
his men to fly back, while the enemyranne disorderly after the chase, he
received his own men within the distances of his armed men, and with them cut
in pieces those that followed. Demosthenes (not the Orator, but a Captain that
lived during the Peloponnesian war) fearing lest the enemy, that in number
far passed him would compass him round about, and charge him on the back;
in a certain valley, and bushy ground nere the place where the enemy made show
to give the charge, ranged both armed men, and (...). Thucid. 3.
archers, which in the joining of the battle rising out of their places should
charge the enemy upon the back. Caes. bell. gal. 1.
Caesar by taking the top of the hill where the Heluetians lay encamped with
part of his force, had given them a greater overthrow, then he did; but that
the mistaking of his men, made him loose that advantage.

It is the part of a wise leader when he pursues, or coasteth the enemy to
take the advantage of woods, valleys, hills, strayts, rivers, and in all places
to lay traps for him, that he may neither march, nor fight, nor lodge without
danger.

But yet in dressing of Ambushes he is to take great heed, first that ye enemy
have no notice of his purpose, and so provide against him. For by this means
traps themselves are often entrapped. Caes. bell. gal. 8.
Corbey of Beauois lying in wait, where he supposed Caesar's soldiers would
come to seek provision, was himself and his company cut in pieces by a
greater number then he looked for, which Caesar sent thither having
intelligence of the matter before hand.

Secondly those that lie in ambush must rise suddenly, and execute speedily and
courageously, least the enemy putting himself in order, and gathering courage
give them more then they came for. Labienus had placed certain fellows in
ambush, that should have charged Hi^t, de bell. Afric.
Caesar's army, as the same passed by: but they came forth so faintly, and
irresolutely, that Caesar's horsemen before they could do any thing, had hewn
them in pieces.

Thirdly let them beware least while they think to do the feat, the rest of
the enemies come on their backs, before they can dispatch. The Liu. 41.
Dardanians had well hoped to have executed a part of the Macedonian army which
they charged upon the back, as it passed through the country; but before they
were aware, they were them selves charged by them that followed after, and were
taken as they say between the hammer and anuill, and well beaten.

Fourthly when a part of the army is sent to lie in ambush, the rest of the
army ought to have correspondence with it: that as those yt rise up in ambush
do charge the enemy one way, so the rest of the army may charge him another
way, and always be ready to succor their men. Which if they of Caes. bell.
gal. 8.
Beauois had considered; they had not suffered their best men to have been cut
in pieces without relief.

The reason that Ambushes do prevail so much are diverse: first the terror
that the same strike the enemies mind withal, coming upon them upon the
sudden: secondly the disorder, and confusion that is in the enemies army
surprised suddenly: and thirdly the vantage of ground, which they choose, and
the weakness of the enemy where they charge him.

Therefore let all valiant soldiers to whom such executions are committed
beware, how they protract time, or loose their advantage, or by untimely noise,
or stir give notice of their purpose to the enemy, or by stirring before the
time cause the enemy to retire before he come within danger. By reason whereof
I have seen some my self, but have heard of many more enterprises that have
come to nothing.

CHAP. XIIII. Wherein is showed, how the enemy being vanquished, the victory is
to be used, and the conquest maintained.
HI thereto we have declared, by what means the enemy may be vanquished in open
field: a mark whereat all valiant Captains aim, and whereunto they address
all their actions, and ^ounsels. Yet all consists not so in victory, but that
they deserve far more commendation, that can use it to purpose, and maintain
that which they win. Vincere scis Annibal victoria v^i nescis. sa^de Maherbal
unto him. Liu. 22.
Annibal had the hap to overcome the Romans in diverse battles, but he had
not the wisdom, or hap to use the victory. And diverse great victories has
God given to our nation against the Frenchmen, and many parts of France have
our ancesters possessed, but we could not use our time, nor Gods graces: nor at
this day have we so much ground in France, as to build a fishers cabane in.
Therefore seeing it is a miserable thing to say we have had, when we have not,
and Non minor est virtus, quam quaetere, parta tueri.
wise men no less consider how they may keep, them win: let us see, if God
would so much favor us as to suffer us to win any thing hereafter, how the
victory may be used, and our purchase assured. Least as the Spaniard foiled by
sea, An. 1588. escaped without pursuit, or memorable loss, save of some
ships: so he or any other might escape again, so good cheap, and
continually return to invade us with hope of victory; at the least without
fear of pursuit, or great loss.

Either the enemies army is altogether vanquished and dispersed; or else some
good part there of is retired entire, and whole. In both these cases what
course the General is to take let us now consider, beginning with the latter.
If the enemy be not so vanquished, but that some part of his army remains
sound, or at least unbroken, then is the General to follow him, and urge him
while the terror of the late affright is not yet out of his mind.

Caesar having obtained a great victory against the Heluetians, Caes. debel.
gal. 1.
ceased not to pursue the remaynder so long, until all yielded. And afterward
having foiled Vercingetorix in the field, and caused him to retire with the
rest of his army; he did not Caes. debel. gal. 7.
leave him until he had forced him to take Alexia for his defense; nor then
neither, until such time, as he had the town and all within it yielded to his
mercy. Caes. debel. ciu. ^.
Vanquishing Pompey in open field he would not suffer him to take Sanctuary in
his camp, but drove him thence, and rested not, until he had taken his
flight, nor before the relics of his army that fled to the hills thereby,
had yielded, being cut from water. Gaston de Fois having foiled the Spaniards
at Rauenna did like a man of judgment follow the relics of the enemies army,
the reason he had no success was, for that he charged the pikes with his
horsemen, which should have been done with shot, and with small forces auanced
himself too far forward, being so evil followed; which cost him his life.
If he had charged them with shot, and taken the way before them with his horse,
or stayed until he had taken them at advantage in some strait, where they
could not have kept their ranks, or cut between them, and their victuals:
without many blows they had been forced to yield. Scipio after he had
vanquished Asdrubal in Spain, and driven him to retraite, he so followed him
with his horsemen, that the man could find no rest, until he came unto the
utmost coast of Spain. Those that after they have victory, give themselves,
either to pleasures, or to rest; for a small rest purchase to themselves great
labor, and sometime loss. If Caes, de bell. cin. 3.
Pompey, after he had given Caesar two repulses at Dyrrhachium, had urged the
relics of his army, not yet being recovered from their late affright, his
success had been far better. The Carthaginians not pursuing their victory
in Liu. 24.
Spain, after the death of the two Scipioes, but suffering the relics of
their armies not only to breath, but also to gather head, were themselves
overcome not long after by those, whom before they had vanquished. When such
men erred, it is not marvel, if diverse errors were committed in these late
French braules. After the battle of S. Denis, both Protestants, and the kings
side departed quietly each from other: and at Moncontour, albeit the kings
brother gave the Protestants a great overthrow, yet he suffered the Admiral
to depart with a great part of his army, and to gather new forces to return
again the next spring to fight again.

But may some say, it is not good to drive the enemy to utter despair, for
that constrains men to adventure, and to try all means to escape. Desperatio
vltima audere and experiri cogebat Aequos. Liu. 3.
Desperation (says Liuy) caused the Aequians to adventure, and try their last
refuge. The Hetruscians being entered the camp of the Romans, and being
compassed about without way to wind out, fought so desperately, that they
slew one of the Consuls, and many brave men, and had done much more Maiorem
cladem nisi data via fuisset dedissent. Liu. 2.
harm, had not some wiser then the rest, given them way to depart out of ye
camp quietly. Afterward of themselves they fell into disorder, and were easily
vanquished by the horsemen, that pursued them. For this cause, Themistocles
said, that a bridge of gold was to be made, for an enemy that flies, that he
might depart quietly. All which I yield to be true, in such an enemy as
flies without purpose to return, and which cannot be broken without great
danger. But if he purpose to return, no danger is to be refused, nor labor to
be shunned, that he may be broken: which in deed is no difficulty. For he
that cannot resist whole, can evil resist broken. And therefore this is a
controversy, without firm reason of the contrary cause. Yet in pursuing the
enemy, I would not have him so stopped, but that he may fly, nor would I have
desperate men fought withal: but I would have them with hunger, and disease,
forced to accept of their lives, and so yielding their arms to depart. Which
if the French had practiced in the conquest of Naples, they had not so
ignominiously been driven out thence, by 3 or 4 thousand Bisognos, that they
suffered to nestle in 2 or 3 out towns of the Country.

But if the enemies forces be utterly dispersed, and dare not look upon us in
the field, then the next labor is to besiege their chief cities, and that
presently while the smart of their wounds is yet fresh. As Well in Tam secundis
quam aduersis rebus non datur spatium ad cessandum, si se Laelius cum equitatu
victoque Syphace Cirtham praecedere sinat, trepida omnia se metu oppressurum.
Liu. 30.
good success, as in bad, a prudent Captain may not give himself to rest.
Masinissa by showing himself, and his victorious company, before Cirtha, so
terrified the same, especially upon view of their king, that was taken
prisoner, that the same yielded unto him presently. Great is the terror of a
victorious army, and sufficient to make any town to yield. The Romans by
the terror of their victorious troops led by Quintius Cincinnatus, obtained
nine towns of the enemies in short space. The Antium paucos dies circumfessum
deditur nulla oppugnantium noua vi, sed quod iam inde ab infoelici pugna,
castrisque amissis ceciderant animi. Liu. 2.
courage of the Volscians was so cooled, after their overthrow by the Romans,
that they yielded their city for fear, without any force. Therefore Scipio,
after the overthrow of Annibals army, brought his forces presently before
Carthage, which he drove to accept of composition. If Annibal upon his victory
at Cannae, had brought his victorious army before Rome, he had proceeded with
more judgment. The Rhodians Stratoniceam recepissent Rhodij post victoriam,
nisi tempus in castellis recipiendis triuissent. Liu. 33.
having vanquished the enemy in open field, spent time in taking of certain
paltry hamlets, and castles: whereas if they had urged the enemy, as they might
have done, they had taken Stratonicea the head city of the country. There is
no town that dare hold out, without hope of succor.

But may some say, it is a hard labor, to take towns well fortified, and
manned, and stored with victuals. I grant, if armies that besiege them be such
as ours, and so furnished, and the towns have hope of relief. otherwise, as
Scipio vidit dissipatum bellum: and circumferre ad singulas vrbes arma, diutini
magis quam magni esse operis. Liu. 28.
Scipio said, it is a matter of more time, then labor. For where the Country
is spoiled, no towns can long hold out. But that may be done easily, where an
army goes up and down victorious without stop, or encounter. The reason
that the towns of Holland and Zeland, have so long holden out against the
Spaniard is, that they have both the sea open, and many good friends and
favors in England.

A victorious army not only takes whatsoever town it besieges, but also
seaseth the whole country. Annibal after the victory at Cannae, possessed a
good part of Italy. After the overthrow of their forces by Scipio in Afrike,
the Carthaginians could not say, that they had any one town remaining in
obedience. After Caesar's victory at Alexia, almost all France yielded it self
unto him: so well did he follow the victory against Pompey in Epeirus,
against Scipio in Afrike, against Afranius and Pompeyes sons in Spain, that
with one victory he assured himself of the whole Country, and with one
enemy fought no more, but once. The French by one victory recovered all the
kingdom of Naples, and by one overthrow at Gariglian, lost it again. Francis
the first, by his victory at Marignan, came in possession of most of the
Duchy of Millain, being overthrown and taken at Pauy, he lost the same
again. The Earl of Warwike, after one victory in the days of Henry the
sixth, assured all England to his Prince. Edward the fourth, by one victory
recovered the same again: and if that our ancestors had well followed the
victories at Cressy, Poytiers, and Agincourt, the French had not so easily
dispossessed them of their hold in France. But what cannot delays, want of
supply, and division work in such cases? First therefore, the army that is
victorious, ought not to suffer the enemy to gather head, but to scatter his
forces. Secondly, the same ought to besiege the chief City, and to sease the
Country into their hands, not suffering the enemy in any place to rest. The
French king after his victory at Moncontour, besieging S. Iean d'Angeli, lost
there the vigor of his army, which might better have been employed about
Rochel. Thirdly, the Generals care ought to be, how to take away the enemies
subjects from them, and to deprive them of the aid of their confederats. A
matter not difficult, if he proceed wisely in war, and justly after the
victory. for as good success procures to the Conqueror friends, so every
one abandoneth, and contemns the vanquished. The Capuans, and a great part of
Italy, revolted from the Romans after the unfortunate encounter at Cannae.
Philip king of Macedonia, being overcome by Titus Quintius, not only saw the
departure of his confederates, and friends; but also the rebellion of his own
subjects. After that the Carthaginians side began to decline in their wars
with the Romans; all their friends forsook them. The same disloyal dealing
of subjects and friends, Charles last Duke of Burgundy felt after his
disastrous journey against the Switzers at Granson. Hereupon Philip of Comines
takes occasion to tell a long tale, how dangerous it is for a Prince to be
overcome in a pight field: at which if he had known ancient histories, he
would not have made such wonderment. For there never was, nor can be other
success looked for in such cases. Wherefore after the victory, the General
is to practice with the friends, and confederates of the vanquished, and with
good conditions to unite them unto him self. Herein the opinion of the
justice, and good dealing of the General shall greatly further his desire; as
is evident by the example of Scipio, and Annibal. For Scipio sending unto every
City in Spain, those pledges which the enemy had from them, and which he had
taken from the enemy; he got him self much friendship: and Annibal after
his victory, dismissing such of the associats of the Romans, as he had taken
without ransom, and using them courteously, procured him self amongst them
great credit of good dealing; so that many did adhere unto him, and forsake
the Romans.

Thus we see how the victory is to be pursued. Now therefore let us see how
our conquest may be maintained, and assured. For want of which consideration,
we see whereto the victories of this nation in France, and otherwhere are come,
and how hardly and chargeably that which we have remaining in Ireland, is kept
in devotion, and what is there to be feared, if ever any enemy with resolution
and strength, do there assail us. To keep our conquest, there are two
principal means both necessary; Force, and Justice: for neither without
force can those that are rebellious, and desirous of innovation be repressed,
nor without justice can the peaceable be defended, or contented. That Empire
(says Id firmissimum longeimperiu^ est quo obedientes gaudent. Liu. 9.
Camillus) is most firm and durable, which the subjects do willingly embrace,
and gladly continue. And hard it is to keep men discontent long in subjection
by force. A country Imp^rium s^cile^js artibus r^tinetur, quibus initio partum
est. Sal^st. coniur. Catilin.
subdued, is kept by the same means that it was subdued; that is (says
Salust) by fortitude, industry, justice. The use of force is diverse: First, to
repel the enemy if he come again, and to keep him down that he look not
up. Caesar used this course in the subduing of France, being always ready to
repress the disobedient, and the same was used both in the subduing of Spain
and Afrike, and other countries by the ancient Romans. The French not having
force ready in Naples and Milan, to encounter the Spaniards that came to
molest them in their possession, soon lost prise. Secondly, force is
necessary to subdue rebels and mutinous persons, that may procure the trouble
of the state. The Romans until the country was quiet which they had
vanquished, and until every husbandman and other fell to labor, kept an army
there continually: when the same was pacified, they brought away their maine
force, and placed some of their soldiers inhabitants in some strong places in
the country, which lived upon the profits thereof, and yet kept the same in
obedience. These towns they called Colonies. The Romans having diverse times
vanquished the Ea clade conterritis hostium animis, vt etiam vbi ea remisissee
terrore aliquo tenerentur, and Velitris auxere numerum Colonorum Romani, and
Norbae in montes nouam Coloniam, quae arx in pomptino esset miserunt. Liu. 2.
Volscians and Sabines, and yet seeing them ready to rebel, for to keep them
in order, placed Romans in the town of Velitri, and in the mountains in
Norba, to serve as castles among them. Afterward when they had vanquished the
Tum de praesidio regionis depopulatae agitari coeptum. itaque placuit vt duae
coloniae circa Vestinum and Falernum agrum deducerentur. Liu. 10.
Vestinians, and spoiled their country, consulting by what gardes they might
best keep the country in devotion: They resolved to send two Colonies into
the country of the Vestinians, and the territory near the hill Falernum.

These towns being peopled with Romans, and placed in countries of new
conquest, Tullie calls propugnacles of the Roman empire. Tacitus calls
Cremona a fortress and Propugnaculum aduersus Gallos trans Padum agente^.
Tacit. 9.
propugnacle against the Gauls beyond Padus. This means also other nations
have thought fittest to keep countries in subjection. And therefore nothing
among them was more usual, then to translate inhabitants from one place into
another. The kings of Syria having vanquished the Israelites, placed a Colonie
in Samaria. The Athenians taking the Island Thucid. 4.
Cythera from the Lacedaemonians, removed the old inhabitants, and peopled it
with their friends. And against the (...). Thucid. 1.
Thracians in defense of their conquest, they sent ten thousand inhabitants
into Strymon.

The kings of this realm peopling Caleis with English, kept the same long in
their possession, which they lost not, but by force. If they had likewise
peopled Rochel, Poitiers, Limoges, Bordeaux, and other towns with this nation;
they would not have been so hard to keep, nor ready to revolt. not doing
that, they did soon loose the same by treason. And if Colonies had now of late
been sent into Ireland, not as now scattering and disunited, and few in number,
but in good strength and united by laws, and dwelling in towns as the Romans
did, I doubt not, but the country would be better assured, and the charge
far lesser then now it is. For the charge of garrisons is great, the
insolency of garrison soldiers greater. And if an enemy come against them,
their strength is nothing. If any man say, that it is hard to dispossess the
ancient inhabitants of the country out of their dwellings: he considers not
that rebels, and enemies are so to be used; and that if they be placed other
where, it is of mercy rather then desert, which notwithstanding in all cases
may not be used. Hard it is, said Plutarch. apopth.
Agesilaus, to be merciful and wise both together. Yet if inhabitants when the
time was, had been sent into Ireland being void in some places, diverse English
might have been placed without injury to any.

To maintain a force therefore without great charge, the mean is to send
Colonies of the English nations into the country conquered. But forasmuch as
both garrisons, and sometimes greater forces are required for defense of it;
the rentes of diverse cities, countries and grounds are that way to be
employed. And to this end the fruits of the roialties are to be converted, and
corn and provision to be laid up in storehouses.

The Romans taking that course, did in all places where they commanded, find
means to maintain their armies without any great exactions, yea oftentimes
the fruits of the country were so great, that beside that charge there came
much to the public treasury.

Charles Guicciard. lib. 1.
the eight of France, having conquered the kingdom of Naples, and divided the
roialties, yea and the public store among his Favorites: when need required,
had almost nothing to maintain his army; and therefore as unworthy of so
good hap, presently lost the same again. Xenophon in the consultation of
Xenoph. Cyr. paed. 2.
Cyrus and Cyaxaris, shows that for maintenance of the wars, and of
countries vanquishe: an army must be maintained, and that an army cannot be
maintained, unless the revenues that maintain it be certain, and continual.

That less force may serve; such as give suspicion of revolt, are to be
disarmed: so Herodot.
Cyrus used the Lydians. The Romans likewise would not suffer such as were
their subjects to Liu. 8.
arm without their commandment. Futhermore, those that are like to prove
heads of factions, are to be removed out of the country: for seldom do the
common people move, unless they be stirred by factious heads. The Romans
having conquered the country of Macedonia, and converted it into a province,
for more assurance of peace, brought away with them the last Regis amicos.
purpuratos, ducesque exe^cituu^^ praefectosque nauium. Liu. 45.
kings friends and Favorites, and all his captains, both of his army and
navy, and likewise men of appearance and quality.

If so be time or sickness do decaie our forces; the same are to be supplied
in time, that the rebellious take not occasion by our weakness to make
stirs. For want of this consideration, in time past we lost our conquest in
France, and all that want it, cannot choose but loose.

For the rest, if the governors of countries newly conquered, be careful and
watchful, and trust no man without cause, and use equality in taxations, and
do good justice against raueuours, bribetakers, and rebels, they need not fear
rebellion: if they do not, all force that may be used, will not long serve to
keep them in subjection. The Liu.
Priuernatians desiring peace of the Romans, and offering to yield themselves:
being demanded how long they would keep it, answered plainly, that if the
conditions were reasonable, long; if unreasonable and unjust, no longer then
they were forced. For no people can long like of a government, wherein they
are spoiled, vexed, iniuried, and to say all in one word, pilled, and
tyrannised.

CHAP. XV. Containing a discourse concerning the means, whereby an army that
is foiled, or fears to fight may most safely retire: and how the enemy in
following the course of his victory, may be stopped.
HOw an army that is strong in the field, may safely march, fight with
advantage, and use the victory, I have spoken sufficient. But because the
success of (...).
wars is doubtful, and Mars (as Poets feign) favors (...).
now one, then an another: To perfect this discourse, it remains that Ialso
declare, how when blastes of wind blow contrary, we may either retire from
the enemy, that seems to have prise, and fast hold on us in marching or
fighting; or else stop his course that he proceed no further, or else our selves
gather new forces.

It is a matter very difficult for an army that is broken to rallie it self,
and depart without utter discomfiture where the enemy knows it, and uses
his advantage. For nothing can be more hardly remedied, then fear and disorder
of the multitude, if once it enter thoroughly, or the enemy follows
speedily. If the enemy gives us respite, or our forces be not altogether
broken, the means to save the rest, and succor those that retire, are these.
First, if there be any ground of advantage in the place, the same is to be
taken with that part of the army that remains entire, which divided into
squabrons, may receive their own people flying within the distances, and
repel the enemy from the higher ground. In the mean while, those that are in
disorder, are to be brought into order again behind those squadrons.

The Vulneribus defesti, and pedem refer, and quod mons suberat circiter
mill passuum eo serecipere coeperunt. Caes. bell. Gal. 1.
Heluetians being wearried and foiled in the fight with Caesar, retired to a
hill has by, and there making head, saved the rest. The forragers sent out by
Cicero at Vatuca, being charged by the Germans retired, and defended
themselves well, as long as they kept on the higher ground. At Caes. bell. Gal.
7.
Gergouia when Caesar's men pressed by the enemy, and briuen from the higher
ground began to fly, he succored them, and stayed the enemies pursuit by
placing other squadrous at the foot at the hill, with whom they had no courage
to encounter. Neither did Antonius cum cohortibus 12 descendens exloco
superiore cernebatur, cuius aduentus Pompeianos compiessit, nostroque firmauit.
Cael de bell. Ciu. 3.
Pompeyes men that chased Caesar's soldiers at Dyrrhachium pursue them, after
that they once saw Antony coming with succor from the higher ground. If there
be no higher ground near to retrait unto; the next course is for those
companies that are pressed, to retire within the distances of those squadrons,
that stand firm. For this cause the Romans did always so range their
battles, that the squadrons of the first battle might retire within the
squadrons of the next, and both be relieved within the squadrons of their last.
In the encounter at S. Clear Anno 1569, where the Kings Auantgard fled, the
same was succored by the battle that followed, which so charged the
Protestants, that pursued it, and drove them down the hill, that if the
Lansquenets that stood at the foot of the hill had not stood firm, many of
them had there been cut in pieces.

That advantage which the higher ground gives, the same a deep trenche, or
thick hedge, or a strait like wise affords: so that if our squadrons, that
stand firm be there placed, the rest that are discouraged may run behind
them, and take breath. The Romans retiring often times within the fortifications
of their camp, have there again made head against the enemy, and saved
themselves.

If neither the place where the army is ordered, nor the ranging of our battles
do admit any such retraite: the last remedy is to auance forward either our
horsemen, or some firm squadron of footmen, especially shot and targetters,
upon the flank of the enemy that chaseth our men: and if he stay not, then
resolutely to charge him. In the mean time those that fly are to be rallyed
again. Annibal in that last battle which he fought with the Romans in
Afrike, thrice rallyed his forces, and so many fresh charges gave he unto them.
If his soldiers had been answerable unto him, or else if the Romans had not
followed very orderly, he might percase have broken them. Liui. 35.
Philopoemen charging the enemy, that followed the chase of his men too egerly;
did overthrow him. At Rauenna the Guicciat^.
Spaniards that remained after the battle unbroken, retiring in good order, and
using the advantage of the ground, did so receive the enemy that charged them,
that they slew the General, and diverse of his company.

Those therefore that retire, Iet them march resolutely, and orderly: the shot
let them approach near to the flanks of the squadrons of pikes. There also is
the defense of targetters against horse. The pikes let them not disdeine the
help of shot, and short weapons. The horse are to be ranged behind the
squadrons, or on the flanks. Which if they be united in one body are not
easily broken, nor rashly to be charged.

If being near the enemy thou desire to depart without fight, at least
without Iosse, thy best course is to make him uncertain of thy purpose, by
pretending that which thou meanest not. By making of fires, hauging of matches
in bushes, and standing of tents, the enemy is oftentimes abused, especially
in the night. That thy companies may make more speed, thou art before thou
beginnest to dislodge, to send thy hurt and sick, together with the baggage
and great ordonance before thee, and then to follow with the rest. Sauciorum
and aegrorum habita ratione impedimenta omnia silentio prima nocte ex castris
Apolloniam praemittit, Ac conquiescere ante iter confectum vetuit, his vna
legio praesidio missa est. Caes. de bell. Ciu. 3.
Caesar departing from Pompey at Dyrrhachium, that he might not be charged at
disadvantage in his march, took this course. The sick, hurt, and baggage of
the camp he sent away first guarded with one Regiment. Other Regiments he
caused to march after them some good distance: with two legions that remained
he followed last. And having marched so much as he meant to do that day, and
making show to lodge there, when the enemy, that followed was not aware, and
vnreaby, he departed presently, and that day got so much ground, that after
ward he old never be overtaken, before he came whither he meant to go. If
the enemy be ready in arms to follow, it is hard to go from him, unless the
neerenesse of hills, or straites do favor thy retraite.

Lest thou be charged in retiring, with the enemies horse or shot, or
disordered in some strait; great care must be uses. To repress the force of
horsemen, use either thy horsemen entermingled with some shot, or squadrons of
pikes flanked with musketeers: against shot, use horsemen in the plain, and
shot and targetters in straites. If thou fear to be charged in some strait,
take the upper ground with thy shot, and targets, and seek those advantages
which before I have showed thee in the discourse of the use of diverse weapons,
and advantages of ground.

To stop the enemies pursuit, where he must pass a strait before be come
at thee, it is a good course to cut down trees and woods, and to set them on
fire. For horse will hardly pass through the fire, nor can lightly pass, but
in hye ways or made ways. By this means Xenophon retired safe with his men
from Xenoph. exp. Cyr. 5.
Dryla, and the (...).
Bellouacians escaped the hands of Caesar, in the warr^s of France.

Pompey being to take ship at Brundusium, and fearing least if he abandoned
the walls, Caesar would enter the town, and charge his men, as they went on
board, Pottas obstruit, vias platealque inaedificat, s^s^ar transuersas vijs
perducir, ibique sodes, stipiesque praeacutos defigir, haec ciatibus teriaque
ina quat, aditus ad portus maximis trabibus praesepit. Milites silentio naues
conscendunt. expediti ex euocati^ and sagittarijs in muro collocantur, quibus
certo loco actuarias naues relinquens signo dato renocat. Caes. de bell. Ciu. 1.
stopped and dammed up all the gates and ways save one, and in the streets
made blind trenches, staked them, and covered them; on the walls he placed
his archery, and light armed for defense of them, until the rest were all
shipped: when all the rest were on board, then did these run toward the
port, where there were boats and fregates ready to receive them.

That there may be some end of flying, either thou art to direct thy course to
the hills, and there to make head, as advantage is offered unto thee, or else to
take some strong town for thy safeguard. The Romans keeping with their army in
the higher ground, wearied Annibals victorious army, and cut between the same,
and provision, So long as the Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
Gauls kept on the higher ground, and straited Caesar's victuals, he could
not hurt them. D. Brutus in taking of Mutina arrested Antonies army, that was
going into France. The retraite of Vercingetorix into Alexia, stayed Caesar a
great time in that siege, in which mean time the Gauls levied new forces.
The siege of towns do oftentimes, break the force of an army. The
Protestants finding no resistance in open field, were harrassed, and tired out
in the siege of Hist. de troubl. de Fr.
Poytiers: and like hap had the adverse party. For being victorious at
Moncontour, they lost all vigor, and strength at the siege of S. Iean d'Angeli.

That thou do not receive dishonor by retiring; two things thou art
especially to have regard unto: first, that thou do not leave behind thee,
thy sick and hurt men; secondly, that thou do not loose thy carriages, and
baggage, nor leave them. For without them, thou can neither commodiously carry
arms, nor victuals with thee, nor maintain thy company.

To do whatsoever in this case is requisite, nothing is more available, then
expedition. By that thou dispatchest all impediments, thou winnest ground, thou
preuentest the enemy, thou sanest thy self, and thy friends. And therefore if
in good success: much more in calamity, ought we to use all celeritie.
Afranius being almost past all danger, yet for idleness suffered the enemy to
come between him, and his retraite, which Caes. de Bell. Civil. lib. 1.
was his ruin.

These things they hinder and stop the enemies proceeding for sometime. But
if thou meanest to drive him out of the country, or to hinder him for winning
any more ground; new forces must be levied, and an army sent into the field,
if not to fight with him upon eauen ground: yet to watch all advantages, and
to succor where need shall require. Further thou must fortify all towns
near, where the enemy lies. This was the proceeding of the Romans against
Annibal, and of the Gauls against Caesar. Philip the King Philippus intra
Tempe statiuis positis, vt quisque locus ab host tentabatur, praesidia per
occasiones summittebat. Liui. 31.
of Macedonia after his overthrow by the River of Aous, encamped with his
forces in tempe a place of very hard access; put gardes in the cities round
about; and as any city or castle was assailed by the enemy; so he succourd
the same with men, and other necessary provision. But in this course two things
we are to take heed of, first that we do not take upon us to defend towns
either weak by situation, or want of defense, or else that want things
necessary for to sustain a siege. Secondly that we do not suffer the towns
that are besieged to languish without hope of supply, or succor.

For mainteyning of our credit with our friends and confederats, which
commonly yield to follow the current of good, or bad success: if in the field
we receive some check, yet are we as much as we can to cover our hurtes, and
diminish the credit of the enemies victory. Caesar having received some
losses at Caes. de bell. Ciu. 3.
Dyrrachium, yet would he not acknowledge them to his soldiers, but ascribed
the slender success of his enterprise to error, rather then to the enemies
force. Vercingetorix after the loss of Auaricum, where a few only of many
escaped, and that in pitiful plight; Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
apparelled them, and hid their deformity, and diminished with the best words
he could the loss of the town. The Heluetians likewise being foiled by
Caesar at the passage of the river of Sone, did diminish the number of those,
that were overthrown, and assigned it rather to casualtie, then virtue.
Nothing does more Charles duke of Burgundy by ambassadors sent to Lewis the 11
of France, covered the loss received at Morat. Phil. comm.
discourage soldiers, then when they see the General himself by the
greatness of the calamity discouraged. This caused the soldiers of Domitius
to forsake him at Corfinium, and to yield the town to Caesar. Liu. 23.
Varro the Roman Consul, discovering unto the Capuans the wants of the
Romans, and the great calamity they had received at Cannae, thereby thinking
to move pity, moved them rather to revolt, as despairing that the Romans
could ever recover themselves after such an overthrow. The Liu. 31.
ugly sight of the Macedonians slain and mangled by the Romans, which in
wisdom the king should have covered, did greatly terrify the army, when to
praise them, he showed them openly.

Finally, as all calamities, overthrows, and mishaps do proceed from contempt
of religion, justice, and military discipline; so there is no hope to repair
our losses, but by restoring the worship of God, by administering of good
justice, and strict observance of military orders. The Romans as they lost
their city, and were overthrown by the Gauls at Allia for their contempt of
these things; so restoring matters to their ancient form recovered the same
again, and afterward had great good success in all their enterprises. Again,
when in the times of the latter emperors, that state was given over to all
impiety, and injustice, and utterly neglected the laws of arms, by which that
empire had grown so great; the same fell into utter ruin. For who can expect
good success in wars, that neglect the worship of the Lord of hosts the
supreme moderator of all wars? As long therefore as religion and justice is
trodden under foot, and hypocrisy, and shows of ceremonial reformation, and
Jewish toys go for good religion, and the goods destinate to the service of
God, mainteinance of virtue, and learning, and relief of the poor, are made a
spoil of harpyes and rauiners, and Gods ministers made a scorn of every lewd
railing companion, and honors are sold for money, and disloyalty, and treason,
and all villeiny redeemed with bribery, and glory is placed in stones, silks,
and strange fashions; and men of value contemned for poverty, and virtue
despised as dust, and wealth esteemed as felicity, and learning rewarded with
alms, and valiant soldiers cast of with proud and disdainful words, and base
rascals command, and ouerrule virtue, and law with wealth and favor; and men's
skins are not valued at the price of dogs skins; and no man may do his
country service, but he shall therein endanger his honor, state, and life, and
no man cares for the common cause; but every man abuses his honor, and
authority, either to enrich himself and his brats, or to win money, and
wealth, to spend the same again in surfeit, leachery, and excess: so long
neither can any nation have victory, nor loosing can ever recover their loss

CHAP. XVI. Wherein is showed how martial men proceed in the sieges of cities
or fortes.
THus having declared what practice of arms requires in accoiling the enemy
that hastes forward to the obteining of a full victory: I am now to return to
speak of him, that having driven his enemy out of the field, makes him to
take sanctuary within some fort or city. for that is rather the beginning of
victory, then the end of wars, and therefore may he not so suffer him to
escape, nor lay down arms, before he command as well in the towns, as in
open field. Wherein that he may proceed orderly, and loose no labor, nor cost,
which of all other actions of war is greatest in sieges: ( Thucidides
reports that the Athenians in the siege of Potideaa spent above Thucid. 2.
Two thousand talents of Athens pass that sum.
350000 pounds sterling) first he is to consider what towns are first to be
besieged, and assaulted: secondly by what means he may prevail against them,
and win them.

Of towns therefore that do make resistance against us, those are first to be
besieged, where the General of the enemies is retired with his forces: if he be
gone far away: then we are next to beset those towns, which for their
authority, or convenient situation do carry with them the rest of the country:
and if wars be so managed, that our forces will not serve both to besiege the
capital city of the country, and to repress the courses of our enemies
intercepting our vittualles, then are we to go on forward orderly in the
country, and to leave no town behind us, that may stop the conueyance of our
victualles. Caesar pursuing Vercingetorix made him take Alexia for his retrait,
and there besieged him. Annibal to terrify the Spaniards, and to enforce them
to submit themselves to the empire of the Carthaginians, assaulted, took, and
sacked Carteiam vrbe^ opulentam caput ge^tis eius expugnat, diripitque. quo metu
perculsae minores civitates stipendio imposito imperium accepere. Liu. 21.
Carteia the principal city of the country, wherewith other small cities were
so dismayed, that they submitted themselves, and paid such tribute, as he
imposed on them. and translating the wars into Italy, he beset, and took
Taurinum caput gentis expugnat. Liu. 21.
Taurinum the head city of all the country at the foot of the Alps, which
made all the towns thereabout to yield themselves. The Athenians inuading the
Island of Sicile, made the attempt against Syracusae, being the head city of the
country, first: which course both the Carthaginians, and Romans in the
Sicilian wars pursued. The prince of Parma in the siege of of Antwerpe had
like respect, and reasons to make him begin there. for commonly all the
country does follow the condition and proceeding of the capital city. Lautrec
in the enterprise of Naples, spending time in taking paltry towns by the way,
when his purpose was to go directly to the siege of Naples, did tire his army,
spend his men, and loose time, which the enemy spent better in arming himself.
In our journey to Portugal, many do likewise mislike, that setting our course
for Lisbone, we turned aside to Coronna, which was no small hindrance to us,
and help to the enemy. In besieging of small towns, there is often as much
labor and cost, as in greater; and little or no gain. Those therefore, that
when they may go to the head, are paltring about small towns, or castles, are
like unskillful soldiers, that when the heart lies open without defense, are
still striking at the hand or foot. but if our force serve not to besiege the
strongest town of the enemies country, yet before we sit down before any
town, let us see what commodity we may get by taking it. Scipio considering
that new Carthage in Spain was a fit port for ships, and the store house of
the enemy, and a place where his treasure and hostages lay, did begin the
wars with the siege of that town. Annibal made many attempts against Nola,
and Naples, for the desire he had to have a port in Italy, that lay
commodiously against Afrike. failing of these, at length he got Tarentum, and
Locri. For the same cause he made reckoning of Salapia. for it lay conveniently
in the midst of the country, and was very commodious for the conueyance of
victuals to his army. King Edward the third, after his victory at Cressi, sat
down before Caleis, for that it was a commodious port for his enterprises
against France. Those that spend great labor in winning paltry hamlets, as did
the French king that was also king of Poland, in the winning of Liuron in
Dauphine, although they win the place, yet win nothing but repentance: and
if they fail; scorn and loss.

Towns are taken diverse ways: viz. either by siege, or by assault, or
surprise, or by all, or two of these joined together. in every of which, the
proceeding is diverse, as the ends are diverse. The end of a siege is to strait
the town, so that either for want of victualles, water, munition, soldiers,
hope of succor, health, or other commodity, the same be driven to yield. The
end of a surprise is slily to enter the town without knowledge of the enemy.
The end of an assault, is to force the enemy to give us entrance. This
diversity of ends may teach us both what to do, and what to avoid.

The end of sieges being to force the enemy to yield for want: we are to use
all devices and means to make him spend his store, and to increase his want.
Alexander king of Liu. 7.
Epeirus, having a purpose to besiege Leucadia, suffered all the country
people that would, to enter the town, that they within might sooner spend
their victuals. When they of Caes. de bell. Gal. 7.
Alexia besieged by Caesar began to send out women, and children, and aged
persons, such as only served to spend victualles; they could not be suffered
to pass. The French king that now is, did otherwise in the siege of Paris, an.
1590, moved with Christianity, and pity. but the practice of war required
rather rigor in that case. In Non facile est simul misereri, and sapere.
which hard it is, both to show mercy, and wisdom together. Where the
defendants are not more politic then ordinary; there the assailants may also
by false shows, and fained escaladaes make them spend their powder in vain.
In these late troubles of France, while the brave soldiers within a certain
place, shot all the night at certain matches conveyed from place to place,
and at an ass, or two, that made a stir in the town ditch, in the morning
they began to yield for want of powder. Caesar by a Caes. bell. Gal. 8.
mine coming to the veins of the spring that served Vxellodunum, took away
the water from the town, and so forced the same to yield. Thucid. 1.
Megabazus besieging the Athenians in the Island Prosopis in Egypt, by a device
turning away the water that ran into the haven, where their ships lay, set
their ships dry, and gave entrance to his men, and took away all escape from
the enemy, whose ships were on ground. The town of Chartres in France had
likewise for want of water, and other necessities been driven to great straits
in the siege, an. 1568, the Protestants turning away the river out of the
channel; but that by conclusion of peace, the siege was broken up shortly
after. Caesar by keeping Pompey in a short compass of ground, by his
entrenchments had almost famisht all his horse, in which consisted his special
strength. Which guard and diligence if the Protestants, anno 1569, had used in
the siege of Poitiers, they had not only famisht all the horse of the enemy,
but otherwise hurt him. but they did not so much as bar the ways, much less
other ground so, but that he sallied at pleasure.

There are two means principal to stop the town besieged from victuals,
and things necessary, the one of which must necessarily be used, if we mean
to atchieue our purpose: the first is to entrench the town round about, if it
be a land town; if it stand upon the water, then to cast a bank about it on
that part that is toward the land, and with ships or boats, to guard and stop
the way to the sea, or water. The second is to bar the ways, and upon all
places of easy access to make in convenient distances, sconces or fortes. The
first is more laborious, but very effectual: the second is easy, but seldom
takes effect, unless time and the weakness of the enemy do help us.
Therefore was that course always used of antiquity, this seldom, unless it
were of such as either knew not what to do, or had not means to do more. The
Lacedaemonians besieging (...) etc. Thucid. 2.
Platea, cast up a bank round about the town, the same they guarded with
turrets built upon it in equal distances, and least any might climb over it,
they made a strong Palissade upon it, and did stick it full of stakes. The
Thucid. 1.
Athenians used the same circumuallation about Potidaea, which they compassed
round with a strong bank and deep ditch. Besieging (...) Thucid. 1.
Miletu^, that part that was toward the land, they compassed with three banks
and so many ditches, and with their ships so crossed the haven that none could
enter or issue that way. Caesar used yet more labor in besieging of towns in
France. Before Alexia first he made a trench 20 foot broad round about the
town. This trench was nearer to the town then his camp by 400 pases. Beside
that he made two other trenches without that, each of them was 15 foot broad,
and behind the utmost of the two, Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
a bank of 12 foot hie with a parapet, and crenels upon it. For guard whereof
he caused sharp forked stakes to be made fast in them. Upon the bank he built
turrets round about, one of them in distance from an other 80 foot: in the
ditches he pitched sharp stakes, and them covered with hurdles, and earth. The
ground betwixt the trenches he set full of sharp stakes, and boords full of
sharp nails with the points upward: and all this from his camp inward to the
town. The like trenches and banks, and turrets, he made round about his camp
without, for defense against those that should come to relieve ye townsme^
without. Things now incredible to be reported but then commonly used. In few
days he compassed the city Vallo pe^um 12 in circuitu 15 millium, crebriscum
castellis circummuniti erant Aduatici. Caes. bell. Gal. 2.
of the Aduaticans, with a bank in circuit 15 miles, in height 12 foot: upon
the same he made turrets, and without it a deep trench. The same proceeding he
used in the siege of Vtica in Afrike, and long before him Scipio, besieging the
same town. Fossa and vallo vrbem circumdat, castella excitat modicis
interuallis. Liu. 25.
Fuluius in the siege of Capua, toward the town did make a ditch of a great
breadth, and upon it he raised an high bank with turrets upon the same round
about the town, and the like defenses he made against the enemy without, so
that not so much as a messenger could go out, nor any succor come in for to
help ye townsmen. The same course another Fuluius used in the siege of
Ambracia, as Liuie testifies. The Gauls at length perceiving the great
commodity that these works brought with the^ in effecting their purposes in
sieges, albeit unacquainted with labor, yet besieging Caes. bell. Gal. 5.
Quintus Cicero his camp, compassed him in with hie banks, and deep trenches,
imitating all such works, as they had seen the Romans to make before them.
Annibal perceiving that the castle of Tarentum which he besieged, had the sea
open, persuaded the Tarentines to go to sea, and to stop the passage that way,
which if they could have done, in the end percase they might have prevailed.
But the Romans were too vigilant, and sent them within succor in time. If
Lautrecke likewise had compassed them of Naples round about with banks and
trenches, and stopped the haven so, that no victuals had been brought into the
town by sea or by land, he had not failed of his enterprise in taking the
city. But now adays our great commanders think every little thing much, and
our soldiers are so idle and proud, that they will not work. If with
certain Pioners they cut the high ways, and make certain Barriquades upon
them, and erect five or six weak sconces which are evil termed fortes being
of no strength nor value, they think they have done much, yea more then
ordinary, either by water or by land they leave the town open, so that
seldom they come to the end of their desires.

The French kings brother that was afterward king of Poland besieging Rochell,
an. 1573. did not so much as cut the ways so, but that the townsmen diverse
times sallied out upon him both with horse, and foot. Long was it ere his
ships were come to bar the haven, and when they were come, yet did they not
so well guard it, but that both ships with munitions and victuals, and
messengers entered and issued diverse times. At Poitiers besieged by the
Protestants, an. 1569. matters passed far worse. They neither barred the
plain, nor the ways with any sufficient trenches: succors entered, horsemen
and footmen sallied diverse times. To this pass idleness has brought sieges,
that few take effect. But let not our soldiers be ashamed to do that which
the Romans did, and practice of war requires. Nay that valiant prince R.
Edward the 3, has showed them by his example, what they should do. for
besieging Caleis, he compassed it with a sufficient ditche, and bank, so that
none could sally out, and for defense of himself, against such as should come
with succor from without, he made the like works outward, and in the end
prevailed. So likewise towns besieged are to be environed with banks, and
trenches, and with the same our camp is likewise to be fenced. The use of the
sea is to be taken from them with ships, as Marcellus did in the siege of
Syracusae, and Scipio in the siege of new Carthage, and Vtica. If the same
stand upon rivers, the same are to be barred with bridges, as Liu. 2.
Porsena practiced in the siege of Rome, and not long since the Prince of Parma
in the siege of Antwarpe.

If men will not take the pains to enuirone the town with banks and trenches
round about, yet must all hie ways and streets, and easy accesses, at the
least, be well trenched and defended with banks; and sconces built in diverse
places for the hinderance of succors, and stopping of sallies. The Duke of
Alua did so in the siege of Arlem, The Prince of Parma in the siege of
Maestricht, and in diverse other places. Those which take diverse castles, or else
new build them two or three leagues distant from the Town which they
besiege, thinking thereby to famish the Townsmen besieged, seldom effect
their purpose. The Protestants, anno 1567, seasing Pont Charenton, Pont S.
Clou, Busenual, S. Denis, and other places near Paris, thought to keep it
from victuals, but the distances from Paris, and of one place to another, were
so great, that even the Country people passed out and in between, almost at
pleasure. The practice of the Earl of Froissart.
Flanders, that took like course in famishing of Gant, in the days of Edward
the third, was likewise made frustrate.

First therefore the towns besieged are to be environed either with a bank,
and trenches, or else with sconces very near to the walls. Secondly, the same
are to be kept with strong gardes, and diligent watches, that none enter in, or
pass out: for defense whereof, ye banks are to be made high, and well flanked;
and the ditches deep, that they be not easily filled. Duae legiones semper pro
castris excubabant. Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
Caesar lying before Auaricum, kept two legions always ready in arms to
defend his works against the sudden sallies of the Townsmen. And such was his
guard and watchfulnes in his sieges, that albeit the Caes. bell. Gal. 2.
Aduaticans that were another time by him besieged, presuming upon his
security, had thought, during the treaty of peace, to force him to break up
his siege by a sally: yet he had men sufficient ready to repel them. The
Romans neither in time of war, nor truce, day nor night, were so secure or
negligent, but that always they kept good guard, and watch. Those that there
in proceeded weakly, or negligently, have endangered themselves, and been often
times forced to rise without doing any thing. Lewis ye Philip Comines.
11 of France, and Charles of Burgundy, lying in the suburbs of Liege, a town
by them besieged, without either good watch, or strong guard, or defense,
escaped very narrowly taking, by them that sallied in the night out of the
town. Amilcar Polyb.
besieging a town in Sicily, was taken in his camp by those that sallied out
upon him in the night: which if his fortification had been good, or his watch
diligent, could not have happened. The Thucid. 5.
Athenians besieging Amphipolis, and lying without sufficient defense, or
watch, were defeated by Brasidas the Spartan. By like negligence, succor, and
victuals entered into Naples besieged by Lautreck; into Poytiers besieged by ye
Protestants; into Rochel, besieged by the French king after ye massacre, anno
1573. Philip of Macedonia, lying before Apollonia without suspicion, or
defense, against the enemies sallies, was forced to rise, yea and to run,
forced by the Townsmen aided by certain Romans. Francis the French king was
taken, and his army defeated before Pauy, by those that came to the succor of
the town, which could not have happened, if he had laien within any sufficient
trenches, or had but well guarded the ways, and passages. Trebonius lying
before Massilia, having his works and engines almost destroyed and fired by the
Townsmen, during the treaty of composition, teaches us not so to trust the
enemy at any time, but that we have a sure guard, and diligent watch. That is
the only remedy against sallies from within, and succors from without.

Further, as we are by this means to proceed against the enemy besieged, so
are we to take heed that by want, or disorder among our selves, we be not
forced to depart with scorn. Caesar sat down before no town, but he knew
how, and where to have victuals, and all provision necessary for a siege. The
Capua obsideri caepta, quaequeue in eam rem opus erant, comportabantur.
Casilinum frumentum conuectu^, ad vulturni ostium castellum communitum, vt and
mare, and flumen in potestate essent. Liui 25.
Romans going to besiege Capua, provided corn and all things necessary, and
took such order that both by sea and land they had supplies coming to them.
Caesar at the siege of Massilia, caused al stuff necessary to be brought into
his camp: neither victuals nor engines, nor instruments to work withal, nor
any thing was wanting. In all sieges the Romans proceeded very orderly both in
their provision and government. Their men lay dry in tents, strong within
defenses, they had meat and victuals, the sick and hurt had relief. But in
our times, and also in ancient time for want of government in these cases,
many calamities have happened, and many sieges have been broken. In the late
siege of Rochel the kings soldiers for want of victuals were famished, for
want of things necessary, and good government, sickness grew among them. The
same was the cause of the ruin of the army of Protestants before Poytiers, of
Lautrecks enterprise against Naples. Charles duke of Burgundy lying before
Nancey, discontinued his battry for want of powder: in the mean while succors
came that raised his siege. The siege of Charity Anno 1569, was raised because
the Kings soldiers sat down before it, before they had sufficient provision
with them. Qu. Cur. lib. 4.
Amyntas lying before Memphis was discomfited, and driven to raise his siege,
for that his men were ranging about the country, when they should have been
ready to defend their camp, and repel the enemy. The same error was
committed by Francis ye first of France before Pauy, who suffering his men to
disband and straggle abroad, diminished his forces, so that he was not able to
resist the enemy that came upon him. In winter if that soldiers do not lie
dry in their trenches, and lodgings, and have fire: the weather and season
forces them to raise their siege. This broke the enterprise of the English
against Zutphan anno 1567. The same incommodities forced Guicciard. lib. 5.
Caesar Borgia to rise from before Faenza well beaten with winter, rain, and
foul weather.

Therefore ought wise Generals before they sit down to besiege any town, to
consider the time, and to examine whether he has sufficient force and
provision to effect such a matter. Multa magnis ducibus, vt non aggredienda,
sic non deserenda. Liui. 24.
Many things are not to be attempted of wise leaders, yet being once begun
are not lightly to be given over, as Marcellus said. The town of Secca in the
kingdom of Naples being besieged and not taken by the French, assured that
whole state unto Co^saluo, as says Guicciard. lib. 6.
Guicciardine. The check we had at Coronna in our voyage of Portugal did not
a little discourage us. Perseuerantia in omni genere militiae maxim tamen in
obsidendis vrbibus necessaria est, quatum plerasque munitionibus ac naturali
situ inexpugnabiles, fame sitique ipsum tempus vincit, expugnatque. Veget.
Perseverance, and constancy in every action of war prevails much, but
most in the sieges of cities, as is evident by the great patience, and
constancy of Caesar's soldiers in the siege of Auaricum, and Alexia. For many
towns that by natural situation are inexpugnable, by hunger and thirst, and
want of things necessary, are taken in continuance of time.

That the General may both provide sufficiently, and know perfitly how to
encounter the enemy; it is requisite that he not only have intelligence of
his proceedings within the town, but also of his succors coming without. For
that cause he is not only to have his espials and discouerers abroad, but
also (if he can) his intelligences within. The Guicciard.
succors that came to Florence were by this means defeated, or ever they came
near. The General ought always to be watchful, yet shall these
intelligences hurt him nothing.

That his victuals and provision may come to him safely, the General that
besieges any place, is to place garrisons in convenient distances from his
camp, and to have his horsemen to encounter such as lie at receite in the way.
Thus by labor, and foresight he shall be able not ouely to keep the enemy
short; but also to provide sufficient for his own people, so that he may
maintain them in heath, strength, and good order.

Those that have no firm hope to obtain the city besieged but by famine, and
want, ought notwithstanding, as occasion shall be offered, to attempt the same
by surprise also, yea and by assault. By surprise towns may be taken diverse
ways, sometime by means of intelligence with some friends within the towns,
sometime by Mine, sometime by escalade, and sometime by some privy entrance.
Intelligence is sometime procured by money, sometime by friendship. Philip of
Spain has no less of late time prevailed by money, then by force. Belike he
has learned of Philip king of Macedonia, that no castle is impregnable, where
an ass laden with gold can be admitted to enter. Tarentum was taken by
Annibal in the night, and again recovered by Fabius by means of intelligence,
which either of them had within the town. The castle of Rome was bought by the
Sabins in the time of Romulus. Byzantium was bought of certain traitors by
Philip king of Macedonia, But what need I bring examples of this, seeing now
adays the the practice of buying and selling of towns is a matter so common?

But let those that buy and sell, and likewise those that go about to surprise
others, take heed first of Trattato Do^pio.
double dealing, next that the enemy be not made of the party, and get notice
of our enterprise. By double dealing many thinking to surprise others, have
themselves been surprised, as before I have declared by the example of the
capt^ine of S. Omar, that would have bought Caleis of the Italian, to whom King
Edward the third had committed it to be guarded, and by the enterprise against
Bourges, anno 1569, and diverse enterprises against Rochell, and Montauban, in
these late wars of France. The surprise that Annibal intended against
Salapia, was vented, and his men slain that went about to execute it. Liu. 43.
Appius Claudius thinking to surprise Vscana a town in Illyrium (now Sclauony,
while he neither kept pledges of the men that offered the town, nor scut any
espialles before, to understand how matters went) fell into a trappe laid for
him by the way, and lost 8000 soldiers. The Guicciard. lib. 3.
Spaniards that thought to surprise Gifona a town in the kingdom of Naples,
were no sooner entered, then they were cut in pieces 500 of them: so were some
of the prince of Parmaes soldiers used not long since at Berghenopsome.

The way to avoid double dealing, is first to assure our selves by pledges of
the wives, or children, or friends of those that deal with us; secondly by
examining those straightly, that seem to make offer to give us entrance; thirdly
by fending espialles before both into the place, and about the place, to
consider if they can see, or hear any thing, that is suspicious. Fabius by
strict examination of the messenger, understood the treachery of them of
Metapontus, that under color of delivering up the town, would have drawn him
into a trappe.

That our enterprise be not discovered, great celerity, and caution is to be
used, when we go about to take a town by surprise. Matters long in
hammering, seldom take effect. While Marcellus lingered in making his
preparatiues to surprise Syracusae, in the mean time his partisans were
discovered and slain, which also happened in a certain enterprise of the
Protestants against Lion; and of the Kings side against Rochell in these late
brabbles of France. Further we are to choose such a time of the night, and such
weather, as may best cover our desseins. Those that take our part within the
town are to be admonished, that they do not bewray themselves by meetings, or
words, or signs, that may be suspicious. we must also take heed, that our
company that are employed in the enterprise, do not give any sign, or make any
untimely noise, whereby the enemy may have notice of our purpose. The Hist. de
troubl. de Fr. l. 5.
town of Diepe had been surprised by the Protestants, an. 1569, had not one
witless companion discharged a pistole, the sound whereof gave the alarm in
the town before things were ready. Another time by fiering a chapel, the
Protestants going to surprise a place, gave the enemy notice of their coming,
and leisure to provide to enterteine them. Finally, appointment is justly to be
kept with our partisans in the town: we may neither come too soon, lest we be
espied; nor stay too long, lest the matter be marred for want of
correspondence. At Lusignen, an. 1569, the faction of the Protestants
discovering themselves before their companions without were come, lost
themselves, and marred the matter, that otherwise could not, but have taken
effect. Those that surprised the castle of Sancerre presently after the
massacre of the Protestants in France, not being succored at the time
appointed, were glad to lay off hold, and to run away.

The town of Liu. 5.
Veij was surprised by Camillus conueying his soldiers into the town under
the ground through a mine. Liu. 4.
Seruilius likewise by a mine entered the castle of Fidene. Chelar a town in
Viuaretz, in these late troubles of France, was taken by a cave that went out
of the town under ground to a place a pretty way off. How we make mines for the
most part to ruinate walls by force of powder: yet may mines be well employed
to enter the town by surprise, for conducting whereof, those that are skillful
are to be employed, that it may be dug deep enough to go under the ditch,
and foundation of the wall, that it be opened in the town where there is least
suspect, that the same be well underpropped, that the earth fall not, that the
earth be conveyed away within some trench or hollow place, and that by some
other work the work in the mine may be concealed and covered. Mines made to
overthrow the walls ought to be made crooked, but this may be made strait, and
either with one or two entrances* but if it be well made, if it serve not to
enter the town, it may yet serve to overthrow the walls. Before thou
beginnest to mine, consider whether the ground be such as may be wrought. if it
be a rock, it cannot be wrought for hardness; if it be full of springes, then
water will mar thy work. In both these cases, thou loosest thy labor. But
more shall be said of mines, when we shall come to entreat of ruins of walls,
and breaches.

Where the enemy is secure, or negligent, the Town may percase be surprised
by Escalade. Which, yt it may take effect, diverse things before hand are to be
provided, and considered. Ladders are to be first provided both for number,
length, form and strength sufficient: the want of ladders, cost the present
French King, the loss of an opportunity in taking Paris. Next, such places as
seem to give most easy access, are to be viewed, and chosen: the ditche also
is to be sounded, if there be water in it, least it be too deep: against that
time of the night, when men are most quiet, our things are to be made ready:
the season that is most troublesome, and dark, is fittest for our enterprise:
sometime the state of the Townsmen gives us opportunity to enter. Syracusae
was taken by Marcellus, while the soldiers and Citizens lay drunk in one of
their solemn feasts. The Town of Cales likewise was surprised by Liu 8.
Escalade upon a feast day at night, when the Citizens were most secure. The
Turks understanding the disorder of Christians in their carneuall (we call it
shrofetide) chose that time to Alphonso d' ^^loa.
scale a strong Town in Sclauony, and while the Citizens lay sleepy, and
drunk, entered the same. Of all the times of the night, and hour before the
dawning of the day, is most fit for surprises. At that time of the night Fabius
scaled Liu. 24.
Arpi. Argentueil a Town in France, a little before the dawning of the day, was
scaled, and entered by the Protestants anno 1568. and by like surprise, and
about the same time they took also Vezelay. For when men have watched a great
part of the night, and look presently to be relieved, then are they most
sleepie, and negligent: and after that the Town is seized in the night, the
day presently appearing, gives us means to assure it, and settle matters.

Diverse not measuring of times, nor duly considering these matters, have lost
great opportunities. Charles Duke of Burgu^dy by the Philip. Com.
shortness of his ladders failed of the taking of Beauuois. The like oversight,
as some say, hurt our men in the scaling of Lies, in the beginning of the
Queens reign. The Thucid.
Thebans entering Platea in the night, not being succored according to their
appointment, were cut in pieces by the Townsmen in the morning. Whether a man
come too soon, or too late, all is one; for if that in such cases there be not
good direction, execution, and correspondence; such enterprises commonly come
to nothing. A small error in this matter, was the cause of the death of that
valiant knight sir Martin Skinke, and of the breaking of the enterprise against
Neumegen.

Some have had good hap to enter Towns by ways not suspect, as Cyrus entered
Babylon by the river, Scipio entered new Carthage by the lake; which the
Townsmen thought a matter impossible. The Venetians took Guicciar. li. 10.
Brescia from the French, entering by a grate through which the river issued.
The Protestants by a grate Hist. de troubl. de Fr. li. 10.
likewise entered Nismes an. 1569. But they that follow their examples, had
need to use like diligence and speed. They chose a blustering season, and a
dark night: those that entered by the grate, slew the watch, and received
their companions in at the gate: other companies were ready to assure the
Town, which they had seized. There was good correspondence between all
parties, secrecy in proceeding, resolution in executing. Of late time posterne
gates have been broken open, some by gunpowder, conveyed between boordes and
the gate; others by petars; and so diverse Towns have bin entered, and
surprised: but the Townsmen must be very weak, and negligent, and the
execution very speedy, and secret: or else such executions seldom take effect.

After that the Town is entered by surprise; let them that are entered use
diligence, and good order, that they be not themselves either presently driven
out, or soon after surprised. Their course is first to assure themselves of
the gates, walls, and rampars by placing sufficient gardes there, and next to
sease the market place, and other open places with strong squadrons: the rest
of the companies are to beat the streets, and to sease such as can make
resistance against them. Having beaten the Townsmen, that themselves be not
beaten out, they are to provide both men, victuals, and munitions; that which
is in the Town they are to save, and make store of it; and lastly, to set good
order for the defense and government of the place surprised. Whosoever fails
in any one of these points, encurreth often times no small danger.

The Thebans entering into Plataea, and not assuring themselves of the gates,
or of the principal Townsmen before their weakness was espied, were most of
them slain, and the rest forced to leap the walls. Alexamenus Liu. 35.
having slain the tyrant Nabis, and taken the Town of Sparta, while he should
have seized the walls and chief places, and set order for the defense of the
Town, him self spent time in searching out the tyrants treasures, his
soldiers in seeking pillage, in which mean time the enemy gathering together
some force, charged him in this disorder, and in a short space cut him and his
company in pieces. In the late braules of France, Histoire de troubl. de Fr.
l. 5.
Colombel having surprised Esscilles, a strong Castle in the frontiers of
Dauphine, lost the same within few days after, for that he had no care to
furnish it with soldiers, and victuals. Bouley Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 10.
having after a long caualcade, spoiled the Town and Fair of Milly, stayed
too long in his return, which gave the enemy leisure to sease upon him, and
make him pay his life for that he had taken. The Duke of Orleance having
surprised Guicciar. li. 2.
Nouara, soon lost the same again, for that he neither provided more
victuals, nor saved those that he found in the Town, nor set order for the
government of the place. Which oversight was the cause of the loss of Naples
unto the French king Charles Guicciar. lib. 1.
the 8. for giving away all the victuals that were in the new Castle, unto one
of his courtly beggars, afterward when the Town was besieged by the enemy,
his soldiers albeit they begged apace, could not tell where to have a biscuit
cake, or other victuals.

By diverse other means Towns may be surprised, as by men disguised in women's
apparel, or by soldiers disguised like clownes, or by men hid under straw in
carts. Demetrias was surprised under color of bringing home of a chief
Citizen Liu. 35.
from banishment. For while his friends welcomed him home, some of his train
seized the gate, which he together with his company defended, until certain
troops of horse placed not far off, came to them. But he that knows
these, and how to proceed therein, can devise more, and may therein see how
to proceed.

If the Town be strong, and hard to be forced, the safest way is to proceed
by siege, and surprise: if in judgment of men experiemented the Town be
weak, and easy to be forced, he loses time that sits about it, that by
force may enter it. Those Towns I account hard to be forced, whereunto either
for height, or for water, or other inconvenience the soldier can hardly
come. A Town situate upon a rock which is well walled, and flanked, can
hardly be assaulted. For such ground can neither be mined, nor trenched.

Other Towns that are placed in eauen ground and good soil, although they be
strongly fortified, yet either by breach, or scale, or mine may be entered,
especially where the soldiers are neither many, nor skillful, nor resolute. Of
such Towns that are neither well flanked, nor well manned, there is no doubt
to be made, but that by a resolute charge they may be won.

The course that is commonly and best to be used in assaulting of Towns is
this: after that the General comes in view of the Town, that he determines
to assault, let him send his campe-master, or some other special mea of
judgment before with his horsemen, seconded with shot, and targets, to view
the walls of the Town, and the ground without the Town, where the battery
may most commodiously be made, by reason of the weakness of the walls, or
eauennes of the ground. If he cannot approach with his horse, he may then use
his shot, and targets, to beat those that will offer themselves to hinder the
discovery. That he fail not in judgment, he is to understand, that where the
walls are hie, or weak, or destitute of bulworkes, or flankers, and the
ditche is narrow, and dry, and ye ground within and without plain and eauen;
there is a good place to make a battery. Yea albeit the wall be strong and
well flanked, yet if there be no weaker place, I would not have him doubt to
choose that place to plant his artillery in. If by espials we understand where
ye ground, and the defenses of the Town give us best commodity to make a
breach, then there needs no great view, but only to see whether it be as
is reported. The quality of the ground would also be considered, whether it be
hard, or soft; plain, or hilly; dry, or miry; and such like, that after the
battery once begun, we be not driven to remove our pieces.

This being reported to the General, he is to cause the great ordonance to be
drawn toward the place; so that about the shutting of the evening the same may
be within mosquet shot, yet covered from the Townesmens view, if it may be.
With the same are two strong squadrons of shot to march, seconded with
halberds, and targets, and supplied with some horsemen. The rest of ye army
divided into four parts, are to take their lodgings in four parts round
about the Town. Somewhat far from the walls, unless they may cover
themselves with some hill, from their shot, or that there be Suburbs about
the Town. That night every part is to fortify their lodgings with trenches,
palissadaes, barriquades, or such means as they have.

When the day is gone, let all the soldiers that may be spared, and for
default of them, let pioners carry baskets and earth to the place chosen to
plant the artillery in, that may not be above sixty, or seventy pases from
the wall. There dividing their baskets into so many parts as the master of the
Ordonance purposes to divide his piecies into: let them begin to fill their
baskets ranged in order as fast as they can. That they be not molested in
their work, the squadrons of shot sliding along by their sides, and shooting
against such as show themselves from the walls, are to provide: against
sallyes the targetters, and halberdes, are to defend them. When the baskettes
are filled: then they may range their pieces behind them. But if the baskets
be not defense sufficient, as seldom they are against great shot: then
under cover of the baskets they are to begin a trenche, casting the earth
inward toward the pieces to serve for a bank. The same trench would be made
along the curteine of the wall, the ends of the bank bending inward, that
there the artillery may be placed, that shoots on slope to the curteine, and
direct against the bulworkes, or flankers.

For defense of the artillery, and those that are placed there to guard it on
both sides, reason requires, that the bank be made with diverse corners, and
that the whole compass of ground where the artillery stands, be
entrenched: but so, that there be issues left for those within to go within
the trenches, and without them. Upon the bank, there would a sufficient
parapet be made all along where the canon is ranged: fifteen or sixteen
foot in new earth is little enough: in that the holes for the canons are to
be left. In other places if the parapet be three or four foot thick, it is
sufficient. All along this bank, and along the trenche, are mosquetiers, and
other shot to be ranged. The broader the trenche is, the better it will
serve to cover our men.

To effect this speedily, many hands are to be employed. If there be
convenient speed used, the ordonance would be ready to speak the next
morning. But for that it is not possible, that men should work all the night,
neither conveniently watch all night: therefore both shot, and targetters,
and such as work the first part of the night, would be relieved at midnight,
and others sent in their places both to work, and to watch.

The artillery is to be ranged in three places. Two fourth parts would be
placed direct before the cortine of the wall; of the other two parts, one
would be ranged some pretty distance off, with the noses of the pieces pointed
toward the flankers, if any be of the one hand, the other toward the bulwarks,
or flankers on the other hand. Yet sometimes they may hit slope wise in the
cortine of the wall, and those that are pointed against the cortine nay be
discharged against the shoulders of the flankers.

If with thy pieces thou can not see the foot of the wall, then before thou
beginnest the battery, thou must cause the counterscarpe, or ground betwixt
thee and the wall to be opened, and the earth cast into the ditche of the
Town. That is to be done both before the cortine, and before the flankers. If
thou do not hitte within two foot of the bottom of the wall, thou do
but waste time, and powder. That the canon may be managed with more ease: if
the soil be soft, thou art to make a sole of plankes, somewhat encliuing
toward the wall, for the same to run upon.

This being done, which is principal, we are to dress a mount, or caualier,
as they call it, some hundred paces from the wall, or nearer, directly looking
along the wall where the breach is to be made, there placing four or five
pieces of artillery, we may beat those that present them selves to the
breach to defend it, or repair it. By the same we may discover those that are
upon the bulwarks, or go in the streets, or within work about the breach.
And therefore where the ground afoordeth us commodity we may not forget to
raise such a mount, and make it formal for height, breadth, and length, with
his stayres, parapets, and places for the corpse de guard, that defends it.

So soon as the artillery is placed, and fitted, so soon the same ought to
begin to speak, and that without intermission day, or night, until the
breach be made reasonable, and the defenses and flankers be broken. The
continuance of the battery, and the artillery that beats in flank
together, with the mosquetiers being placed where they may discover the breach,
does hinder not only the repayring of the breach, but also the retrenchement
behind. If thy battery once cease, thy labor and charge increases. Nothing
hurt Monluc more in the siege of Nyort, nor la Chatre in the siege of Sancerre,
then the discontinuance of the battery which happened by reason of want of
powder. Sausar removing his battery at Vezelay, confirmed the Townsmen to
hold out, whose hearts before fainted. Nothing did more help them of Rochel
in the last siege, then the frequent intermission of ye battery. By which
means they made defenses stronger, then the walls were before.

The more artillery is employed, the more speedy and forcible, and less
chargeable will the battery be. The Turk in the battery of Vienna, employed
above threescore canons, culuerins, and other pieces. At Rochel the king had
forty, and the prince of Parma little less in the siege of Scluse. He that
employeth less then twenty cannons, and other pieces, cannot look for any
good effect. That some hoped with four small pieces to batter the walls of
Coronna, was without reason. Yet I will not deny, that in these late troubles
of France, the Protestants with three or four pieces took diverse Towns. For
where the walls are bad, and within them no defendants; it is not hard to take
Towns either with a few pieces, or without pieces. But where there are men
within, and walls sufficient, it is better to make no battery, then a battery
not sufficient.

The great artillery being placed: the canoniers are to place their powder in
safe places, and to make their bollets, rammers, waddes, charges, matches, and
al these instruments fit, and ready before they begin their work. What is the
level, randon, charge, and effect of every piece, every canonier either
knows, or ought to know. And therefore I need not spend time about the
declaring thereof.

While the canon is in placing, and the battery in making, al those soldiers
that are not employed about that work, are to fortify their quarters with
banks, trenches, and barriquades, and to bar and trenche the ways, and to
keep good guard, or watch, that none enter, or sally out: that if not with
assault, yet for fear of want, the Town may be forced to come to reason.

That against the breach be made, all things may proceed orderly, ladders,
mantellets, and targets, and all things requisite for the assault are to be
made ready; and to be delivered to the companies, that are to use them.

If there be any time remaining, the same is to be employed in making of
trenches, and parapets, along the enemies counterscarpe, likewise in stopping
all the auenues, and ways, whereby any may come to the succor of the Town.

The horsemen and footmen, that may be spared from the camp, are to range the
country, to discover, to repress the enemy, to convey victuals to the camp.
All which may be done easily, if there be no time lost, nor any disorder in
proceeding.

If the ground be fit to be wrought; from the trenche behind the
counterscarpe, it is no hard matter to carry a mine into the Town, or under
the walls. The earth, that comes out of the mine, being cast into the ditch,
or up to ye bank, shall seem to come out of the trench, especially where
there is continual working. In making of mines, observe these rules: first
work not, if the ground be full of springs, or rocks. The Liu. 36.
Macedonians going about to undermine Lamia, were frustrated of their purpose,
encountering with rocks. Secondly beginning to dig, make the mine crooked,
that the force of the powder be not broken having vent backward. Thirdly see
that the distance from the entrance to the wall be well measured, least the
powder be placed either short of the wall, or beyond it. Arriving to the
foundation of the wall, the miners are first to make a broad place along the
foundation of it, and to underprop the earth well, that it fall not: secondly
they are to place their barrels of powder, with their heads knocked of, and
bored through with diverse holes, and to straw powder upon the bordes where the
barrels stand. Thirdly they are to convey a match well boiled in gunpowder in a
pipe of wood, or between boordes, and therein also to make a train of
gunpowder from the place where fire is to be given to the barrels: their next
care is to see the mine well stopped and rammed, that the fire break not out
backward. Lastly, when men stand ready to go to the assault, yet without
danger of the mine, and when the defendants approach the breach, the fire is to
be given. Any of these points neglected, does frustrate or hinder the effects
of the mine. At Rochel the place where the powder was placed being too narrow,
and ye entrance not well stopped, ye mine did no great effect. In ye same siege
the soldiers not being retired, when fire was given, many men lost their lives
by their own mine. At Coronna the mine being direct, and not well stopped, ye
force of it brake out backward.

Before the assault be given, the breach is to be viewed, whether it be
reasonable; likewise some men of judgment are to consider, whether the
flankers be ruinated sufficiently. These things appearing, and the ditch made
passable; the assailantes are to march to the breach in this sort: first
certain targetters, well armed, and with them the ensigns: after them
halberdes, and pikes. On the flanks of the targetters, and somewhat before
them all along the counterscarpe are shot to be placed, to beat them that
offer themselves to the defense of the breach and wall. These are to be
seconded with other targetters, halberdes, and pikes; with shot likewise on
their flanks. At the same time, if there be other breaches in the bulworkes
some are to march to them also ranged in like sort. The distances of men
marching to the breach are small, for they are to march so thick, as they can
one by an other, being first to enter, and then to fight. The thinner they go,
the more open they are to the enemies force. In these late wars of France
commonly shot has been placed in the first ranks of those that went to the
assault, and therefore no marvel, if they never prevailed, where there was
any resistance. But they could not do otherwise having so few armed men. At
that instant when the assault is to be given at the breach, other companies are
to be appointed to scale in all places of easy access. The same will trouble
the enemy much, and divert his forces. In scaling this rule is to be observed,
that while the targettiers go to the walls, the shot beat them that stand
upon the walls.

That there may be supply where need is, the whole army at the time of the
assault is to be brought into arms, and every man to have his charge
assigned. Some to defend the lodgings, against any sudden stirs: some to
discover: others to stand in their places appointed, either to pursue the
victory, or to favor the retraite of their fellows, or to go where they
shall be appointed. The more force is employed, the weaker will be the enemies
resistance.

Those that purpose to prevail by assault, are to consider further both time,
and place, and other circumstances. To give ye assault, that time is most
proper, when the enemy is least provided, which commonly is at ye dawning of
the day, or at noone time. In the Liu.
siege of Heraclea the assailants making fained shows 2. or 3. days of coming
to ye assalt, and yet doing nothing, made the defendants so secure, that when
they came indeed with all their forces, they found them unready, and so entered.
In the place where we purpose to show out utmost force, there least noise and
show is to be made, and contrariwise greatest stir where we mean to do
least. Hirt. de bell. Alexand.
Caesar making show to enter at the place of easiest access, took the camp
of the Alexandrians, scaling it where they least looked for any such matter.

That the enemy have no time to consider, our men are to go resolutely to the
assault, not as Monlucs men did at the siege of Hist. de troubl. de Fr.
Niort, who going to the breach, paused being entered the ditch. Likewise there
ought to be good correspondence, that the town may be scaled, and assaulted at
the breach, both together, and that every part may be well seconded, and
supplied. If either the breach or walls be won, there let them that enter
stay, until so many be entered as may serve to force the town; and so placing
others to guard the entrance, and to receive the rest of their company let them
march in good order, some to the market place, others to the bulworkes, and not
sever themselves before their whole company, or so many as is requisite, be
within the town. Caes. de bell. gal. 7.
Caesar taking Auaricum by scale would not suffer his men to descend into the
town before he had filled the walls with men.

If the enemy make resistance in the streets, the houses are to be fired
near them. By this means Liu. 2.
Coriolanus made way for his men in the taking of Corioli, and the Spaniards
cleared the streets in the sack of Antwerpe. If they show themselves
obstinate, they are to be compassed round about, and so dealt withal upon
advantage. Liu.
Camillus making proclamation that no man should be slain, that laid down
his arms, took a certain town which he had entered quietly: which otherwise
without great slaughter he could not have obtained.

Before that every man in the town has laid down his arms, and the town be
possessed quietly, no man is to be suffered to disband, or enter houses, or to
seek pillage.

The last care of the General is, how to make use of the town, that is won.
If he mean to keep it: then ought he diligently to repair the breaches, and
to save the victuals, and lay them up in store, and with the rest of the spoil
to reward those, that best deserve. If he mean not to keep it, yet ought he
to save that which may be for the use of the army, and to ruinate the walls,
and to fire the town, that the fame serve no more for a nest for the enemy to
rest in. The Guicciar. hist.
Duke of Orleance neglecting this care, no sooner had taken Nouara, but he lost
it again for want of victuals. Corbueil in France of late taken by the Prince
of Parma, not having the breach repaired was shortly after recovered by
surprise by the kings side.

Small towns, such especially as have no great ordonance, or no places where
to employ it, are taken by zapping, or digging down the walls, especially if
they be hie and without terrasses behind. By this Sub musculo milites vectibus
infima saxa turris hostium conuellunt. Caes. de bell. ciu. 2.
means Caesar's soldiers ruinated the walls of Massilia: and Annibal 500.
Afros cum dolabris ad subruendum ab imo murum mittit. Liu. 21.
Annibal made a way into Saguntum. But before they approach the walls lest the
enemy dig their sides with shot, or throw down stones upon them, the enemy is
to be beaten from the wall with shot, and the soldiers to be covered with
mantellets of wood, on the sides, and over the head. Then with crows of iron
they are al along the wall to pull out the lowest stones, and lest the same fall
on them to underprop it with wood. The same when al is finished, is by
gunpouder to be fired. By this means the townsmen of Sancerre An. 1572.
recovered the castle from certain traitors that were there entered: and Hist.
de troubl. de Fr.
Bordet in the siege of Chartres, An. 1568. wan a corner of a raueline. That
the breach be not repaired by them within, the assailants are to make
themselves ready to go to the assault in that order, which before I have
prescribed. That this course in sieges, surprises, and assaults, is according
to the true practice of arms, although in part has been showed, yet now shall
it further be confirmed, and those that have done otherwise by their evil
success, and evil proceeding refuted, and their course reproved.

Liu. 24.
Annibal pretending to go to sacrifice at the lake of Auerne, did presently go
to assault Puteoli: and in our times the Prince of Parma, making a fair show
as if he meant to besiege Ostend, did suddenly sit down before Scluse. This
practice is good in this and in all enterprises of war. For thereby the enemy
being made uncertain, his forces are derived an other way, and his care
diuerted from that which should principally be cared for.

The Protestants of France, Anno 1568. purposing to besiege Hist. de troubl. de
Fr.
An golesme sent Montgomery before with certain troops of horsemen to hinder
the access of victuals to the town. But far better they had done, if before
they came with their whole forces, they had not discovered their purpose. For
in the mean time the townsmen prepared, and strengthened themselves.

in the siege, and taking of Saguntum Annibal proceeded in this sort. Liu. 21.
He environed the town round with trenches: by zapping and diverse engines he
made a breach: in the assault fresh men succeeded them that were hurt and
wearied, until such time as his men forced the breach. From the breach his men
marched and took a place of advantage: others scoured the streets, and having
assured himself of the town, in the end he took the castle.

Scipio having environed the town of new b Carthage in Spain, Liu. 25.
and shaken the walls, at noone time when the enemy was at rest, sent part of
his men by the lake, and scaling the town at one instant in diverse places both
from the water, and the land, entered with part of his men, which gave access
to their fellows: which marching in order cut in pieces such as resisted, and
in the end took the castle.

The Corona cinxit vrbem omnibus copiis admotis. Liu. 10.
Roman Consul besieging and assaulting the town of Comimium, first compassed
the same round with all his forces: against the gates he opposed certain
troops to repel those that should offer to sally out. Covering his men with
mantellets of wood, he broke open the gates, with others he scaled the walls,
marching into the town with his men in order, beat those that had seized the
market place: and assured himself of the walls, and streets. In the assault
of Romani signo dato pars eminus glande aut lapidibus pugnare, alii succedere
aut murum suffodere, and scalis aggredi. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
Zama; the Romans having a sign given them by the general at one instant
some presented the scale, others with slings, and stones beat the defendants,
others zapped the walls. In the assault given to Liu. 32.
^latia a town in Greece they made show to make all their force to enter in at
the breach. But when they perceived the townsmen to drawthither, they scaled
the walls in an other place, and so entered the town.

The common course which antiquity used in sieges and assaults, as I have
declared, was to compass the town besieged, with banks and trenches. The
havens or rivers they dammed with ships filled full of stones, and sunken. If
the same were broad, they guarded the issues with Caes. de bell. ciu. 1.
towers built in the straitest places, upon which they placed their engines:
which Caesar practiced at Brundusium. Sometimes they crossed the river with
boats, as Liu. 29.
Scipio did the haven when he besieged Vtica: and as Liu. 2.
Porsena did in the river of Tyber when he besieged Rome. Before they went to
assault the Agger ab vniuersis coniectus, and ascensum dat Gallis, and quae in
terram occultanerant Romani, contegit. Caes. bell. gal. 7.
walls, they filled the ditches with earth. The men that labored, they
covered with mantellets made of square timber, and fensed with occum made of
old ropes; these planed the earth, these began the trenches and banks. In
working at their trenches, banks, and mounts, no man was exempted. They never
assaulted town but with their whole forces, and that in all places together.
Taking the town, first they assured themselves of the walls, and gates, and
from thence in good order they went to take the open Vt quisque intrauerat
eques, ad forum occupandum citato equo pergebat, additum erat and triariorum
equiti praesidium. Liu.
places of the town. No man might depart from his Inde signo dato milites
discurrunt ad praedam. Liu. 25.
ensign, nor run to spoil, but after a sign given. And therefore no marvel
if they prevailed for the most part, as now men fail of their purpose for the
most part, being so far departed from the laws of arms. What is now the
common proceeding in sieges, batteries, and assaults, shall now appear by the
examples following.

The Protestants going about to besiege and win Poitiers, 1569. first made
their approches, and quartered their soldiers in the suburbs which they took
at their first arriual, for ye most part. Next they made their trenches,
mounts, and gabions for to accommodate their great ordonance. Part was placed
to batter the walls, and part to beat the enemy in flank behind the cortine.
Certain small pieces they leuelled against the parapet and certain defenses
made by the enemy upon the walls. Of these pieces some were placed in houses
near the walls, others were ranged on the plain behind gabions, or baskets
of earth, which they filled there in the night. The breach being made 20 pases
wide, and very plain, the Admiral disposed his men to go to the assault in
this order: first 700. shot marched, after them 300. gentlemen marched with
targets on their arms: after them followed halberds, and pikes: the rest of
the army was ready in arms to succor where need should be. But their errors
were so many, that these good orders auailed little: first they spent time about
Lusignen, and other small matters, and made not their approach, so soon as they
might. In which mean time, the D. of Guise entered with his troops, fortified
diverse weak places, and provided diverse things necessary: secondly, their
auantgard going before the town without direction, did nothing, but give the
enemy warning, and so returned: thirdly, they neither trenched, nor barred the
ways, nor kept such ward, or guard, but that both succors entered guided by
Onoux, and diverse times the enemy sallied both on horseback, and on foot:
fourthly, they did not take the suburbs, nor bridge of Rochereuill, but
suffered the enemy to possess it: yet by reason that it flanked the breach,
and stopped the water, was it most necessary to be taken. For the water being
there stopped regorged upward, and the enemy being there lodged had a full mark
at those that went along to the breach: fifthly they made their breach beyond
the river, which by reason of the depth of it made them, to their great
prejudice, differ the assalt al other things being ready, and broke their
arrayes as they went over the bridge. They might have done better to have
passed their troops before and had them on the other side before they went to
the breach: further they considered not that the ground behind the breach
being hie was not to be mounted, albeit there had been no wall. And therefore
a place evil chosen to make breach in. For albeit they wan the breach yet could
they not go forward up the hill: lastly, they did neither divert the enemies
forces by escalades, nor went to the assault with all their forces. Of the
simple provision of victuals, and bad government in matters of justice, and
discipline of arms. I will say nothing, because such disorders are inseparable
companions of civil wars. Yet was there not much better proceeding in the
Kings camp besieging Rochell, Anno 1573. which was in this sort.

The king before he sent his forces before the town, caused two enginers to
go thither about other matters, but their purpose was to sound the haven, and
harbor, and to mark the walls, and places of the town, and to draw a plot of
it. Not long after he sent Biron thither with some forces, which he lodged in
villages round about Rochel. Who first fortified his lodgings with tre^ches,
terrasses, and barriquades: nearer to the town he built certain sorts at
diverse corners of it. His artillery being about 40. pieces he ranged in 3.
places crossing one an other. A fourth rank he planted upon a mount to beat
the cortine in flank. For the guard of the pieces, and canoniers he caused not
only gabions of earth, but also deep trenches, and good banks to be made,
with two pieces brought into the ditches he beat the casemates. To deprive the
townsmen of fresh water he caused the condu it pipes to be cut. Monsieur with
his ships that ankored in the harbor went about to deprive them of the
commodity of the sea. Having with battery, and mines made a breach: the kings
lieutenant caused diverse assaults to be made, in the order used commonly.
Beside that which is common, he made diverse mantellets to cover his men, and
for their easier approach, framed a bridge of wood, which from the counterscarpe
reached to the bulworke near the breach, But all this in vain. For neither
were the townsmen so straited by sea or land, but that some entered and issued
both the ways. Yea sometimes they entered the trenches, and cut diverse men in
pieces: the mine was evil conducted. For most of the force broke out backward
upon the assailants. The assault was not general, nor did the companies march
with one consent at one time: the escalade was but at one place, and that
weakly performed. What for want of victualles, and good order, and what by
reason of winter season the soldiers grew sick and weak: and for want of
justice many bad examples escaped unpunished: finally things were long delayed,
and disorderly executed.

The siege, battery, and assault of Sancerre Anno 1573. passed in this sort.
The enemy making his approches first planted his artillery some part about 60.
pases off, and some part nearer: 6. pieces beat them in flank being placed on
a hill half a mile off. On the counterscarpe he placed diverse shot in a trench
which he made there. From that trench he entered the ground coming under the
walls with a mine: Under a frame of wood he brought some to zappe the point of
the raueline. When the breach was made almost 80. pases wide, and the defenses
every where beaten down, he caused his men to march to the assault in this
order: first marched the ensign colonel of Sarrieu guarded with targetters,
and others well armed; behind them and upon their flanks marched certain
companies of shot: these being repulsed the second charge was given by the
gentlemen of the country thereabout, which were likewise seconded by diverse
troops of shot: the escalade at the time of the assault was likewise
attempted: but nothing succeeded. The causes were diverse. First the shot
dragging behind left the armed men almost naked on ye front, and sides, to the
shot of the townsmen, which they should have kept occupied. Secondly the
escalade was faintly executed by one poor company, that went naked to the
walls. What might have been done by diverse companies well armed, if they
hoped to prevail with one alone? Thirdly, those that marched to the breach
went thin, and dispersed, which was the cause that the shot so marked them,
that all returned not to complain. Fourthly, the breach was repaired by reason
of the discontinuance of the battery, for want of powder. Finally, the mine
could not work any effect, by reason the train took not fire, as it should
have done.

In no place do I hear of more resolution and expedition then in the siege and
assault of Chateleraud, Anno 1569. The first day that the enemy approached under
color of a skirmish he caused the walls, ditches, and defenses of the town
to be viewed. The artillery arriving about midnight, he had placed, and
gabionned the same in the night in two diverse ranks, and so fitted it, that by
seven of the clock the next morning the same began to batter the foot of
the wall. Wherein such was the diligence of the canoniers, and force of the
pieces, the bullets entercrossing one another in the breach, that by two of the
clock in the afternoon in the same day the breach was 60. pases wide, and the
soldiers ready to march to the assault. Wherein if the soldiers within had
not been very resolute, and the Frenchmen without very slack in seconding the
Italians that had the point of the assault, or if the escalade had withal
been presented at two or three other places: they had percase prevailed. At
Xaintes, Scipio the enginer purposing to make a breach discharged a piece where
he meant not to batter. Which caused the townsmen to spend their earth,
labor, and provision, where no need was. Then Histoir. de troubl. de Fr. l.
13.
changing the place of his pieces brought them hard to the ditch of the town,
where he made a breach threescore pases wide. To hinder the reparation thereof,
he had placed four coluerins, and diverse small pieces upon a mount to beat
them in flank behind the breach. After that there marched to the assault first
certain shot, then forty cuyraces of proof, and last of all certain other
shot.

The county of Lude did thus dress the preparatiues to the assault of Niort,
Anno a thousand five hundred sixty and eight. after he had with his canons
placed in two houses near the walls, made a breach thirty pases wide, and
had raised two coluerins so high, that they might beat the defendants in
flank all along the cortine of the wall: three ensigns marched to the breach,
others presented the escalade. These being easily repulsed, to the second
charge marched first one principal commander, and after him twenty
targettiers: then certain shot: after them followed the ensign colonel, and
after it diverse other ensigns with a strong guard of halberdes and pikes. The
rest of the army stood ready in squadrons. The horsemen were also in arms to
repress the townsmen, if they should dare to sallie. But all this served not.
For in the first charge there wanted courage, and resolution: in the second,
execution. For having wet themselves in passing a little river, most stayed,
the rest went faintly forward: in sum all the bravery which they showed at
the first, in the end proved nothing but a brag.

If the Protestants had not proceeded more resolutely in the battery and
assault of Brouage Anno 1570. they had not so soon prevailed. Scipio by
trenches made his approches, and within thirteen paces of the ditch placed his
pieces within a certain defense for the canoniers made of sacks of wool, and
earth. With the canon he beat the cortine, and bastion toward Oleron. With the
artillery, and shot of the Venetian Carrake which he caused to be brought
along the Haven, and to be placed hard to the Fort or Castle of the town, he
so beat them that were within, that none could come to the walls or look out
without danger. Which expedition, and resolution of the assaylants did so amaze
the townsmen, that presently they began to fall to composition.

Thus we see how those that proceed carefully, diligently, resolutely, and
according to the practice of war do seldom fail of their purpose, but
either by siege, surprise, or assault they take the towns, which they beset.
Towns that cannot be taken neither by sleight, nor force at the first; yet by
continuance and perseverance, may be taken at the last by one means, or other,
especially if they be weakened in one or two sallyes. Annibal by a devise
causing the Locrians to sally out of their town, cut between them and their
safety, and by taking them, made the rest to yield. He would have trained out
those that guarded the Castle of Tarentum, by laying a bayt for them, but they
were too wise. Romulus by a feined retrayt drawing the Fidenians some pretty
distance from the town, cut most of them in pieces, and pursuing the rest
entered Pelle Melle with them into the town.

Many other stratagemes may be devised, whereby towns may be forced, or
surprised: but seeing the general reasons are apparent by this which I have
said, now I will turn my speech to those that adverse events drive to defend
them selves within towns. For practice of war does teach us not only to
force others, but also where the enemy pursues us, to defend our selves.

CHAP. XVII. Wherein certain observations are set down good to be practiced
for the defense, and good government of a town or place besieged, battered, or
assaulted.
SEeing as places are taken either by want through long siege, or by
intelligence, and treachery, or else by force: those to whom Princes commit their
guard, are diligently to encounter these things with provision of things
necessary first, then with watchfulnes and care, and lastly by strength of men,
and walls. They that take on them to defend towns neither well provided nor
fenced, howsoever they show therein courage, yet do they show no jot of
wisdom in it; for often times they cast away themselves, and hurt their Prince,
and country both in the loss of so many men, and in giving courage to the
enemy. And better it were for them to convey them selves into some place of
safety, or to yield; then to hold out without reason. In which case the
Prince cannot blame them, if they provide for them selves. The Romans not
being able to defend certain towns of Apulia, and Lucania against Annibal,
gave them license to provide for them selves by composition. Which also the
French kings in the victories of the English nation in France permitted to
their people. Cas. de bell. ciu. 1.
Domitius was blamed by Pompey for that he rashly engaged himself and his
company in Corfinium, without his commandment. It was the loss of many brave
men, and a great prejudice to ye cause. Dandelot hanged up a certain companion,
that refused to deliver up a paltry castle without view of the canon, albeit he
saw the army of the Protestants. And in deed less favor does the practice
of arms yield to those, that unable to defend them selves will notwithstanding
hold out, until they be forced. Se ipsos conseruaturum dixit Caesar, si
priusquam aries murum tetigisset, se dedissent. Caes. de bell. gal. 2.
Caesar did not easily spare them that held out until he had shaken their
walls: those that otherwise yielded, he used with all clemency.

The first consideration therefore of him that has a town committed to his
government ought to be, whether the same may possibly be defended against the
force that comes against it or no. For Nec temere suscipienda eotu^ defensio
est, quae tueri non potes, nec temere deserenda, quae tueri potes. Liu. 34.
as we are not rashly to abandon a town that may be defended: so we are not
ignorantly to take upon us the defense of towns not tenable. The Romans while
Annibal ranged up and down Italy, burnt those towns which they could not
defend: the like did Philip of Macedonia. The Cetera pra^ldiis firma^unt. Liu.
34.
rest they kept with strong garrisons. Liu.
Antiochus did foolishly in abandoning Lysimachia which for the provision, and
strength that was in the place, might have holden the army of the Romans at bay
one whole year. The like error did Trans^untib^^ Romany claustra a front and
tergo deseruit. Liu. 44. and 45.
Perseus king of Macedonia commit, who seeing the Romans approach forsook those
strayts which if he had kept he might have shut them in both behind and
before. Likewise are the Gauls taxed by Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Vercingetorix, for that contrary to his opinion and commandment, they would
needs defend Auaricu^ against Caesar. Some do commend ye French that in the
defense of paltry towns of late years have willingly hazarded them selves; as
they did in the defense of Dorat in Limages, Lusignen in Poitou, Bray upon
Seyne, Nogent and such like, which have been taken diverse of them by assault
only of shot: but they had deserved more commendation, if they had not lost
them selves in the end. Let those therefore that purpose to win honor by
their actions consider what towns may be guarded, what not, what are difficult
to guard, before they take on them to guard them.

Great cities are hardly defended against a great force, that is able to strayt
them, and keep them from victuals, and other necessaries. That Paris has
holden out of late time, the weakness of their adversaries, and their great
succors are cause. Gant likewise in the days of Edward the 3. held out
against the Earls of Flanders a long time. But the reason was because he could
not besiege so great a city: but if that such cities may be kept from victuals,
they can not long endure it. When the Protestants in An. 1567. did but hinder
the repair of the country people to Paris, the city was in extremity, and
far greater it was in being besieged by this King. For such infinite numbers
of people no provision can serve any long time. The Caes. bell. gal. 7.
Gauls and Caes. bell. gal. ^.
Belgians thought to oppress Caesar with multitude. But when they were come
together, they saw that such numbers could not be maintained with victuals, and
therefore not being fought withal were forced to scatter of themselves. But
against a small force, great cities are most strong. For neither can they be
straited of victuals by reason of their multitude of men, nor can they be taken
by assault, being so well able to defend the breach and repair it. So that to a
great force great cities are easy to be taken, to a small army that can not
without danger compass the same about, they are impregnable.

Contrariwise small piles or castles hardly resist a great force. First for
that there is no room within to make retrenchments, or defenses against the
enemies canons; secondly for that a small number of men cannot continue their
resistance against a great army, where one company succeeds another: lastly
for yt the men being kept within a short compass, the air must needs be
corrupted, and their health empayred. Q. Cicero albeit his camp was of good
compass and well fenced, and had in it 4000. men and upward, yet he had not
been able to resist the multitude of Gauls that assaulted the same, any long
time, had not Caesar succored him. The Spaniards, presuming of the strength of
La goleta besieged by the Turks were notwithstanding by the force of the canon,
and multitude of men oppressed, about sixteen years agone.

Furthermore towns that are commanded by hills, or whose Territory may be
drowned with water, or which have no water within the^, or which lie so
situate, that the enemy may come between them and succors, are hardly
defended against great forces.

Other towns that are neither too great, nor too little, nor evil situate, may
be defended, so that the walls be strong and well flanked, and the provision of
victuals, munitions, arms, soldiers and whatsoever is necessary, be
sufficient. Provided always, that ye Governor be a man of judgment and
courage, and proceed orderly. Without which all other provision is nothing:
and with which he may do much, although his other means be slender. But
because no man can see all things himself, let him first adioyne unto him a
counsel of men experimented, of whose loyal dealing he may assure himself.
With them let him consult both of the fortifications of the town, and of all
things necessary, and see that all things be in good state before the coming
of the enemy before the town. And first that there be victuals provided
sufficient for the company, for a long siege. for whatsoever strong places
yield to hunger. The Liu. lib. 2.
Romans understanding of the coming of Porsena to besiege their city, sent
round about among their neighbors to provide corn, and victuals. In their
Tacit.
Castles, and garrisons they had always a years provision before hand. The
Thucid. 1.
Athenians understanding the desseins of their enemies to besiege the^, stored
their city with provision for many years, and so furnished themselves at sea,
that what they could not have from the land, they might have abundantly from
the sea. Besides provision of victuals to be made, order must be set, that they
be well kept in storehouses, and orderly dispensed by measure. Caes. bell. gal. ^.
Vercingetorix practicing this at Alexia, did cause his victuals to serve him
long. At Caes. bell. ciu. 8.
Massilia understanding, that the town would be besieged, they provided corn
and laid it up in garners. In free towns in Hie Dutchland the citizens have
always a years provision of victuals beforehand laid up in public
storehouses, and a strict order for the dispensing of them. Without Paucis
diebuper licentiam absumpta sunt, quae aduersus necessitates in longa
suffecissient. Tacit. annal. 20.
which that which otherwise might have served for many months, will be spent in
few days.

The town ought to be discharged before hand of aged persons, women, and
children, such except as have for their company sufficient: when the enemy
comes before the town, it will be too late to do it, as the Gauls tried in the
siege of Alexia, and the Florentins also besieged by the Prince of Orange at
the request of Clement the 7.

All the victuals that are in the country near about are to be brought into
the city. for thereby the townsmen may be relieved, and the enemy deprived of
help of the country.

Further because corn without cornemils cannot conveniently be used: handmils
are to be provided where the enemy may take other milles from us. Lignieres in
the siege of Chartres without his handmils, had been driven to eat corn evil
ground.

Last of all provision is to be made of water where the town is dry, and of
whatsoever either for nourishment, or health is necessary.

With provision of victuals, ye Governor ought also to join a care, that he
have arms, munitions, and all instruments requisite for wars ready in the
town: and stuff also to make more. Workehouses are to be erected of arms, of
powder, of weapons, and other engines: artillery is to be mounted ready;
bullets, and all instruments about it are to be provided. Neither may he
forget store of mattocks, spades, axes, baskets, crows of iron, ropes, timber,
nor such like stuff: nor saltpeter, brimstone, or coals to make powder
withal, nor in sum, any thing necessary. want of small things may hinder
great matters.

But principally ought he to have care, that he have with him sufficient
numbers of valiant soldiers, without which all other provision is vain.
Walls reared to the skies are easily taken, where there are not valiant
defendants within to guard them.

As other things are doing, and providing, he ought also to have consideration,
that his walls be good, that his ditches be deep, and broad, that his
bulwarks, and defenses be sufficient to flank the walls, and defend both
ditches and conterscarpe. In which works let him not spare his friends, nor
himself. It is a shameful matter when men refuse to labor to defend their
country, them selves, and their lives. When Themistocles walled (...). Thucid.
^.
Athens, so willing the people were, that men, women, and children labored,
and every man was content that the stones of his own house, yea of public
houses should go to the walling and fortifying of the town. Among the Romans
every soldier did as well set hand to his work, as to his weapons. we
forsooth are so deinty fingered, and our soldiers so peruers, that so soon as
they are enrolled, yea long before they are good soldiers, they think they
ought to work no more, and therefore they must have Pionniers to do their
work: A kind of men which the Romans knew not, nor can be expressed in the
Latin tongue. Hereupon it comes, that our proceedings are so slow, and so
insufficient. Neither can it otherwise be, where so few men set hand to the
work. Likewise so sparing some are in their expenses, yt their Port towns for
the most part lie open without defense to the spoil of any enemy that shall
come suddenly upon them with any force. And no man will ruinate the corner of
his garden wall to save himself, and his company, and friends. But if we knew
how necessary such labors were, and how as many brave actions are done with
work as with weapon, and that nothing does more apperteine to soldiers, then
to work fortheir own defense, and safety; me^ would never show them selves so
niggardly and illiberall in their expenses, nor so dainty in laboring, and
thereby fortifying them selves.

Further the Governor ought to have a watchful eye, that he be neither
entrapped in ye practices of dissembling friends, nor surprises of the open
enemy. his best course is to trust neither. If he doubt of the townsmen, he is
not only to assure himself by pledges, but by strong guard, having the gates
and walls in his possession. Popilius was no sooner placed in garrison at
Popilius Strati positus in praesidio claues portarum, custodiamque murorum suae
extemplo potestatis fecit. Liu. 43.
Stratus a town of the Aetolians, but he seized the custody of the gates, and
walls into his own hands. He is like wise to see, yt he have the victuals of
the town in his own custody. The Garrison of Thucid. 4.
Megara that kept in the castle having victuals from day to day out of ye town,
when the same revolted were driven also to yield to the enemy. I need not
exemplify this by antiquity. for it is the case of Vlissing, and some other
places where our men lie in garrison. Where if the townsmen at any time quarrel
with them, they shall be constrained to yield for want of victuals, and other
provisions, which are in the power of others. There can be no good assurance,
where the to wnsmen are able to master thee, specially if ye enemy be without,
as treacherous friends are within. And therefore a wise Governor will provide
that such In eo spem pone nihil moturos Hetruscos, si ne quid mouere possint
praecaueris. Liu. 27.
can not hurt him, though they would. So a certain Roman persuaded his friend
to deal with the Hetruscians. Against such, a provident Governor must always
keep one eye waking, and appoint strong gardes, and continual rounds, both on
horseback and foot, and no less without the town, then within. Which are to
see that every sentinel do his duty. He that doubts yt cownsmen must not
suffer them to come nere the gates, not to talk with the enemy. Nolani muros
portasque adire vetiti. Liu. 23.
Marcellus would not suffer them of Nola to come near the walls, or gates,
the enemy being without. Neither would the Transfugae ne^ adire muros, nee
alloqui quemquam passi sunt. Liu. 25.
garrison of Syracusae, that consisted of fugitives suffer the men of the town
to come to the walls, or talk with the enemy that besieged them, or whisper
together. All whisperings and secret meetings in such cases are suspicious. The
Governor must further take heed how he come in place, where the townsmen may
lay hands on him. The Salust. bell. Iugurth.
Vaccians in Afrike inuiting ye Governor of the town, and certain of his
chief commanders, and Captains to banquets, did there first cut their throtes
and afterward setting upon the common soldiers destitute of heads did kill them
also, and so yielded them selves to the enemy. They of Rochel did not so
euilentreat the English that were there in garrison in ye castle: but inuiting
Captain Mancell then Governor there to a banquet, first laid hands on him,
then drawing out the soldiers under color to moster them, did fair turn
them and their simple Captain with scorn out of the town. All parleys with
the enemy, are dangerous, unless they be managed by those that have skill, and
be loyal, and in such place where the enemy may not come near the walls.
While they of Syracusae did parley about the redemption of certain prisouers,
a certain Roman marked the height and accesses of the walls, which gave the
Romans means to enter the city by surprise. Eretria was taken by L. Liu. 32.
Quintius while during the parley of peace, his soldiers espying the negligent
guard of the townsmen scaled the walls. Casilinum inter colloquia
cunctationemque petentium fidem per occasionem captum est Marcello portam
occupante. Liu. 24.
Casilinum was likewise taken by Marcellus his soldiers during the parley
seasing a gate, and so giving entrance to their companions.

The like happened to the town of Charity in France Ann. 1569. where the
Protestants in the time of parley espying their opportunity entered the town
through the breach, that was evil guarded. In time of parleys therefore, and of
feasts, and of times of greatest security, then the Governor is to have
greatest care. Liu. 25.
Syracusae was taken on a night when the soldiers had kept Holiday before, and
lay drunk without fear or care. Nismes was surprised in a stormy night, when
a man would have thought that none would have looked abroad.

And if no wise Governor will commit any man of worth into the hands of his
enemies, least if they should break promise they might prejudice him; much
less ought he to parley with the enemy where he may come in danger himself.
Caes. bell. gal. 5.
Titurius Sabinus going to parley with Ambrorix was by him perfidiously slain.
Paches the Thucid. 3.
Athenian detained Hippias the Governor of Notium that came upon assurance of
his word to treat with him of peace, and forced him to deliver up ye town. This
was also ye ruin of Guicciardin.
Liuerotto da Fermo and the Duke of Grauina and others, whom Caesar Borgia
inducing by fair words to come to treat with him of peace, put to death at
Senogallia.

Those that have diverse nations together in defense of one town, must also
take heed, that there arise no grudge or coffeehouse among them, to make
them revolt to the enemy. Liu. 26.
Mutines the Numidian upon some coffeehouse offered him by the Carthaginians
whom he served, by the help of his countrymen seized a gate of Agrigentum, and
gave entrance to the Romans. The like cause together with some corruption in
the soldiers caused some English to deliver up Alost to the enemy. Which
practices he that means to avoid, must never trust men yt are suspect, nor
suffer strangers to watch united without some of such as he dare trust joined
with them, nor let any man know his quarter before he goes to the watch.
During the siege he may not suffer bell to ring or clock to strike, and further
must keep good watch, and make rounds diligently, and at times uncertain.

To content all men the Governor is to administer justice equally: that God may
be pleased, he is to see that God be served religiously: and that laws
concerning religion, justice, and military matters be strictly executed.

Sallyes are not to be made upon the enemy rashly, nor without good cause,
especialy, where ye townsmen are not to be trusted. They of Rochel served our
countrymen an odious touch upon such an occasion in ye days of Richard ye 2.
Charles duke of Phil. Comines.
Burgundy defeating 500. archers yt sallied upon him out of Piquigni, made the
town to yield unto him soon after for want of men. They of Liege sallying out
upon ye same Duke, lost their best men, which after ward they sore rued. And
such was the wisdom and direction of some in the government of Caleis
besieged by the duke of Guise, that albeit they had very few men to defend such
a town, yet they would needs loose some of them going out to s^irmish with the
enemy. Oftentimes subtle enemies drawing out the townsmen by devises, do
make them come short home, as I declared by the practice of Romulus against the
Fidenians, of Annibal against the Locrians. At Nola Liu. 23.
drawing out the townsmen, he circumuented a brave troop of horsemen in an
ambush laid for them. Sallies therefore are to be made only when we have men
sufficient, and do see the enemies negligence, or other advantage. Diaphanes
Achaeus stationem Antiochi regis ad Pergamum inuadens semisomnem nullis stratis
equis aut peditibus paratis fudit. Liu. 37.
Diaphanes sallying out of Pergamus upon a corpse de guard placed by Antiochus
before the town, at such time as the same was negligent, cut the same in
pieces. By opportune sallies many sieges have been raised, as I declared by the
example of Philip lying before Apollonia. Soldiers that sallie upon advantage,
do hinder the approches of the enemy, so that he is to win inch after inch.
but whe^they sallie, let them take heed first that they go not too far, least
they be drawn into ambush; and secondly, that they have some behind to favor
their retrait, as Aluarus Sandze observed in his sallies upon the Mores, in
defending a fort in Zerbe.

Before that the enemy approaches, the Governor is to cause all houses and
villages near the town to be ruinated and fired, and all the wood and timber
as near as may be, either to be brought into the town, or spoiled. Lamentable
(I confess) it will be to the country, but who would not rather spoil such
things, then suffer the enemy to use them against himself?

In stopping of the enemies approches, let him use this course: first if there
be any narow ways which the enemy must pass, before he can come before the
town, let them be well trenched and guarded: when the same cannot longer be
guarded for fear least the enemy cut betwixt the corpse de guard and the town,
let them then retire and make head in the The Italians call it Via coperta.
covert way behind the counterscarpe, not only for the defense thereof, but
also for defense of the plain before the town, especially of that place,
where the enemy means to range his pieces for the battery. For defense
whereof likewise, both the great ordonance from the bulwarks, and other shot
from the walls are to be employed. In case the enemy by his negligence give
occasion, either in the evening, or in the night, he may make a sallie upon
those that labor about the pla^ting of the ordonance, and the gabions. If the
enemy be so strong that he is able to take away the The counterscarpe is the
bank that is made all along without the ditch of the fortress.
counterscarpe, then by trains and Casemates are defenses of earth within
ditches or trenches, where the soldiers lie covered, to shoot at those that
present themselves unto them.
casemates in the ditch, by sallies and shot from the bulwarks and walls, he is
to defend his ditch so long as he can. And last of all being beaten out of the
ditch, his last hope is in the defense of his walls and bulwarks, sustaining
them with good terrasses of earth, and when they are beaten down, repairing
them, and when no longer they can be defended by making retrenchments behind
them.

For defense of a breach, this course is good, and commonly used. First all
along where the enemy makes his battery, let there be presently upon the
first shot a retrenchment made; the deeper the ditch is, and the higher the
bank is raised, the better the work proves: upon the bank, or else behind
the bank, let some pieces be placed in counterbatterie. In houses near
adjoining, and upon the bank, let the small shot be disposed chicke. Against
the enemies artillery that beats in flank, let there be an high terrasse of
earth raised. On both sides of the breach in places convenient, the armed men
are to be placed to repel such as escape the shot. If the place have bulwarks
or towers that look along the ditch, from thence the enemy is to be galled
upon the flanks as they enter the ditch: if there be none, then mounts or
terrasses are to be raised in such places, as most commodiouslie we may look
into the ditch, and toward the breach. Walls or banks are to be cast up
beneath the breach in the ditch. Lastly, if store of men will permit it, a
sallie of targetters and other armed men is to be made out of the town upon
the sides of those that are upon the counterscarpe, or within the ditch: which
no doubt will make the enemy make more speed to return.

This or the like proceeding, both ancient and later practice of war has
taught us in the defense of towns besieged, and assaulted. The Plataeans
besieged, having set order for their provision and the government of their
people, to repel the enemies force, raised their walls higher in that part
where the enemy made show to assail them. All along the mount which the
enemy built without, they made a new wall within their old. When the Thucid.
2.
enemy went about to smother them, and to burn their engines upon the wall,
they defended themselves with their archerie and slingers, and quenched the
fire with water and earth, and when they could no longer defend the town, in a
tempestuous night they passed over the bank which the enemy raised against
them.

The Massilians when they perceived Caesar's intention to besiege them: Frumenti
quod inuentum est in publicum conferunt. Caes. bell. Ciu. 1.
provided soldiers, brought corn out of the country into the city, erected
workehouses for arms, brought their provision into the public store, repaired
their walls, trimmed up their ships. When the enemy began to force them, they
defended themselves by diverse sallies, and engines fitted on the walls.

The like diligence did the Gauls use against Caesar besieging Auaricum: they
frustrated his engines with hooks Laqueis falces auet tebant. Caes. bell. Gal.
7.
and other engines, they caused his mount to sink by undermining. Upon the
walls they made diverse towers; by diverse sallies they hindered his works, his
mines they opened with cross mines, and filled with great stones. The like did
the Prenestins Transuersis cuniculis hostium cuniculos excipiebant. Liu. 23.
against Annibal.

Against escalades the Caes. bell. Gal. 2.
Aduaticans besieged by Caesar, placed great stones and pieces of timber upon
the walls, and likewise they of Zamenses saxa voluere, sudes, pila, picem, and
sulphur taedam mixtamardenti mittebant. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
Zama to resist the enemies assault, Upon those that set the ladders to the
walls tumbled down stones, and pieces of timber, and cast upon them pitch and
brimstone, and shot and cast darts at them.

In the defense of new Carthage in Spain assailed by Scipio, all things being
provided, Mago assigned to every man his quarter and his charge, and both with
engines from the wall beat the scalers, and with archerie and armed men
defended the breach. The Romans hearing of the approach of Porsena to besiege
their city, sent into other countries to buy victuals, fortified their city,
assigned to every man his several charge, dealt well with the common sort. The
same reasons always continuing, the same course for the most part has been
used also of late time.

Lignieres deputed governor of Chartres, an. 1568. which then was threatened
by the Protestants to be besieged, first encouraged the people with good words,
then together with ye principal me^ of the town going about to mark the
weakest places of the walls, caused rampires and trenches to be made
presently. In that work he caused all the inhabitants to labor. Afterward
being bet in flank, he raised up a terrasse near the breach, spreading
sheets and clothes before it for to cover the workmen: for grinding of corn
he caused handmils to be made, and finally set good order for the administering
of matters of war, and justice. But if he had burnt the suburbs, and beaten
down the houses near the walls, and defended the Rauelin by the gate Drouaize
more carefully and strongly, he had done far better. These things being
neglected, the enemy placed his ordnance near to the wall in houses, from
whence he discouerd ye breach, and diverse places of the town, and hurt diverse.
He lodged his men very commodiously in the suburbs, and taking that Rauelin,
had entered the city, if he had followed his good hap, or kept the place.

The duke of Guise Governor of Poitiers, entering a little before the siege
which the Protestants laid before the town, anno 1569. spent first one day in
viewing the walls, and appointing fortifications and defenses to be made,
which was also executed with great expedition. He took the next day the moster
of all the soldiers, and inhabitants able to bear arms, to see what strength
he had. Afterward he appointed officers, and orders for the storehouses of
victuals. Further he set some on work to make powder, others to burn ye
houses nere the gates. The light horsemen he sent out to take some prisoners,
and of the^ to understand the disseins of the enemy, and for avoiding of
surprises, would not suffer bell to ring, nor clock to strike during the
siege. For defense of the breach he caused a retrenchment to be made behind the
wall: against the pieces that bet his men in flank, he opposed a trauerse of
earth: and directly against the breach placed certain pieces in
countrebatterie. For sustaining ye assault, he assigned to every man his
quarter, disposed his shot upon the walls, and in certain houses near to beat
the enemy approaching both in front, and in flank. Near the walls he had his
armed men ready, his horsemen he sent about the streets to keep men in
order, and to send those that were there to the breach; only this was omitted,
he burnt not the suburbs, nor spoiled the country round about, nor provided
cornemils, nor discharged the town of such as were unfit for service, nor of
asses and iades that spent the haie so fast, that in the end there wanted for
the maintenance of his horse of service.

They of Rochel against the siege that followed an. 1573. first fortified their
town, and then set order for their government: withal they made the best
provision of victuals and munitions, they could: they sent to their friends
for succor: they hindered the approches of the enemy by diverse sallies: for
defense of the breach, they made a retrenchment behind, and filled the breach
up with sackes of earth, and other things. For covering those that wrought,
they made a thick smoke before the breach. Against the breach they ranged
diverse pieces in contrebatterie. To sustain the assalt, they placed the shot
on the flanks, and walls, placed squadrons of armed men both by the breach,
and in other places: with trains of powder in the ditche, they scorched the
enemy that came to the breach. Upon the foremost they cast stones, fire,
scalding water, hot tar, and pitch: yet might they have done better, if they
had made better provision of things necessary: next, if they had not made so
many vain and weak sallies. If in one sallie those that went out first, had
been well seconded, they had surely raised the siege: while they spared the
houses, and villages, and woods near the Town, they ministered many
commodities to the enemy, without which he could not as he did, have
continued his siege the whole winter long.

In the siege of S. Iean d'Angeli, anno 1569, captain Piles wan to himself
great commendation. The town was not strong, yet did he hold it long. The
enemy wanne no ground upon him, but it cost him dear. Upon his first approach
he made so courageous a sally, that he made the enemy to give ground. In the
place of the breach, he made a wall in the ditch before it, and a retrenchment
within behind it, and casting the earth inward, raised a bank upon it,
whereupon he placed diverse pipes of earth, for defense of his soldiers. Upon
the side of the breach, he raised up a platform of earth, with a parapet, for
saving his men. By this means he sustained diverse assaults, and at diverse
sallies cut diverse of the enemies in pieces, and cloyed and dismounted diverse
Canons. If his provision of victuals and munitions, and the strength of men had
been greater, he had no doubt kept the Town still: but wanting all things,
and his platform being new, and but fifteen foot thick, and pierced by
every Canon shot, and not able long to stand; force it was for him to accept
of an honorable composition offered him by the king.

And although the Town of Sancerre was yielded in the end to the enemy, yet
do the defendants deserve to be remembered for their resolute defense, and
reasonable good government. When they heard that the enemy determined to besiege
them, they chose a Governor, and joined with him a Counsel of Capteines, and
the most apparent Citizens. Next, they mostred their people, enrolled them in
bands, and assigned to every man his charge and quarter, and appointed orders
such as the time required. For defense of the breach, they made a retrenchment,
and defended the same with gabions on the front, and sides, where they placed
their shot, to serve at the time of the assault. To sustain the assault,
they ranged their shot there, and on the walls, and in a certain gallery, and
other houses near the breach. Upon the sides of the breach, and in other
places convenient, they placed their halberds, pikes, and armed men: but
wanting victuals, munitions, and men requisite for defense of such a place,
they were driven to accept of a hard composition. Whereunto, if they had not
spared their money in the beginning, or had sent out such as for age, and
impotencie were not fit for service, they could not have been so easily forced.

The assault of Chateleraud, anno 1569, as it was forcible, so was it valiantly
sustained by diverse brave men directed by Scipio the Enginer. The breach being
80 paces wide, was so great, and the enemies coming so speedy, that they could
not make any retrenchment behind it. Therefore leaving that course, upon each
side of the breach they made gabions and barriquadaes, behind which they
placed diverse valiant men, armed with cuyraces, and targets. The front before
the breach, was sufficiently fenced with houses. In the windows of the houses,
and in certain holes made for the purpose, they placed their best shot, other
shot they placed upon the walls behind the parapet, and in a certain gallery
that ouerlooked the breach. When the Italians that had the point, came to the
assault, and had entered the breach; they that were covered under the gabions,
sallied upon the first, the shot from the houses, gallery, and walls,
dispatched a number of the rest.

In defense of towns besieged by the enemy, no time is to be lost, no cost,
nor labor to be spared. By negligence, delays, sparing, and want of skill of
the Governors, many towns are lost. It grieueth me to think how Caleis,
Bullein, Rochel, and other Towns, which sometime this nation possessed in
France, were lost by negligence, and misgouernment. But that it is the lot of
all towns that that are committed to such weak persons, as beside the name
have nothing of nobility. Alcida Thueyd. 1.
that was sent to succor Miletum, by forslowing the time, suffered the
Athenians to take the Town. Montegue a strong castle in Poitou, was lost by
the negligence, ignorance, and covetousness of the Histor. de troubl. de Fr. li.
5.
Captain, that for two hundred soldiers which he should have maintained
there, kept but twenty, and sought nothing, but spoil without regard, or
knowledge of the keeping of the place. The Protestants lost Bronage, a town of
great importance, for want of garrison, munitions, and victuals sent in time.
What we have lost, and are like to loose by this means, I had rather we should
learn by others examples, and reform it, then to blush to hear it reported,
and confirmed by the examples of those that were actors.

Thus we see what is to be done in the defense b government of a place
assaulted or besieged, and also what is to be avoided. But because all this
serves to small purpose, unless the siege in time be raised, let us now
show how that may be effected.

The siege is raised sometime through want, or missgouernment in the camp,
when for want of victuals, or other disorder the enemy of his own accord
departs. Sometime through sickness, sometime through the distemper of the
weather, sometime through dissension of soldiers; sometime he remooueth to
succor his own people, straited in some other place: sometime by sallies of
the townsmen, or succor of their friends, he is driven away. All those wants
therefore that may move him to depart, are to be increased, and all those
means that may hasten his departure, to be used. He is to be streited for
victuals by our friends without. Some Town which he favors is to be
besieged, his waters are to be corrupted, the place where he lies, if it may
be, is to be drowned. If he may be taken in disorder, with all our force he is
to be charged, and all means used to call him home, or to tire him lying
before us. The Prince of Orange succored Leyden, and anoyed the Spaniards, by
cutting of the banks of the rivers.

Fabius Hetruscos castra circumdantes vigilia quarta erumpens in stratis
sternit, reliquos fudit, Liu. 9.
being besieged in his camp by the Hetruscians, inuading them upon a sudden a
little before day, killed many, and put the rest to flight. The French kings
brother anno 1569, besieging Chateleraud, caused the Protestants to raise their
siege from before Poytiers, to succor their friends there. The Aetolians
entering into the City of the Liu.
Thaumacians besieged by Philip king of Macedonia, by their often sallies
caused him to raise his siege. Liu. 24.
Crispus Naeuius sallying out of Apollonia in the night, put all the Macedonian
army that lay before the town in disarray, and caused the same to dislodge.
Scipio Liu. 24.
going to succor his friends besieged, passed through the enemies camp in
the night, and presently sallying out upon them, forced them to relinquish
their hold. The rumor of Liu. 34.
Catoes approches with succors, caused the Celtiberians to depart from a town
which they besieged. Likewise in the year of our Lord, 1569, the town of
Charity in France was disengaged, the enemy departing for fear of a brute of
great succors coming to the town, both of horse and foot, which God wot was
nothing so.

At such time as the army rises, the defendants have commonly good
opportunity to cut those that lagge behind in pieces. When Appius Liu. 43.
departed from the siege of Phanotis, the Captain of the town following after
him, and charging him in streite and troublesome ways, at the foot of
certain hills, cut a thousand of his men in pieces. Therefore as at other
times, so then also the General ought to have care, that the sick, and hurt
be sent before with a good guard, and with them the baggage of the army. then
may he follow safely with the rest. By this course Caesar departed safely from
before Dyrrachium, and in our times the Admiral from the siege of Poytiers.
The French kings brother rising from Chateleraud, when his men were at the
assault, as soon as he saw they could not prevail, he began to send away his
great ordonance before, and at midnight followed with all his army.

Rests now for the finishing of this discourse, concerning the defense of
places, that I show how any place may with labor be fortified, and what
rules are to be observed in the making of bulworkes, walls, ditches, banks,
and all sorts of fortification, not in such curious sort, as do the
Italians, which can neither be well understood of soldiers unacquainted with
Geometrical terms, nor practiced in time of wars, by reason of the time
required in the raising of them: which notwithstanding may serve them in time
of necessity, as well as the artificial workmanship of Italians that costeth
millions, and always helps not. Yet would I not have things made either
rudely without proportion, nor hastily without perfection, nor niggardly
without things convenient.

In ancient time, before the use of gunnes was found out, the danger of walled
towns was, lest they might be taken with scaling, or their walls ruinated
with shaking or zapping, their defense against scaling, was the height of the
walls; against shaking, the mixture of wood, and stone, and thickness. Caesar
shows that the Gauls in his time fashioned their walls checker wise,
filling a frame of timber with square stones. so that for every piece of
timbers head there was a square stone of that bigness laid in the wall. To
increase the height of their walls, they made high towers upon them, in
distance fourscore, or an hundred paces one from another. Their defense was
stones, pieces of timber, iauelines, darts, arrows, and whatsoever could
hurt the enemy thrown from the wall. These things for that their force was
increased by the height of the walls, therefore did they build them high, as
also to hinder the escaladaes of the enemy. Now for that great ordonance does
hurt more in flank then forward, and shakes any wall though never so thick,
and those most easily that are highest; therefore the use is to build walls
low, that they may the better be sustained by the terrasse behind, and more
hardly discovered by reason of the counterscarpe. for defense whereof, there
are bulwarks builded out from the wall into the ditch, that the great
ordonance being there placed, may not only shoot forward into the field, but
in flank along the ditch, and the wall.

Those towns therefore, and castles, I account to be well fortifield, that
first are strongly walled, or banked round, with bulwarks in convenient
distances to flank the walls, or bank; secondly, that behind the walls
have a good rampare or terrasse, and before them a deep and broad ditch: and
last of all a sufficient counterscarpe, with his covert way, with all the
parts, and measures of the wall, terrasse, bulwarks, ditch, and counterscarpe
proportionable. Where there is either part or proportion wanting, there wants
so much of the perfection, and strength, that is in such works required.
Whosoever therefore purposes to fortify a place, must have respect first to
the wall, and rampare, or to the bank, next to the bulwarks, thirdly, to the
ditch, and lastly, to the counterscarpe.

The parts of the wall are these, first the foundation, then the wall to the
cordon, and lastly, that above the cordon. Cordon I call that row of stones
that divides that part of the wall that is lowest, and covered with the
counter scarpe from the enemies shot, and leans much inward to the town,
from that which is for the most part open, and higher then the counterscarpe,
and leans less inward then the lower part of the wall.

The whole height of the wall from the ditch to the top, is more or less
according to the judgment of the Enginer, and means, and time he has to
build it in. Provided that it be not easily reached with ladders. it is
sufficient if it be betwixt five and forty or forty foot high. of which
albeit the parapet be beaten down, yet few scaling ladders will reach so high.

The foundation of the wall would be made firm, and even, leaning a little
inward. if the soil be soft and moist, it must be helped with piles of wood
driven down thick into the ground, and stones rammed fast between them. if
the soil be rocky, then must the same be made plain, or at least with degrees
be aten out with the pick, and made level, that the stones may lie orderly,
save that toward the town as the rest of the foundation it ought to be a
little lower.

The foundation of the The cortine of the wall is that distance or part of the
wall that is betwixt bulwark and bulwark, turret and turret, for that it is
spread for the covering of the town.
cortine of the wall being laid, the first stone of the wall would be laid one
foot from the board of the foundation, if no more. That part of the foundation
that is without the wall the Italians call relasciato, which is nothing else in
English, then that which is left of the foundation.

The wall the Italians would have made so thick at the foot, that in the
midst there may be left a space for a man to go along in round about the
walls. this they call contramina. But it is cost to no purpose: for to vent a
mine, the countermine is to be made as low as the foundation of the wall and
lower, and rather in the ditch, if it be dry, then in the wall. The wall would
be made so thick at the foundation, that albeit in every five foot of height
it lean inward, and loose one foot of breadth or thickenesse, yet at the
cordon it may be twelve or fifteen foot thick. From the cordon upward the
wall is to lean inward, and to loose of his thickenesse in every five one
half foot.

The rampar or terrasse behind the walls would be raised until you come
within four or five foot of the top of the wall. This uppermost part for
that it gardeth the soldiers that are behind it, when they turn their
breasts to shoot, or strike the enemy is called parapet. If the same be not
raised so high, but that the wall is seven or eight foot higher, as it is at
Luca in Italy, and in the bourg at Rome, and diners places, which I have seen:
then must there be made a bancke or way upon the inside of the wall four foot
within the top of it, and degrees to mount from the rampar unto it, in diverse
places.

The rampar cannot be too broad, but nine or ten pases it would be, if it be
made sufficient. if it be less, hardly can you fit the cannon or coluerin upon
it. The height is proportionable to the wall, as before I have showed. Toward
the town the rampar would be made somewhat stope and pendant, that the
soldiers may go up and down the same in all places, when need requires; in
the same like wise are stairs to be made in diverse places, that those that
have occasion may go up unto it with carriages. The side of it would be set
with trees, for thereby the earth will be holden up more firm, and the same
may in time serve to many good uses.

Within every two hundred pases or thereabout, there would be a bulwark
erected, the outward walls made in the same sort, that the walls of the
cortine are made, but more thick and high by two or three foot. These are made
for guard both of the great ordonance that beat along the ditch and cortine, and
that which is pointed into the fields. These are sometime made with two
stages, or places for the ordonance, the one above, the other beneath; sometime
with one only place, sometimes all solid without any places at all, as in
Holland and Zeland, for the most part. the which are rather to be called
terrasses then bulwarks, for that they only serve to place great ordonance
upon them to flank the walls or banks somewhat, but especially to scour the
plains without.

The form of them comes nerest to five square, the base whereof is the
rampar behind that part of the walls that goes to the making of the
bulwark, and is behind it. If thou would make a bulwark at any corner of
a wall, measure out from the point thereof forty pases, and draw a line of
that length equally distant from the cortine of the wall on either hand. From
the cortine take of each hand 25 pases, and from that point that is 25 pases
from the corner, draw a line Ad aequales angulos, or ad perpendiculum.
direct from the wall long two and twenty pases. From this line of two and
twenty pases take ten to serve for the ditch between the town wall and the
The Italians call it Orecchion or Spalla del Belnardio.
shoulder of the bulwark. the rest serves to make the shoulder it self. From
this point draw a line to to that point that is forty pases from the corner of
the wall. and so thou have the delineation of the one part or face of the
bulwark. do the like on the other hand, and so thou have thy bulwark
delineated in good proportion. which not being observed in the bulwarks of
Berwike, makes them show crooked and deformed: but that is one of their least
faults.

From the line that is five and twenty pases long take twelve pases on either
side toward the point of the corner of the wall, and thence drawing a direct
line directly to the shoulder of the bulwark, upon that line work a wall all
of massiue stone, and when thou art come ten or twelve foot high, make there
four loope holes for the cannon, and within the wall a sole for the ordonance
to run on, well planed, but somewhat inclining to the ditch. The loope holes
would be a yard broad, and four foot high. The first loope hole that is
nearest to the cortine, would be made four foot distant from the said cortine,
that the connon placed there may serve to scour the front of the next bulwark
that is unto it, and the ditch and counterscarpe thereof, being more then two
hundred pases off. The other three loope holes would be made in equal distance
one from another, and so far asunder, that both the cannon may recoile
without touching any thing, and that in the midst there may be made a pillar
to bear the flower of the place above. The use of the three pieces placed in
these three loope holes, is to defend the cortine of the wall, and the ditch.
and therefore the sole where they run, is to be made so high, that with their
noses they may look somewhat downward into the ditch. In the midst of the
lower place thou art to make a pillar all of massiue stone, neither so big
that it hinder the recoiling of the cannon, nor so little, but that it may
bear the vault, and the cannon there placed above. In this upper place thou
art likewise to make four loope holes, as in the place beneath: but if the
same be uncovered, a good parapet well crenelled will serve for the loope
holes. Within the bulwark also there would be a place made for the keeping
dry of the munition, and instruments occupied about the ordonance, and also
for keeping of arms for the soldiers. The entrance into this place and unto
the places of the canon would be from within. And that the soldiers or
Canoniers may sally or go out into the ditch there would be made a door in
the cortine of the wall near to the first loope hoole. The like places, loope
holes, and door is to be made on the other hand of the bulwark.

All the bulwark save the places for the artillery, and munition, and except,
if you will, the countermine going to the point of the bulwark, would be filled
with earth beaten small, and well rammed together. The wall of the bulwark
would be made like the wall of the town unless it please them that bestow
the charge to have it thicker: and either may it be made with cordon, or
without. The parapet of the bulwark would be more firm, then that of the
wall. And in diverse places would there be made soles for the canon to run
upon above the bulwark. The shoulder of the bulwark being made for defense of
the canon placed in the loope holes would be made strong. And likewise would
the point of the bulwark be for that the enemy uses there to make entrance
with his mattocke, or zappe.

I know few bulwarks are so large, or half so large as this that I have
described, but ye lesser they are the more they want of strength and of
perfection; and deserve in deed to be called rather terrasses, then otherwise.
Those therefore that do mean to make them strong, let them make them also
large, and if they make not their terrasses with such places as I have
described, yet let them leave some places, where to bestow the canon for
defense of the ditch and cortine.

Where the wall is round, or crooked, or so long that one bulwark cannot
succor another, or that the same is so vneauen, that the cortine cannot be
made proportionable for distance: there the remedy is in the midst of the
cortine to make platformes, and caualiers, or mounts. The platform is made of
the same matter, and almost in the same form that the bulwark has; likewise
it comes out from the wall as does the bulwark. But the difference is, that
it is placed in the midst of the plain cortine, and is nothing so large as the
bulwark, nor has those places, and loope hooles that the bulwark has, and
serves only to place the ordonance upon it above.

Sometimes that which platformes do being joined to the wall, that do
rauelins, or terrasses divided from the wall, which form la Noue commends,
and I do not mistike: For both the charge and labor is less, and well they
may serve to strengthen some weak place, that otherwise is not fortified. And
the same being beaten, yet the wall remains safe.

These Caualiers are terrasses of earth built without, or within the walls. So
called because they look over the walls.
Caualiers or mountes are made within the walls some two or three paces, and
are employed to the same purpose that platformes are. From them they differ,
that the platformes are raised in the ditche, and join to the wall, where as
mounts are made within. They are to be made higher then the walls to look
into the ditch to scour the plain or uppermost superficies of the bulwarks
on either hand, and to discover the plain. The form is four square, yet often
times broader, then long. The stuff is earth, and fagots for the most part,
holden up with bordes and pieces of timber. The length is more or less
according to the necessity of the place, and time that is given us to make it
in. Some make them 180 foot broad, and long 150 the parapet would be 20 foot
thick on front and on the sides. The stairs that are made to ascend the
caualier, are made behind.

The place being thus walled round with walls direct, and well flanked with
bulwarks at every corner, either in convenient distances, or else succorde with
platformes or mounts in the midst of the cortine, cannot easily beforced, if it
be well defended.

Whether it be better to have five, or six, or more bulwarks, about one
town, or forteresse it is hard to determine: for if the cortine be made right,
and of a reasonable length, and the bulwarks be so placed that one may
entresuccour another, how many corners soever the forteresse is, the same is
good. Only forteresses of four corners and bulwarks, and much more those of
three, because the bulwarks cannot one defend another unless they be made
very sharp and weak, of men of experience have been found defective. The
forteresse of Porto Hercole in the territory of Siena is of three corners, but
it was so built either by reason of the ground that would admit no other form,
or for that the insufficiency of those small bulwarks with three corners was
not known when that was made.

Those that either have not time or means to make walls, and bulwarks of
stone, if they will observe the same measures and proportions, may make the
same very well and strongly of earth, clay and small rubble mingled together,
and either made in mortar stiffened with straw, or else borne up with small and
straight sticks laid thin in the works. In Holland, Zeland, and other places
of the low Country, there are diverse good fortifications made only of turffes
of earth well laid and fastened together on the out sides, and within stuffed
with earth and rubble. Only the places for the canon which are made in
bulwarks of stone, in these kinds of fortifications are wanting, and the
points of the bulwarks made very weak and subject to zapping. Yet with
timber I would not doubt to make one sufficient place on either side of the
bulwark to range the canon in to beat low along the ditch and cortine; and
with fagots also to make both the shoulder and point of the bulwark as stiff,
as if were made with stone.

Those that fortify their places only with turffes, or earth of which both the
walls and bulwarks are to consist, are thus to proceed in their work. First
the ground is to be plained so broad as they mean to make their bank, or
rampar, or bulwark, and that would I not have less then 14 pases at the
bottom. Some what lower in the midst then in the outsides. The ground being
plained, a rank of turffes is to be laid outward, every one a yard or three
quarters long if the earth be tough, and likewise a rank of turffes of a
worser sort inward to the town. They are to be made thin to the inside and
thick to the outside: upon the ends of these turffes, are other worser
turffes to be laid, and the space within to be filled with small earth well
rammed together. Upon these ranks of turffes other ranks of turffes are to be
laid and to be fastened together, and to be filled in the midst until the
same come to a sufficient height. The bank is to be made leaning inward, the
better to hold up the earth. The earth must be dug out of the ditch al
along the bank, leaning a yard or more from the foundation of the bank,
which the work being finished, may be plained and fashioned to the bank, and
may serve to make the bank seem hie.

To make a bank of earth and hasell rods, or other brush mingled together,
this is the course. First the earth is to be plained, where the foundation is
to be made, then small earth well sifted and rammed to be laid half a foot
thick, and above that small rods with their heads laid as eauen as may be:
and to the ends of those, other rods are to be laid, and earth over them,
this is to be done both on the outside, and inside, and so to be mingled and
rammed together until the bank come to the full height. The bank is to be
made slope for the better lying of the earth, and to be filled with earth
dug out of the ditch for ease of the laborers.

If neither turffes of earth, nor sticks may be had sufficient, then the
outward crust on both sides of the ramper, would be made of mortar well mingled
with hay and straw, or else if the ground be stony, of stones laid in mortar.
The inmost part, if it be filled with earth and rubble, and well rammed; will
stand when the stones ruse down, and bear many canon shot, if it be of
sufficient thickenesse. This manner of fortification requiring no great cost,
and being perfited only with labor: greatly were it to be wished, that
Plimmouth, Falmouth, and other Port towns in England were so banked, and
fortified. For albeit in continuance of time such banks are beaten flat, yet
would they bear off any suddeine force.

When the work is come to the height, then is the parapet to be made 4 pases
broad, if thy bank will bear it. And to mount up the rampar, stairs would
be cast out in diverse places. The broader the bank is, the better the earth
will lie, and the better resistance it will make. But if the same be weak in
any place, then is the same to be defended with mounts from within, and
rauelins without.

The measures of the bulwarks of earth with all their parts would be either
equal to those that are made of stone, or larger, because otherwise the ditch
would soon be filled with ye rusing down of the earth.

In making the walls and bulwarks, the breadth also and fashion of the ditch
is to be cast: for if they be done both together, the earth that is dug out
of the ditch may serve to make the rampar. The ditch where it is narrowest
would be 15 pases broad. If it be made narrower, it may the more easily be
filled up by the enemy, and by the ruins of the banks and walls. In France
the ditches made in old time are either a dos de l'asue, that is, deep and
narrow in the midst, and rising on both sides, as the ditches about Amiens, and
Paris; or else a fond de cuue, that is, equally deep in the bottom, and steep
upon the sides. In both which the foot of the wall is open to the view, and
easily battred. Neither do the defenses made upon the rampar on which the wall
is built, which they call fausses brayes help the matter. Now the wall being
raised out of the ditch, the bottom of the same would be level, but broad
and deep; And in the midst of it a deep trench, which in dry ditches serves
to discover the enemies Mines, in watery places to convey away the water. Some
for defense of their ditch have built a wall in the midst of it, as in the
ditches of Caleis: but it is to no purpose, seeing for the lowness of it,
either with the ruins of the wall, or with earth and faggots cast into the
ditches, it is soon covered.

Whether the ditch be dry or full of water, it skilleth not greatly. For as
both have their discommodities; so they have also their commodities. A
fortress environed with a deep water, is less subject to sudden enterprises,
except it be in time of hard frost. The same is more incommodious to pass, or
to fill to the enemy: but the same is hurtful to the retraite of the
soldiers that sally, and keeps them up as it were in mue, and seldom is any
ground so level, but that in some place or other, the water may be let out of
the ditches: contrariwise dry ditches make fortresses more subject to
surprises, but yet they are more commodious for soldiers to sally out, and to
favor the retraite of those that come back. If there be heaps of stones in
them, the canon does more hurt to the enemy beating among them. Finally, the
dry ditch gives the soldiers means to defend their contrescarpe, which those
that are environed with water, do as it were yield up to the enemy. There fore
where the fortress is strong, and well flanked, and manned, it is better to
have a dry ditch: where it is weak, and evil furnished with soldiers, it is
better to have ditches deep, and full of water.

The last defense which is thought of, but first lost, or won, is the
coutrescarpe, or bank without the ditch. The same is to be fashioned according
to the ditch. In the making of it, we are to respect three points, according
to the three parts of it. First, that the same be made so plain on the top,
that the enemy do not hide himself behind it, and use it for a parapet.
Secondly, that toward the ditch there be made a covert or close way, four
foot broad, and four foot and a half high. Wherein the soldiers lying, may
hinder the approches of those, that come to view the walls, or full the
ditch, or place their artillery; and sallying, may retire thither safely, being
pursued by the enemy. Thirdly, that the pendant or bank of the contrescarpe be
made so slope, that the soldiers may go down in all places without breaking
their arms or their legs, although they cannot come up upon it, but at the
stairs.

These are the common defenses of Towns or Castles, according to which, by the
same rules others may be devised. Of late there is an Italian, that has
devised by certain terrasses of earth before the walls, to keep the enemy
from battering the cortine of the wall: and therefore he calls them
contraguardie. the same are thus to be fashioned.

The cortine of the wall is to be made bending inward some eight or ten
pases from the right line in the midst. eight pases from this is a rampar of
earth to be raised all along the cortine between bulwark, and bulwark,
higher then the contrescarpe, but lower then the parapet of the wall. this
rampar is to have a covert way like to the contrescarpe inward, and being made
low toward the ditch is there likewise to have a parapet. the same at the
ends is to be made small, so that it do not hinder the artillery of the
bulwark to scour the ditch. the artillery of the town that is placed at the
inward angle of the cortine is to beat all along the ditch, and flank of this
contregard.

This manner of fortification having so many parapets and flankers, and such a
thickenesse of earth, he supposes that no battery shall be able to force:
but on the otherside he considers not, that the forces of the castle or
town being not great are not sufficient to furnish so many places, nor
convenient that they should into so many parts be divided: neither does he
think, that it is more easy to fortify two towns or castles, then to build
these double defenses: nor that the charge would be infinite.

It is reported, that the Castle of And warp cost a hundredth thousand ducats
building. what then would a citadel cost, that has double the defenses, and
works, and requires twice so many men, and twice so much ordonance? if few
go to the cost of fortification with stone, and content themselves with banks
of earth, it is not likely that any beside the work of stone will make so many
terrasses of earth, as by the rules of this kind of Italian fortification is
required.

The Prince of Orange in his time traced diverse banks about such places as he
thought necessary to be defended; as about William stat, and others, where
there is scarce any bulwark, caualier, or good platform. but the walls being
made in and out, the inward angle of one part is made with great ordonance and
mosquets to flank the other. besides this, the Rampar is so large, that the
artillery placed thereon, may be made to serve to many purposes.

He that understands these rules, and withal the use of the canon, and all
lesser pieces together with their effects: in what ground soever he is, may
understand how to defend himself and his company so long as his victuals and
munitions last. For example, if he be taken in plain ground, and would there
lie safely; let him trace his banks and trenches either five square, or six
square with bulwarks or terrasses at every corner like unto a castle or town
fortified: he may make it big, or less according to his number. If he be
appointed to guard the passage of a river, he may understand how to cover his
company, that he be neither forced in front, nor on the bank. Such places
as are aduantageous by nature as hills and straites, he knows how to make
stronger by labor. The Guicciard.
Bicocke in Lombardie resolutelie defended by Prospero Colonna against the
French, teaches us how hard it is to pass a bank, that is well defended.

The Spaniards in their wars in the kingdom of Naples against the French
having made betwixt themselves and the enemy a bank and ditch of no great
strength, yet by that small advantage obtained a great victory.

These rules may also teach us how to strengthen such towns as are already
walled and ditched, though weakelie, and for the use of the canon
unprofitably. The defenses of walls made inartificiallie, are diverse. First,
rampires cast up behind the walls. Secondly, retrenchments with banks made
toward the town with a strong parapet, such as before I have described.
Thirdly, platformes made at the corners or on the cortine of the walls, made
in such places, as our artillery may best serve to flank our walls and
ditches.

The like effect have mountes, raised behind the wall upon the rampar.
Fourthlie, rauelins placed from the wall forward, where the same is most
straight, and the ground most even. The same are to be made five square, or at
least three square, and raised of earth and rods mingled and rammed close
together, about the which a broad and deep ditch is to be wrought. The last
defense is in the depth of the ditches, and strength of the counterscarpe,
which is to be wrought artificially all along where we think the enemy will
assail us.

When the governor of the town has used all possible means for defense of
himself and his company, and yet through either long siege, or want of
supply, or succor can hold the place no longer, let him before he attempt
extremities, declare his estate to those that gave him the place to guard. After
that, if he neither receive succor, nor answer, let him call the colonels,
captains and chief citizens to counsel, and resolve in time what to do. The
first point to be resolved, is, whether by any possibility the place may be
defended any longer, consideration had of the number of serviceable men, of the
want of victuals and munitions, and weakness of the place that lies almost
open to the enemy; likewise of the resolution of the enemy, and despair of
succor. And if it appear that the same cannot longer be defended, the next
point to be considered is, whether the same be to be yielded upon honorable
composition, or to be destroyed and forsaken. In this case the qualities of the
enemy are to be respected. For better it is, to run into any hazard, yea
and to die fighting, then to yield to him that perfourmeth no promise, and
kills and massacreth men after yielding. If it be resolved, that it is best
to attempt to escape by breaking through the camp, the next point to be
considered is, by what means, and at what time and place the same is to be
performed. The Ala equitum Numidarum prae sidio Salapiae relicta eruptionem
tentauit. Liu. 26.
Numidians that were left in garrison at Salapia, when the town was betrayed,
and entered by the enemy, attempted to break through the enemy. A course
commendable although it succeeded not. They of Plataea driven to great
extremity by the Thucid. 3.
Lacedaemonians that besieged the^, when they could do no more for want of
victuals, in a dark and tempestuous night went over the enemies trenches and
banks, and so escaped. They of Acerrani desperata tutela vrbis, vbi
circumuallari vrbis moenia viderunt, priusquam continuarentur hostium opera,
per inte^missa munimenta, neglectasque custodias silentio noctis dilapsi sunt.
Liu. 23
Acerrae despairing the defense of their city, when they saw the enemy to
begin to compass them round about, before that his works were continued and
perfited, in the silent night passing through where least resistance was made,
escaped. The same was likewise attempted by the Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
Gauls besieged by Caesar in Auaricum. The people near the sea coast of
France, defended themselves so long as they were able against Caesar, and when
they saw the case desperate, conveyed themselves and their goods into their
ships, and so fled away. Attilius when he could no longer defend the town of
Locri against Annibal, counselling the townsmen to compound with the enemy,
conveyed himself and the garrison away by water. Such as had means to escape,
and chose rather to compound with the enemy, the Romans in time past did so
utterly mislike, that they refused to redeem those that had yielded themselves
after the overthrow of Cannae, albeit they might have ransomed them with very
little money. Yet those that purpose to break through the enemies camp, are
to resolve upon many things before they put it in execution: first of the time,
secondly of the place where they purpose to pass, that they may fill the ditch
of his camp if any be, and provide things necessary for that purpose, thirdly
of the place where to retraite. Lastly in what order, that both they may force
those that resist, and escape them that follow after.

When there appears no hope either to hold out, or to escape by flight, then
are we to try what composition we can have, and that in Publius Sitius
ciuitatum obsessarum quae conditiones oblatas recusarant ciues interficit.
Hirt. de bell. Afric.
time. So did the Romans besieged by the Samnites in the strait at Caudium.
Neither did the Romans dislike with the garrison at Casilinum that compounded
with Annibal. Nay they Liui. 23.
rewarded them for holding out so long having no other victuals but nuts and
roots. Nicolas Serin refusing necessary conditions of peace offered him by
Soliman that besieged him in Sigeth, lost himself and many other brave men
that were with him. The fact of Liui. 32.
Aenesidemus governor of Argos, who when he might have escaped, the city
being surrendered, chose rather to die armed himself alone in the place, then
to depart, is rather to be lamented, then commended, or followed.

Necessary composition therefore, so it be in extremity, is not to be
refused. But yet while we talk of composition, we are to use great
circumspection and care; first that the garrison be not discouraged; secondly
that the same grow not more secure, and careless; thirdly that under color
of parley the enemy do not view the walls, or ditches or breach, or attempt
to sease the breach or the gate, or else enterteine some intelligence with some
within: which things how dangerous they are, I have heretofore declared. To
avoid these dangers this course is best; the necessity of the town, and other
secrets are to be kept from the knowledge of the soldiers, who by good words
are to be encouraged, and made acquainted with so much only, as is necessary:
secondly such men only are to be deputed to parley, as are well known for
their sufficiency, and loyalty: thirdly the place of parley is to be
appointed far from the town, that the soldiers within hear nothing. Which
was practiced in diverse parleyes during the last siege of Rochel.

In capitulations two things are especially to be respected, first that the
conditions be honorable, and favorable: secondly that the same be performed.
The most reasonable composition that may be, is when they within keep the
place still, paying only certain money, or loosing only some other
commodity. So Rome was redeemed from Porsena that besieged it; and so they
that were besieged by the Gauls in the Capitol redeemed themselves. And Rochel
escaped the more easily ye hands of them that beesiegd the town, by
compounding for money. Contrariwise of all points it is most extreme, to
yield up the place to the enemy. If the Saguntins would have yielded up their
town to Annibal, and consented to have dwelt some other where: they might have
saved themselves, and their goods; but they would not. There is yet a mean
betwixt these two, when those that yield to the enemy do promise him to become
his subjects, and to pay him certain tribute, and so keep the place under his
dominion.

If then by any sum of money we may redeem our selves, and our city driven
to such extremity, let us not prise gold above safety: on the other side if
we be not in extremity, let us not sell our advantages for money. When I read
former histories, I cannot but wonder at the baseness of many of our nation,
that in times past have been bought out of their places for money: and lament,
that some accounted of, well otherwise, should therein deal more dishonourably,
and foolishly then other nations. For what could be more dishonorable, then the
surrender of Terwin, Torney, Bollein, and other places, or the loss of Caleis?
and what more ridiculous, then that our army going to fight, should with a few
French crowns be bought out, and persuaded to return?

But if the enemy will hear of no composition without surrender of the place,
the next consideration is, that we may be assured of our lives, and depart with
our horses, and arms without disgrace. By the capitulation of S. Hist. de
troubl. lib. 10.
Iean d'Angeli the captains and soldiers departed with their arms, horses,
and baggage. Only they were driven to roll up their ensigns, and to make
promise that they would not bear arms in the cause of Religion for the space
of four months. The garrison of Somieres surrendering the town to the enemy
were suffered to depart with their arms and goods, and had seven days respit
given them to convey away their goods in. Like honorable composition had our
men in the late surrender of Scluce. The more resolute the garrison shows it
self in standing upon points, the more honorable their composition does
commonly prove. And contrariwise those that will needs compound, loose both
life and honor. The Romans for the most part would not compound without
surrender made of the defendants arms: but the ancient faith and loyalty of
the Romans being now lost and gone, let it be judged, what wisdom it is for
men to put themselves into dissoyall men's hands all naked.

The greatest difficulty is in procuring of good assurance of the capitulation
of surrender made. which is most of all to be stood upon. For what avails it
to have good words without performance? In these late brabbles of France the
garrisons of Mucidam, and Maile, and diverse other places have been cut in
pieces contrary to composition. And howsoever the prince of Parma dealt with
our men, yet the poor townsmen of Scluce, and some of the Dutch complain,
that all points were not performed. The Protestants of France, contrary to the
articles of peace, were shamefully massacred during the mirth and solemnities
of the kings sisters marriage. And now it begins to be a rule, that no
faith, nor laws of war are to be observed to heretics. In which roll,
seeing the Romanists do moster all that are not of the Papal faction, it
behooves us to look about, how we do trust them. especially giving us such
warning by the feined treaty of Dunkirke. Beside all this, a certain Spaniard,
a great man of law in the Low countries, affirms, that all Baltazar Ayala de
iure belli.
capitulations wherein any thing that belongs to the state is alienated, are
void and of no force. Which if it were true, then could hardly any
composition of surrender be good, further then they that have the same
surrendered, keep the same by force.

Wherefore, that we be not herein abused by treacherous enemies, let us see
by what means we may assure our selves. In times past we might trust men's
words. if they performed not words, yet had they regard to writings and
seals. Hist de troubl. de Franc.
Captain Piles for the assurance of the composition of S. Iean d' Angeli,
required only the kings hand and seal. But now such disloyalty is entered into
the world, that neither with words, nor writings, nor seals, nor yet oaths men
can stand assured. And therefore beside words and writing, wise men now
require sureties, pledges, and hostages. The house of Guicciard.
Bentiuogli in Bologna would not capitulate with Caesar Borgia, unless the
French king, and Florentines would give their words, and bind themselves for
performance. The Phil. Comines.
constable of France would not trust Lewis the eleventh his oath without
pledge. Both of Lysander in old time, and of Lewis the eleventh in latter
times, stories affirm, that they had small regard of promise, or oath, further
then their profit required. Therefore both in time past the Romans, and of
late time others have required, and had other assurance. The garrison of
Brouage Anno 1577.
capitulating with the enemy about the surrender of Brouage, doubting of the
performance of covenants; demanded, and obtained hostages, which were conveyed
to Rochell before they gave up the place. they of Somieres had likewise
hostages delivered unto them, such as they did nominate, before they did
deliver up the town. Without this assurance, it is not safe for any to commit
their heads into their enemies hands. and far more honorable it is to die
like brave men in the field with our arms in our hands, then like sheep to
have our throats cut in the hands of perfidious butchers. Tit. Liu. 24.
Sempronius seeing himself betrayed, and that he must needs die, exhorted his
men to die rather fighting and doing somewhat, in which case men have less
apprehension of death, then under the knives of executioners.

To avoid all cauilles about words, the sentence is to be conceived plainly,
and all circumstances to be expressed, as nere as may be. and the redress of
all contrauentions, if it may be, either by some means to be kept in our own
hands, or in the determination of honorable persons. The Sleidan.
Lantgraue that yielded himself, and came to the presence of Charles the fifth,
Maurice of Saxony being mediator betwixt them, upon cavil about one word, was
contrary to his meaning, detained prisoner, and had been longer, if that
Maurice had not conceived indignation, that upon his word the good prince
should be abused. All we can do in this case, is too little. For when princes
will quarrel, they can pick occasion, and ground themselves upon every small
point, and make many fair pretenses: as in the dealings that passed betwixt
Guicciard.
Lewis Sforza, and the house of Medici; bewixt pope Iulio the second, and Lewis
the twelft of France, and betwixt them and Ferdinand king of Spain is evident.
Of more then we have in our own power, we can never assure our selves, when we
deal with perfidious enemies. And therefore let all brave soldiers consider
before hand and provide, that they come not into these straytes, and if
necessity enforce them to compound, let them deal wisely.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the use of the Navy in wars, and of diverse points to be
considered of those that command at Sea.
THose Nations and Cities, that have the commandment of the Sea, howsoever
they are foiled at land: yet can never be thoroughly vanquished, before they be
beaten from ye Sea. A matter apparent by diverse examples. The Athenians,
although their country was all wasted, and the people driven by the
Lacedaemonians their enemies, to hide themselves within ye walls of the City;
yet so long as they were Thucid. 1. Exorat. Periclis.
strong at Sea, not only had all things necessary for themselves, but also
deprived their enemies of many commodities, and spoiled their coasts by diverse
sudden incursions. And albeit they had no dominion in firm land: yet kept they
the Islands in subjection, so long as they kept ye Sea. The same people before
that, being invaded by ye Persians coming upon them with huge array, in so
much that they thought themselves unable to resist at land, abandoned their
City, and made themselves strong at Sea. By which means, in the end they
vanquished their enemies, and recovered their losses with great advantage both
of wealth, and honor. The Cities likewise on the coast of Caes. bell. gal. 6.
France, which is now called Briteine, although they could not defend
themselves against Caesar's forces at land, yet suffered no great loss, as long
as they had ships to command at Sea. Their ships furnished them with things
necessary being besieged, the same conveyed the men and their goods away being
distressed. Contrariwise how strong soever a Nation is by land, yet cannot the
same maintain it self long, nor continue in reputation without a sufficient
power at Sea. The Romans were driven to great straytes by the Pirates, that
kept the rule of the Sea a great time, and continued it until such time, as
they were driven thence by the victory of Pompey the great. Sext. Pompeius
keeping the Seas with his ships, drove Augustus, and Antony to a hard
composition. The Lacedaemonians could not remedy the spoils of their country
made by ye incursio^s of the Athenian ships, nor could Caesar have reason of
the coast Towns of France, before he had provided a Navy, and vanquished them
at Sea. Neither shall ever ye Spaniard obtain his purpose of ye Low Countries
so long as they can keep ye sea: but if they fail of that, it would go hard
with them. This was the cause that made the Romans, albeit before that
unacquainted with sea causes to arm to sea. Without their navy they could
neither have defended their Empire against ye Carthaginians first, nor
afterward against the pirates, nor without strength at sea could either Caesar
have subdued the coast towns of France, or entered this Island. Nor could
Augustus have vanquished Pompey, nor the Lacedaemonians prevailed against ye
Athenians. The experience of these nations, and great warriers, does teach us
this conclusion, that if we mean either to maintain the honor, and reputation
of our country, or to defend our selves against the enemy, ye pursues us, or
to prosecute injuries done unto us, or to aid our friends that crave our
help, we must have diligent regard to our seafaring men, and shipping, that
both may be maintained, and kept in order. Our own experience, and diverse
reasons may teach us the same. Before that this Nation did use ye sea, first
the Romans, then the Saxons, after them the Danes, and now last of all the
Normans, have taken and possessed diverse parts of this country. Neither could
we wanting sufficient force at sea, resist them. Sithence that the kings of
England have had ye government at sea, neither have foreign nations had like
courage to invade us, nor have we wanted means to defend our selves, or aid
our friends. If that our ships had not had ye vantage of sailing, when the
Spaniard came to invade us, or yt we had wanted shipping, God knows what
would have bin the issue. How much then is it better now, then when our
auncesters had neither navy to defend their coasts, nor to transport their
armies to pursue their right, or help their friends? in ye days of king Edward
the 3. and Edward the 4. our nation for want of shipping, was beholding to the
Flemmings and Hollanders for shipping, to transport the English army into
France. The use of ye navy is great in peace, greater in wars. Thereby
trafique, and intercourse betwixt friends is maintained: victuals yt go to the
enemies are stopped, our wants of victuals, arms, munition, and other
necessaries are supplied: the enemies coast is spoiled, our own defended: the
coast towns of the enemies country, that live upon the sea are brought to
great extremities, our own maintained. Without ye same neither can the trade
of merchandise be maintained, nor ye sea towns of ye enemy be besiged, nor
their country spoiled, nor can we understand ye enemies proceedings, nor help,
or well defend our friends, or our selves. For three causes especially as
Classem trium rerum causa parauimus, vt Africae oram popularetur, vt tuta nobis
Italiae litota eslent: ante omnia ne suppleme^tum cum stipendio, commeatuque a
Carthagine Annibali transportaretur. Liu. 24.
Fabius witnesses did the Romans furnish, and set out their navy: First to
spoil the coast of Afrike, next to guard the coast of Italy, but chiefly to
hinder that no supply of men, victuals, or money should come from Carthage to
Annibal, with who^ then they had great wars. Octacilius sailing from Sicily
toward Afrike, and coming upon ye coast upon a sudden, first took Vtica a
rich town, and then spoiled ye country, and returned with 130. ships laden
with spoil. And all this within 3. or 4. days. Caius Laelius coming with his
navy to C. Laelius nocte ad Hippone^ Regium cum accessistet, luce prima ad
populandum agrum sub signis milites sociosque nauales duxit. Omnibus pacis modo
incuriose agentibus magna clades illata. Liu. 29.
Hippo on the coast of Afrike landed his men on the sudden, and at the break
of day led forth his soldiers, and mariners in warlike manner under their
colors, and made a great spoil, for that as in time of peace, the people of
the country were without care. M. Valerius Liu. 25.
Messala sailed into Afrike, as well to spoil the country, as to understand the
proceedings, and purposes of the enemy: which he learned by the examinations
of diverse prisoners of good account, which he took there. Liu. 27.
The Romans understanding what spoils were done upon their coasts by
Pirates, and others, sent two captains, each of them with 10. ships to defend
the coasts, and to keep the seas. These uses of shipping, although experience
has taught us, yet many will not admit nor believe. For by reason of their
want of skill, they think that neither the enemy can land here, nor we land
in the enemies country. And if the enemy should attempt any such mattter they
verily believe, that ye country people with their forkes, and the women with
their rocks and spits will kill them down. But little do they know how
small trust there is in such defense, nor what great actions may be performed,
when resolute men land in the enemies country upon a sudden. Which in part I
have showed by the examples of Octacilius, Laelius, and Messala. Neither will
any trained men, or small garrison, help the matter as now I shall show. The
king of Vrbem tenebat regium praesidium, agrum circa depopulati sunt Romani
exsce^sione ex nauibus facta Liu. 37.
Macedonia did place garrisons in all the coast towns, yet was he not able to
guard the country from spoil of the Romans, that out of their navy landed
here, and there. The Athenians notwithstanding that the Thucid. 3. and 4.
country was well guarded both with horsemen and footmen, yet landed diverse
times, and sacked and spoiled diverse towns in Peloponnesus. Neither may we
think, that Afrike that so was spoiled by ye Romans, was all that while
without guard. But the suddenness of ye invasion prevented ye gathering
together of those, that were to make resistance.

Caes. de bell. ciu. 2.
Nasidius coming upon a sudde^ into the haue^ of Messana took out a ship
thence in the sight of the Townsmen and other ships. Neither could the
Athenia^s keep so dilligent Thucid. 1.
watch at their beaco^s, but that the enemy coming on the sudden took 3.
ships out of the haue^ of Salamine, and set ye town in an uproar. As for those
yt think it a hard matter to land quietly in ye enemies country: they seem to
be ignorant not only how easily we landed our men in ye voyage of Portugal,
both at Coro^na and Penicha: but also of ye easy landing of ye Athenia^s in
Peloponnesus, of ye Romans in Afrike, and in ye coast of Spain, and Greece.
Al ye forces of this Island being assembled together, and seeing Caesar's
coming, could not hinder his landing. Nay when Pompey held all the port towns
of the coast of Caesar inter saxa quietam nactus stationem, milites exposuit
Pompeianis omnia tenentibus. Caes. bell. ciu. 3.
Epeirus with strong garrisons, and had a most puissant army ready, yet could he
not forbid Caesar to land his army yt came against him, and in a calm landed
his men among rocks. Sarlabous minding to stop ye landing of Minguetiere in ye
isle of Oleron an. 1569. charged him in ye landing, but with such disadvantage,
the others men being covered in their botes and shalups, and he being on the
open shore, that he and diverse men lost their lives in ye place, the rest had
no way to escape but by running. Those yt land against those that resist them
have many advantages, they come upon the sudden, they have great number of
resolute soldiers, they comeprepared to fight, They stand close in their botes
covered with their targets: their small shot, and their falcons or other small
pieces placed in the noses of their botes does make them way. Contrariwise
soldiers are not gathered upon a sudden, and tumultuary forces of ye country
come rather to gaze, the^ to fight. Seldom do they endure blows, and sometime
they fear at ye sound of pieces. Those yt present themselves upon the shore,
lie open to ye enemies shot. Neither captain nor soldier can come in warlike
sort, being taken upon such a sudden. The only danger of those yt land in a
foreign country is, least ye tempest arysing, suffer them not to be shipped
again. Which happened to the Thucid.
Athenia^s landing in Pelopo^nesus. And yet going to the next harbor, they
took the place, and stayed there, until such time as their ships could come
unto the^. In all which time the country was not yet come together in such
numbers, that they durst fight with them.

By the navy ye victuals yt go to ye enemy are intercepted. Nabis the Liu. 34.
Lacedemonian with a few ships so watched the coast, that no victuals could
come to the Romans, that then warred against the Macedonians in Greece. By the
same Classem paratam, instructamque ad commeatus intercipiendos habebant. Liu.
30.
course the Carthaginians lying incertaine Islands at the receite hindered the
repair of ships that brought victuals to the Romans. Neither could they
redress this disordred before they had taken all the Toto mari pulsis hostium
nauibus magni commeatus frumenti Romam subuecti sunt. Liu. 28.
Islands from them, and driven their Liu. 21.
ships out of the sea. Those yt would defend the coast from the enemies
spoils, are to proceed in this sort. In Carthaginenses speculas per singular
promontoria ponebant. Liu. 29.
Promontories they are to keep diligent watch at beacons. To understand ye
enemies proceeding, they are to send forth their espials in ships of good
fail. Upon the coast they are to maintain Omnia oppida maritima praesidiis
firmauit. Liu 35.
forces both on horseback and foot, and to place in port towns good
garrisons. This did the Carthaginians practice in their wars against ye
Romans, and long before them ye Lacedemonia^s against ye Athenians, and other
nations proceeded in like force. and al little enough. For where there is not a
navy ready furnished to seek out, and to fight with ye enemy, either in one
place or other coming with great forces, he will land, and may for any
resistance that can be made from ye land upon a sudden against such force, do
the same without danger.

But if (as in deed it is far better) we purpose our selves to invade the
enemies, and to land our men in ye country, yet let us proceed more wisely,
and orderly, then heretofore some men have done, and let us not always presume
upon ye enemies weakness. If former examples can not instruct us, yet may ye
smart of their losses having lost both many good friends, and brave men make
men more resolute and more wary. First therefore let us consider the time when
ye enemy is most secure, and ye season yt best serves for us, yt we the^ go
not when either heat, or cold will beat us, and the country is least provided
to maintein us with victuals or forage. Secondly let us consider ye place
where ye enemy is most open, and where there is most commodity for us:
further let those that attempt such enterprises provide themselves of al things
necessary for such a journey. Alas why should men be sent to sea to be
famished, or among ye enemies to be dishonored? Before things be ready, let us
not discover our purpose. Neither let ye Spaniard hear of our enterprises,
before yt men be levied that should execute them. If the Thucid. 1.
Lacedaemonians had repressed their anger, until such time as they had provided
themselves both by land and sea, as Archidamus counseled them; they had done
more hurt then they did to the Athenia^s. But what if such as go in such
services cannot have things necessary? then let them quiet themselves, and let
those that are the hindrances of all good service go themselves, and fight
themselves first: for by going in that sort, they do hazard their lives, and
loose their honor.

The provision is to be made at a place certain, which being made, all ye
soldiers are to have their rendeuous given them at that place, and both they
and the provision is to be shipped, and to depart with the next fair wind yt
blows after that time. When we are Vbi omnes iam in nauibus erant, scaphas
circummisit, vt ex omnibus nauibus gubernatores and magistri nauium and bini
milites, in forum conuenirent ad mandata accipienda. Li. 29
ready to depart then is direction to be given unto the chief of every ship
either by word of mouth, orin writing sealed, and to be opened at the sea. That
the enemy do not meet us, or cross us at sea, we are to understand by our
espials where his shipping lies, and what it is, and in what readiness.

To come upon the sudden, the best course is, as soon as we descrie land, and
see where we are, to stay until the shutting of the evening, and then to make
toward ye haven, or harbor. If the weather be fair, there is no danger.
Neither did the Romans ever doubt to come on the coast in ye night. Laelius
la^ded at Liu. 29.
Hippo in the night. Liu. 31.
Claudius lurking behind a promo^tory so long as it was light, landed his men
in the evening, and took Chalcis before day. And some think we might have
sped better at Coronna, if we had either entered in ye evening, or not
discovered our selves so long before we entered. Neither are brave Formidolosum
dictitans imperatori quo prohibentur plerunque conatus honesti. Tacit. annal.
actions hindered by anything more, then by pretense of fear. The more
expedition yt is used in landing, ye greater execution is commonly done; and ye
longer it is delaied, the more time ye enemy has to resist, or rather to
run away, and convey away his goods. If we mean to do any great execution,
our force must be ye greater. The Romans employed not in such enterprises
less then an army: but if we might land but 4000. foot, and 200. horse,
leaving guard sufficient for our ships, I would think to do some great
matter with them.

Yet that we may speed the better, it were good to resolve and give direction
before we depart from our country, who should land first, and what every man
should do presently upon landing. Being landed, we are to proceed in order,
according to the practice of war, sending our espials before, and placing
corpse de guard in convenient places, to defend those that are ranging about to
fetchin spoil. The Romani palati, and praeda graves interficiuntur, and ad
naues compelluntur. Liu. 27.
Romans marching dissolutely after their landing in Afrike, and thinking their
coming thither was only to spoil, and not to fight, were discharged of their
burdens, and driven to their ships with loss. Another time wandering up and
down without Cum multa caede and foeda fugaretro ad naues compulsisunt. Liu.
22.
care or fear, they were drawn into an ambush, and driven back to their
ships with great slaughter, and shameful flight. Which mischief cannot
happen to those that forecast dangers, and go strong, and dispatch quickly, and
provide for their retrait. As did Laelius and others, whose examples I have
propounded to be imitated in like enterprises.

Those that do not as well provide yt their men may retire safely, and be orderly
shipped, as yt they may go forth orderly seldom escape danger or loss.
Therefore is there a defense to be made at ye landing, and certain banks and
trenches to be cast, that our men may safely retire within them, and from them
quietly, and without tumult take shipping, repelling those ye come to charge
them. At Alexandrinis imminentibus, nullus dabatur in naues receptus. Hirt. de
bell. Alex.
Alexandria when Caesar's men being driven from their ground, would have fled to
their ships, they came so fast, that they sunk the botes that were ready to
receive them, so that few escaped, save such as could swim: the enemy
pressed so fast upon them, and so little order there was to favor their
retrait, that was not looked for. The like disorder Caes. bell. ciu. 2.
happened to the remnant of Curioes soldiers in Afrike. If they would have
gone orderly, and quietly, every man might have bin shipped: because they
striued, the botemen were afraid to set their botes to the shore. Although no
enemy urge us, yet great loss happens by such tumults, as is evident by the
tumultuous Liu. 41.
retrait of Appius his soldiers, that ran to their ships, and were drowned
many of them by their haste, when the enemy who^ they feared, followed not.
Further, we are to appoint a time, when every man is to retire to his ships,
that no company stay to long. And above althings we are to provide, yt our
ships stand safely both against ye attempts of the enemy, and the force of the
weather, and to give order in case they be forced before our return to wey
ancre, where to meet us. If ye enemy can either burn our ships or botes, or
if there be not correspondence betwixt those at land, and those at sea, they
both incur a manifest danger, and therefore we are to choose a safe place of
landing, and to keep a diligent and strong guard. The Carthaginia^s being
charged by the Romans, while their men were at shore, were over thrown at
sea. Neither did it help them, that their men were in the port. For while they
hasted to get on board, and to provide themselves to fight Omnia praepropere
agendo militum apparatu nautica ministeria impediuntur: trepidatione nautarum
capere and aptare arm^ miles prohibetur. Liu. 22.
the soldiers hindered the mariners, the mariners crossed the soldiers, and
all was out of order. Never therefore ought the ships to be left without
sufficient defense. The Liu. 10.
Greeks that went up the river of Po to seek spoil, were defeated by the
pesants of the country, for that going on land, they left their botes in the
river without defense or guard, which being seized, they were cut from their
retrait.

Didius Hirt. de bell. Hispanico.
Caesar's admiral in Spain, burnt Pompeis ships left without guard, while he
and his men were gone on shore to feteh in water, and other provision. So he
that escaped Caesar's hands in the overthrow at Munda, was here overtaken by his
own negligence. The same Ibidem.
happened to Didius himself also. For fearing no enemy at sea, and coming
himself and his company on land, his ships were sudde^ly fired by certain
Lusitania^s that before had served Pompey, by who^ also himself, and his
company was slain. Neither ought we to enter any haven or harbor, where the
enemy may bar us in, or take us single as we go out. The Thucid. 3.
Athenians taking the mouth of the harbor at Pylos, shut in the navy of the
Lacedaemonians so, that it did them no service. The same stratageme the
Lacedaemonians put in practice against the Athenians in Sicile. For taking the
Thucid. 5.
mouth of the haven of Syracusae, where al their navy did lie, they drove them
in the end to forsake their ships, which was the beginning of that calamity
that happened to them in Sicile. The English in the days of Froissart.
Edward the 3. finding certain Spanish ships in a certain haven in Briteine,
seasing the mouth of the haven at flowing water, sending certain boats and
barks on fire among them fired them al. Polyxenidas Liu.
admiral unto Antiochus, taking the Rhodians with their ships in a strayte,
kept them within; and when they forced to come out, which they could not do,
but two or three on front, he took the foremost before the rest could come to
succor, and so destroyed the Rhodian navy. Therefore ought we to have no less
care, that we may lie safely within the harbor, and go out easily at
pleasure, then to win the harbor.

Thus we see the manifold uses of shipping, and how it is to be guarded and
governed in foreign enterprises in countries abroad. Let us now therefore
consider how it is to be fashioned, furnished, and governed, that the same may
be vantageous in fight at Sea, and fit for service. Wherein a principal
point is, that they be made swift of sail, and sharp to go near the wind.
This only one vantage next unto the power of God gave the victory to the navy
of England, and the foil to the supposed invincible navy of Spain of late
time. D. Brutus Caes. de bell. ciu. 2.
although in all points else he were superior to the Massilians, yet by
reason their ships were lighter and swifter, could he not overthrow them,
although many times he foiled them. If they be too weak, those that are swift
of sail may safely depart, if they prevail, no ship can escape them by
sailing. They ought likewise to be made strong, both to abide the force of the
Sea in a storm, and to bear the shaking of our own ordonance, and the blows
of the enemies. How that is to be wrought, I refer my self to the masters of
the occupation.

Further, ships may not want victualles while they are at sea, least either
having the advantage, they be driven to give it over, or being taken at
advantage, they be not able to abide it out. And most absurd it were if ships
that go to fight should want ordonance, munition, and arms to fight with.
First therefore there ought to be good ordonance mounted on their carriages, and
fitted with their rings and tacle, and al instruments necessary. Of al pieces
the demi coluerine in the nose and poope is most effectual, both for the long
reach, and for that it gives the fire all out of the ship. There would be
store of cross bars, chain shot, and other bullets. How many pieces there
ought to be in every ship, it cannot be determined, considering the diverse
makings and burdens of ships. Much less can it be resolved what munitions,
victuals, and furniture for great ordonance must be provided further then in
general, that there must be sufficient. Beside the great ordonance there ought
to be provision made of mosquets, caliuers, and pistoles, swords and daggers,
half pikes, halberds, glaiues, blackbils, and other sorts of weapons, and for
the defense of the soldiers good cuyraces and morions, and targets both of
proof and lighter. Likewise there would be rampars made of wool, and for
the defense of the waste and the deck a strong netting. Beside castles made in
the poope, and foredecke for guard of the ship. For which there would be made
also mantellets of plankes filled with occum stuffed between, and moveable,
that they may be employed where need is. The castles would also be made to
take down, that in sailing the ship be not hindered by them. There would also
turrets, bridges or frames of wood be made leaning over board, that our men
might more easily boorde the enemy. The tops would be fensed with some
frame of boords lined with occum and furnished with stone and shot. But that
need not be before we come to join. The yard arms would have sharp hooks in
the^ to cut the tacle of the enemies ships.

To fire the enemies ships there would be balls of wildefire, and other fire
works and engines devised, and to quench the enemies fire store of clay,
vinegar, and water set ready. Besides all this, axes, hammers, wimbles, and al
instruments to work withal, and in sum whatsoever may serve to annoy the
enemy or defend our selves, the same is to be provided.

Caesar albeit his ships were lower then those of the enemies, yet did he raise
up turrets and Turres excitabant in nauibus, vnde in hostium naues altiores
transcendebant. Caes. de bell. gal. 3.
frames of boordes in them, by means whereof, his men when they came to
boording did easily enter the enemies ships, and foiled them. By which means
he vanquished the power of the Gauls at sea. If that we have to do with the
Spaniard at sea; either must we use some such devise, or else shall we hardly
enter their ships being so high, in respect of ours. With Vna erat magno vsui
res praeparata a nostris falces praeacutae insertae, affixaeque longuriis,
quibus funes abrumpebant. Caes. bell. gal. 3.
hooks in the yard arms he cut the tacle of the enemies ships in the same
fight. But above al things there ought to be in every ship store of valiant
soldiers, and mariners, without which neither the ship, nor the furniture can
be employed to purpose. I would only content me with mariners, if they were
soldiers also. The Romans and Greeks that well knew the difference betwixt
them, for every mariner put in their ships two soldiers, which proportion the
Spaniards observe now, making great difference betwixt mariners and soldiers,
although we do not therein make that difference, that we should.

The Poenus vt sociis naualibus affatim instructam classem, ita inopem milite
habebat. Extemplo 7. punicae naues circumuentae, fugam ceterae coeperunt. Liu.
20.
Carthaginian ships encountering with the Romans were not able to make any
fight for want of soldiers, albeit they had store of mariners. And in the
encounters that Caesar had at sea against diverse enemies, it was not the
mariner, but the legionarie soldier that gave him the victory. Howsoever it
is either with mariners, or soldiers, or both, our ships are to be furnished
so, that both the great ordonance may be employed in the rooms below, and
diverse be placed to do all services necessary in the houle of the ship, and
also all the deckes and parts above be well manned and guarded: not forgetting
the tops and other places.

If men set out their ships neither well manned, nor well victualled, nor well
furnished with arms and munition of war; what hope is there for them to
vanquish the Spaniard or any other their enemies at sea?

Some, I doubt not, do think to make them ducke at sea with great shot. And
therefore as they provide somewhat slenderly for that, so for other matters
they go to sea altogether unprovided. Besides that I understand that in some
places the Princes shipping have for the most part special instructions not to
graple. Matters very ridiculous to those that have but any small skill at sea.
For it is not always in their power to take and leave, as the lamentable
experience of some of late has declared. Where the enemies ships are swifter
then thine, he may if he find thee at sea, and list to fight, force thee
against thy will to fight, or to yield. Yea admit he has only some ships
swifter then thine, yet will it suffice to force thee to a general fight,
unless thou meanest shamefully to abandon to the enemies courtesy such ships,
as are slower of sail, then the rest. For we may not think that always we
shall meet with such a General, as the duke of Medina Sidonia that always
fled, and never made head again, or with those that have commission to fly,
and not to fight. Which if we do, then beware those that are hindermost.
Besides this our ships may be taken sometimes in harbor, or at some advantage
when they cannot fly from the enemy. Were it not expedient in this case, that
thy ships were well provided forgrapling, and al manner of defense? unless they
be so furnished, how can they abide a brunt, or stay a time until they be
succored? or how can they be succored, unless the succors be provided for
grapling? Finally suppose all thy navy were swifter then the best ships of the
enemy (which cannot be) and that thou had always sea-roome, which cannot
be hoped: yet all this makes little to fighting, but rather to flying. The
Parthians that shot backward flying, yet did not always fly, but now and
then charge the enemy, if advantage were offered. Sure in this kind of fight
of ships there is altogether no honor, no nor profit. For how can they that
fly subdue the enemy that comes to spoil their coasts? How can they hinder
him, but that he may go whither he lists, and return when he lists,
the wind and weather serving him? Suppose that by shot thou should sincke a
ship, yet the men may still be saved. Those therefore that thus fight
shooting, and never come near, are like unto those that strike the enemy
down, but dare not set their feet upon him, and dispatche him.

As for those that think to work wonders with great shot, they do only
feed themselves with imaginations, that the enemy is like to women or
children, that fear the noise of great pieces. For other great hurt it does
not, unless it be to Merchants ships heavy laden, and where the men within
cannot come to stop leakes. if the sea move never so little, twenty to one but
the shot falls either hie, or low, unless the ships come very near, which in
fight with a navy of ships, I suppose, no one ship will, and many cannot for
fear of grapling, which they forswear. I would gladly know of these men how
many ships they have known to have bin taken with this manner of fight. Don
Pedroes ship, although abandoned of all her fellows, yet would never have
yielded, but that they within imagined they should be boorded of all the
fleet. Those ships that fell among the flats before Vlishingen being a
remainder of the Spanish fleet, yet abode a charge, and would not yield, but
upon fear they should have been invested. Did not our men at Coronna beat a
great Biskaine ship from the land within mosquet shot a whole day with diverse
great pieces? yet could they neither sink the ship, nor force the men to yield
before that with their boats they made countenance either to fire her, or to
board her. They of Rochel An. 1569. besieging Brouage brought the great
Venetian carrake hard to the side of the castle: whence a man might have spit
into her, not only hit her, and shot into her. Yet could not they of the castle
with all their canon shot either sink her, or greatly hurt her, but she hurt
them much more. By grapling I have heard of many overcome at sea, both in
ancient time, and also of late days, as in the gulf of Lepanto where the
christians over came the Turks; and in the encounter betwixt the Guicciard.
hist.
Spaniards and Philip Doria, where Hugh Moncada and many Spaniards died of the
sword, not of the bullet. But if great ordonance could do so much as is
supposed, yet where should we have shot, and powder to furnish the continual
shot of our ships: when in the encounter betwixt the Spaniard and us at sea,
in one two days most of the ships had spent all their powder, without any
sensible loss to the enemy?

How shall we drive the Spaniard out of our ports without grapling, if he come
once again as he threatens? How can we succor any town by him besieged by
sea without fighting? Caesar's ships were heavy of sail, yet lying before
Massilia, they could not be removed, nor could any victualles enter into the
town by them. Neither had the Spaniard been so easily removed from before
Caleis, but that God stroke them with fear without evident cause.

Those that are afraid to venture their ships of war (a goodly color for
such cowards) they may also be afraid to venture in the defense of their
country. For without aduenturing not only of timber, but also of men's lives,
which (howsoever some now in our time do not value thousands of men at the
price of one rotten ship) are far more precious, our country cannot be
defended, nor the prince served. These men therefore, let them keep their
decayed wits, and joints warm, and let them not henceforth tell us of things
impossible, ridiculous, yea and very dangerous. For the way to hazard our
ships, is not by boording, but by sparing of money, when they are not, as they
should be furnished for fight, but must needs fall into the enemies hands, if
ever they be taken at any disadvantage, by the breaking of their mastes,
tearing, or burning of their sails, or cutting of their tacle. This is a fear
that neither the Romans, nor Athenians, nor other nation ever feared; and yet
fire was then as dangerous as now. Neither the Spaniards, French, nor Dutch
fear any such matter, neither do our men of war that go to sea forecast it.
Wherefore then should our best ships, and such as should be best furnished
fear, more then others, this course especially being so fit to make the navy
of England unprofitable, and to give the enemy the victory? if this be not so,
let it be showed where the Queens ships have taken any ship of war by
canonades: but of merchants ships, and other men of war we have heard of
diverse, that by boording have prevailed.

Let us therefore so provide, that we need not to fear any such danger, and
that we may not only overcome the enemy with flying, but with fighting, as our
ancestors did in the days of Edward the third, and Henry the 8. famous kings
of this land, and as our soldiers and mariners would now do, if men's hands
were not bound, and their hearts broken, whereas men should endeavor to
encourage them, and whet them, to go forward.

In fighting at seathe Admiral, that has his ships well trimmed, and al things
ready must have care also further, that his company may have the advantage of
the wind, and keep good order in the sailing of the ships, that one go not
before an other, that he range his navy with supplies, and finally that he
provide, whatsoever else is necessary or requisite for the obtaining of
victory.

Those that have the wind on their backs, have thereby many advantages: their
shot does more hurt the side of the enemies ship lying up, then the enemies
shot can hurt their ships: their fire is easily carried into the enemies
vessels; the smoke of the ordonance does blind the enemies. Among other
things, the vantage of the wind did greatly further the victory of the
Christians against the Turks in the gulf of Lepanto. The array and good order
of the navy does bring with it this help; that one ship is not lightly
environed by many other, and further, that one ship is ready to succor
another. And therefore as in fight at land, so at sea likewise an order, and
array is to be kept of ships sailing to fight. The most common array is that
the front of the battle be divided into three parts, into the right corner or
wing, into the mid battle, and into the left corner. Every one of these are to
have other ships appointed not only to succor those that fight, but also to
fight with those that offer themselves to charge the navy behind.

The manner of sea fight is the same with the whole navy, that ships meeting
single do use. First they assail the enemy with their great shot: which would
be done only when the ships come very near: then they charge him with the small
shot. Those that suppose themselves to be the stronger do lay hold upon their
enemies ship, and force themselves to enter the same. In the mean while neither
do they, yt are in the tops of the ships, nor others that have the charge of
fire works cease to do their endeavor. And that with great care lest they hurt
themselves, or their fellows. The Liu.
Rhodians in their fight against Antiochus hanging pots of fire flaming at the
end of their bowsprits, by a devise they had, shaked the same so, that when each
boorded other, it fell into the enemies ships.

In fighting disorder is greatly to be feared. Which is when our ships are
entangled one in another tacle, or fall aboard, one upon an other, or are
singled from the rest of the company. Thucid. 3.
Eleven ships of the Athenians discomfited seventy ships of the Lacedaemonians
being in disorder, and fallen aboard one of an other. Therefore in ancient time
did they keep a curious order in their sea fights.

The Athenians coming in aid of them of Corcyra (now Corfu) against the
Corinthians ranged their own ships in the right corner, the ships of
Corcyra were divided into three parts, every one of which had his several
commander. After a sign given they charged the enemy. Both sides had many
armed men aboorde beside archers and slingars: and fought so egrely that after
they were once grapled, they hardly fell off again. The words of Thucidides,
which I have here set under, do describe the same most lively.

Thucid. 1.
(...).

In the encounter betwixt the Romans, and Antiochus his Admiral Polyxenidas,
as soon as he perceived the approach of the enemy, Polyxenidas extended the
left wing of his navy into the sea, in the right wing he ranged his ships, so
that the uttermost of them were near the land: after that with equal front he
sailed forward. The Roman Admiral Liuius staying for those ships that were
not come up, ranged his ships in order, and set al things in order to fight.
Himself grapling with two of the enemies ships, that came on each side of his
ship, caused his men to enter them.

Polyxenidas vbi appropinquare hosts cernit, Liu. 36.
sinistrum cornu in altum extendit, dextrum ad terram applicat, and aequa
front ad pugnam procedebat. Romanus armamenta componens opperitur insequentes
naues. Liuius in duas hostium naues ex vtroque latere praetoriae venientes
ferreas iniecit manus. Romam in hostium naues transcendunt.

In the battle of Lepanto, first were Natal. Come^.
ranged certain great galliasses of the Venetians, some pretty distance one
from an other. Then followed the rest of the navy ranged in three parts, and
supplied with others following after them. The galiasses having put the Turks
in some disorder, the rest of the galleys grapled every one with those they
encountered, and the men striued to board them.

But that every man may know his place and charge before the nauies join, good
direction is to be given forth. And every man to be ranged in order, and to be
exercised, that they may know out of what place to board the enemy, and what
company is to perform it, and how, that when men should execute, they do not
stand gazing one upon another. Nabis Remigem militemque; simulachris naualis
pugnae exercebat. Liu. 35.
providing for the sea, did exercise his soldiers and mariners with fained
sea fights. They that observe not good order commit many faults, and hurt one
another in boording. They of Rochell, An. a thousand five hundred seventy two
boording a gally in the night disorderly, some fell over board, other killed
their fellows being entered. Wherefore seeing without provision, and order nothing
can be done, either at sea or land, let all things be provided that are
requisite for the strength and employment of the navy: and let the practice of
war in maritime causes be diligently followed, that abuses being reformed, we
may vanquish those, that now scorn us, and contemn us.

CHAP. XIX. Wherein special matters concerning treaties of peace, truce, and
confederacies, and likewise concerning the privileges of ambassadors and
messengers, which ordinarily are mediators of peace, truce and such like
treaties are handled.
AL though the joy and triumph that is made in victory be exceeding great, yet
I account him not wise, that when al things hang in equal balance refuses a
reasonable peace with equal conditions, upon hope of a doubtful victory. All
that we take Omnia quae agimus subiecta mill casibus Scipio apud Liu. 30.
in hand is subject to infinite chances, and Mars belli co^munis, vtrinque
ferrum, vtrinque humana corpora crunt. Nusquam minus quam in bello euentus
respondet. Annibal apud Liu. 30.
success of battle is common to both parties. Both sides have arms, and the
strength of war consists but in frail humane bodies. Neither do events
less answer our expectation in any thing, then in wars. Wherefore seeing
that peace is the end of wars, and seeing that we take arms in hand, not to
do wrong, but that we may recover or obtain our own right: let no man refuse
reason that may have it. But because many that seem to offer peace, have
nothing, but wars in their hearts: let us, now that we have showed the
practice and train of war whose end is peace, declare also how we may assure
our selves, that we be not abused either with colored treaties, or unequal
conditions, or bad assurance of peace, which is more dangerous, then any war.
Metellus in Verbis pax nunciabatur ceterum re asperrimum bellum erat. Salust.
bell. Ingurth.
words and pretense made semblant, that he would make peace with Iugurtha, but
his doings were the effects of most sharp wars. Maximilian ye emperor being
demanded what he meant to treat so much of peace with his enemy whom he deadly
hated, answered, that thereby he hoped to give him a Per darli colpo mortale.
Guicciar.
mortal wou^d when least he looked for it. Pompeius ab Augusto imagine pacis
deceptus; Lepidus amicitiae specie. Tacit. annal. 1.
Sextus Pompeius by a fained show of peace was abused by Augustus, and Lepidus
was ensnared under color of friendship. What the Spaniard meant by the treaty
of Dunkirke, his navy at the same time coming in hostile manner upon our coast
declares. The very motion and mention of peace does slake the preparatiues of
war, and while men do either hope or desire peace, they Ex mentione and spe
pacis negligentia, vt fit, apud Paenos orta crat. Liu. 29.
stand more negligently upon their guard. Sometime under color of seeking
Philippus de pace agendo nihil aliud nisi moram and dilation^ ad vires
colligendas qu^^rebat. Liu. 32.
peace the enemy seeks delays, until such time as he himself is ready.
Philip of Macedonia being foiled by the Romans seemed very desirous of peace,
that in the mean time, he might again repair his forces. For this cause
Thucid. 1.
Archidamus counseled ye Lacedaemonians rather to treat of peace, then to
denounce war unto the Athenians, until such time as they were better
provided. The Ambassadors of the Caes. bell. gal. 4.
Tencterians and other Germans desired peace of Caesar that came against them,
because a great part of their forces was from them. Sometimes treachery is
wrought under color of treaty of peace. Metellus Salust. bell. Iugurth.
during the treaty of peace with Iugurtha corrupted most of his friends.
Scipio Liu. 29.
to the intent his men might have access into Syphax his camp, pretended the
continuance of the treaty of peace, albeit he misliked the conditions, and
meant nothing but to espy his camp, and to surprise him at un wares. The
messengers of the Legati per speciem pacis petendae speculatum ad L. Aemilium
venerunt. Liu 40
Ligurians under color of treaty of peace espied what Aemilius did in his
camp. Cotys Tacit. annal. 2.
king of Thrace under color of confirming a league was drawn to a banquet,
and there slain by his enemy Rhecuporis. Caesar Borgia having made a solemn
league with the Duke of Guicciard.
Grauina and other Princes of Italy, contrary to his oath slew them having them
once in his hands.

Therefore in treating of peace we must first see that we slack not our
preparatiues of war, nor defer to take any advantage that is offered. Perseus
ni vana spes pacis occaecasset consilia, omnia praeparata, atque instructa
habens, cum nihil haberent Romani, and suo maxim tempore, atque alieno
hostibus incipere bellum potuit. Liu. 42.
Perseus king of Macedonia, if a vain hope of peace had not blinded his eyes,
might then with advantage have begun the wars when him self was most ready,
and the Romans most unready, and unprovided.

(...) Thucid. 1.
Archidamus albeit he persuaded the Lacedaemonians to talk of peace, yet
would he not have them neglect to provide for war. For peace is not obtained
with parley, or entreaty, unless we also make ready our forces.

Secondly heed must be taken, that we trust not the enemy. None are more
easily abused, then those that are light of credit. we may not therefore let
the enemy see our weakness, or any thing that may prejudice us; nor commit our
selves into our enemies hands either during the treaty, or after the
conclusion of peace. Philip of Comines notes it as a great simplicity in our
nation, that having concluded peace with Lewis the French King, did so
familiarly come into Amiens, and converse with the French, that meant them no
good. Seeing peace is so easily violated upon light occasions; he is not wise,
that will trust the enemy too far. That which certain Italians persuaded
Lewis Sforza, that faith is rather to be violated, then we suffer Guicciar.
li. 4.
any part of our State to be taken from us, that some do now put in practice.
And yet breach of promise is often times Cosa facile a Principi di iustificar
imprese con titoli Ch'appariscon^ honesti. Guicciar. 16.
justified with glorious pretenses. Wherefore seeing as experience teaches us
yt Princes Principi si riconciliono piu tosto conle dimostrationi che con li
effetti. Guiciar. lib. 1.
are rather made friends in show, then in effect, those that deal wisely do
so condition with the enemy, that if he break, they may have the staff in
their own hands to chastise him.

Thirdly great care is to be taken that we yield no advantage to the enemy.
The first injury that we receive at the enemies hands is but a step to the
next, as has been showed, and he that from the top of the stairs descends
one step, shall sooner be thrust down to the bottom, then recover the top
again. He that once begins to fall, is easily overthrown. The Africans
that yielded one little piece of ground to them of Carthage, were in the end
constreined to yield them their whole country. The Germans received into
France by the Gauls, and Saxons into this Island by the ancient inhabitants,
did after contend with them for the possession, and right of the whole country.

The time to treat of peace which is fourthly to be considered, is when both
parties have tasted of the cup of calamities that wars bring with them, and
yet neither part is overthrown, or thoroughly vanquished. When things do hang
in equal balance, then is the fittest time to treat of peace by the judgment
of Annibal, and then Si integer qua^ si victus, pacem aequiorem impetrari posse
ratus est. Liu. 30.
most equal conditions are liked of both parties. For being vanquished the
conqueror gives rather then receives conditions: as the Romans did to the
Carthaginians, to Philip of Macedonia, to Antiochus, and to other Princes, and
nations which they vanquished.

Further we are to look that the conditions of peace be reasonable. If we
contend about limits, towns, or countries, it is no honor to loose our right:
if we have wrong done unto us, it is no reason we should rest without
satisfaction. But because conditions are diverse according to the causes of
war, the times, and persons that contend, and diverse other circumstances:
therefore that is to be referred to the judgment of those, that are employed
in such affairs. Whose chief ends should be the majesty of God, the honor of
the Prince, the safety, and profit of their country.

But most especial care is to be had, that the conditions be performed.
without which all the treaty is nothing, but a vain show of fair words.
This I commend as a specall matter to be considered of our nation, who although
many times they were victorious in the field against the French, yet seldom
could match them in conclusions of peace: and also because it is a hard matter
to assure conditions of peace. The contempt of religion and true honor, and
griedy desire of gain, have brought not only promises, but also oaths into
such contempt. Yea some regard neither hostages, nor pledges, so they may take
a good advantage. The Histoir. de troubl. de Fr. l. 3.
French Kings of late years did so often break with the Protestants, that
they little regarded either their word, or their letters patents. The ordinary
means to assure the conditions agreed upon in treaty of peace, are diverse,
first word or promise, then writing and seal, thirdly pledges of towns,
which the Protestants of France have found to be the best assurance, and we
have chosen for the assurance of the contract betwixt us, and the Low country.
Charles Guicciar. li. 10.
the fifth, would not trust Clement the seventh for all his paternities holiness
without pledges. Fourthly hostages, of which King Edward the third accepted for
confirmation of the peace agreed betwixt him, and King John of France. The same
is an old practice, and was used both of the Romans and Carthaginians and
other nations. But forasmuch as those that list to Nunquam causa deerit cur
victi pacto non stent. Liu. 9.
quarrel, never want pretense, I see no other assurance of peace then either
so to use the enemy, that he can not if he would hurt thee, or else to have
arms in hand, that he can never break without loss or disadvantage.

To avoid quarrels, and to take away al just cause of brable, it were good,
that the conditions were conceived in good terms, and set down in writing
confirmed with the seals of the Princes or States whom it concerns.

Giulio the twelfth took Guicciar. lib. 8.
exception against an Article agreed upon betwixt him, and Lewis the twelfth,
for that it was not written. And Guicciar. lib. 2.
Ferdinand of Spain by cunning interpretation of words, did directly contrary
to his agreement with Charles the eight of France.

Further if any doubt should arise, power would be given to some Prince, that
has honor in recommendation, and power to compel the froward to obey, both to
interpret the words, and also to see the agreement performed.

Lastly, as by conditions we covenant what should be done; so likewise in case
of contrauention there should penalties be set down. Howsoever penalties be
set down, wise Princes do not only forecast, how to cause the enemy to
perform conditions, but also how, in case he should break promise, he may be
forced.

The same considerations that are used in treaty of peace, have also place in
treaties concerning truce, and confederacies. For truce is nothing but a
surceasing of hostility for a time, the causes of war hanging still
undecided, whereof peace is, or ought to be a final conclusion. But peace is
made sometime where there is no confederacy. For this is among associates and
friends, that may be made between enemies.

The conditions of peace and confederacies are diverse according to the
condition, and state of the parties that are made friends. Those that are
vanquished whose case is Vae victis. Bre^nus apud Plut. in vita Camilli.
most miserable, are not to refuse any conditions, as a certain Spaniard
persuaded the Saguntins. Scipio offered peace to the Carthaginians with these
conditions: first that they should redeliuer up all prisoners of war which
they had taken, likewise all Transfugas. Liu. 3^.
reuolters, and fugitives: secondly that they should withdraw their forces out
of Italy and Liguria, nor afterward meddle with Spain, nor the Islands betwixt
Afrike, and Italy: thirdly that they should deliver up all their ships of
war twenty excepted, and should pay 500. measures of wheat and 3000. of
barley: fourthly that they should not make wars either in Afrike, or out of
Afrike, without license obtained of the people of Rome: fifthly that they should
restore to Massinissa such things as they had taken from him, and should pay
the soldiers, and find them victuals until a certain time: sixthly that they
should deliver up their Elephants, and in time to come tame no more: seventhly
that in 50. years by equal portio^s they should pay 10. thousand talents, and
lastly for performance of these covenants they should give a hundred hostages
neither younger then 14. years, nor above thirty years of age: if these things
were performed, then the Romans promised that the Carthaginians should live
free according to their laws, and possess such cities and countries in Afrike
as they held before the beginning of the wars.

When the Romans had vanquished the Liu. 8.
Samnites, they imposed upon them a tribute, took from them some of their
country, and enjoined them to furnish them with so many soldiers, as was
agreed upon betwixt them. Which conditions with others were also imposed upon
Philip Liu. 33.
of Macedonia, and Antiochus Liu. 38.
king of Syria.

The (...) Thucid. 1.
Thasians having long contended with the Athenians, after three years siege
yielded, and had peace upon these conditions, that they should pull down the
walls of their city, and deliver up their ships of war, and pay such sums
of money as were due before that time, forthwith, and afterward their ordinary
tribute, as it should be due: and finally that they should forgo their mines
of metal, and possessions they had in the mayn land. Those yt were vanquished
by the Romans as they were bound to help them, so might they not either
oppugn their associats, or aid their enemies, with men, money, or victuals,
albeit the same were not expressed in the articles of agreement. If they did,
they prosecuted wars against them. For that was the cause of the wars both
Liu.
against the Carthaginians, and Nabis, and Philip of Macedonia, and diverse
other.

When Princes or people of equal power join in league, and confederacy the
conditions are more equal. Such were the agreements that passed betwixt Lewis
Philip. Com.
the 11. and Charles duke of Burgundy: between Edward the 4. and the same
Lewis, and the associats of them two. Peace or rather truce was made for 9.
years: the conditions on the French kings part were, that he should pay
certain crowns, and that the Dolphin of France should marry king Edward the
4. his daughter, and have part of Guienne for ye maintenance of the two young
married folks. But other assurance then oath there passed none. Thus the French
could feed us still with fair words, and buy out our advantage with a few
crowns, and therefore little regarded our forces. The Carthaginians joining in
league with Hierome king of Sicile agreed together, that after they should have
expulsed the Romans out of Sicile, they should divide ye country according to
certain limits agreed upon betwixt them. Like agreement passed betwixt Annibal
and Philip king of Macedonia, concerning their future conquest. In the mean
time they both couenanted to oppugn ye Romans both by sea, and land with all
their force. The Data vltro citroque fide cosde^ amicos inimicosque habituros
iureiurando affirmatur. Liu. 29.
Carthaginians entered with Syphax into a stricter bond of friendship, and both
promised each to other to have the same for friends and enemies.

Sometime it falls out that a mighty Prince or nation does for some
opportunity or help expected, join in league with those, that in power are
inferior to them. Wherein albeit ye conditions be not equal upon both sides,
yet the weaker neither paieth tribute, nor loses any commodity, or liberty.
So the Romans joined in amity with Attalus, and Eumenes, and the Rodians, and
in Italy with them of Caere and other towns: the Kings of England with the
Dukes of Brittein, the Kings of Spain with some weak Princes in Italy. In
which agreements the weak side had need to use great caution, that under
color of aid it be not oppressed, as ye Dukes of Brittein by the French,
Sforza Duke of Milan by Charles the 5. the States of ye Low country by king
Philip, and his Predecessors Dukes of Burgundy. The Capuans made peace with
Annibal on these conditions, that no foreiner either in war abroad, or in
peace at home should have any jurisdiction over a citizen of Liu. 23.
Capua, and that no citizen of Capua should be forced to serve in wars, or to
bear office against his will, nor should be subject to any other laws, then
those of his own country.

Those that are either equal or inferior in force each to other, do sometime
join in league defensive, sometime in offensive also against such as are
enemies to either, and that either with all their forces, or with some numbers
of soldiers specified, and them also either paid of those that send them, or
those that use them.

Some nations for fear of their enemies do yield them selves into the
protection of others with certain covenants, as they Guicciar. li. 3.
of Pisa did first to the French king, and afterward to the Venetians, and as
the Duke of Ghelderland, did to the French king. In this case as the receiver
does bind him self to defend those that yield them selves into his arms: so
they either bind them selves to pay money, or to do him service, or to deliver
him up certain towns. No man is bound to refuse the protection of others,
unless it be specially couenanted: nay it is a dishonor not to protect those
that are wrongfully oppressed, and much more to abandon those whom they have
taken upon the^ to defend. Guicciar. li. 8.
Lewis the 12. is taxed for his base mind, for that he couena^ted to receive
none into protection, that were the subjects or did depend upon Iulio the 2.
And for yt he much more forsook the lord of Guicciar. lib. 5.
Piombino. Likewise are the Florentins blamed for that they abandoned the house
of Riarij at the request of the Pope. Contrariwise the Romans in nothing
deserve commendation more, then that they defended all those that fled to them
for protection. And in nothing did they dishonor themselves more, then in that
they were so flow in succouring the Saguntins.

Neither do Princes only and free States covenant each with other, but also
subjects with their Princes, and Princes with their subjects, as the
Arragonians with ye Spanish king; the Protestants of France, with ye French
king. Wherein if they proceed no further, then to require each of other that,
which ye laws of nations require, it is more tolerable. But that the subjects
should prescribe laws to their sovereign Princes, and bind them to
inconveniences, it sauoureth rather of force, then loyalty; and that Princes
hestes should be obeyed against reason, proceeds of tyranny, neither can any
assurance be made of such agreements.

That covenants of peace, and association may be well conceived and made,
Princes and others are dililgently to consider unto whom they commit ye
managing of such affairs, and to furnish them with good instructions: and
those likewise are to have regard, yt they pass not their commission, and
instructions. Without commission no man, under ye degree of those that rule in
souerainty, is to make peace or league. The people of Liu.
Rome held not them selves bound with ye treaty made at Caudium, or Numantia,
being made without their authority. Princes in the choice of Ambassadors do
respect Nobility and are led sometime by favor, but ye event shows that
wisdom, experience, and virtue are rather to be regarded. Phil. Commin.
Lewis the 11. sent Oliver sometime his barber to them of Gant, and to the young
Duchess of Burgundy, but the man was heard with scorn, and returned without
effect.

Ambassadors and messengers betwixt Princes, and States, are privileged by the
laws of all nations: insomuch that among ye points of weapons such men are
suffered to pass safe.

The Romans not only revenged sharply the death of their Ambassadors slain
by the Liu. 4.
Fidenians, and Florus.
Illyrians, but also the scorn done unto them by them of Corinth. 2. Reg. 20.
King David warred upon the children of Ammon for no other cause, but for an
abuse offered to his messengers. Phil. Comm.
Charles Duke of Burgundy, put all the garrison of the Castle of Nele to the
sword, for that they killed his messenger sent to them to treat with them of
peace. And albeit some do patiently digest al abuses offered to their messengers
by ye Spaniard, who deigned not to give the^ audience, yet the Romans Liu. 42.
took the matter very heinously at the hands of Perseus king of Macedonia. The
death of Quo diligentius in reliquum tempus ius Legatorum a barbaris
conseruaretur, omnem senatum Caesar necauit, reliquos sub corona vendidit.
Caes. bell. gal. 3.
Caesar's messengers sent to a city upon the sea coast of France, cost all the
chief of the citizens their lives. The rest of that town Ceasar sold for
slaves. If any of the Romans did wrong to the Ambassadors of other nations, the
Senate caused such men to be taken, and to be delivered unto them, yt they
might judge them, as it pleased them selves, as is apparent not only by justice
done upon those that did injury to the Ambassadors of Qui Legatos
Carthaginensiu^ pulsauerant, Carthaginensibus traditi. Liu. 38.
Carthage, but also upon those that had wronged certain messengers coming
from Val. max. l. 6.
Apollonia. Tatius neglecting to do justice upon those that had wronged the
messengers of the Laurentins, was him self Liu. 1.
slain of them, when he came among them.

But this privilege as it belongs to Ambassadors betwixt Princes, and
nations; so Bodin. de la repub. l. 1.
some have supposed that it belonged not to such messengers, as come from
rebels. And thereupon defend the fact of Charles the 5. that imprisoned ye
messengers of the Duke of Milan, that had revolted from him. And according to
this supposall we understand, that hard measure has been offered to diverse
messengers sent from the Protestants of France to the adverse party. As if
Princes should make wars with his subjects with all extremity, and not admit
the laws of nations, in matters which pass betwixt him and the^. I grant
there is a great difference betwixt public enemies, and rebels; yet necessity
requires often times parley; and if ye Prince look to have his Ambassadors to
have good interteinment with them, he must likewise use their messengers well.
The Romans practiced that in the war which they had against their Bello
sociali.
associates, and did not offer violence to those which were sent by Antony: yet
there may be I grant such wars, that admit no intercourse of messengers,
which in the wars among the (...).
Greeks was sometime practiced: but that was inhumane cruelty, and rather
hurtful to them selves, then to the enemy.

Yet if any purpose to enjoy the privilege of Ambassadors, he may not pass
the bounds of an Ambassador, whose ordinary office is to denounce war, or
treat of peace, or truce, or prisoners, and such matters as by Ambassadors are
ordinarily handled. If Ambassadors come under that color to epsy our
proceedings, the name of their office does not warrant their lewd dealing.
Caesar Caes. bell. gal. 4.
detained the messengers of the Tenctherians perceiving that they came for no
other purpose, but to win time, and to epsy his forces. The black Froissart.
Prince caused a messenger, that came from the French king, to cite him to
appear in the Parliament of Paris to be arested: but it was for that he came
not as an Ambassador in matters of state, but as a somner or bailif to do him
a disgrace. Francis the French king the first of that name caused a gibet to be
erected before he would hear a certain messenger that came from Charles the
fifth, fearing that otherwise he would have abused him in terms. That the
Romans did dismiss the Lin. lib. 2.
Ambassadors of Tarquin broching a conspiracy in Rome, and the Ambassadors of
the Dionis. Halic. lib. 6.
Volscians, that came as espials, and that her Majesty did likewise dismiss
Bernardin Mendoza, that was an abettor, if not a contriuer of great treasons
wrought against her, it was of special clemency and favor, rather then for
that the laws of arms require it. for they warrant none to practice treason,
nor rebellion, nor to abuse a Prince, nor to do other matters, then belong to
the office of Ambassadors. The Doctores in L. vlt. ff. de legationibus.
Laws of the Romans in matters of public crimes against the laws of nations
make ambassadors to answer notwithstanding their privilege. Neither do any
writers excuse the fact of Fabius Ambustus, that being sent in embassage to the
Gauls besieging Clusium, put on arms and fought against them.

Thus we see that Ambassadors coming from other Princes unto us in such
matters, as belong to that office, are privileged; but whether our enemies
ambassadors going to other princes and nations, or contrariwise coming from
other princes, to our enemies, are likewise to be privileged, it is of some
doubted. The French complain, that their ambassadors sent to the Turk were
slain by the Spaniard: and some do think hardly of the fact of Charles the
fifth, that allowed it; but without cause. For ye word Ambassador, or Messenger
being a word, that has relation to those, to who^ a man is sent, there can be
no bond betwixt Ambassadors and others to whom they are not sent. The Romans
detained not only the ambassadors of Annibal sent to Philip king of Macedonia;
but also Philips ambassadors sent to Annibal. And the Athenians put the
ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians to death, being taken as they were sent by
them to require aid of the king of Persia against the Athenians.

Ambassadors therefore would be well chosen, and discreetely ought they to
handle their business, without curious intermedling with affairs that
concern them not. Tully iesteth at a certain Ambassade consisting of three
persons, one of which was an idiot, the second had a great scarre in his head,
the third had the gout. This Ambassade said he, had neither head, brain, nor
feet. nothing ought they to speak that may prejudice the affairs of the
Prince: wherein Philip of Comines notes a certain English Heralds ignorance,
whose foolish babbling was no small hinderance to the affairs of Edward the
fourth, that sent him. Charles Duke of Burgundy conceived great displeasure
against Jews the xi. for certain foolish Phil. Comin.
words uttered against him by an Ambassador sent from the king to his father.

The Romans to the Ambassadors of their enemies gave audience without the
City, and when they had given them their answer, sent certain to conduct
them to their shipping, to see that they practiced with no man. The like course
did the Athenians follow in hearing, and interteining the Ambassadors of the
Lacedaemonians. Which course they may also follow, that fear least under such
colors cunning fellows should espy our country, and our doings. And if
those, that have the government of garrison towns have care, that no messenger
shall come into the place, but blindfold; sure reason would, that men should
have an eye also, that such messengers as come into other countries, should
neither see so much as they do, nor have that liberty to talk with whom they
list, as now they have. For by such means often time they understand their
estate better, then they do themselves.

CHAP. XXI. Wherein is declared that to encourage forward men to do valiantly,
nothing is more effectual, then reward, nor for maintenance of military
discipline, any thing more requisite, then severe punishment.
THe course of wars, if nothing else did persuade us, yet shows us, that
after victory obtained, or troubles ended, such as have done valiant service,
are to be rewarded. Wherefore albeit wars in our times admit no such order,
which being ended, are the beginning of beggarie and calamity to many poor
soldiers: yet may I not omit the ordinary course though interrupted, and
broken by men ignorant of wars, and all good order. There is nothing more
effectual to move men to adventure their lives in the service of their
country, then reward. Law does much, and necessity more, yet neither of them
in this behalf are so effectual as reward. By Magni animi magnis honoribus
siunt. Liu. 4.
great honors, men are encouraged to make great adventures. Men do Eo
impenditur labor and periculum, vnde emolumentum atque honor speratur, nihilque
non aggressuri sunt homines, si magnis conatibus magna praemia proponantur.
Liu. 4.
willingly hazard, and bestow labor, where there is profit, and honor looked
for. Neither is there any thing so difficult, which some will not attempt, if
brave service be recompensed with honorable rewards. As it is in all arts, and
professio^s, so it is in the profession of a soldier, Honos alit arts etc.
iacentque; ea semper quae apud quosque improbantur. Cic. Tuscul.
there is best service where there is greatest honor for well doing, and
contrariwise where there is no reward, there is no man desires to be singular.
Lysander being demanded what manner of government he liked best, answered, that,
where valiant men had reward, and cowards punishment, that common wealth
pleased him best. Socrates praised that state above all, where most honors were
given according to virtue and merit, and none for meede nor money. Of all
laws, says Demosth. aduers. Leptin.
Demosthenes, those deserve best to be continued, which concern the reward of
good men, and the punishment of lewd lozels. And if reason cannot excite the
cold affection of covetous wretches to consider the merits of valiant men: yet
in the end necessity will work it. For neither Neque domus, neque resp.
stare potest, si in ea nec recte factis praemia extant vlla, nec supplicia
peccatis.
common wealth nor private house can stand, where there is neither reward for
well doing, nor punishment for the contrary. The common wealth of the Romans
had never grown to that greatness, if among other their virtues their
thankfulness to valiant men had not been singular. Horatius Cocles that
repelled the force of the Hetruscians, himself alone standing upon the bridge
of wood over Tyber, had a Statua in comitio posita, agri quantum vna. die
circumarauit, datum. Liu. 2.
statue of marble erected in the place of common meetings for continuance of
his memorial, and so much ground given him as he could compass with his
plough in one day. At the same time they gave lands also to Mutio Scaeuolae
ager trans Tyberim virtutis cause datus. Liu. 2.
Mutius Scaeuola for his singular valiantness. Cornelius the Consul, for a
singular piece of service, gave unto Decius a Liui. 7.
crown of gold, and an hundred oxen, to every of the soldiers that went with
him double allowance of victuals, an ox and two suits of apparel. In the
wars against the Samnites, Sp. Nautius, Sp. Papyrius, 4 Liu. 10.
centurions, and one whole squadro^ of targetters (the Romans call them
hastatos) were rewarded with brace lets and coronets of gold by their General,
Caesar Caesar S^aeuam ad primipilu^ traduxit, 2000 aeris dedit, cohortem
duplici stipendio, and frumento donauit, and aliis militaribus donis. Cas. de
bell. ciu. 3.
for his valiant service advanced Scaeua to the highest place in his regiment,
and gave him two thousand pieces of money, the whole company he rewarded with
double pay and allowance, and other military presents. After the winning of
new Carthage in Spain, Liu. 26.
Scipio gave coronets of gold to those that first mounted the walls, and
rewarded others every man according to his desert. Likewise did he reward such
as showed themselves valiant men in ye wars Liu. 29.
against Syphax and the Carthaginians. And after the wars were ended not only
did he give his soldiers money, but the state gave them lands also. after the
end of wars, the Agri veteribus mil^tibus qui auspicio Scipionis in Africa
bellum perfecissent diuisi. Liu. 31.
Romans divided ordinarily to some money, to some Romulus militibus agros
captos diuisit. Dionis. Halic. l. 2.
lands. Alexander L. in agris. ff. de acquir rerdomin.
Seuerus divided the contrie that was upon the frontiers among the soldiers
that served there. At that time honors and the highest places were rewards of
valiant men. Valor. Hac dextra mihi tres consulatus summamque laudem peperi.
Liu. 7.
Coruinus doubts not to say that with his hands he had won to himself
great praise and three Consulships, which was the highest dignity in that
state. And Decius affirms that Non generis sed virtutis est praemium. Liu. 7.
rewards were due to virtue rather then nobility. When by reason of their
great losses the Senate of Rome was much diminished, and must be supplied, those
were chosen which had the Senatores lecti ex ijs qui spolia ex Romans host sixa
domi haberent, aut ciuicam coronam accepissent. Liui 23.
spoils of the enemy in their house, or had for the saving of the life of a
citizen been rewarded with a crown. The spoil was not then, as now it is,
given to those, that forsaking their colors run after spoil, Liui. 6.
leaving the labor and danger to others; nor was it lawful for any to go
before commandment given. The Consuls did sell and divide the spoil, says
Praedam. coss. vendiderunt diuiserunt que. Liu. 25.
Liuy, and rewarded those especially by whose forwardness the enemies camp
was taken, and before others, two captains whose valiantness was singular.
And in another place Data ex praeda militibus aeris octogeni bini, sagaque and
tunicae, praemia illa tempestate haudquaquam spernenda. L. 10.
he testifies, yt the soldiers had every man a suit of apparel and 82. pieces
of money given him. Neither were valiant soldiers forgotten no not in ye most
corrupt times for observance of military orders, nor when the Roman empire
began now to decline. Tacitus Tacit. annal. 3.
mentions those rewards that were given to Rufus Heluius at diverse times for
his service Constantinus filios in paternam militiam vocabat. l. 1. and 2. C.
de fill. off. militis. 12.
Constantine was most bountiful to his soldiers, and gave the rewards due to
the father to his children also. neither were they bountiful to their own men,
but also such as served with them. Marcellus presented Liu. 23.
Bantius of Nola with a horse and furniture for his good service. They of
Preneste for reward of a noble fact done by them, had Liu 23.
double pay, and five years vacation from service. The Ager Hispani^ in
Hispania, Numidis in Africa post bellum virtutis causa datu^ est. Liu. 23.
Spaniards had possessions given them in Spain, the Numidians in Afrike for
their faithful service against Annibal. By Solons law the sons of those that
died in service of their country, were maintained upon the public charge. But
what marvel is it if the Romans who are precedents of military orders, and
the Greeks from whence learning and civility issued, rewarded their
soldiers, when the most barbarous Turks do it, and at this day no man more
then they? The most valiant men are made chief commanders, and of his
counsel. He that first mounted the walls of Constantinople, of a common
soldier was after made Bassa. What should I speak of the great advancement of
Ariadine Barbarossa, and Dragut Reis. Ochiali Bassa of a poor Mariner, is now
(if he be not lately dead) one of the greatest men of that state. There is none
that does service, but he is assured to have lands and possessions given him.
The Spaniards also yield their soldiers great recompense. The common soldier
is made Caporall, he is for his service made Serieant, the Serieant is made
Ensign, the Ensign Captain, who if he deserve well, is afterward preferred
to be Colonel, and then master of the camp. Julian Romero, and Montdragon,
and diverse of them, of common soldiers, have risen to great dignities. Beside
ye due of their place, for every valiant act they have their pay increased,
which they call Ve^taias.

Yet this holds not every where: for in some states there is neither reward,
nor scarce praise for service. Honor is given for wealth, kindred, favor, and
if any be rewarded, it is such as deserve none. By which abuses (as says
Largitionibus corrumpitur militaris disciplina. Hirtius de bell. Alex.
Hirtius) the discipline of war was corrupted by Cassius in Spain, which
afterward was much increased in the times of the Emperors, who for friendship
gave great titles to men of no desert, and to valiant men were very sparing and
restraintiue. Even so now in some country is, rewards are given to great
beggars; and valiant men, if they escape hunger, and the sword of the enemy
abroad, yet come back to live in base sort at home. And so it comes to pass
as one complains in Eurip. Hecuba.
Euripides, That the valiant has no more reward then the treacherous coward,
and that injuries are sure remembered, whereas good deeds are scarce thought
upon, (as Procliuius est iniuriae, quam beneficio vicem exsoluere. Tac.
Tacitus says.)

As valiant deeds are to be rewarded, so treachery, cowardice, and disobedience
are severely to be punished. These two, antiquity supposed to be of equal
force. The Gentiles, yt for the profit they reaped of diverse things, did
ascribe unto the^ divine names, did this also in reward and punishment. Diogen.
Laert.
Democritus honored the^, as two divine things. And if in any part of the
government of the common wealth, punishment be necessary, sure most necessary
it is in managing of arms, and maintenance of military discipline, which
Abscisso and aspero castigationis genere disciplina militaris indiget. Liu.
requires peremptory and sharp punishment. For if the princes commandment
may without danger be neglected; and ambition and covetousness of particulars,
cause public matters to be neglected, delaied, and dalied with; if public
treasure may be abused to private uses, and that which should be employed in
payment of soldiers and other necessary uses of the common wealth, may be lent
to usury, or spent in purchases; if such officers as are to provide victuals,
arms and munition, or else to keep the^, may make their gain, and accomptants
give in false reckonings, and captains and officers bring in false numbers in
mosters, and neither colonels obey the general commanders, nor captains their
colonels and other superiors, nor inferior officers and soldiers their
captains; who sees not, that not only the sinews of military government,
but of state also will easily be dissolved? The Romans therefore as in all
feats of arms and government, so in this also deserved special commendation.

Diverse sorts of punishment did they use, as L. poenae. ff. de re milit.
Modestinus testifies; as for example, Reproof, forfaitures, impositions of
charge, change of degree, loss of place, dismissing with shame, yea sometime
banishment, sometime death. Therefore were those that offended punished, (as
says Ne discrimen omne virtutis, and ignauiae pereat. Liu. 24.
Marcellus) that there might appear a difference betwixt valiantness and
cowardice. At the Ita bello gesto praemio poenaque pro cuiusque merito
persolutis Romam rediere. Liu. 8.
end of wars, as they rewarded valiant men, so they forgot not to punish
offenders. Neither did they only punish the common sort, but their Generals
also where they deserved it; yea the Generals spared not their own sons,
friends, and kinsfolk. Fuluius for that by his negligence his army was
discomfited by Annibal at Herdonea, himself flying among ye foremost, as we
said, was driven into banishment. M. M. Postumius quod eius ductu and culpa
male ad Veios pugnatum erat, december millibus aeris damnatur. Liu. 4.
Posthumous was fined 10000 pieces of money, for yt by his fault, and leading
the Romans were overthrown at Veij. Manlius executed his own son for
transgressing military orders. Caesar dismissed diverse colonels and chief
commanders in Afrike, for outrages by them committed. The more dangerous the
wars were, the greater severity they used. Even barbarous nations perceived,
that without severity the wars could not be administered, as Caesar makes
evident unto us by the example of Summae diligentiae summam seueritatem addit
Vercingetorix. Caes. de bell. Gal. 7
Vercingetorix. By the laws of Sparta they that ran out of the field, might
not return into their country. The Athenians did punish a negligence in their
captains that did not take up their men that were slain and wracked at Thucid.
Arginusa, but too severely. Neither was it the use only of two or three
nations, but of all those, who by practice of arms have won to themselves any
name, or reputation. The particular penalties due to every military offense,
I have set down in ye chapter following, if not to imitate in all points, yet to
come as near as we can in most. The Romans without any table or writing set
before the^, did by their continual practice of arms, know not only all
military laws, but also the punishments yt were inflicted on the
transgressers of the^, as well as we know any custom of England not written:
which were also to be wished in our soldiers. But because by long disuse of
arms, and many abuses crept in among us, few know the laws of war, least
any man might pretend ignorance, or think themselves punished otherwise then
they ought; I have for instruction of young soldiers comprised in writing such
matters as for the good government of the camp and army, and those that
converse in the army, I thought most necessary to be known and published in
the camp, garrison, and other places of service. Neither is the course new or
strange. The prince of Orange for the good government of his camp before
Florence in the days of Charles the 5, by sound of trumpet Caualier Cicuta.
published such orders as he would have observed. The duke of Alua though
otherwise cruel, yet a man skillful in matters of war, for reformation of
diverse disorders crept in among the Se debrian promulgar algunos estatutos con
cuya osseruantia los soldados particulares, y priuados no hisiessen desorden
alguna. Sanch. de Land.
Spanish soldiers, gave order to Sa^cho de Londonno, to frame certain
statutes in writing, which being published, might give the^ particular notice
of their duties. The Puis auoir fait quelques ^ix militaires, and statuts
politics firent iurer la noblesse, soldats, and autres de les entretenir
inutolablement. Histoir. de troubl. de Fr. l. 4.
Protestants an. 1568. having made certain military laws and orders for the
government of their army, did publish the same, and cause both the nobility
and other soldiers to swear, that they would observe the^ inuiolably. In
imitatio^ of others, I have thought good likewise to set down a form of
military laws, not that all of them are necessary for all times and places,
nor yt I could set down so many as are necessary, but wise gouerners having
this draught before their eyes, may choose such as are fittest, and apply them
to their company and other circumstances.

Howsoever it is, whether it be by Res militaris legibus in tuto collocata. L.
1. Cod. de Justin. cod. confirmand.
laws, or without laws: let those that have the government of soldiers,
have care of the observance of military discipline, without which an army is
like a body discrazed and disioyned, and by which, armies beforetime out of
order have been made victorious. Before Scipioes coming into Spain, the
Romans through their disorders had received many foiles of their enemies. But
after that he had Scipio minor militarem disciplinam reuocans pulcherrimam
tulit de Hispanis victoriam. Plor. epit. Liu. l. 58.
removed those disorders, of a cowardly and disorderly multitude, he made a
most victorious army. Like commendation did Metellus deserve in Afrike, who
remoouing all instruments and occasions of pleasure Metellus adiumenta ignauiae
sustulit, etc. Salust. bell. Iugurth.
and slothfulness, and restoring the strict orders of the Romans in their
marching, encamping, labors and watches, brought Iugurtha to great extremity,
which before that time overcame, and contemned the Roman forces. Corbulo by
like Legiones Corbulo operum, and laboris ignaras populationibus laetantes ad
veterem morem reduxit. Tacit.
severity causing the Roman soldiers to return to the observance of
military laws, and to endure labor, and to keep araie, and to refrain
their outcourses for spoils, obtained diverse great victories against the
Parthians and others. Neither do I doubt if the ancient orders of wars might
be observed of our English soldiers, but that they should be likewise
victorious over all their enemies.

To do them honor and my country good, I have as near as I could endeavored
to set them down in terms, beginning first with matters concerning religion,
which howsoever it is now neglected and scorned of profane men; yet ought it
both in this, and other things to have the first place.

CHAP. XXI.
Wherein a form of Military laws requisite to be published and observed of
our English soldiers and others employed in public service of their country,
is prescribed. The first part of it contains laws concerning religion and
moral matters.
1 Every Morning at the relieuing of the watch, and every Evening at the
setting of the watch, all Captains, Soldiers and others, both in camp and
garrison, either in some special place to be appointed, or in their corpse de
guard, or those that watch, in their guard, the rest in some other place shall
assemble to hear prayers, and other exercises of Religion.

2 No enterprise shall be taken in hand, but the companies that are to execute
the same, shall first commend themselves to God, and pray to him to grant them
good success.

3 Every Sunday the whole company at hours appointed shall meet to serve God,
so much as the necessities of wars will permit. And for this cause a
convenient number of Ministers are to be enterteined, and such as abuse them,
to be severely punished.

4 Notorious swearers, and blasphemers shall be punished according to the
quality of their offense, yea with death, if their faults be heinous.

5 All abuses of Gods word, and holy Name in cursing, banning, charming and
whatsoever other unlawful practice, shall be punished by imprisonment of the
offenders, and death also, if the crime be heinous, and the example scandalous.

6 Many offenses against God and man do spring of dicing, carding, and other
such unlawful games. Therefore let all dice, and eardes, and such like
instruments of abuse be taken away as much as may be, and let such gamesters be
admonished, and if they do not so leave, and reform themselves, let them be
imprisoned.

7 Common women let them be whipped out of the camp, and garrison, and such
soldiers, and others as use their company, let them be imprisoned. Officers
that give bad examples of such matters, let them loose their places. Suspicious
women let them be banished the camp, or garrison.

8 For that God is greatly offended with drunkenness, and the abuses that come
of it, and forasmuch also as camps, and garrisons are thereby much disordered,
and many good men suffer for the abuse of such lewd drunkards: therefore such
are to be imprisoned and fed with bread and water, so long as the quality of
their offense shall deserve.

Annotations and interpretations of the former laws, for the better
understanding of them.
[Concerning Religion.] The name of Religion, I know, will seem strange to
most of our lusty young soldiers, that in swearing and blaspheming place their
greatest bravery, and account it a shame for a soldier to be religious. But
seeing not only Religion, but reason also may teach them, that no good
success can be expected at Gods hands, where he is not served; and that such
wicked men as they show themselves to be, are rather to fear the wrath of God,
then to hope for victory or other favor; let them if they be but motherwise,
desist from scoffing at Religion, and if they be Christian-wise, let them
learn to serve him, that is Lord of armies, and giver of victory. The very
Gentiles, albeit ignorant of the true God, yet in matters of war were most
devout, and religious. The Romans yielded such honor to their divines, and
Sacerdotio augurum tantus honos accessit, vt nihil belli, domique postea, nisi
auspicato gereretur. Liui. 1.
soothsayers, that nothing was attemted either in matters of peace at home, or
in wars abroad, but after consultation with them. Before they began wars
with any Prince or nation, they sacrificed to their God, and besought him to
give them good success, as is evident in all their attempts Liui. 22. and 23.
against Annibal, and in their wars against Romani bello Philippo indicto a
precatione, and re diuina inchoarunt. Liui. 31.
Philip of Macedonia and Res diuinas faciebant, and supplicationes. Liui. 36.
Antiochus. When after long wars Annibal Praetor extemplo edixit, vt aeditui
sacras aedes tota vrbe aperierent, vt salutandi Deos agendique gratias per
totum diem, populo potestas fieret. Liui. 30.
departed out of Italy, they caused their temples to be set open, that every
man might publicly give thanks. They did the same upon the report of Scipioes
good success against their enemies in Afrike. Contrariwise, they imputed their
evil success to their contempt of Religion, and ceremonies, whereby then they
thought they pleased God. Fabius did so interpret the Q. Fabius Max. ab dijs
exorsus edocuit patres plus negligentia caeremo* niarum, auspiciorumque
temeritate, quam inscitia peccatum a Flaminio esse. Liui. 22.
cause of the calamity happened unto them in the overthrow of Flaminius, at
the lake Thrasimene. The only means to recover Gods favor, he declared to be
reverence of Religion, and care to please God. Camillus after the recovery of
Rome out of the hands of the Gauls, discoursing of religion affirms, that
all good success did proceed from the Intuemini horum deinceps annorum vel
secundas vel secundas res, vel aduersas, inuenietis omnia prospera euenisse
sequentibus Deos, aduersa spernentibus Liui. 5.
favor of God, while he was honored, and contrariwise that they had no good
success since Religion was by them contemned. This was also the opinion of
other nations. Pontius the famous captain of the Samnites says, that as Rerum
humanarum maximum momentum est, quam propitijs rem quam aduersis agant dijs.
Liui. 9.
God favors or disfauoureth their enterprises, so they sway one way or
other. The ancient English and French used to compass the Church within their
fortifications: or at least built a church within their castles; for that they
imagined Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 5.
that no fort could long hold out, unless God were there served. God
promises to those that observe his laws, that one of them should chase ten,
and ten a hundred, and a hundred a thousand, and threatens the transgressors
of them, that although they were many in number, yet they should fly many
ways before their enemies. If therefore we hope or expect good success in
our wars; let us first begin with the service of God, and let those be
ashamed, that professing themselves to be Christians, yet are not so forward
herein as the heathen that knew not God; and are occupied most in abusing
Religion, and pulling down Gods Church.

1 [Euery morning etc.] Little do they deserve favor at Gods hands, that will
not open their mouths to crave it: neither do they deserve to be delivered,
that will not seek help in danger. That therefore which is here set down in
this law, is nothing else, but the duty of all Christians, yet specially
commended to soldiers, considering their great negligence therein. That they
may do their duty more willingly, and know how to do it, certain short
prayers would be framed for the purpose, which in the absence or want of
Ministers may be said of the clerk of the band, or any of the company. Every
captain ought to have care, that his company do herein their duty, as the
general officers appointed for justice, ought to see the same done in the
whole camp or garrison. The penalties are according to the faults either more
or less, to wit, either admonition, loss of two days pay, or imprisonment.

2 [No enterprise etc.] As the former law respects times, so this respects
several actions, and enterprises, and enioyneth soldiers in all matters of
weight to require the help of God; a thing acknowledged just of all
Christians, and practiced by the heathen. The Romans departed not from the
city to go to the Prius quam ab vrbe mouerunt, prodigia procurarunt. Liui 24.
wars, but first they pacified the wrath of God, as before I have showed by
diverse examples. The form of Scipioes prayer loosing from the coast of Sicile,
to go into Afrike to war against the Carthaginians, is expressed in Dij
deaeque quae maria colitis, vos precor, quaesoque quae in meo imperio gerentur
ea mihi, populo, plebique Romanae, socijs, nominique Latino etc. been
verruncent, eaque vos omnia been iuuetis, saluos victis perduellibus domos
reduces sistatis. Liui. 29.
Liuie, the sum of it is, that God would give him, and his company
goodsuccesse, and safe return with victory. They did not attempt any great
enterprise, but they made their Supplicatio circa omnia puluinatia decreta.
Liui. 27.
supplications before all their gods. Fabius escaped a great danger by means
he went not on his journey being sent for by them of Metapontus, before that
after his manner he had consulted with God. The same was likewise the proceeding
of the Greeks. (...). Thucid. 2.
Archidamus bringing his army before Plataea began first with sacrifices to
crave the favor of God, after his heathenish manner. The like did the Greeks
long before at Aulis going against Troy. Xenophon in his return out of his
voyage with Cyrus, would do nothing before he had reconciled his company to
God. And when his men were in distress; he (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 3.
encouraged them, and willed them to put their confidence in God, for that he
was able to save a few out of the hands of many, in what danger soever they
were. Neither was ever any nation so Caes. bell. Gal. 1. and 4.
barbarous, as to suppose, that victory came from other, then God, or could be
procured by other means, then Religion. Shame then is it for Christians to be
less religious then the heathen, or to have more irreligious conceits, then
they had. The penalty of the transgressors of this law, howsoever some escape
the hands of Judges and officers, is very severely imposed by God himself,
that ouerturneth their enterprises. By enterprises in this place, I understand
battles, skirmishes, sallyes, ambushes, and such like feats of Arms.

3 [Euery Sunday etc.] It is much to be lamented, that among other the cares of
Governors, they have had no due care of Religion, and the service of God among
soldiers, nor have made any allowance for the Ministry among them. In so
much that in some garrisons in the low Countries, soldiers have lived almost
without exercise of Religion, and in camps without any due exercise of the
same. This first gave me occasion by this law to excite their care and the
care of Generals and captains, both for more devotion in religious exercises,
and also for better means. If there were to every two Regiments one or two
Ministers allowed, it were a very commendable course. The Papists have their
priests in their armies, nay the very heathen had their exercises of Religion,
but in our times those that are most curious, are in this point least careful,
and religious. Que ningun s^ldado p^nga las manos en ningun sacerdote, o
religioso, ni le tratare mal'de palabra, so pena de ser castigado ala calidad
del delicto, Sanch. de Land.
The Spaniards unto every tertio, or Regiment have diverse Priests, whom they
have in great estimation, and punish those that do violate them either in
word, or deed. The punishment of the offenders against this law is
arbitrary, according to the quality of the offense.

4 [Notorious swearers etc.] For that there are diverse sorts of oaths, and
blasphemies in degree one worse then another, therefore have I left the
punishment of them to the discretion of the judges, or officers that deal
therein, respect always being had to the heinousness of the fault. The
Spaniards inflict grievous Ningun soldado rintegue, ni blaspheme, so pena porla
primera vez de treinta pias d^ drision, por la seconda vez sesenta, de mas de
ser trahido a la verguenca c^n vna mordaza a la lengua, y por la tercera,
puesto en Galera perpetua, ^a volundad. Sanch. de Land.
penalties upon them that transgress in this behalf: and all Christians ought
to detest and banish all abuses.

5 [All abuses. etc.] Under this title are comprised all profane scoffs at
religion, all wicked opinions bolstered out with colors of religion. which
together with other faults severally named, are severely to be punished by the
governors of camps and garrisons, being contrary to good proceedinges in
war, and in peace, for which also they are condemned by civil laws.

6 [Many offenses etc.] In this point many abuses are committed by our
soldiers, of which insueth the displeasure of God, and many other great
inconveniences. To furnish themselves at play some sell their arms, others
their apparel. At play they loose their money, which should buy them
victualles, and other necessaries. By loss some are driven to steal, and to
use other unlawful practices. Some run to the enemy, and commit diverse other
outrages. For this cause the Spaniard in time of service, does banish all Que
ning^^ soldado iuegue a iuegos illicitos. Sanch. de Land.
unlawful games. The best remedy of all these abuses is, first to take away
cards and dice, and to forbid them the camp or garrison; the next is to
erect some other warlike exercise; the third, is punishment both of those that
play, and those also that maintain such implements of play. But as in other
matters, so in this also, example is most auailable.

7 [Common women etc.] Among this number, all those women that abuse their
bodies unlawfully, are to be numbered. For avoiding of which abuses, no women
are to be suffered to follow the camp, nor any suspected women to keep in the
place of garrison. The Que ningu^^ soldado tenga in casa muger s^spechosa etc.
San. de Land.
Spaniards in their military laws, do restreine officers, by loss of their
place, and common soldiers, by other punishment, from this abuse. Among the
Roman soldiers such abuses were seldom heard of. but if they were, very
severely were they punished, and carefully reformed. Scipio the yoonger when
military laws grew in contempt among the soldiers of Spain, did for redress
banish all women out of the camp.

8 [For that god etc.] The voyage of Portugal taught us the inconveniences of
drunkenness by experience, but yet reason teaches us much more. Thereof
proceed quarrels, injuries, mutinies, and many other disorders. Drunken men are
unfit to march, to watch, to fight, or to do any manner of service. too common
it is notwithstanding among common soldiers. And I would to God that captains
and officers of companies, were free from it. In whomsoever it is, the same may
not be passed without punishment. Wherein that neither sober men be touched
wrongfully, nor drunkardes escape scandalously, I do think that those deserve
to be punished as drunkards, which either through drink commit any excess,
which sober men would not commit, or else are unfit to do the service required
at their hands.

CHAP. XXI. Part. 2. Wherein laws are set down, tending to the common safety
of the state, army, or garrison.
1 ALl soldiers, or others that conspire against the state, or Prince, or
General, or go about to betray the General, or the army, or any part thereof,
or any city, or ground in possession of the state or army, shall suffer death,
and torments, if the matter be heinous.

2 Such as practice, and enterteine intelligence with the enemy without
direction, or knowledge of their superiors, shall be punished as traitors.

3 Mutinous and rebellious persons are to be punished with death.

4 Whosoever yields a town or fort to the enemy, or motioneth any such
matter, but upon extremity, and that to the Governor, or in council, let him
be executed as a traitor.

5 No captain, officer, nor soldier may refuse to come, being interteined in
pay, nor depart the camp, or place where he is appointed to serve, if the
enemy be ready to charge us, or we ready to charge the enemy, upon pain of
death, if it be not in time of service, upon pain of imprisonment. Except
those always, that have license of the General, or chief Governor, or other
lawful cause. To hurt, and sick persons, the Colonel of the regiment, or
Judge martial, or other officer appointed, may give license, that they may
depart for a time, to refresh themselves.

6 All that run to the enemy, or attempt to do it, as traitors to their
country, are to be put to death.

7 No man shall bewray the word to the enemy, or give a false word in time of
service, nor when the enemy is nere shall sleep in the watch, or suffer him to
approach, without giving warning, upon pain of death.

8 Whosoever of wantonness, or foolery, is cause that the enemy has notice of
our disseins and purposes, so that some good opportunity of service is thereby
omitted, is to be punished according to the quality of his offense.

Interpretations and annotations upon the former laws.
1 [All soldiers etc.] If conspirators deserve death, much more do they
deserve the same that execute their treasons, and conspiracies. Liu. 28.
Scipio killed all the inhabitants of Iliturgi a town in Spain, and burnt the
town, for that they betrayed the garrison, and revolted to the enemy. Xenoph.
exp. Cyr. 1.
Orontes going about to betray Cyrus and his army to the enemy, was executed by
Cyrus. This is nothing but the ordinary practice of the Romans, which as
Tacit. 1. and l. 3. in bello. ff. de re milit.
Tacitus affirms, brought such matters within the compass of treason.

2 [Such as practice etc.] There is no surprise nor dangerous treason wrought
against a prince or his army, or garrisons, but the same proceeds for the
most part from secret practices, and intelligence of traitors with the enemy.
Such practices therefore are not only diligently to be sought out, but also
severely to be punished. Supra 70 Nolanos damnatos proditionis, quod colloquia
cum host habuissent, securi percussit. Liu. 24.
Marcellus executed seventy persons of them of Nola for treason, and secret
talk, and intelligence they had with Annibal. The Romans having notice of
diverse cities in Hetruria and Vmbria, that had communed secretly with Annibal,
Liu. 28.
gave order that both inquisition might be made, and due punishment awarded.
Neither it is sufficient for any to allege that he is not subject to our
jurisdiction, for whosoever commits treason against us, be he Dutch or
French, is to be punished. Quintilius Tacit.
Varus had intelligence how Harminius dealt with him treacherously, yet was
slack in making inquisition of the matter, which was the ruin of him and his
company.

3 [Mutinous and rebellious etc.] Mutinous I do not call them, that use bad
words to their captains, or that demand their due of them, although in
tumultuous sort, albeit some do so take it, and have practiced it. yet do I
acknowledge that the same is a great offense, and to be punished, yet not in
the degree of mutiny. But Qui atroce^ militum seditionem concitat capite
plectendus est. l. 1. ff. ad leg. Iul. may. sin vero intra vociferationem
and leue^ querelam seditio mota sit, gradu militiae dejiciendus est. l. 3. ff.
de re milit.
mutinous persons are those that raise sedition, and stir up soldiers to
rebellion against their governors, whereby the common cause may receive
detriment and hindrance. He that raises sedition, and gives cause to
dangerous stirs, is to be punished with death ( says Modestinus) but if he
proceed no further then to clamorous complaint, then is he to be punished with
the loss of his place, if he be an officer; or if no officer, with some less
punishment, then death. Yet are not all mutinous persons to be punished in one
degree. Scipio when his army in Spain mutined under color of want of pay, and
long service; with the death Liu. 28.
of thirty persons which were principal moouers of the sedition, did pacify
the matter. Caesar dismissed Hirt. de bell. Afrie.
Fonteius, for that he was a seditious person. Suetonius Sueton. in Caesar.
testifies that he cassed all the tenth legion for the same cause. Mutinous I
account the^ also, that dissuade the soldiers from performing any service
commanded them by the General, and do think that they deserve no less
punishment. The Marquis of Guast cast certain mutinous companions into the
Paul. Iouius.
sea in sackes, for that they dissuaded the soldiers from the enterprise of
Afrike, whither Charles the fifth then led them. Such mutinies are diligently to
be suppressed in the beginning, with the death of the beginners, as Tacit. ^.
Tiberius did the mutiny of his soldiers in Pannony, or with dismissing some
of the principallest. Liu. 25.
Fuluius understanding of a secret mutiny among his soldiers in Capua, gave
them no leisure to execute their purposes, and presently dismissing the most
seditious, had afterward reason of the rest.

4 [Whosoeuer yields etc.] This is nothing but a transumpt out of the Roman
laws, which in like case decree like Lege Iulia maiestatis tenetur, qui arcem
no tenuit, aut castra hostibus concessit. l. 3. ff* ad leg. Iul. may.
punishment. Pinarius being first prayed, then threatened by them of Aenna, if he
would not depart out of the town where he was in garrison, told them that he
might not do it, for that no man was to Praesidio decedere apud Romanos
capitale. Liu. 24.
depart, or give up the town of garrison, upon pain of death. The Qui Vaccam
amiserat condemnatus verberatusque poenas capite soluit. bell. Iugurth. Salust.
Governor of Vacca, a town in Afrike, was condemned, and executed to death,
for that he yielded the town to the enemy. He that yielded Pont Charenton to
the Protestants, upon the first appearing of their troops, was executed at
Paris, anno 1567, by express commandment of the king. Rutilius spared not his
own son, that by negligence lost the castle of Val. max. l. 2. c. 7.
Taurentum in Sicily. So that not only treachery, but cowardice, and
negligence deserves in this case to be punished. Cotta caused a near kinsman
of his to be beaten with rods, and afterward to serve as a common soldier for
loosing a place by his default, which was given him in guard. The Carthaginians
executed most cruelly him that Polyb.
surrendered up the castle of the Mamertines to the Romans. There is nothing
that can excuse a governor in this case, but necessity, to wit, when either
for want of men or victuals, or other weakness of ye place, he can hold out no
longer. So was Liu. 27.
Attilius excused that departed the city of Locri, and the garrison of Scodra
that yielded the town to ye Turk, not only excused, but relieved by the
Venetians: for they held it to the uttermost. The Romans suffered those to
compound with Annibal, that were not able to resist his force. Except the case
of necessity proved by men of judgment, in few other cases can those that
surrender places to the enemy, be excused. In so much, that Alphonso Perrez (
as the Spanish histories report) would rather suffer his son taken by the
Moors to be slain before his face, then he would surrender up Tariffa into
their hands, to recover his son. Nay it is not lawful without cause
manifested before the counsel, so much as to parley, or motion any composition
with the enemy. The women of Athens stoned Cirsilus to death, for that he
Justin.
went about to persuade the townsmen to yield to the king of Persia. After the
death of Expedit. Cyr. Xenophon.
Cyrus, when the Greeks that went with him being far from their country,
were in distress, one Apollonides despairing of other means, would have had
them to yield themselves to the mercy of the enemy: but his speech seemed so
unworthy the profession of a soldier, that he was there disarmed, and like a
base minded beast laden with baggage. How many cities have under color, and in
the time of parley been betrayed, I have heretofore declared. The very motion
of parley does daunt the courage of soldiers: and therefore such motions are
not to be made but in secret counsel, and in extremity.

5 [No captain, officer, nor soldier, etc.] The first part of this law the
Roman soldiers when they were first enrolled, did swear to perform; the
second part is comprised in the Roman laws against such as depart the army
without leave. A matter very dangerous: for by such starting aside of
soldiers, many garrisons are taken unprovided, and many companies that are
full in mosters, are very thin in time of service. And therefore although among
us every captain of a company take on him to give license of absence, yet is
the same against all practice of war. By the laws of the Romans no man had
Solus dux exercitus missionem dare potest. l. 1. ff. de his qui notantur infam.
power to dismiss soldiers, but the General: and if otherwise it were, ye
army might be dissolved, or at least greatly weakened without his priuitie, and
the cause hindered by inferior persons treachery.

6 [All that run, etc.] It is a great fault for a soldier in time of service
to forsake his General. But far greater to turn his hand against his country
and friends, and to fly to the enemy. Such therefore deserve no favor, being
not only traitors, but enemies. The Romans punished such more De perfugis
grauius, quam de fugitiuis consultum, nominis Latini qui erant securi percussi,
Romani in crucem sublati. Liu. 30.
grievously then fugitive slaves, and howsoever they compounded with others,
yet always excepted them. Sometime they were nailed to gibbets, sometime they
were Perfugae omnes virgis in comitio caesi, ac de saxo deiecti. Liu. 24.
thrown down from hills. Those that did but endeavor to fly to the enemy
although they performed it not, were Volens transfugere qui deprehensus est
capite punitur. l. desertorem ff. de remilit.
put to death. Yet would I not have them so deprived of hope of mercy, but that
they may find favor, if they with any new service can blot out their former
offense. No man fought with more resolution against the Romans, then these
reuolters. Fabius would not suffer the Liu. 23.
Romans to punish Altinius, that offered to restore Arpi unto them, which
himself before had caused to revolt to Annibal. Marcellus knowing the purpose
of Bantius, and that he meant to fly to the enemy, yet by courtesy and
liberality did choose rather to draw service from him, being a man of value,
then to punish him. If then such poor men as by extremity and want are driven
to fly to the enemy, will voluntarily return again and crave pardon, I would
not have them debarred from hope of mercy, which rigor is due only to
stubborn and wilful rebels.

7 [No man shall bewray, etc.] This being a difference, and sometime, as in the
dark, the only difference whereby soldiers know their fellows, great care is
to be taken, that the enemy have no notice of it. In the night fight betwixt
Vitellius and Vespasians soldiers, nothing did more prejudice Tacit. 18.
Vitellius his side, then that the enemy came to have notice of the word.
Which happened by the often repetition of it in the dark. By the same the
enemy either passes away safe, or comes among us without resistance. Great
punishment therefore does he deserve, that gives the enemy to understand it
by simplicity or negligence, but greater if by treachery and false dealing.
Likewise does he deserve punishment that neglects his watch. For seeing that
the safety of those that rest, consists often times in the watch, who sees
not that they that neglect their watch, betray their fellows safety? the Liu.
5.
watchman that suffered the Gauls to enter the Capitol, while he slept, was
thrown down from the rock whereon the Castle stood, there to sleep for
ever. By the laws of the l. Qui excubias ff. de re milit.
Romans he that slept in the watch was put to death. Epaminondas going the
round slew the Plutarch. in Epaminonda.
watchman whom he found sleeping, affirming that he did him no wrong leaving
him, as he found him. Yet would I not that any man in punishing these faults
should proceed rashly, and without cause spill poor soldiers blood, that is
so willingly spent in the service of their country. For if the enemy be far
off, and the danger little, this fault is much lessened.

8 [Whosoeuer of wantonness etc.] By two means especially the enemy comes
to have notice of our purpose, against the will and purpose of him that gives
the notice: first by making of noise and signs, which may be heard or seen of
the enemy being far off; secondly by talking and prating of matters, that
ought to be kept secret. by either of which means many enterprises are broken,
and many good counsels discovered. The practice of the protestants against the
town of Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 5.
Saumur anno 1569 was broken, by fiering of certain houses whereby the enemy
had notice of their coming. A like enterprise of theirs against Diep the same
year was discovered by discharging of a pistole. In our voyage of Portugal
the Spanish horsemen that coasted our company, had fallen into a trappe laid
for them, if one rash companion had not discharged his piece too soon, and
thereby given them warning before they entered into danger. If that certain rash
fellows had not risen up too Hist. de troubl. de Fr. l. 11.
soon and discharged their pieces upon the gallyes of the Baron la guard: both
he and his company had been taken at Tonne Charente by Rochel An. 1569. by the
babble and prating of a certain Philip. Comines.
Herald sent to the French king, he knew more then was convenient of the estate
and proceedings of Edw. the 4. as I before have showed. Caesar therefore that he
Caes. bell. Gal. 7.
might take the Gauls unprovided, forbade his soldiers in their march to make
fires. And Homer expressing the (...). Homer. 3.
courage, and good order of the Greeks, says they marched with great silence,
whereas the Trojans made a noise like a flight of cranes. Froissart reports
that in ancient time the English did take an oath, that they should not
discover any practice, or counsel of their superiors. But now (it seems) that
custom is out of date. for no nation does march with more noyce, or talk more
willingly. Wherefore although these matters may seem trifling, yet experience
shows what impediments they bring to our affairs. which caused me in this
place, seeing other means too weak to work it: to forbid discharging of
pieces, firing of houses, making of noise in the march without special
direction; and also talking of secret counsels of our governors at any time,
and to wish that the same were by law enacted.

CHAP. XXI. part 3. Containing laws concerning the duties of Captains and
soldiers yet more particularly.
1 ALl Captains, soldiers, and others shall yield their obedience to the
lawful commandments of their superiors. Neither shall any lift his weapon
against his commander correcting him, or others, for their offenses orderly,
upon pain of death.

2 No Captain nor officer of a company shall depart the Camp, or garrison
without license, nor shall lodge or absent himself from his company in time
of service, or when the enemy is ready to charge, upon pain of loosing his
place. except those always, that have lawful excuses of sickness, or
hurtes, and have appointed sufficient deputies in their place.

3 All soldiers that wilfully absent themselves without lawful cause from
their colors, or company, that goes to charge, or resist the enemy, deserve
death.

4 No Captain nor officer shall defraud the soldier or other person of his
pay, that is committed to his hands to be delivered unto him upon pain of
loss of his place.

5 No Captain nor other shall prefer, or subscribe to a false mostre roll,
or fraudulently give in more, or other names, then he has presently in his
company, upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of his place.

6 No captain, lieutenant, sergeant, nor other that ought to be armed, shall
come into the field without their ordinary arms, upon pain of two armors to
be deducted out of their pay, the one to their own use, the other to some
other of the company that wants.

7 No soldier, nor other shall go into service without the word, and some
other mark to be known by, from the enemy especially in night service, upon
pain of imprisonment.

8 No captain, officer, nor other private gentleman in pay, shall intertaine
any others soldier, or servant, without consent, or lawful dimission from his
former captain, or master, upon pain of loss of a months pay. Neither shall
any soldier, or servant depart from his captain, or master without lawful
cause, upon pain of imprisonment, and returning again of soldiers to their
captains, of servants to their masters.

9 Captains and officers of companies shall watch and ward with their colors,
and companies, upon pain of loss of a months pay.

10 No man shall march with the baggage but the companies appointed, neither
shall any march out of his array, or straggle abroad, or go on pilfering when
he should march, watch, or serve, upon pain of imprisonment. Such are also by
bastonataes to be corrected by their officers, if they be taken in the manner.

11 No companies shall go on foraging, or make any enterprise against the
enemy upon private motion, without the knowledge, and direction of their
general commanders.

12 No soldier shall sell, or pawn, or lend, or loose, or give, or cast away,
or play, or otherwise make away his horse, or arms, or weapons, or furniture
wherewith he is appointed to serve: nor shall suffer his horse by his default
to decay, or his arms to rust, or go to spoil upon pain of imprisonment,
and infamy both to him that offends, and to his abettors, and aydors.

13 No private captain shall give Passe-port to his soldier that is able to
serve upon pain of loss of his place, neither shall any soldier in time of
service depart without Passe-port upon pain of death.

14 No soldier nor other being once placed in array either in marching, or
fighting shall depart thence, without lawful cause. Whosoever either to run
to spoil, or to fly away, does abandon his ensign, or standing where he is
ra^ged to serve, shall suffer death.

15 No soldier nor others shall use any showting or crying, or without cause
discharge a piece in marching, or embatteling, or lying in ambush, upon pain
of bastonataes presently to be inflicted by the officers upon the offenders
taken in the manner, of imprisonment afterward.

16 No man shall give an alarm unto the army marching, or lodging without just
cause, and that in quiet sort, nor shall any tumultuously run nor cry upon an
alarm taken, upon such penalty, as the circumstance of the offense shall
require.

17 He that by negligence, or gross ignorance kills his fellow with his
piece, or other weapon, let him die the death.

18 No man shall challenge another, or defy him in camp, or garrison, nor
accept the challenge upon pain of imprisonment, and disarming before his
company. Neither shall any offer an injury to his fellow to provoke him to
fight, nor shall others privately revenge it, upon pain of imprisonment.

19 All braules, and quarrels betwixt fellows, are to be punished severely.
Whatsoever therefore he is that in camp, or garrison kills any man in any
sudden braule, or challenge, except he be thereto forced for his own
defense, or strikes his fellow being placed in array ready to fight, let him
suffer death for it.

20 No soldier nor other shall fraudulently, or the euishly take any thing from
any man's person, or their lodging, house, or cabane upon pain of death.

21 When any company of soldiers shall be lodged in any village, or pass
through it, or by any dwelling house, or other belonging to our friends, they
shall not hurt, nor injury the people in their persons, nor goods upon pain
of death, or other grievous punishment according to the quality of their
offense.

22 No man shall burn any corn, hay, or forage, or destroy any provision, or
house, barn, or cornemill, or other building that may serve for the use of the
army upon pain of death.

22 All murders, periuries, forgeries forcing of women, or maidens, cosinages,
or other disorders, whereby the army may any way receive disgrace, or hurt,
although not comprised in these laws, shall be punished by such penalties, as
the civil laws, or else common laws of England enjoin in such cases.

24 No soldier nor other shall be mostered, or answer in two companies, or
answer to two names in one company, nor shall any victualler, or other that is
no soldier, pass in mosters for a soldier, upon pain of death.

25 No soldier that has victualles delivered unto him for certain days,
shall spoil or spend the same in less time, then is appointed upon pain of
imprisonment.

Annotations upon the former laws.
1 [All captains, soldiers etc.] Obedience is the bond that keeps all in
order, without which neither can our own men be governed, nor the enemy
discomfited. If (says Liu. 24.
Papyrius) the common soldier might neglect the commandment of his captain,
the captain of his colonel, the colonel of his superior commanders; all
military proceedings would fall out of order. The Dictator signiferum
cunctantem signum vt iussus erat infer, occidit. Liu. 4.
General of the Romans killed an ensigne-bearer that refused to auance
himself forward among the enemies, as he was commanded. Some spared not their
own friends, no, nor sons, neglecting their commandments. This general
rule therefore is to be observed strictly, and the offenders to be punished.
Neither may they or others make Que si algun soldado hiriere a algun officiale
especialmente su superior muera porello.
resistance against those officers that punish them for their offenses. Yet on
the other side, I do not authorize rash brains to kill or hurt their
soldiers. There is difference between correction and killing. By the orders
of the Spaniards, he that kills his soldier disorderly, dies for it. By
commandments in this place, are not understood every captains private
pleasures, but orderly directions in time of service.

2 [No captain nor officer etc.] No man may return into his country without
license; but captains least of all for example sake. For if this were lawful,
it were not possible to keep an army together. Such as stay from their
garrison, and are to seek, when they should lead their company to the charge,
give just occasion of this law.

3 [All soldiers etc.] These are next in degree to those that fly out of the
field. For when they should fight, then like traitorous cowards they hide
themselves; and therefore deserve equal punishment with those that fly.

4 [No captain nor officer etc.] A far greater fault it is, that soldiers
seldom have that pay, that their prince allows. But yet may not those
capteines, and officers be excused, which of that which is coming to them, do
cut off some part, and pinch them of the rest by diverse frauds, and devises.
After that Stipendio equites frauda^tes Caesarem veriti transsugerunt. Caes.
bell. Ciu. 3.
Caesar had notice how Roscillus and AEgus, two captains of horsemen, had
defrauded their men of their pay, and taken from them their parts of the
spoil, as soon as they perceived it, fearing punishment, they fled to the
enemy.

5 [No captain nor other etc.] Many are the incommodities that come of false
mosters. The prince is defrauded, the army weakened, service neglected,
opportunity given to the enemy. Neither is there any thing that in our times
more dishonoreth captains, and officers, then the suspicion had of some in
this behalf. The army of Iulio the second, being in the moster Guicciard. l. 9.
rolls double the number that it was indeed, could do nothing of those
enterprises that were intended. The abuse of mosters was the ruin of
Guicciard. l. 15.
Francis the first before Pauy. Guicciardine reports, that four thousand
Guicciard. l. 17.
Suitzers were mostred, and paid for six thousand, and that Lansqueners
seldom are half so many, as are contained in the moster rolls; of which
ensues the spoil of princes without any effect done in service. This abuse
was not known in ancient time, which makes me much wonder, that no man goes
about to remove it: and more, that those that should reform it, in some
places do suffer captains to have certain dead pays, which is a means to
maintain it, and cover it. To remedy this abuse, there are two means; first
to allow captains honorable maintenance, and to pay every soldier by the
poll, as the Liu. 28.
Romans did, and as the Spaniards do, that have their Pagadores, or
Paymasters, for this purpose; the next is that the General cause all the army
to be mostred at once, and all those that give in false numbers, or commit any
abuse herein, to be punished most severely. By the laws of France they suffer
death.

[No captain, lieutenant etc.] This law may percase to some seem needless.
for who would think, that any man would come into the field to fight without
arms: but he that has seen the disorder in wars in this point, and
considered how many captains, lieutenants, sergeants, which are the brauest
men of their companies, do come without arms defensive into the field, will
acknowledge, I doubt not, that it is more then necessary to be thought upon,
and redressed. As it is now, they only lead men to fight, and when they come
near, convey themselves out of the braule, letting their soldiers fight if
they will. In time past, centurions, and their options, or lieutenants, were
the first and principal men of their ranks, and the strength of the battle;
and by the vantage of their arms prevailed against their enemies. Would not
then so many brave captains, lieutenants, and sergeants now add a great
strength to the army, if they stood in their ranks well armed: Now standing
out of array, they serve for nothing, but for cyphres in the joining of the
battle, unless it be to give evil example, and to trouble others. The
Spaniardes at mosters pay none, but such as present themselves before their
officers with their arms, and furniture. If then in mosters, arms are to be
showed; sure more requisite it is, that men should come armed into the field.
For what reason has he to reprove, and check his soldiers for casting away,
or loosing their arms, that has no sufficient arms himself:

7 [No soldier, nor other, etc.] For want of sufficient marks, and
cognisances, often times soldiers of one side hurt their fellows, especially
where diverse nations serve together. This was the death of Ponsenac, and diverse
brave men an. 1569. slain by their fellows in a skirmish in France, and is
cause of many disorders. Diligently therefore is this point to be looked unto,
especially where the enemy, and we speak both one language. Pompey himself
for want of ready pronouncing the word, had like to have bin slain of one of
his own soldiers, in the wars against Settorius in Spain. For this cause
ye Protestants in these late troubles in France, wore white cassakes, and the
Dutch that came in their aid, scarfes of colors of their General.

8 [No captain, officer, etc.] Of this cause proceed many quarrels among
captains, and diverse frauds in mosters, and disobedience of soldiers to
their superiors. Which cannot be avoided if offending one captain, they may
find protection, and shelter under another. Therefore both ye receivers, and
they that are received, deserve to be punished. By the orders of the Spanish
camp, the captain loses his place, the soldier is banished offending
herein. Among ye Romans such abuses were not usual. But if so be the soldier
be evil entreated of his captain, or the servant by his master; then upon
proof the lord marshall, or judge marshal is to set order.

9 [Captaines, and officers of companies etc.] For that ye soldiers are often
times charged while their captains are absent, and thereupon fly, or commit
some other error, as men without government: therefore are Que se Huuieren de
Leuar vanderas a las guardias vayan los capitanes, officiales, y^ soldados con
todas sus armas en orden, pena de castigo arbitrario.
capteins and officers to watch with their companies, and to see that their
soldiers depart not the place, nor there stay in disorder. They of the Eam
fraudem noctes, ac dies perstando in armis vitastis. Liu. 24.
garrison of Aenna could not have escaped the dangerous practice of the
townsmen against them, but by continual watch day and night in arms. The
Admiral Hist. de troubl. de Fr. li. 8.
caused a certain ensign to be hanged in the siege of Poytiers for that he
was found playing at cards, while his company watched.

10 [No man shall march etc.] no man that has care of his honor, or
reputation, will be behind while his company is before: but because all are not
of one metal, and diverse regard not honor, to remedy the disorders in
marching, this law is framed. Many inconveniences come of disorderly marching.
the enemy has opportunity given him to charge us: particulars that wander
among the country people are either slain, or taken. Scipio Romanum extra
ordinem deprehendens vite, extraneum fuste caedebat. Flor. Epit. Liu. 58.
Scipio therefore did chastise such as he espied out of their ranks, with a
Vine wand if they were Romans; with a cudgel, if they were other. Cato Siquis
extra ordinem auidius procurrit, and ipse interequitans sparo percutit, and
tribunos, centurionesque castigare iubet. Liu. 34.
riding among the ranks of his soldiers as they were marching, struck those
that were out of array with his leading staff, and commanded the colonels and
captains to chastise them. By greediness oftentimes of a little spoil, while
soldiers range out of order, an army may be defeated. The Samnitium equites
auiditate praedae impetum faciunt in impedimenta; iis praepediti caesi sunt.
Liu. 8.
Samnites bought dearly the spoils which they ran after, being overtaken
by the Romans in disorder. The Romans therefore among other things when they
were enrolled, did swear that they would keep their araie.

11 [No company shall, etc.] Although companies do go out with the Generals
priuitie, and sufficient order be taken to second the^, and to favor their
retraite, yet many times do some come short of home. What are then they to
look for, that go forth without direction or succor: that the body of the
army be not weakened, and diverse good men lost by their own rashness, and that
the enemy take not thereby opportunity to charge us, let good direction be
given, and al dangers be forecast. The Romans A procursationibus quaemultae
temere inter muru^ and vallu^ fieba^t, edicto ne quis iniussu pugnaret, ad opus
milites traducti. Liu. 5.
in the siege of Veij, seeing many men lost by sudden skirmishes, between the
town and the camp, forbade their soldiers to fight any more without
commandment. Papyrius vincentem magistru^ equ^tum quod iniussu pugnauerat,
caederevoluit. Liu. 8.
Papyrius would have executed the general of his horse, for that he fought
contrary to his commandment, albeit he returned victorious, Manlius punished
this disobedience, by the death of his own son. The Que ningun soldado vaya
a correre sin ordeny licencia de quin si la pudiere darque ningun soldado traue
escaramuza, o vaya a saccomanno sin orden so pena da to castigo arbitrario.
Sanch. d^ Land.
Spaniards neither make road nor skirmish without direction of their superior
commanders.

12 [No soldier shall sell etc.] To sell away, or to throw away their arms
Arma in bello alienare, aut amittere, capitale. l. 3. miles ff. de re milit.
was capital to the Roman soldiers. Appius Appius armis amissis fugientes
milites verborum insuper addita contumelia securi percussit. Liu. 2.
Claudius did behead those soldiers, that throwing down their arms fled
from the enemy. Lycurgus among the Spartans made a law, that no man should
turn home, that turned his back to the enemy. And therefore did they banish
Archilochus ye Poet out of their city for that he affirmed, that it was better
for a man to loose his arms, then his life. The Lacedaemonian women when they
delivered shields to their sons (...).
going into the wars, exhorted them either to bring them back again, or to
die valiantly upon their shields. Epaminondas in the battle of Mantinea having
received his deaths wound, asked if his shield were safe. Chabrias when his
ship was ready to sink, and he might by Aemil. prob.
swimming have saved himself, chose rather to die with his arms, then to save
himself without them. In our time few do carry all arms into the field, and
of those that do, few make conscience to loose them. Yet did the Romans carry
beside their heavy arms both victuals, and certain stakes, and thought it
great dishonor to loose their arms. Very requisite therefore it were, that this
law were put in practice. Further it is not sufficient to have arms, unless
the same be well kept and serviceable. Arma tersa sint, ferramenta sana.
Vopisc. in Aurelian.
Aurelian did enjoin his soldiers to keep their arms whole, and neat.
Aemilius Arma habeat miles apta corpus pernix. Liu. 44.
required no more of his soldiers, then that they should maintain their
bodies in strength, and their arms fit. The Que ningun soldado sin legitimo
impedimento dexe de lleuar, en la orden todas las armas, con que estuuiere
obligado a seruir s^ pena de ser sacado de la hilera Vergo^ cosamente.
Spaniards have at this day great care, that every soldier have all his arms,
and them sound and fit for service, in which point whosoever offends, they
draw him out of his rank with shame.

13 [No private captain etc.] long experience has taught men now to have more
care in this point, then in time past, when any captains passeport was thought
sufficient to dismiss his whole company. and great reason there is men should
look unto it. For while this was suffered, brave men were dismissed for some
little money, and weak persons received in their places, and the pay of diverse
soldiers emboursed by the captains, and the princes Exercitum co^sul
infrequentem commeatibus datis per abitionem culpabat. Liu. 40.
service slackely performed. Fuluius Liu. 40.
a Colonel of the Romans was banished his country, for that he took upon
him without other authority to dismiss a legion, whereof he had the
commaundemet. Caius C. Matienus quod exercitum in Hispania deseruisset, sub
furca caesus nummo sestertio veniit, Florus 55. l. epit. Liu.
Matienus for that he came from the army in Spain without pasport, was beaten
under a gibet, and sold for one piece of money, to signify unto us, yt such
fugitive rascals are of no more value. While in the civil stirs in France
every soldier came, and went at pleasure, and in the service in Flanders, and
France, there has not bin that order herein, yt was requisite; neither they in
France, nor others could at any time assure themselves of their number, or
strength.

14 [No soldier nor other etc.] Among soldiers there can be no greater fault,
then to forsake their ensigns and standing, and so to run out of ye field. Be
it for fear, or spoil, the same is grievously to be punished. Liu. 2.
Appius beheaded the ensign bearers, and centurions, that fled away from their
ensigns. To those companies that fled and lost their ensigns in a certain
encounter with Annibal, Cohortibus quae signa amiserant hordeum dari iussit,
centurionesque manipulorum quorum signa amissa fuerat, districtis gla. dijs
discinctos destituit. Liu. 27.
Marcellus gave nothing but barley to eat, the centurio^s he caused to stand
with their garments loose, and swords drawn, which among their soldiers, was
a great shame. Caesar did put certain ensign bearer from their Caes. bell.
ciu. 3.
places, for that they lost their ground, in a certain encounter with Pompey
at Dyrrhachiu^. Crassus Appian. Alex.
causing his soldiers that fled, to cast lots, put every tenth man to death,
which Antony did likewise execute upon his soldiers flying from the Parthia^s.
Antonius Primus, Vexillarium fugientem transuer. berauit hasta. Tacit. 19.
one of Vespasians captains, seeing an ensign bearer turn his back, stroke
him through with a iauelin. In this case Clearchus would have soldiers to
fear their captains, more then the enemy.

The fault of those yt run to spoil, is not much less, then of those that
run away. While those that pursued the enemy turned aside to spoil, the
French were overthrown at Guinguast, the Italia^s at Guicciard 1.
Taro, and the Liu. 8.
Samnites in a certain encounter by the Romans, that turning head upon the
victors, took the victory out of their hands. Caesar a militibus contendit,
ne in praeda occupati reliqui negotij gerendi facultate^ dimitterent. Caes. de
bell. ciu. 3.
Caesar having overthrown Pompey in open field, prayed his soldiers that they
would not so set their minds on spoil, that they would omit the occasion to
atchieue the victory, and perfect other matters. The Romans what with reward,
what with severity, wrought so much in the minds of their soldiers, says In
bello saepius vindicatum est in eos, qui contra imperium in hostem pugnauera^t
quam qui signa reliquere, aut pulsi loco cedere ausi sunt. Salust. coniur.
Catil.
Salust, that they were more often punished for fighting without commandment,
then for flying away, or forsaking their ensigns. The Lacedaemonians banished
such cowardly persons. Aristotle, no soldier, but a Philosopher, (...). Arist.
thetoric. 2.
holds it a dishonorable thing for a soldier to fly, or to cast away his
arms. A certain soldier of Caesar, albeit he had vanquished his enemy, yet
craved pardon, for that he was driven to forsake his shield.

15 [No soldiers nor others etc.] the cries, tumult, and running up and down
of disorderly persons do much discourage young soldiers, and Caes. bell. gal. 5.
hinder them that they cannot hear the commandments of their leaders, and
therefore are diligently to be avoided.

Aemilius cum clamoribus omnia confunderentur tribunos militum Primipilo
legionis secretu^ edere imperium iussit, singulos proximo cuique dicere. Liu.
44.
Aemilius perceiving the diverse inconveniences that grew hereof gave all his
directions to the colonels, and they to the first man of the legion, and he to
the Centurions, and every one to his fellow secretly, and quietly. Among the
Que ningun soldado gritte. ni hable en la ord^n. etc. so pena de ser sacado de
la hilera vergoncosamente. Sancho de Land.
Spaniards no man may cry out, nor speak loud, either marching, or embattelled
in squadrons. The punishment of the offense among them is shame, and infamy.
Only at the joining of the battle, it is not only lawful, but also profitable
to begin with a great noise. Of which, as it was greater, or lesser: some
have gathered a Veget.
presage either of loss, or victory.

16 [No man shall give an alarm etc.] False alarmes disquiet the army very
much, and often trouble those that ought to rest. And therefore does the enemy
oftentimes suborne some to keep our men in continual alarm, that more easily
he may prevail against us being tired and ouerwatched. Those difficulties
therefore which the enemy casts in our way, let us not Que ninguna persona
de arma falsa sin' erden ded que se la pudiere dar, so pena de la vida.
increase by our unskillfulness, and let us in our watches and discoueries keep
good order: and the rather, for that lodging for the most part without strong
defense, and marching without diligent discovery, we lie open to many
surprises, and sudden attempts of the enemy. The penalty is arbitrarie, and
may be more or less, according to the quality of the offense. Yet in avoiding
the excess, we must take heed that we run not into the defect; and so for
want of warning be taken unprovided.

17. [He that by negligence etc.] If this did not fall out too often among our
young soldiers, that either for want of skill, or through fear not looking
before them do kill, and hurt their fellows, this law might seem needles. But
as now it is, I would think this law very profitable, if by this prouiso the
soldiers might be made more wary. By the same not only those that hurt others
negligently, but also, and much more they that hurt their felows maliciously
are to be punished.

18 [No man shall challenge etc.] In l. 18. and 19.
The Romans contended among themselves rather who should kill most enemies,
then who could overcome most of their fellows. Commilitone^ gladio ferire
capitale erat, lapide percutiens militia reijciebatur. l. 3.. qui aliena. ff.
de re milit.
Those that stroke their fellows with their sword died for it, those that
threw stones at them, were displaced with shame. And therefore did seldom
any quarrel or braule arise among companions. Among us nothing is more
common, neither will any law serve to restrain such disorders. Yet do I not
doubt, but if these laws whereby not only the original, that is, injurious
words and deeds, but also the means, that is, challenges and acceptance of
challenges is taken away, were executed, and braulers punished, that these
faults would be less common. In experience we find that these spadassines,
and common quarellers prove not most resolute soldiers. Many inconveniences
come of these quarrels. For not only brave men are often lost, but also the
common cause hindered by them. The quarrels betwixt captains and gentlemen in
Tifauges Anno. 1569. caused diverse to depart malecontent, of which the enemy
having notice took the town disfurnished of soldiers. The Qualquiera persona
que hiziere o fixare carteles o dixiere palabras escandalosas, de las quales
puede causarse tumulto, o motin, muera por ello. Que ningun soldado sobre
enemistad, o pendentia vieia durante la guerra, y iornada rinne, nitrate, ni
por pendentia nueua desafie a otro so pena de la vida al prouocante, y
destierro al prouocado.
Spaniards therefore do expressly forbid all cartels, injurious words, and
braules upon great penalties, both in their armies, and garrisons.

20 and 21 [No soldier nor other shall fraudulently etc.] Those that know what
necessities poor soldiers are driven unto, cannot choose but pity their estate
that contrary to orders of law are forced to shift. Yet for the necessity of
some, the disorder of others, that as they stole at home, so steal abroad, may
not pass unpunished. Nemo pullum alienum rapiat, ouem nemo contingat, oleum,
salem, lignum, nemo exigat. Vopisc. in vita Aurel.
Aurelian the emperor would not suffer his soldiers to take so much as a
pullet, or oil, or salt, or wood from the country people. For De praeda
hostium non lachrymis prouincialiu^ habeat. Vopisc. ibidem.
soldiers, says he, ought to enrich themselves with the spoils of the enemy
not with tears of the people, that are friends. Sueton. in Tyber.
Tiberius caused one of his guard to be put to death for taking a peacocke out
of a man's yard. Tacit. annal.
Aufidius Cassius punished rapine, and theft most extremely. Of the Turk it is
reported, that he put one of his soldiers to death for taking away a poor
woman's milk. L. 3. qui aliena ff. de re milit.
Modestinus judged him worthy of death that stole his fellows arms. To
restrain this disorder the Roman soldiers when they were first enrolled did
swear that they would bring to ye general, or his deputy, whatsoever they
should take up. Only certain trifling things were excepted. Caesar setting
gardes at the gates of the city of Leptitanis se tradentibus centuriones ad
porta^ posuit, ne quis miles ingrederetur. Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Leptis, that yielded to him, kept his soldiers out, for fear they should
spoil the inhabitants. The Romans most severely punished Liu. 29.
Pleminius, and others that spoiled the town of Locri wherein they lay in
garrison. And put to death all that legion that driving out the townsme^ seized
Rhegium to their own use. The Spaniards do diligently Que ningum soldado
dentro ni suera del campo, tome, ni quite cosa alguna a persona alguna.
forbid such filcheries. In sum, the ancient orders of war require, that
not only soldiers, and others within the camp or garrison, possess their
arms, and goods in peace, but also that our associats, and friends be kept
from spoil.

22 [No man shall burn etc.] Many things may be found in the enemies country,
which might greatly benefit the army, if they could be saved from the wanton
spoil of the soldier. Wherefore that soldiers fall not into needless wants
through their own default; let this law among others be diligently executed.

23 [All murders etc.] Such offenses as by civil laws are punished at home,
ought to have like punishment abroad. Yet must the Judges and Officers that
dealt herein, proceed with great discretion. For small matters in time of
peace, as neglecting of the watch, and disobedience against Officers, are
severely punished in time of wars: and contrariwise great matters in time of
peace, are for some evident cause neglected in wars. Favor, and alliance
Aliter in ardore belli, aliter in pace iudicandum says Fabius. Liu. 24.
have liew in choice of Officers in peaceable government: but in wars they
that make not choice of worthy men, worthily repent themselves. Again in time
of peace proceeding is flow, and forms are observed: but in proceeding in
martial causes neither formalities, nor delays are admitted. Provided
always, that in cutting off formalities, and delays injustice be not done.

24 [No soldier nor other etc.] The fifth law of this Chapter concerns
Captains and Officers, this is proper to soldiers and such as pass for
soldiers. Both are little enough to redress disorders, and if there were
diverse other laws made to the same purpose, yet were it good if all could
remedy the inconveniences that follow false and fraudulent dealing in mosters.

25 [No soldier that has etc.] Military discipline is so far grown out of
use, that men are constreined, by express laws to prescribe many particular
matters, which otherwise might seem either trifling or needeles. And among
other things as you see, that soldiers dispense and spend their victuals
moderatly, or rather sparingly. for he that betime spares not, very timely
shall want.

CHAP. XXI. Part. 4. Wherein orders especially concerning the camp, or town
of garrison are contained.
1 Whosoever shall deal fraudulently, or negligently in such matters, as are
by his Camerada committed to his trust or government, let him have punishemnt
according to his offense, and make double restitution out of his pay.

2 All manner of persons within the camp or garrison, after the watch is set,
shall repair to their quarter, and there use silence, that every man may rest.
All straglers and tumultuous persons, that are taken abroad after that time,
shall be committed to prison, and there abide until their cause be examined by
the officers of justice, and order taken for their punishment, or dismissing.

3 No man in camp (or garrison in time of war) shall lodge out of his
quarter, or delay to repair thither upon an alarm given, upon pain of
imprisonment.

4 No soldier nor other shall receive any stranger into his cabine, or lodging
upon pain of imprisonment, nor shall harbor any spy, or messenger from the
enemy, upon pain of death.

5 No manner of person shall pass in, or out of the camp, or town of
garrison any other, then the ordinary ways, upon pain of death.

6 Women, and boys, and such as do idly follow the soldiers, not being
enterteined in pay, as much as may be, are to be banished the camp.

7 No captain, soldier, nor other person, in time of necessity, and for
defense of himself and the army, or garrison shall refuse to work with
mattocke, spade, basket, or other instrument, upon pain of imprisonment.

8 No soldier appointed to stand sentinel, shall depart from the place, or
sleep in the place, upon pain of death, nor shall sit down upon pain of
imprisonment.

9 For keeping the camp clean, and mainteining of men's health, some places
shall be assigned for the slaughter of beasts, and others for other necessities
at the outsides of the camp, or town of garrison, out of which places it
shall not be permitted to any to kill beasts, or do other offices upon pain
of imprisonment. Every Colonel, and Captain shall look to the cleansing of
his quarter every third day, upon pain of loss of a months pay; and shall
cause such as cast out any garbage, or filth, and bury it not, to be
imprisoned.

10 No man shall spoil, or hurt any victualler or other person coming with
provision for the army, or any merchant that brings necessary commodities to
the camp, nor shall break open any shop, or steal any thing out of any tent,
or caban, or house, upon pain of death.

11 No man shall buy, or sell any victuals, but in the place appointed for the
market, nor until such time as the same be reasonably rated by the officers
appointed, nor above that price that is reasonably set, upon pain of
forfeiture of such victualles so bought, or sold, or the value thereof, and
also imprisonment.

12 No soldier nor other shall break down or burn any house that may serve
for lodging of the company, nor shall trouble or defile any spring, or stream
of water, that is to be used for the service of the army, upon pain of
imprisonment.

Annotations for the better understanding of the former laws.
1 [Whosoeuer shall deal etc.] Many are the commodities that proceed of
camarades: De Camaradas proceed poderse sustentar meior con el s^eldo que
estando cadauno de pors^^y assimismo grande amistad con otras muchas vt^lidades.
Soldiers do live better, and cheaper in camarada then otherwise: they are
linked in more strait bonds of friendship one with another: if any be sick or
hurt, his camarada takes care of him. When they are ranged together, one does
more willingly succor another. For which cause it were to be wished, that as it
is among the Spaniards, very commonly, so among us our companies were divided
into camaradaes, and that such as violate the laws of societi^ should be
sharply punished.

2 [All manner of persons etc.] The cries and disorders of some lewd persons
that take no delight but in their own lewdness, and disorder gives occasion
of this law sufficient. And all little enough to stop their mouths, and procure
others rest. In the Roman army there was in time past great quietness in the
night: and now the Turks after the watch set use great silence. The wandering
up and down of soldiers, and others after that time does cover spies: which if
every man resort to his quarter, cannot long lie hidden.

3 and 4 [No man in camp etc.] While men lodge out of order, it is hard to
bring them in Qua todos los soldados acudan a us vanderas con gran diligentia
encommenaeando acoger los atambores.
the night into any order. Besides this inconvenience, while soldiers lodge
out of their quarter, the same falls out to be unfurnished oftentimes, if the
enemy should then chance to assault it, and espials cannot be discovered, nor
the dangers of secret meetings avoided. For which cause order is to be given,
that all do lodge in their own quarter, and give notice to their superiors, if
any stranger, or suspected person lodge there.

5 [No manner of person etc.] While this is neglected, the way is made easy up
to the rampire, gardes and sentinels are abused, and espials pass in and out,
and are not espied. For this cause the Romans did Si quis vallum transcenderit,
aut per murum castra ingreditur, capite punitur. ff.dear milit. l.
punish this disorder with death.

6 [Women, and boys etc.] Infinite abuses come into the camp by these means.
Victuals are consumed, disorder increased. And therefore as Scipio purged his
camp at Numantia of all superfluous persons, so allowing boys to captains
and certain officers, the rest are to be banished as much as may be.

7 [No captain or soldier etc.] The stubburnnesse of some, and daintiness of
others, that either refuse to work, or think it not belonging to the
profession of a soldier to work, has given but too just cause of this law;
which is therefore set down, that every man not hindered with hurts, and sickness
may know ye it is the duty of a soldier no less to work with a spade in
trenches, the^ to fight with the sword in the open field. The Romans, as before
I have showed, generally set hand to the work: which made them victorious
oftentimes without setting hand to the sword. Xenoph. exped Cyr. 1.
Cyrus and al his nobility set hands to work, and help forward the cariages
that were often myred, as his army marched over certain moors, notwithstanding
the Persian pride and bravery. But since our soldiers began to put such
bravery in their silks, it is no marvel if they have made difficulty to mire
themselves. For nothing is more contrary to silks then mire. Yet do not the
Spaniards that think themselves as brave as the best, think themselves by
these labors any whit disgraced.

8 [No soldier appointed etc.] The safette of the camp, and garrison is often
reposed in the diligence of the sentinel, by whose watchfulnes others rest
assured. The more severely therefore ought his negligence to be punished. The
Romans in time past, as before I have showed, and now the Que ningun soldado
dexe la sentinela so pena de la vida ni a part del lugar, ni se siente sopena
de castigo.
Spaniards do punish this fault with death. Paulus Aemilius to avoid the
sleeping of sentinels, ordered, yt they should stand, or walk, which others
likewise do now practice.

9 [For keeping the camp etc.] There cannot be too much diligence used in this
behalf. The inco^modities that come of infection of the air, occasioned by ye
filthiness of the place, are so many: and the thing so loathsome. The Ningun
soldado ni otra persona each immunditias y es^rementos detro de los quarteles
so pena de castigo arbitrario.
Spaniards therefore in effect decree as much as we, but they observe it far
better. The Romans without law proceeded herein very carefully, by reason of
their continual experience.

10 11 and 12 [No man shall spoil or hurt etc.] The ancient orders of the
Romans, that carried victuals with them sufficient for their company, being
out of practice, and the provision of the army being made now from day to day
by victuallers, that for gain follow the camp: it stands the General upon
to see that they may safely come and go: and that victualles may be provided
and saved. The army of the Prince of Caualier Cicuta.
Orange that besieged Florence, had like to have bin famished by the disorder
of three or four lewd persons, that spoiled the merchants, and victuallers
that came, and went from the camp; no sooner were they hanged, but the army
had al things for their money plentifully. By the laws of the Que ningun
soldado ni otra persona salga a lo^ camin^s ni a part alguna a tomar las
victuallas, ni a impedir los conductores dellos, ni a romper o quemar los
molinos, villas, granias, cazare, y lugares de la comarca, ni compre victuallas
fuerae de las placas, qu^ para venderlas fuere^ senna ladas, y despues
deapreciadas per los officiales.
Spanish government, such spoilers are severely punished, and victuals both
well saved, and reasonably rated. Neither are victuals only to be looked unto,
but also corne-mils, and houses, and granges, that may serve for the use of the
army: streams of water are to be kept clean, not only for the use of men,
but of cattle also.

These laws being well observed, and provision made not only of victuals, and
things necessary for the whole, but also of physic and places of ease for the
sick, and hurt, I would well hope, that matters would proceed in better order
among soldiers, the^ they have done heretofore.

CHAP. XXI. Part. 5. Wherein a form of laws especially concerning sea causes,
and ships going in public service of the Prince is prescribed.
1THe ordinary practice and laws of war concerning religion, and the state,
and also concerning obedience, and peaceable conversation betwixt fellows,
which have course in service at land, shall be observed likewise at sea, respect
being always had to the diverse circumstances, which are diverse in either.

2 The execution of justice at sea appertains to the General, or chief
captain with his counsel: if a ship be severed from the rest of the company,
then the punishment of faults that may not be differred belongs to the
captain with the advice of the most apparent men in the ship. Provided that no
execution be done at sea contrary to the laws of arms, nor that such as
offend and escape at sea, do escape at land also, especially where the fault is
heinous. For which cause those that have jurisdiction at sea, are to have their
jurisdiction continued at land, until such time, as offenses be punished.

3 No ship shall go forth upon public service without sufficient ordonance,
arms, soldiers, mariners, munition, victualles, surgeons and other necessary
furniture.

4 No man shall sell away the arms, tacle, artillery, victualles, or
munitions belonging to the ship upon pain of death.

5 Whatsoever ship having directions to come to a place certain, shall not
keep course if it be possible, nor come thither so soon as the wind will
serve, the captain, and master, and those that are in fault shall suffer death
for it.

6 Whosoever shall motion to do contrary to the Generals direction, so long as
there is possibility, or means to follow it; shall suffer imprisonment for the
same: and if he persuade the company, so that the ship goes another way, both
he and those that willingly yield to him shall suffer death for their
disobedience.

7 Whatsoever captain or other does board a ship of the enemies without
direction, or reasonable cause, or when commandment is given, or a sign made
of fight, does see a ship boarded upon one side, and does not if he be able
board her on the other side, or at least do what hurt he can to the said
ship, shall be dismissed from his charge, and suffer such further punishment,
as the General shall think meet.

8 Every particular person shall execute his charge imposed upon him in the ship
where he is placed, upon pain of imprisonment.

9 No soldier nor other when the enemy attempteth to board our ship, shall
abandon his standing upon pain of death.

10 No soldier nor other appointed to board the enemies ship seeing his
fellows entered, shall draw back, or resuse to follow in his turn, and order
upon pain of death.

11 No man shall break open his fellows, or others caban, or coffer, nor shall
take any thing thence, or from their persons, or hide any thing that is not
his, upon pain of death.

12 He that neglects his watch, or sleeps leaving a candle or match light,
or any fire in any place and puts it not out, shall be put into the
bilbowes, and have further punishment as the offense shall deserve.

13 When a ship shall be taken, then shall the spoil be brought to persons
deputed by the General or Captain. And whosoever shall hide any thing of value
from their knowledge, shall not only loose the same, but his share of the rest
also.

Notes upon the former laws.
1 [The ordinary practice etc.] How many voyages have bin broken of late time
for want of government, every one that is acquainted with sea causes, that
have passed of late, understands. Nothing therefore is more requisite, then
that such as go in those services that hereafter shall be attempted, should have
both authority to do justice, and a form of proceeding set before them. For
this cause I have made this light, and as it were first draught, that men of
wisdom and experience seeing what is wanting therein, may add more, and
bring the same to more perfection. Those laws that concern treacheries
against the prince and state, or against the General, or else concern
mutinies, disobedience, braules, murders, or else are common in service at
land, and sea, I have not here set down, for avoiding unnecessary repetitions.
Yet are they no less necessary at sea, then at land. And therefore let them be
borrowed thence, that no military disorder, nor other offense escape
unpunished.

2 [The execution of justice etc.] The want of this consideration, has bin
cause that many notorious treasons and villenies have escaped without
punishment. I will not name particulars, for that my meaning is rather to
provide against future disorders, then to have the sword drawn for matters
forepassed. Only let there be hereafter care, that such as go to sea may be
furnished with authority to do justice, and that rules be set down, that they
may know what to do.

3 [No ship shall etc.] The Admiral of France in time of peace at home has
special care of this matter. In civil wars all things are in garboile. He
puts into men of war, the tenth man, and is at a tenth of the charge, and
deserves a tenth of the Popelliniere in a treatise concerning ye admitaltie of
France.
prise. Which many do wonder how in our days certain officers contrary to
all custom do come to challenge, especially in goods taken by reprisall. Where
if law might take place, neither the taker, nor other ought to have more then
has been taken from him in foreign countries. But if men will needs have a
tenth, yet let them have a tenth of the care that ships may go forth well
furnished, that they be not lost, and the land disfurnished in time of service.

4 [No man shall sell etc.] Every gunner, and petite officer in the Queens
ships can tell the mystery of this law. I would it were so well known how we
might meet with their filcheries. The best means is to look to matters
narrowly, and to punish such companions as offend, severely.

5 [Whatsoeuer ship etc.] As at land, so at sea, if colonels, captains, and
masters do not execute the Generalles commandment: there can be no
performance of service. If ships may straggle from ye company, and go on
pilfering, or upon every light occasion return, and leave their General at
sea, or if private men may take upon them to dissuade men from doing that, which
the General has commanded, and all this without fear of punishment, as has
been done in some countries, but too much heretofore in voyages at sea: there
can be no better hope of success, then has been had heretofore.

6 [Whatsoeuer captain etc.] This law has two parts: the first is against
such as attempt matters without direction, by which means, they either
endanger themselves going single, or else break the general purpose of the
action: the second is against cowards and traitors, that look on while their
fellows fight: against which no punishment can be devised sufficient. Liu. 1.
Metius Suffetius was drawn in pieces by force of horses, for that while
Tullus Hostilius encountered with the enemy, it pleased him to stand by, and
give aim. And not much less punishment had Laetus one of the captains of
Herodian.
Seuerus his army; for that while the rest fought, he caused his men to make
alta. Lib. 25.
Amminian Marcellin reports, that certain horsemen of the Romans were
disarmed, and had their horses taken from them, and were driven to serve with
the baggaglioes of the camp, for that they retired when their fellows went to
charge the enemy. The like reason is in fight at sea. For if when one ship
enters ye battle, the rest do not second her, or if when one ship is charged,
the rest come not to succor: there is no hope, yt any great service can be done
at sea.

The laws of this section that follow are plain enough of themselves, and most
of them like to those that are ordained for good service at land; and therefore
I purpose not to spend words in explaning that, whose reasons every man may
easily conceive of himself.

CHAP. XXI. Part. 6. Wherein there is contained certain orders concerning
adue^tures at sea.
1 WHere men do adventure at sea upon their own charge, there the prises taken
are to be divided into three parts, whereof the first belongs to the ship and
captain, the second to the victuallers, the third to the soldiers and
mariners, (Some allot a third part to the ship alone, but there seems
therein to be no just proportion.) If by reason of the charge otherwise then is
ordinary bestowed, other agreement be made, the same is to be observed and
kept.

2 Where two or more do join in consort, the division of the prize shall be
made according to the composition that is made among them: if none be made
according to the greatness and goodness of the ships and furniture: provided
always, that where a ship is forced, those that first board her, and do most
valiantly, be first rewarded, and their hurtes, and losses repaired at the
common charge.

3 Al adventurers that join in consort, and submit themselves to one man's
government or to more, shall to them yield obedience, and of them receive
justice according to the laws of arms, and customs of sea government.

CHAP. XXI. Part. 7. Wherein an order is set down concerning the officers of
the army or navy, or that have charge to make any provision for either.
1 Whatsoever commissary, or officer appointed for leuy, or muster of
soldiers, or provision of victuals, munition, arms, weapons, cariages, ships,
or other matter, does deal therein fraudulently, or negligently, let him be
imprisoned, and fined, and make satisfaction; and if the crime deserve it, let
him suffer death for it.

Annotations upon this last law.
The ancient Captains of the Romans as in skill and experience in wars: so in
care also and labor far excelled the men of our times. And therefore neither
had they, nor needed they so many lieutenants, and petit officers, as now are
used, to bear together with them the several parts of their charge. Themselves
saw their soldiers levied, mostered, exercised, paid, lodged, provided of
arms, and victuals, and other necessaries, and had seldom any commissioners
for leuies of men, and never any moster-masters, nor sergeant mayor, nor
special officers of justice, nor quartermaster, nor trenchmaster, nor
scoutmaster, nor commissaries for provision of arms, nor victualles, nor such
matters. For the pay of the soldiers, and saving of the spoil they used a
They called him Quaestorem.
treasurer. The tribunes or colonels did execute the office of the campmaster,
and sergeant mayor. The Generalles themselves with their counsel did ouersee
the works of the soldiers in their mines, banks, trenches, and other
military labors. Now the general care of al matters belongs to the General.
But to assist him several men are deputed to every several charge. Who if
they behave themselves fraudulently or negligently, his general care avails
him nothing. Great care therefore ought the to have, that his officers be not
only loyal, but also careful and sufficient to discharge that office, that
is imposed upon them. If they be not such; that he see them not only removed,
but also punished according to their deserts. For if soldiers be not levied in
time, or else if sufficient men be dismissed for money, and the s^umme of the
people put in for soldiers, or if young soldiers be not trained and fashioned
by light skirmishes, or if yt soldiers be famished or not furnished, or have
not their arms or victuals in order, or that military orders be not observed,
or soldiers unpaid or unprovided for by fraud, or the country ransomed by
Captains, and quartermasters, or the honor of the Prince sold for money, or
other abuse committed, and finally if those that deal in these offices may do
what they list without punishment, or controlme^t, whatsoever labor and pains
is taken otherwise, yet is it to no purpose.

Among the Romans those that dealt in public charges, were very sufficient men
for the most part, and dealt therein loyally. But if at any time they did
otherwise, they were most severely punished. L. Liu. 38.
Scipio and his Officers were condemned, and fined for ransacking the friends
and associates of the Romans in Asia. Aquilius hardly escaped condemnation for
his concussions and exactions in Spain, and Sicile. Against the exactions, and
frauds of Officers, they framed diverse laws, whereby they not only punished
ff. ad leg. Iul. repetunda^um.
the offenders, but caused restitution, and reparation of damages to be made.
He that by occasion of Qui occasion transitus ab vibibus, vel praediis per
concussione^ quid accipit, tenetur in ^upium* Authent de tra^sit milit* col. 10.
passing his army by any city, or country extorted any thing, was bound to
restore double. The examples of those that took money for redemption of
lodging, and passing of soldiers are rare. Tacitus does Irinerum spatia and
statiuorum mutationes venditauit. Fab. Valens foedis pactionibus. Tacit. annal.
17.
mention it in one Fabius Valens, as a notorious and singular griedines, and
filthy kind of gain. That equallity might be therein observed, Arcadius and
Tertia pars domus mil tibus assignabatur. l. 2. Cod* de metat* and epid.
Honorius, decreed that no soldier lodging in any man's house should have more,
then one third part thereof, the rest to remain to the owner, and his family.
No soldier by the orders of the Romans might exact so much as salt, light, or
vinegar, of those where he lodged. The laws of France upon pain of death
forbid their Petr. Gregor. Tholos. Syntag. iuris.
furriers or quartermasters to take any money of any, either for lodging, or
for sparing them for lodging.

By the law Iulia made against exactions Lege Iulia repetundarum tenetur qui ob
militem legendum, mittendumue pecuniam acceperit. l. eadem.. lege Iul. ff ad
leg. Iul. repetundaru^.
of Officers, he was banished, and condemned to make restitution, that either
for choosing or dismissing of soldiers received money. Cassius caused a revolt
in Spain by reason of the peoples coffeehouse. For that he Hi^t* de bell.
Alexandr.
exacted money of such, as would not go with him into Afrike, whither he
pretended a voyage, that rich men being enrolled might redeem them selves with
great sums of money. Of which abuse Caesar had no sooner understanding, but he
gave order for to displace him.

The Romans condemned those Colonels, Captains, Tribunus, Ce^turio, vel alius,
qui refert falsuna numerum militum, stipendia intercipiens conde^natur in
quadruplum, and d^gnitate priuatur* l* vlt. pro limitaneis. Cod. de offic.
prefect. Afric.
and Officers, that brought in false moster rolls, or inter cepted the pay of
soldiers to pay four fold, and to loose their places. By the constitutions
of France such as deal in Petr. Greg. Tholos. Syntag. iuris.
mosters fraudulently, whether they be Officers or others, are condemned to
dye: and yet all this is not sufficient to restreine the unlawful shifts, and
practices that are therein used.

The like severity did the Romans use against them that dealt fraudulently in
any other military charge. M. Posthumous and other Liu. 25.
merchants for deceit used in provision of victuals, and other necessaries for
the army in Spain, and for giving in false accounts, and pretense of loss,
where in deed they lost nothing, were banished the city of Rome, and all
their goods confiscate. But what should I need to show their justice against
fraud and deceit, when they used to punish and dismiss those, that were
negligent in their charge? Caesar disarmed, and dismissed Hirt. de bell. Afric.
Auienus, for that in a ship wherein he should have transported soldiers into
Afrike, he put nothing but his own private servants, and goods. And for that
diverse of his men, and ships were intercepted, and taken by the enemy, as they
passed into Afrike, he Quos apud Thapsum custodiae causa esse, iusserat ob
negligentiam ignominiae causa dimittendos ab exercitu curauit. Hirt. de bell.
Afric.
dismissed his Admiral, and others, and put them from their charge. For by
their negligence he received that great loss.

If then the Romans when these offenses were yet new, and rare, for repressing
them used great diligence and severity: how much more ought Princes to use
justice, and severity herein, when scarce any punishment, unless it be very
peremptory, can restrein men's griedy and insatiable desires? the principal
cause of the neglect of military discipline proceeds from fraud, negligence,
and insufficiency of Officers. He therefore that desires to bring things into
order, must begin with reformation of Officers, who both first brought in, and
since have continued many disorders, in the proceeding and practice of arms.

CHAP. XXI. Part. 8. Comprising orders concerning booties, spoils, and
prisoners taken in wars.
1 AFter that the enemy is driven out of the field, or the fortress or town
besieged is entered, yet shall no man leave his rank, or ensign to run to
spoil before license, or a sign given upon pain of death.

2 Whatsoever adventurers that serve upon their own charge, and are not
enrolled in companies that receive pay of the Prince or State, shall win from
the enemy by their own labor: that shall they have divided among them selves,
except a fifth part that goes to the Prince. If they join with other companies
in consort; then shall there be a proportion made of the spoil according the
number of adventurers, and other soldiers. Provided always that no
adventurers attempt any enterprise without direction from the General, or lord
Martial.

3 All spoils taken from the enemy belong to the Prince, or State, that pays
the army. And therefore whatsoever any soldier shall take or find, being in
value above ten shillings, the same is to be brought to the General, or his
deputy upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of the double value of the thing
concealed. By this means the General may reward the most valiant and forward
soldiers, and have wherewith to make payment of the soldiers wages.

4 Every man shall have liberty to ransom his prisoner taken in wars at his
own pleasure. But if once he compound with his prisoner, that composition
shall stand, if it be made without fraud. Also if the prisoner be a Prince, or
great man, then the General is to have the prisoner to make what commodity he
can of him for the benefit of his Prince and country; allowing to the taker
either the value of the prisoner, or an honorable reward.

Annotations upon the former laws.
1 [After that the enemy etc.] This has been already enacted in former laws
in other terms. Yet when I consider the disorders herein committed, and
griedines of soldiers; I thought good more specially to prohibit their
disorderly running to spoil: of which I have by diverse examples showed the
inconveniences. Phil. Comm.
Charles Duke of Burgundy having in the taking of Liege made proclamation
against breaking of Churches, killed a certain soldier with his own hands,
for that he took him in the manner doing contrary to his commandment.

2 [Whatsoeuer adventurers etc.] This is to be understood of companies of
adventurers, not of every single person, that shall follow the army upon hope of
spoil: likewise of spoils taken only by their own prowes, and not of
spoils, which the enemy forsakes for fear of the army. Such adventurers we
have few in our wars, and therefore I say the less of them: yet because good
it were they should be there, somewhat I thought good to say of them.

3 [Al spoils taken etc.] Nothing is more equal, nor profitable either for ye
Prince, or the soldier, then yt the spoil be brought to the General. For by
that means the Prince may be eased of some part of his charge, and the
soldiers the better paid and rewarded. Contrariwise nothing is more
unreasonable, the^ that those yt do least, should have most, and those that do
most, should have nothing, as it falls out when the sack of a town is given
to the soldiers. For a coward that enters the last, may percase light upon
the greatest spoil, while those that first entered can not stir for their
hurtes. Therefore did the Romans bring all the spoil to the General for the
most part; and Nomb. 13.
Moses having vanquished the Midianites, after he had the spoil brought to
him; divided it among all the soldiers. Neither does any reason permit, but
that those that watch, and fight should have as good part, as straglers that
run to spoil. And to permit all to go to spoil together were to yield the
victory to the enemy. How hard therefore so ever it seem to keep the soldiers
from spoil; yet do I think they might easily be persuaded, if they were well
dealt withal. and albeit it were a hard point; yet must Captains endeavor to
obtain it.

4 [Euery man shall have etc.] It is an inhumane, and hard part to massacre
such as yield them selves, and throw down their weapons confessing them
selves vanquished, and flying to our mercy. The Lacedaemonians in the first
beginning of the Peloponnesian war, killed as many Athenians as they caught,
which the Athenians likewise practiced upon the Lacedaemonians, to requite
them: but in the end, says Thucid. 2.
Thucidides, this truelty displeased them both. The Spaniards in the beginning
of their wars in the Low countries killed cruelly as many as they took: but
when they saw them selves to be dealt withal in like sort, they repented, and
perceived that such savage cruelty is contrary to the nature of fair wars.
but if it be inhumanity to kill him, that yields, much more is it for men to
kill those in cold blood, whom they have promised to save. Who does not
detest the cruel slaughter of the Prince of Conde after he was taken at
Bassac, and of those Gentlemen that then were taken prisoners, and stayne three
days after in the Generals lodging? Prisoners therefore let them be saved, if
it may be, and that composition that is made with them for their ransom, let
it be performed.

CHAP. XXI. Part 9. Wherein certain orders are contained concerning the
execution of Laws and administration of justice.
1 THat the auctours of disorders may be detected and punishment awarded
accordingly, it shall be lawful for the judge Marshall, or others that have
commission from the General, or lord Martial to do justice, to enquire of
the auctours, and circumstances of offenses committed, by the oaths of such,
and so many as they think convenient, and shall further use all means for
examination, and trial of persons accused, dilated, suspected, or defamed.

2 All causes and controversies arising between Captains, and soldiers or
others within the camp, or towns of garrison, shall be heard and discussed
summarily, and execution done according to military laws without appeal or
relation, unless ye greatness of the cause, or other circumstance require stay,
or deliberation.

3 If any Captain, Gentleman, or soldier declare or make his testament, or
last will of goods he has in camp, or fortress, or which he has gotten in
service, the same shall be enrolled in the judge Martials office, and executed
by those that are named executors: if no will be made, then shall his goods
descend to his next kindred, or wife if he have any. If he have none, or if none
come to demand his goods, within one year: then shall his goods be bestowed
on the poor soldiers of the regiment, or company, the division being made by
two or three deputed to administer them.

4 The Provost Martial shall see all judgments, sentences, and commandments
of the General, high Martial, or judge Martial put in execution.

5 Every soldier, and other person shall assist the Provost Martial, and his
Officers apprehending of malefactors, and executing of justice, upon pain of
imprisonment, neither shall any rescue a prisoner taken, or to be taken for any
capital crime, upon pain of death.

6 No man shall interrupt or trouble the judge Martial or Officers of justice,
doing their office, but upon request made shall be ready to assist them upon
pain of imprisonment.

7 No jailer nor prison keeper shall refuse to keep a prisoner committed to
his charge, or dismiss him being once received without warrant, upon like
pain as he should have suffered, that is so dismissed* or suffered to escape.

8 Wheresoever there is not special order set down in laws already written,
and published, there the ancient course of military discipline shall be
observed, until such time as the General or the Officers appointed for the
administration of justice, cause order to be taken, and by sound of drum to
be published, which shall afterward stand in force.

9 If any that is culpable of any notorious disorder do fly over into England,
hoping thereby to escape the danger of martial laws; the same party upon
request made to the Justices, Sherifes, Majors, Baylifes, or Constables, shall be
sent back to the camp to the Provost martial. And every of them shall do
their endeavor to assist those that are sent for the apprehension of him. But
if request be made for the punishment of him, then shall the same offender be
tried before the Judges, at the next assizes, and by them be punished.

10 Although the wars be ended, yet are those that offend against the laws
of arms and during that time are not punished, to be apprehended, and punished
according to the same either by the Judge Martial, and Provost Martial, whose
commissions are to be extended so far, or by the Judges of the Realm; that
notorious faults do not pass without punishment.

Annotations.

1 [That the authors etc.] If neither state nor house can stand without
justice; much less can any army be governed without it. Most necessary
therefore are the laws of this section: and so much the rather, for that law
is nothing without execution. But because justice cannot be executed unless
offenders be detected, therefore the first care of those that purpose to
proceed orderly, is to find out the authors of offenses, and persons
culpable. This is by examination and oath both of the parties principal, as
far as they are bound by law to answer, and of witnesses also: further
where presumptions are sufficient, and the matter heinous; by rack or other
pain. The administration of justice belongs to the General, and lord
Marshal, or those to whom they shall give authority: where there is no
superior commander, to Captains joining together, as it is evident by our
practice, and also by the examples of the Greeks returning from the voyage
with Cyrus, which (...). Xenoph. exped. Cyr. 5.
appointed certain Captains judges, and gave them authority to determine of
matters, and to punish offenders.

2 [All causes etc.] Whether the causes arise of specialties, or other
contract, or act, if the parties be in camp or garrison, they are there to be
heard and determined.

3 [If any Captain etc.] Many inconveniences do fall out for want of order in
this behalf. The goods of the dead are either lost, or spoiled; yea many poor
men lying sick, and in distress, are hastened to their ends by those that
gape for that they have: the next friends of the dead have nothing, few are
better for any thing they have. which I think would be in part remedied, if
order were taken for the bestowing of their goods. Therefore were it good not
that any new invention, but that old laws herein should take place. By the
laws of the Bona militis qui successorem non habet, deferuntur legioni, no^
admisso fisco. l. siquis. eius. ff. de iniust. rupt. irrit. test. l. 2. Cod. de
haered. decur.
Romans, soldiers goods went to their next kindred: if they had no wife, nor
kindred: yet came they not to the Prince, but were bestowed on the regiment
wherein they served. By the laws of Baltazar Ayala de iur. bell.
Spain, the pay and reward that is due unto soldiers at their death, comes
to their sons. And howsoever practice ouerruleth law, yet in this point the
laws of nations require, that men's last wills be performed. The which that
they may take effect, nothing is more requisite, then that they be enrolled,
and kept in record, and inuentaries of their goods likewise, whether they die
testate, or intestate.

4 [No man shall interrupt etc.] The interrupting of justice is commonly the
beginning of sedition, mutiny, and rebellion. Therefore do the Que ningun
soldado impida a los ministros de iustitia, el exercitar sus officios so pena
de la vida, Sanch, de Land.
Spaniards in their orders, decree such to be punished with death. But because
the interruption may be with words only, or noise without further matter; the
rigor of the law is by discretion to be moderated. If any do interrupt the
ministers of justice doing their office, with force and in tumultuous manner, he
falls within the compass of laws ordained against sedition, and mutiny, and
in that degree is to be punished.

The rest of the laws of this section are plain, and need execution, rather
then further exposition. Therefore what need we seek for knots in rushes, or
look for stumbling blocks in so plain a way? this is the sum of all, that
wars can not be managed without execution of military orders, and observance
of the orderly practice of arms: that makes our forces effectual, that
mainteineth them, encourages them, and makes them victorious, victory makes
an end of wars, and assures us of peace, if it he followed and used. Peace
is the end not only of this labor of mine, but of all their labors that wish
the good of their country. And therefore to obtain peace, we are to desire
him that is Lord of armies, that once we may see our wars artificially, and
iudicially managed. Before which time he that looks for peace with the
Spaniards, unless God do work extraordinarily: he neither understands what
belongs to peace, nor war.

Deo, qui Dominus est exercituum, laus, honor, and gloria in secula seculorum.
Faults escaped.
IN page 17. lin. 16. lege Tatius. page 42. in margin, (...). page 56. in
margin. gouuernarsi. page 61. lin. 7. scriuanoes. page 83. lin. 13. by long
peace. page 88. in margin. arcendi belli. Liu. 21. page 112. lin. 31. a la
legiere. page 117. lin. 17. Purlilia. page 130. lin. 32. their country. page
159. lin. 18. of dust and smoke. page 191. lin. 15. ordonance, or shot. page
231. lin. 5. Sansac. page 238. lin. 5. defer. page 243. lin. 11. Limoges.
page 248. lin. 25. some degenerat English. page 249. lin. 24. Aluarez Sander.
page 255. lin. 9. Brouage. page ead. lin. 15. defense and government. page 264.
line 8. Plimmouth, Dartmouth. page 277. line. 4. disorder. page 284. line 24.
Philippin D^oria. page ead. lin. antepenult. Spaniards.


