AN ANSWER TO A CERTAIN LIBEL SVPPLICATORIE, OR RATHER Diffamatory, and also
to certain Calumnious Articles, and Interrogatories, both printed and
scattered in secret corners, to the slander of the Ecclesiastical state, and
put forth under the name and title of a Petition directed to her Majesty:

Wherein not only the frivolous discourse of the Petitioner is refuted, but
also the accusation against the DISCIPLINARIANS his clyents justified, and the
slanderous cauils at the present government disciphred by Matthew Sutcliffe.

These dreamers defile the flesh, and despise government, and speak evil of
them that are in authority.

Jude verse. 8. Etsi loqui nesciant, tacere tamen non possunt.

Hierom. Neither can they well speak, nor wisely hold their peace. (...) They
pretend and seek the reward of Phinees zeal, but do the works of Zimri.
Imprinted at London by the DEPVTIES of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
QVEENES most excellent MAJESTY. 1592

TO THE HONORABLE SIR EDMUND ANDERSON, LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF HER MAJESTY'S
COURT OF COMMON PLEAS.
ALthough (my good Lord) I cannot without grief remember the dangerous and
hurtful effects of the late stirs which certain factious persons have
made, both in the Church, and common wealth about the new consistoriall
government; yet seeing diseases cannot be well cured, unless they be made
known; nor well known, unless the patient declare them: I could not refrain
from uttering them, being one of that Church and state, that has so long
suffered them, yea though not I only, but all others whom they concern,
should of importune shamefastnes conceal them: yet would they not, being so
great be concealed. It is well known what scandale thereof has grown to
religion, diverse wicked persons are thereby confirmed in their atheism: weak
christians are either driven back to popery, or discouraged from coming
forward to embrace religion: the Seminaries abroad are replenished with many
towardly scholars seeking that abroad, which they despair to find at home:
sects and evil opinions grow up, like noisome weeds in diverse corners; those
that should and would repress them, are by domestical stirs of secret
enemies thuarted and hindered: The Papists take thereby encouragement, and hope
for innovation. De schism. lib. 3. quo bello Catholici indies plures,
constantioresque in fide sunt facti, says he, speaking of his false
Catholics, and Roman perverse taith.
Sanders in his book, as he calls it, of schism, does brag, That through
these contentions the Romanistes daily multiplied among us, and grew more
resolute. they also from these domestical braules made by some against our
Church do draw an argument to harden men's hearts against religion, and the
authors of religion. both In lib de cansis cur catholisis, etc.
Vlenbergue, and Rosse in their seditious treatises against us, do much insist
upon that point: and it is a common objection made by the enemy, yea a matter
not lightly feared of friends.

For learning has lost almost all reputation, while these unlearned and unwise
confistorians declame against learning, and seek no further divinity, then
Caluins and Bezaes and Iunius his glosses and commentaries, and without ground
of learning and arts, as it were with unwashed feet, enter into the Lords
sanctuary. while the fathers and ancient writers of the Church are despised,
and every man takes upon him to interpret scriptures after his own foolish
conceit, and forces them to serve their own changeable humors: they run
into diverse dangerous opinions. I report me to the strange doctrine of
Theologia sacra.
Fenner and his Master T.C. in their new book of Consistoriall divinity. of
the law, gospel, sacraments, and ecclesiastical government, there is scarce
any point delivered without error, but those are faults of a lighter mark in
respect, of points concerning the divine essence, and the Trinity, whereof
they talk strangely. In the Theologia sacra lib. 1.
divine nature they confound essence, and person; and divide the persons of the
Trinity into two members; and make the son together with the holy ghost to
proceed from the father: where all religion says, that he is borne of the
father, which is the characteristicall difference of that person. further they
affirm that the holy ghost proceeds from the father, Ibidem.
without mentioning the son. they teach also that hatred as it is attributed
to God is the essence of God. And while they would commend their fond
preaching, and disgrace the scriptures: John Penrie In his supplicat.
one of the great disciplinarian prophets, either like a dolt, or (if he defend
it) a blasphemous heretic Makes Christ to be the word preached, therein
destroying Christ's eternal essence, and divinity. in The book was offered
to the parliament by common consent of this faction: that it might throughout
England be recented.
their Communion book they have taken out two articles of the Creed; namely
that of Christ's burial, and Christ's descending into hell; and added a new
Article: viz. of their new fantastical discipline: a compendious and short way
to erect their new kingdom. for articles of our Creed are rather to be
believed, then to be disputed of. In their Creed also, they make Christ to be
borne of the virgin according to the flesh, dividing Christ into two parsons
with Nestorius. lastly (for here I mean not to speak of all) they forget A
petition in their brave paraphrase of the Lords prayer. which matters are very
shameful, and yet not to be denied. for their own worthles books convince
them.

While they have refused the old order of preaching, and followed the style of
Bezaes vain, and verbal sermons, whereof I, and many others that have heard,
and read them are witnesses; their expositions be either verbal, or
fantastical, or both. their prayers for the most part are disordered fancies,
yea some times malicious inuectiues, full rather of words then devotion;
conceived without study, and uttered without judgment: which kind of Matthew.
6.7.
verbal babbling Christ condemns as heathenish.

To leave matters of the Church, we see how schools are decayed, and how both
learning and rewards of learning are daily diminished: and all this while
these unworthy fellows first think that all learning is contained in Caluins
institutions, and Bezaes opuscula, and secondly measure every man's merits by
their own foot, and allow no more to others, then they suppose they deserve
themselves, taking away all hope of honor or reward, by making the ignorant
judge of the merit of learning, and talking of certain strange positions of
forty pound pensions. as if forty, or a hundred pounds yearly were the
uttermost reward, that learning could deserve: and every other sort of men
were worthy of most high rewards, and preferment. the number of scholars
decreasing in both the Universities does declare how much men are discouraged;
and examples of this sacrilegious discipline otherwhere received, do show
what further wrack is to be feared hereafter.

The governors both of Church and schools are contemned: I would I might not
say discouraged. they are made marks for licentious youths armed with malice
to shoot their boltes against. the laws are not only contemned, but most
boldly oppugned: yea with such confidencie, that law is now accounted disorder,
and faction and tumult, termed Petition to her Majesty.
reformation: and libellers in evil time called reformers. what rests for
them to work, but that al wise, and learned men being put from government, the
seely sots which these call elders, and certain famous authors of popular
faction should be placed in the highest offices, or else that laws being not
executed, or Judges crossed in executing of justice, the contumacious might
live as they list: wherein they seek nothing, but that either the forreyne
enemy may oppress us, or else inward tumult, and disorder consume us.

But I doubt not but her Majesty, and all those that bear office under her,
will take speedy order. that it is not already taken, many do wonder, some
do complain. but the clemency of her Majesty's times, and her benign nature
does afford us answer. she will not have any complain, that in this case, any
are punished, but such as are obstinate, heinous, and notorious disturbers of
the state. because they were not at the first known for such, she would not
have them punished for such. besides this, the height of the style, and the
loud bragges they made of their discipline, made many believe, they did it
either of simplicity, or zeal, or error. few suspected the greedines of some,
and malice and ambition of others: their notorious hypocrisy could not of long
time be discovered. but now their leudnes is apparent, and their false visage
is dismasked. let them therefore beware, that they abuse not the clemency of
the times, or hope for continuance of undeserved favor.

The vanity of their bragges, and weakness of their cause is evident to all,
that are not either wilfully blinded, or naturally ignorant. All the
demonstrations of their discipline are discifred, and stand confuted. they do
not so much as go about to defend them. their whole plots of false discipline
lie razed. they cannot say a word for them: in this late petition wherein they
had occasion to show their skill, they have not so much as answered one
argument brought by us against them. The defense of Bezamade for his Aldermen
most weak, and simple.
as in a desperate cause they have entreated Beza to say somewhat. wherein we
may see that their forces are spent to the last man. yea so spent, that they
have no hope of recovery. for what says he good man? he tells us a long
tale of his Geneuian devises, hut neither does he answer our arguments, nor
brings scripture, fathers, or reason for his cause. unless we believe him
on his bare word, the controversy is at an end. call you this answering? this
is rather the plain overthrow of his cause. for while he went about to
answer, he has confirmed our cause saying nothing either for himself, or
against us, but what he in his old age dreameth. where was T.C. that valiant
champion of discipline all this while? where was W. Tr. W. Chapter D. Sp. could not
one of them speak for their cause, but they must send to Geneua for a speaker?
it is too great, and notable a confession of the weakness of their cause.

As for him, or (that I mistake not) them that made the petition lately
printed, and pretended to be presented to her Majesty on the behalf of the
Puritans; they do not deserve the name of speakers: unless it be among
Puritans; where every one that can prate, is said to speak. For what say they
for their cause? their only reason is, because Calvin, Beza, Daneus,
Carpentier, Golart, Perot, Tauergues, Pollan, Sneccan, and a number of other
authors (of whose names and gestes we should never have heard, if these me^ had
not in this cause brought their names to light) do speak somewhat for their
consistory, that therefore we are to like of it. A goodly reason: yet such a
one, as I think they will not admit against their discipline. For albeit
Master R. M.B.M.G. M.A. M.H. M.D. M.W. and infinite other learned, and good
preachers among us, (yea such, as one of them is to be vaed against many of
these ignorant and presumptuous disciplinarians) do like of the present
government: yet are they not therewith satisfied. nay, albeit all the ancient
Fathers, and acts of Counsels do like of the authority and government of
Bishops: yet are these fellows still contending against it. That the same was
established by most learned and godly men, that in Q. Mary's time gave their
lives for the testimony of the truth, they little weigh: nay, they neither
care for them, nor their authority.

With what face then can they allege Golart, Pollan, Sneccan, and a number of
birds of like feather, and men neither wise nor learned, nor that have ground
of antiquity or reason; seeing they renounce not only the authority of our
men more learned then they, but of our Martyrs more holy men then they: yea and
all the writings of the Fathers, and acts of Counsels speaking of the
authority and state of Bishops, and such a government as we have? In times
past they were wont to tell us of certain laws established by God himself;
and made vante, that they would prove their discipline out of Gods word. Why
then are they now mute? why are not these laws, and this word brought forth?
why are they silent in bringing forth these mighty reasons? when all is come
to all, must we rest on Golart, Pollan, Tauergues and Sneccans, and three or
four odd compagnions idle conceits? there can nothing be devised more absurd,
nor senseless.

Therefore having nothing to say in defense of their cause, now in a desperate
rage they begin to revel not only at Bishops, but also at Laws and Judges,
and the ordinary trials of this Realm. The drift of the petition is to show,
that John Vdall was wrongfully condemned. they insinuate therein, that the
Judges were either corrupted, or blinded, and that the evidence was wrested.
They say in plain terms, that Judges have no skill to deal with such
fellows as John Vdall: another kind of man percase, then he is taken to be.
Is he trow you any of Hackets or Coppingers consortes? to bring Bishops into
hatred, they have after their petition collected diverse Articles, and by them
and by certain calumnious interrogatories have gone about to bring them in
disgrace with the multitude: that if they cannot have their desire of their
celestial consistory; they may be yet revenged of such, as they take to be
the hinderers of their purposes.

Whose malice to encounter, as before I have answered their cauils against the
ecclesiastical government of our Church to the utter disgrace of the
Consistory: so now having other occasions to print a discourse against
Bellarmine, and foreign adversaries of our Church, I have thought good to
recreate my self with this more easy labor, and to answer their cauils at
our proceedings in law, together with such authorities as they bring for the
proof of their consistory, to the final discovery of their unbridled
malice: that all seeing the nakedness of their cause may join together to
extirpate the relics of those, that have been causers of these stirs.

Against this my purpose, I do understand, that diverse exceptions are taken.
First, those that favor the consistoriall discipline, do say I withstand a
noble work of reformation; and therefore cannot like of my doings. but unto
these this whole treatise shall make answer: for thereby it shall appear,
that their whole course tends rather to confusion, and disorder of Church and
state, then to reformation of either: and therefore seeing they do declare
themselves open enemies both unto the present state, and to me in this cause, I
do not regard what they like, or dislike. no doubt, but that open enemies will
like that best, which for the State is worst, and greatly praise that, which
tends to the hurt thereof.

Others there are, that condemn all those discourses, that are written of both
sides concerning this argument, which albeit they would seem to be friends:
yet in deed are enemies, as well as the other. For no more is he an enemy
that oppugneth us in plain field, then he that trecherously seeks to
discourage such as are forward in mainteining the State at home. and albeit
they would color their malice with pretense of detestation of contention among
friends: yet do they us wrong, to account them that oppugn the state,
friends; or attribute the cause of contention to us, that only defend the
State against contentious, and malcontent persons, such as would ruinate the
same. for not those that defend, but those that begin the braule are
contentious. Were it not think you a ridiculous thing for a man to say, that
valiant men that fight for their country, are contentious; and a point of
treachery to discourage them? why then should not the like be thought of those
that condemn them that write in defense of the present government, of
religion, and learning, in like degree, as if they had writ against the same?
These men are sorry that any should stop the breach against such, as seek to
enter to make spoil, and therefore, as secret enemies, or weak persons, that
neither understand matters of State, nor reason, are to be contemned, if not
reproved.

A last sort there is, that percase mislike the sharpness of my style. but
they must consider, that in this discourse I deal not against men of learning,
or gravity, or such as desire to learn, or find out truth: but against
ignorant, wilful, and seditious Libellers, that seek partly by falsehood, and
partly by disgrace of some bad persons unworthy of their places to discredit
the whole ecclesiastical state: against whom no sharpness of style can be
sufficient. but I did respect rather what became me to speak, then what they
deserved to hear.

This discourse I present to your Lordship, a man well acquainted with the
humors of the men, and weakness of their cause, and a Judge most skillful in
law. Unto whom should we seek for resolution in law, and redress of wrong,
rather then to him that bears so honorable a charge in matters of Justice?
under your name I would it should come to the hands, and view of all other
reverend Judges, learned Lawyers, and well affected subjects. We desire
nothing more, then that matters may be examined according to justice, and
doubt not, but if that may be obtained, that the controversy will be ended,
and the calumnious mouths of factious persons stopped. for seeing the
platformers have neither support of truth, nor law; what man will doubt, but
that they are to be repressed as well by Justice, as by disputation and
discourse?

That is the means to end all our complaynts, the remedy of our common
griefs, if the perturbers of our State at home were first calmed, I would not
doubt, but foreign adversaries would soon be danted, and the minds of
friends united, to the joy of all that love the truth of Gods religion, and
seek the long continuance of her Majesty's peaceable reign, and the
flourishing state of the Church.

Accept therefore I beseech you, my good Lord, this my good will, which I
testify unto you in this Treatise. Due it is to you, being so forward and
upright in matters of Justice, and was expected at my hands being specially
touched in the petition which I answer, I make your Lordship and all the
learned, yea all indifferent men judges. Judge therefore according to justice
and truth. There is no reason I should require favor in this cause, further
then my simple skill, and insufficient handling of matters for want of time,
and being oppressed with other business shall require favor.

The Lord send peace to his Church, and heap upon you, and all others that
love his truth, all heavenly graces, that by your means enjoying the
benefits of true religion, justice and peace, we may consent in one truth,
and jointly in his holy Church glorify Christ Jesus the Prince of peace.

In London the 20 of December. Your Lordships in all duty, and hearty
affection, MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

The Preface wherein both the argument of the discourse ensuing is delivered,
and certain general faults of the petition, touched.
I Had once well hoped, that either the authority of the Magistrate could have
commanded, or the terror of the common enemy, that so violently does assail
the whole Church at this time, would have enforced the contentious to make an
end of their braules: and if neither reverence of superiors, nor respect of
common profit could put them to silence; yet did I imagine, seeing they have
nothing to say, that discretion, and common sense would make them to hold their
peace. how much my expectation was deceived this petition which I have here
undertaken to answer, does declare. for without respect to laws, or common
profit, yea or common reason, the author thereof has put forth himself to
speak. a man as you shall see without reverence to superiors, or conscience in
reporting of laws, or iudgementin matters divine or humane, and most unable to
speak, or write in this, or other argument.

To go no further, this his petition shall make proof of my words. for
neither is there art in his style, nor wit, or sharpness in his arguments,
nor is there any decency observed in the discourse: nor does the treatise
agree with the title, nor the parts thereof with themselves. the style is like
John Bells song of Couentrie, the sentences hang together like lenten deames:
first, he kneeleth on his knee, then asks pardon, afterward tells of all
good subjects, how they desire peace (and yet notwithstanding he tells of
many that increase contention,) then he talks of writing of books, of
general counsels, and a new kind of disputing by writing: matters that
neither have coherence among themselves, nor with his general purpose. having
made this absurd entrance, he proceeds more absurdly. his arguments are all
drawn from authority, of late writers: a weak kind of reasoning, and good
for nothing: yet as if he had said very much stoutely does he revel at
Bishops, Judges, laws; and quarrelth against the state: afterward he
gathers certain notes of his own discipline, which unless you receive of
his bare word, you stop all his glorious proceeding: last of all he lays
down certain articles, and interrogatories. It should seem he has been
either a petty fogger in law, or a clerk in some office: or has been
furnished with these matters by some odd clerk, or petie fogger. nothing is
more simple, nor clerkely, nor worse beseeming men of learning. there is in his
writing no good course of words, no good frame of sentences, no sufficient
proofs, no order nor sequence of parts.

His arguments yet are worse then his style. to prove the consistory and his
new conceits of discipline, he alleges first, that the government of Bishops
is not so exquisite, but that somewhat may be amended. as if it followed
because men do not their duties, or because there are imperfections in men,
and in proceedings, or want of some law: that the state were to be ouerturned,
and a new uncouth and unruly government by Churchaldermen to be embraced: or
else, as if a man should say, we were to be governed by the laws of Turks or
Jews, because of the faults of the common laws. nay rather let laws stand,
and such Turkish and barbarous conceits of general innovation be corrected,
and faults of laws amended.

Secondly he brings in a pack of authorities against Romish bishops: as if
either the ancient Bishops of Rome, or the late Bishops that preach the
Gospel, were to be measured by the wickedness, and tyranny of the late Romish
Bishops: or government were to be taken away, because it has been abused.
thirdly he produces the opinions of Calvin, Beza, and a pack of others: most
of them unlearned and unknown, as if it were reason to follow them against all
antiquity; or as if the government of the Church stood upon opinion, not upon
scripture, and ancient laws, and customs. Before times these fellows told us
of a discipline commanded in scriptures; this fellow tells us of certain
fancies of Calvin, Beza, and certain obscure authors newly brought out of
corners into light. and yet can he not show, that any of these whom he has
alleged, do in all points consent with our platformers. to prove that his
partisans offend not against law, he alleges diverse of their opinions: as if
it were an excuse for heretics to say, they believe well in some few points.
what punishment then do they deserve that offend both in the opinions alleged,
and diverse others concealed? finally to prove that his fellows offending
against law, are not to be punished, he shows that Bishops also offend
against Law: as if the offense of one, were to be an excuse for another, or as
if a man offend in any small point of law, and that not of malice, it were
lawful for these fellows to overthrow all laws, and that of selfewill, and
malicious purpose.

There is no decorum observed in the whole discourse, the petition is supposed
to be made by the author kneeling before her Majesty. yet does he often
speak to others, and quarrel and dispute with those that are absent, as if a
man making his petition to her Majesty, should suddenly rise up, and quarrel
with by standers. which not only is a point of absurdity, but of the authors
old frenzy.

Secondly what is more unseemly, then before the chief governor to plead as
does the petitioner; that all his government is lewd, and antichristian, and
that his laws are deuoyde of reason, and that judgments given are unjust,
and ought to be reuersed, and most odiously to rail on the state and
governors?

Thirdly seeing this petition is directed to her Majesty, to what end is the
same put in print? belike the man's purpose is, that so much as the Queen by
wisdom shall deny, the people by force, and fury shall establish. which in
deed is his drift. for the same was never presented to her Majesty, but only
to the people.

Fourthly, nothing is more absurd, then to handle matters of controversy by
way of supplication. seeing he disputes, he should rather have come in
schools, then in court; and before lawyers, then courtiers.

Lastly a very indecent thing it seems to me, that a man not conversant in
study of divinity should teach divines, that a disordered companion should
controllgouernors, and laws: that a man lately distracted of his wit should
teach law and order, neither knowing order, nor law. which course if it may be
suffered: it is but folly to study divinity or law, or to maintain
government; and a bad encouragement for judges to do justice, seeing every
ignorant and disordered companion shall take on him to control them and to teach
law, and to govern as it were by revelation, inspiration, and fancy. what
should be the cause that this base fellow should come forth, I know not:
unless this be it, that all that were wise foreseeing and eschewing the
danger, this bedlem writer that neither foresawe, nor saw any thing, being
armed with diverse collections of others, should say something, if for nothing
else, yet to make show, that they can say somewhat.

The treatise answers not to the title. for where he promises therein to
deliver a means how to compound matters; in the whole treatise he does with
all his force endeavor to enkindle wars, he rayleth on goueruours and laws,
controlleth judges, and goes about to reuerse judgments, and would if he
could; overthrow all the ecclesiastical state: which sauoureth rather of a
humor to fight, then to compound. and yet is not he the man that must be the
leader of these consistoriall warriors, being but a ragazzo fit for nothing
but to carry baggage.

In this his book he fights no more against us, then against himself. he
says he will neither speak to overthrow Bishops, nor to erect consistories:
yet does he his uttermost malice against Bishops, and speaks what he can for
Consistories: and yet nothing to purpose. he professes he knows not
whether part has better ground, wherein like a simple fellow, he not only
confesses he speaks of matters he understands not, but also contrarieth
himself in denying that he professes. in the very first entrance he says,
that all her Majesty's loving subjects, that love religion, honor her
Majesty, and do desire the good of the Realm, do heartily bewail the
contention of our Church: wherein he pronounces sentence against himself, and
his consortes, as neither loving ber Majesty, religion nor the state. for
seeking to inflame this contention by scurrilous libels, and interrogatories,
how can it be surmised, that they do bewail, this contention? do men
bewail, that which they do? or do men seek peace, that against good men
throw out their bolts, even bitter and slanderous words?

Besides the former, the libeller has also these faults. most foully he
abuses scriptures: most shamefully he alleges authors, most ignorantly he
talks of law, and maliciously reuelleth at the ecclesiastical state. in the
first page he abuses three places of scripture. the Proverb. 31.
wise man says, open thy mouth for the dumb etc. by this place he would
justify his babbling in this treatise. but nothing is more impertinent to his
purpose, then this sentence. for the wise man would have innocents, that cannot
speak for themselves defended by order, and justice, by such as can speak.
neither may we think, that it was his meaning, that every seditious person
should gape and rail against Laws and Governors for doing justice, or that
malefactors should be defended against law, and judges. how can then this
place agree to his purpose, seeing those men whom the libeller defends are
not innocents (for they were condemned for felony, and tried according to the
laws of England) neither were they mute, when they reuelled against
governors, nor was John Vdall condemned, but for speaking too much: nor is
this busy behavior of this companion any way allowed, nor sedition or
libelling priutledged?

The Prophet says further, Psalm. 115.
that because he believed: therefore he spoke. which the libeller turns
answer, and would draw to this his treatise. but it fitteth not. for this
petition is no answer, but rather a railing libell, or challenge, neither
proceeds it of faith, but of a foolish disordered conceit of a distempered
brain, not yet well seasoned, since the authors last bedlem fits. and if this
be his belief, then is his faith built upon fancy, and upon that which
himself confesses, he knows not.

Neither does it appertain to his purpose, that the Prophet says, that for
Sions sake he will not hold his peace. for it is not the cause of Sion, Isai.
62.
nor any good cause, but sedition, faction, fancy, conceit, and opinion, that
by him is here defended: and that to the great scandale of all the watchmen of
Sion, yea of althat pray for the peace of Jerusalem. in the end of his articles
against Bishops, as if he were ravished in an ecstasie he exclameth: how long
Lord holy and true? and says, come Lord Jesus. which sentences make much
against him. for all good men desire, that God would try the cause and that he
in judgment would visit the perturbers of this Church, which if once it shall
please him to determine to do, then shall he and such vipers as he, that
fret the bowels of the Church which nourishes them, be discovered, punished,
and rooted out. these may serve you for a taste. the rest of his forgeries, and
forcing of authors shall be touched, as they shall offer themselves in their
place.

Neither may we think, that he that makes so little conscience to abuse, or
dally with the scriptures of God, has used more religion in handling the
writings of men. for example; to prove the aldermen, of his Church, and their
proceedings, he has alleged Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, and many others
that are contrary to these men in their discipline, and never knew such
aldermen, as he speaks of. neither does Calvin, nor Beza join with him in
his several points of discipline. therefore does he allege them in gross,
and abuses his readers with a show of names. the like abuse shall appear in
his quotations of law, which he by forging and lying makes to speak contrary
to law.

Little does he understand of law, he neither knows what proceeding of
office means, nor what is law in ministering of oaths, against which he
argues: neither any one point of common, civil, or Canon law, of which he
so much stands. but whatsoever his knowledge is in law, his malice in
railing against the state is singular: all which points as they are touched
here in a generality, so hereafter shall be more particularly laid open, and
most of his misallegations, falsifications, malicious slanders, weak proofs,
and proceedings answered, not that either the author, whose insufficiency is
notorious, nor the discourse, the weakness whereof is too too pitiful,
deserves any answer: but least that the simplicity of the ignorant, who is
easily misled with these great shows might be abused, or justice be by
opinions controlled. herein also all men may understand the weakness of the
cause of the Consistory, the boldness, malice, and fashood of the
Consistorians, and such as contend for it, and how fit it were, that such as
are altogether incapable of reason, should be governed, if not enforced by
laws.

The author whatsoever he pretends for color, proposes to himself to prove
diverse things: First, that the Ecclesiastical government of the Church of
England is to be changed. for that does he mean by reformed. Secondly, That an
Eldership should be established among us, as being a government used in the
ancient Church, and commanded to be continued in all ages. and to the end that
his reasons may be weighed, he craves disputation by advised writing. Thirdly,
he mainteineth, that the disciplinarian faction has not offended against the
statute of 23. Eliz. c. 2, and that John Vdal was unjustly condemned. Fourthly,
he would declare, That the consistoriall patrons are unjustly slaundered with
desire of innovation, and their doctrine with disloyalty or disorder, and
endeuoreth to excuse himself for not declaring himself, nor setting his name
to his petition.

Lastly, by diverse Articles, and questions, he goes about to bring the
Ecclesiastical state into envy and hatred; That while men are busy in
examining their faults, his clients of the new disguised discipline may escape
in the dark, and without danger undermine the estate.

To meet therefore with his malice, and to encounter him in all his turns, I
do purpose by Gods grace to show; First, that the government of the Church
of England is most conformable to the practice of the government, both under
the law, and the gospel, and has testimony of scriptures, confirmation of
antiquity, and was never gainesaid, but of late days, when factious
companions, and clouters, and tinkers, and merchants, and men of occcupatio^
aspired to Church government; and that the cauils and proofs brought by the
petitioner against it, are fond and foolish:

Secondly, that the novelty, vanity, injustice, and inconveniences of the new
government are such, as cannot stand with any good, or well ordered state,
wherein also the insufficient pleading of the petitioner for the Consistory
shall be refuted: thirdly, that John Vdall was justly condemned, and that the
platformers are justly charged not only with breach of diverse laws, very
penal, but also with sedition and faction; and therefore are most mercifully
dealt withal, that they are nether in greater number, nor in other quality
punished; the vain glosses, that are set upon their factes, and opinions shall
be there also wiped away. in the last part of this treatise, such accusations,
as the libellor has brought to disgrace the Ecclesiastical government, and
which he has set down in malicious Articles, and interrogatories shall be
answered; neither do I mean therein to omit any speech, that shall seem any
way pertinent to purpose: being loath, he should say, he was not answered.

Wherein if you see no color, or show of reason for this newfound platformes;
or proof of his accusation: consider then I pray you first, what indignity
has been offered by this libellor to the Church of God, to her Majesty and her
laws, to the Ecclesiastical state, and such as live in obedience of laws:
and secondly what they deserve, that have offered this indignity unto so many
and honorable persons, and brought this scandale into the Church of God. the
common Rescius i^ ministromach.
adversary makes profit of those shameless slanders, which those uncivil,
and unlettered authors of the Admonition have uttered against the Church: the
adversary triumphs to see this contention: disordered companions take
occasion of contumacie, and rebellion: when will the governors use like
diligence, to repress them?

If then you love religion, her Majesty, and the state: you will not suffer
such notorious reuellors at laws and governors: if you be desirous of truth;
you will no more be abused with vain gloses. H. Nicholas has painted his
book with quotations, as full as T.C. he uses the same style, and seems to
have the same erroneous spirit.

He says as well as T.C. that for Sions sake, In euangel. regni.
he will not hold his peace. and yet nether of both speaks to purpose, nor
to the edifying, but rather the pulling down of Gods Church. and therefore
seeing both the authors and their dealings have been tried: let them be both
dealt with all, and esteemed according to their deserts.

It may be these fellows looked for answer of her Majesty: and to say sooth,
the Magistrate were most fit to shape aunsweres for such disordered
petitions. but in the mean while it may please them to accept of my answer.
they are no such high persons, but meaner men then her Majesty may answer
them, and reason it is seeing they put their petition in print, they should also
receive a printed answer: and seeing they challenge me, they should hear my
answer. And let them not think, but that howsoever their malice is repressed
by law; their fond assertions and cauils shall be refuted by reason.

That truth may appear; I have done my endeavor. God is my witness, I seek
for nothing but truth and peace. there rosteth then nothing, but that truth
be embraced, and law maintained. for little avails it to know either, if by
faction, and mutiny laws may be broken, and truth oppressed. to make truth
and Justice known, it belonged to us: to defend the same belongs to
Magistrates; to wish the same to all. read therefore and judge, and seek the
maintenance of Justice, and truth, without which neither Church, nor state can
be well governed.

AN ANSWER TO A Certain calumnious Petition, and also to certain Articles,
and Questions of the Consistorian faction.
CAP. I. Wherein is declared, that the authority and state of Bishops, as it
is used in England is lawful: and the Petitioners cauils brought to the
contrary, answered.
Deuteronomy. 17. leuit. 13. exodus 28. nom. 3. and 4.
superintendence of the affairs of the church, and under him 1. Chron. 24. and
25.
diverse heads of their divisions, that things might be done in order. Noe, then
in Sem, then in Abraham, then in Isac and Jacob, afterward in the 12
Patriarchs, which for many years governed their whole families both in matters
divine, and humane. If equality of ministers had been so profitable, no doubt,
God would have used that order in his Church.



Paul did excommunicate 1. Timoth. 1.
Alexander and Hymenaeus: Peter as Beza confesses by the swoorde of
excommunication struck Ananias and Saphyra alone. Beza aduers. Erast.
Paul ordained Timothy and Titus: and Timothy and Titus ordained other
ministers. The Apostle Paul prescribes orders and laws to Timothy and Titus,
and their churches; the populer government which our platformers commend, was
not so much as in time of persecution used.

Saint John writes to the bishop of Ephesus, to the bishop of Smyrna, and
likewise to the several Bishops of other Churches. to them he gives
directions, them he reprehendeth for bearing with the wicked: which if they had
had no authority above other Ministers, had been very unfitting.

Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Antioche, and other famous
Churches. Saint Jerome and diverse other ancient writers testify, that Mark
ruled Alexandria as Bishop, which happened in Saint John's time.

Saint Jerome has a most pregnant place for excommunication, Ieronym. aduers.
vigilant.
where he wondereth that no one Bishop could be found to excommunicate
Vigilantius. and if all the government of the Church was committed to Bishops;
no doubt but that they disposed of these matters also.

chief learned men that then lived, and took pains therein, In histor and
Apologia confess. August.
protested in their public writings, to the intent that all posterity should
know it, that if Bishops would embrace religion, they would most willingly
submit themselves to their episcopal jurisdiction, accompting in most godly,
and expedient for the Church. Melancthon uses many speeches to that purpose,
fearing that if the authority of bishops were rejected, a greater tyranny
would succeed. and Calvin likewise to Sadolete protests, that he misliketh
not Episcopal authority.





These arguments, and others which I have set down, stand unanswered. that
which is said against bishops, may be most easily, and has often been
answered: neither does this unlettered fellow bring either new arguments, or
confirm the old. nay, he leaves all arguments which his fellows have
brought out of scriptures: therein showing good judgment. for in deed it is
absurd to think, that bishops may be overthrown by scriptures, upon which
their authority is built. I wonder with what face after so many proofs
brought in this cause, he durst go about without arguments to overthrow
that, which has such ground upon scriptures, laws, reasons. only for a
show he has brought a number of names of Page 10. and 11.
counsels, fathers, Churches, and late writers: but when the matter shall come
to trial, it shall be found, that they do all forsake him in this cause: and
that both they, and infinite more then these speak against him. I answer
therefore first generally, that it is no good argument that in this cause is
drawn from Daneau, Tauergues, Perot, Chauneton, Carpentier, or other of their
faction. Secondly that these counsels, and fathers, and Churches, and learned
men which he quoteth, have not oppugned Bishops, or their government.

The canons of the Apostles are placed in forefront of this array against
Bishops, Can. 6. etc. 80.
not that they speak against the^, but for that it pleases the petitioner to
make some show in the entrance of his matter, of apostolical authority. in
the sixth Canon there is no mention made of Episcopal jurisdiction: so that it
may appear that he looked not on the place. It may be, he meant the seventh
Canon (for there both Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are forbidden to meddle
with worldly affairs) and in the 80 Canon, Bishops and Priests are charged,
not to intrude themselves into public charges. But neither place makes one
word against the superiority of Bishops over Ministers, nor their authority
in ordination; excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical matters, for which
they are alleged. nay, contrariwise, they give ordination Can. 2. and 36
of Ministers to Bishops, and plainly distinguish c. 1. and 2. and 40.
Bishops, and priests, giving to Bishops both superiority over priests, and
also the c. 40. and 41.
disposing of the affairs of the Church. that Bishops in the primitive Church
were excluded from civil charges, the reason was, for that the Emperors were
yet heathen: and therefore without danger of impiety, none could deal in
office under them and in those times, the offices about collection of the
Emperors rentes were ff. de decurionib.
burdensome, and dishonorable. and therefore no marvel if Bishops might not
bear them: last of all, they were subject to accomptes. yet howsoever it was,
the Canons forbid not Bishops to sustain a charge imposed upon them, but
ambitiously to seek such charges. generally, seculer matters were not
forbidden Bishops, as may appear in the same Canons. c. 41.
so that neither do these places make against our bishops under Christian
princes in common wealths, wherein they are subjects, as well as others; and
by their authority help their calling, yea and the whole ministry under
them, and no way hurt it: neither do they fit the petitionners purpose. For
Bishops by their episcopal office do claim no civil authority. nor does it
follow, because Bishops may not bear certain civil offices, that therefore
they are not to exercise episcopal authority: as the petitionner does
insinuate.

Next to the Apostles Canons, as they are called, he cites the 6 counsel of
Carthage. 19. c. but there do not appear any Canons to have been made in that
counsel, so wide is the man from his mark. commonly his fellows use to
allege the 4 counsel, and 18, and 19 Canon: yet do not these canons fit
their turn. for nothing is there spoken against the office of Bishops either
in ordination, or contentious jurisdiction: only Bishops are forbidden to
take on them the execution of testaments (which notwithstanding has Council.
Chalced. c. 3.
exceptions) and to be common quarrellers in law: which no man thinks
convenient. neither canon makes any thing to the purpose. were not this man
without discretion he would never allege this counsel against Bishops, that
so c. 3.27 31.55.68.
diversely confirms the authority of them, and condemns such c. 57 and 67.
libellers, and raylors as the authors of this petition.

Neither does the counsel of Chalcedon decree any thing against the state of
Bishops. the Canons alleged only forbid them, as the puritan Ministers,
whereof some are grasiers, some fermers, some malsters, do use to do, to hire
grounds, which paid rent and tribute to the Emperor; or to deal in civil
affairs, or warfare; least thereby they should neglect their ministry. a
pregnant place against diverse of these counterfeit hypocrites; that shaking of
their Ministry, and disdeining the base account of it, trade in usury,
merchandise, fermes, and other such like occupations, giving over themselves to
serve mammon. This counsel makes nothing for the cause of Puritans; for it
establishes the authority of Bishops and Archbishops, and condemns such
malicious and factious persons, as they are, that by c. 17.
calumnious accusations conspire the hurt, or disgrace of their bishops.

The Petitioner does also allege the 6 counsel of Constantinople: yet do we
not in the books of counsels find any of that number; nor in any counsel
holden at Constantinople any thing against the authority, or dignity of
bishops: it may be he mistook the 6 counsel of Constantinople for the 6
synod: yet does not that speak against bishops, but rather enacteth diverse
Synod. 6. ca. 9. and 10.
cannons against usury; a practice which Th. Cartw. and W. Chapter and others
might do well not to use: and for the dignity of bishops many Synod. 6. c.
31. and 36. and 37.
places.

To let us further understand his ignorance, he quoteth the 3 counsel of
Turon, whereas there were never but two there, and in neither of them any word
sounding against the authority of bishops. perhaps he meant by names of
counsels to face down simple men: or thinks it no sin for the glory of the
consistory to lie. I beseech him to show us where this 3 counsel of Turon may
be found, and then he shall have further answer.

Beside the new third counsel of Turon, he has devised a new counsel also of
Macra: which course if he hold on, I perceive we shall have a new book of
counsels, to frame a new consistory withal. to put the blame from himself, he
puts it on Illyricus: as true a quoter of textes almost, as ever was Th.
Cartwr. his scholar. but suppose that which Catal. test. veritat. page 121.
Illyricus has of this counsel were true; yet can not the words of the
counsel be interpreted against bishops. for suppose that a bishop may not be a
King, or Prince, and that the callings be distinct: yet may he have episcopal
jurisdiction, against which that counsel is alleged.

To help his array of counsels, he brings in a supply of Fathers. but very
unlike it is, that they should speak against counsels, being diverse of them
chief doers in diverse counsels; and therefore let him take heed least while
he mustereth the names of Fathers against bishops, the men themselves do not
all fight against him. That Cyprian is contrary to his allegation, it is
notorious: for he establishes the dignity of bishops, and utterly ruinateth
the cause of the new come gentlemen called Church-aldermen. He subiecteth the
whole Lib. 1. ep. 3.
brotherhoode to the bishop; and says, that the same obedience is according to
the commandments of God. The same authority is confirmed by the letters of
the clergy of Rome to Cyprian. Post Fabiani Lib. 2. ep. 7.
excessum (say they) non est constitutus a nobis episcopus, qui omnia ista
moderetur. He gives to bishops the Lib. 3. ep. 9.
succession of the Apostles; and from no Lib. 4. ep. 9. and lib. 1. ep. 3.
other root does he suppose heresies and schisms to spring, then from
contempt of the authority of Bishops. So shameless is this Libeller to
allege Cyprian against bishops, that in the places above named, yea, and in
the Lib. 3. ep. 10.
places by him quoted does confirm their authority. For albeit Cyprian does
say, that from his first entrance into his charge he had determined to do
nothing, but by the consent of the people, and counsel of his Clergy: yet
does it not make against his superiority: nay it confirms it rather. For
with us Bishops may do nothing without law, which is a most certain consent:
nay, good Princes rule by counsel and Laws, and yet they will not deny, but
that Princes in all places, and Bishops with us have a superior authority
over those that are committed to them. And Cyprian in that self same Epistle
writing to the priests and Deacons uses these words, I Hortor, and mando.
exhort and command: yea further, he prescribed, what was to be done both
concerning the poor, and confessors: and Vice mea fungamini circagerenda, quae
religiosa administratio deposcit.
made a deputation to others, that were to govern in his absence: as much, or
rather more then bishops may with us take upon them to do. Likewise in the 14
Epistle of his third book alleged also against bishops, there are found
manifest arguments for their authority. For he reprehendeth the presumption
of certain Ministers too rash in reconciling those that had fallen, and
declares unto them, that the Bishop is Ep. 14. episcopus ipsis praepositus.
set over them, and that their place is under the bishop, of which Loci sui
immemores.
they were unmindful: and that the bishops duty was to Vt instructi a
praepositis faciant omnia.
instruct them, and their duty to obey him. It is evident, that this author
was not much acquainted with Cyprian, that alleges him thus contrary to his
meaning, and which is most childish and absurd, quoteth the 27 epistle of
Cyprians 3 book, where there are only 15 epistles there.

In Lib. 1. ep. 9.
another place Cyprian reprehendeth a certain minister being appointed gardein
to orphans, and executor of a testament. but how the same may be drawn to make
against the estate of bishops, I understand not: for bishops among us desire no
such matter as that which Cyprian condemns: neither came it ever in Cyprians
meaning to condemn the authority of Bishops, as it is used in this Realm. If
he speak against any, it is especially against T. C. for albeit he be a
Minister, as he says himself, yet refused he not the execution of his brother
Stubbes his will, no nor refuses the government of his Hospital: and
therefore this fellow seems unwise thus deeply to lanch his dear brother
T.C. whose purchases and purloynings he has taken on him to defend; where in
the mean while the state of Bishops, for any thing Cyprian says, stands
inviolable, nay, in the same place their jurisdiction is confirmed: for Cyprian
being a Bishop, takes on him to reform Ministers, and gives bishops Episcopi
antecessores nostri censuerunt etc. and sacerdotum decretum.
authority to make ecclesiastical laws: which pearceth the Church-aldermen
that long for superiority, to the very heart. Finally, he takes on him to
punish disorders: then which authority, what can be greater?

Did. 10. c. quonia^ idem.
Gratian also extolleth Bishops above Princes: so far is he from speaking
against Bishops, or their authority. so that to allege Gratian for proof,
is as much as to use corrosiues for pleasant medicines. Neither does it take
away, or diminish the authority, and state of Bishops, that by the Canons
they may not encroche upon the Princes authority in Civil causes: for we
say, that the vocation of Magistracy, and ministry is distinct, and that
Bishops in England do not in respect they are ministers, meddle with Civil
causes, but as they are subjects, and are commanded. Wherein they do not show
themselves busy in encrochments in taking on them charges imposed, but should
show themselves disloyal persons, at least no good subjects, if they should
refuse them, the consistoriall faction contrariwise does encroche both upon
Ecclesiastical and Civil governors, having authority from neither; and
intrude themselves where no man sends for them, or admits them.

After Cyprian, Tertullians De ieiunio.
book of fasting is by force drawn in by the imperious Consistorials for
evidence against Bishops: which I cannot but wonder at, seeing they condemn
both fasting in Lent, and other fasts which he allows, and the degree and
state of bishops, which he commends in his book Lib. de baptism.
of baptism, where he gives the chiefetie, and praerogatiue of Priesthood
to Bishops, expelling out the impudent Aldermen that now are crept in, I
know not by what strange concetie, into Churchgouerment. In the book of
fasting there is not so much as the office of bishops mentioned; much less
any speech against them. there is order taken for their allowance, which the
sacrilegious consistorials, that have ruinated the Church in all places where
they come do deny them. In the same place Tertullian does construe the place
1. Timoth. 5.17. against these men: for he only understands by Elders that
rule well, Bishops and Priests, and not these new Aldermen, which albeit they
be mute in pulpits, yet are they mouthy enough in Consistories.

The opinion of Augustine concerning the estate of bishops is sufficiently
known: for he thrusts them among heretics, that deny their superiority.
In which croude let this Libeller, and his fellow T. C. go pack out of the
Church together, with Aerius their ringleader, and an old master of an
hospital, and a famous heretic. himself was also a bishop, and governed his
clergy and church with as great power, as now do our bishops: neither does
he in either of the places De opere monach. c. 16. and de ciuit. der lib. 19.
c. 19.
quoted say any thing against them. He condemns not the state of bishops,
but their worldliness: and not the dignity of bishops, but such as sought
honor, and would not endure labor: which negligence we do not defend in
any. neither was he so scrupulous in distinguishing civil, and ecclesiastiall
causes, as these seem to be. for in his book de opere Monachorum alleged by
this Petitioner, he does declare that he dealt himself in civil causes,
notwithstanding he was a bishop; and that he hoped God would reward him for it.

Neither is there in In Tit. and ad Ocean.
Hieroms whole works any word sounding to the disgrace of bishops. Hierome
makes the terms of Bishops and Priests common in the Apostles time; but that
bishops and priests should now be equal in power and dignity, he never
concluded: nay he says, that the superiority of bishops is an Apostolical
Ep. 85.
tradition, and borrowed of the analogy betwixt the Law and the Gospel, and
confesses that it began in the Apostles time: accordingly he uses Damasus
Bishop of Rome, and all bishops with great respect.

The authority and credit of Ambrose both with the Emperor, and people, and
his jurisdiction in ecclesiastical causes was far greater, then that which
our Bishops have. Is it then think you likely, that a bishop would speak
against Bishops? nay, he is said himself, to have exercised the Church
censures against the Emperor, and gives ordination to Bishops, and calls
them the Apostles successors.

The place of Ambrose commonly alleged Ep. 33.
against Bishops civil jurisdiction makes nothing against the state of
Bishops: for in England no Bishop has civil jurisdiction, as he is a Bishop,
but as he has it by commission. which to refuse were not only a weakening,
but a denial of loyalty: neither does Ambrose forbid any to take civil
jurisdiction, but to follow worldly cares, and to give over their ministry,
and as diverse of this faction have done, to throw off the robes of the
ministry, and to run in their lether Ierkins after worldly gain and
pleasure. That Ambrose esteemed highly the office of bishops, is apparent: for
he In ephesians 4.
says, that those that are now called bishops, succeed in the charge, and
place of government of the Apostles.

Chrysostom takes to himself the power of excommunication: yields to
bishops the power of ordeining In 1. Tim 4. and epist. Paul. ad Philip. and
homil. ad pop. Antioch.
ministers, over whom he gives them authority: himself was a bishop of great
power and authority: he condemns certain heretics, which would not yield
the due titles to bishops, but called them only In Psalm. 13. reuerentia tua,
dignitas tua, and such like terms condemned by Chrysostom.
reverend and worshipful, even like to the platformers. what shame then have
these fellows, that blush not to make either so holy a bishop contrary to
himself, or manifestly to belie him, and slander him? wherefore let the words
of Chrysostem against bishops be brought forth if he bring them not, Hom. 2.
in epist. ad Phil.
every man will take him for a plain false coyner of authorities, which now
is in part apparent. he says that the names of bishops and priests were all
one: but that all bishops and priests should have equal authority, he says
not, nor ever thought.

That Gregory the great is alleged against bishops, is a matter most
miraculous, for in his time the bishops of Rome were come to extraordinary
greatness, and incroched not only upon their neighbors, but also upon most
christian Churches: so far was he from conde^ning the state of bishops. in the
preface to his dialogues, if they be his, (as is most unlike) he reprehendeth
those that waxed old in worldly desires: which neither in bishops, nor other is
to be allowed against episcopal authority he says nothing: the power of
bishops over priests every wherein his epistles he commends.

The quotation out of Hillary makes nothing to the purpole. he reprehendeth
Constantius the Emperor for advancing bishops above the degree of bishops: but
that makes for bishops, and not against them. for he disaloweth not the
state, but the Emperors too much forwardness in giving Arrian bishops too much
honor and credit.

The Libeller has a strange sight in Ep. 67.
Synesius, if he think that he spoke any thing against bishops. percase he had
on his Those dreams that pass through horny doors, as Homer feigneth, are
untrue: for horn is not trans. parent.
horn spectacles when he read them; without such sight nothing is to be found
in Synesius against our cause. If he would have made any conclusion out of him,
he would have acknowledged so much him self.

He alleges with like judgment Nazianzen his oration aduersus Maximum: yet in
all his works is there not any such oration found. there is an oration of such
matters, as Gregory did against Maximus, but concerning the superiority of
bishops, there is nothing therein, least of all any thing against bishops:
neither is it like, he would speak against bishops, himself being a bishop,
and alowing ye state of bishops. he governed with authority: his Cum
auctoritate hic praesidemus, and haec multis ex vobis tamquam lege sancimus.
Nazianz. in orat. de modest. in disputat. seruanda.
words were observed, as laws in the church: he says, Ibidem.
there is order while bishops command, and others are ruled. of such as these
fellows are, that will neither observe order nor rule, he complains, and
commends yt which they despise. only he speaks against ambitious seeking
the greatest bishoprics, and highest places, wishing that the principality
should be removed, rather then such inco^ueniences admitted. Origene In Esaiam
hom. 6.
gives most ample titles, and authority to bishops, even in the same place
where he is supposed to speak against the^: only he would not have them
insult, nor tyrannise over the people, which the bishops of England neither
do, nor can do according to laws: but the Aldemen of the consistory whose
word is proof, and will law, and against whose wrongs there is no sufficient
remedy by appeal, they do properly tyrannife, yea and oligarchize: and
therefore against such cruel tyrants Origin declaymeth, and we have good cause
to speak.

Bernarde De consid. ad Eugen. lib. 2.
speaks against the Pope for clayming soueraintie in both swords, which no
bishop in England claymeth, neither does any bishop by his episcopal
authority exercise the material swords, as the Pope does: and therefore as
Bernards reasons are good against the Pope: so are they not to be used against
our bishops. neither was it ever Bernards meaning, to condemn the prerogative
of bishops, allowing the same in so many of his epistles and writings, and
commending so highly the bishop of Rome notwithstanding his infinite abuses. he
Sermon. 66. in Cantic. non est mirum si ordinibus ecclesie deirahunt, si mandatis
non obediunt.
bitterly inueigheth against those heretics which for their apish imitation
of the Apostles, called themselves Apostolickes, because they condemned
prelacy; and therefore calls them Stultissimos, and obstinatissimos.

Thus the man, or at least his partakers have sought every corner of the
Fathers, and yet find nothing against the prerogative of bishops. therefore is
he glad to fly to the practice of late churches, and late writers: but the
conclusion which he draws from them is most weak. for admit that in Geneua
and in France, and Flaunders, and other churches they have not bishops of such
quality in all respects as we have, no more have other churches such Elders as
they of Geneua have. it is sufficient, that we have such bishops, as in time
past they had at Jerusalem, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Carthage,
Seuil, and throughout the world, before that the cornercreeping Alderme^ crept
out of the slime of fond men's invention: and that the bishops in reformed
churches of Almayne, have episcopal authority over other ministers in
ordination of ministers, and correction of manners. so that they are to be
blamed, that digress from all antiquity, yea and later churches: not we that
agree with all former times, and the Almayns. for both they, and the Danes,
albeit some of them mislike the names, and most of them have taken away the
livings of bishops: yet retain still their authority and office in their
superintendents, and general superintende^ts; and had done better, if also
they had retained the livings and rewards of learning, and stipends of
ministers. wherefore let the libeller cease to object unto us the Heluetian,
and Dutch, and Danish churches: for they differ farther from the Geneuians,
then from us: and the petitioner himself Page 10.
confesses, that they have authority, though not so much.

Of late writers I know none of name that has condemned our bishops. even the
chief authors of this innouatio^, Calvin, and Beza, as may appear by their
letters which are to be shown, speak every where honorably of them. Zanchus
greatly extolleth that order. only Beza (as some say) has written a foolish
Entitled, The judgment of a learned man beyond the sea.
pelting discourse, wherein he would prove our bishops to proceed of men, as if
himself were a bishop of God. and Daneau in that point consents with him
taking himself also to be a bishop of God. and yet the Geneuians, when
through weakness of body, sickness, and age, he could not execute the
ministry, shut this bishop of God from his living, and forced him through
want to depart out of their City. Bullinger, and Gualter, and diverse learned
men of Suitzerland, and Germany have by letters and writings allowed our
bishops. yea, Histori. confess. August.
Melancthon, Camerarius, and Sturmius wished to God they had such in their
Countries. neither did any of these that are named by the libeller, ever speak
against other, then papisticall bishops. let the world then judge, what
honesty or shame was in this companion, that alleges Luther, Melancthon,
Bucer, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Zanchus, Erastus, Gualter, and Mounster,
against our bishops, whereof some never spoke of them, others never spoke of
them but with reverence, and none against them. and In diverse of his letters to
be showed.
Beza complains of some, that drew his words uttered against popish
bishops, against our bishops. If therefore the libeller do not bring forth some
other places then these he has quoted, there is no cause, but that every man
should take him for a forger of false writings, and an abuser of his reader.
But suppose Beza, or Daneau, or some other of that sort should write their
pleasures in private letters, or in their imperious, and paltrie pamphlets, who
would not be ashamed to oppose these two, or all their headie followers to
Ignatius, Dionysius, Chrysostom, Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome, and all
antiquity: yea to most writers of late times?

And if these men that patronise the consistory which cannot stand with
bishops (for in deed there is no agreement in government betwixt the
rusticall fauni, and the muses: between learned men, and men of occupation,
between clownes and scholars) if these I say do not speak against bishops,
we may not think that bishop Jewel, orbishop Elmar: or bishop Bollingham, or
others that have written in defense of the state, have uttered any thing that
sounds to their disgrace. In his Apology.
Bishop Jewel expressly defends the degree of bishops, above priests: and
good reason. for it is the public doctrine of this Church, and those that go
against it, make this Church to revoke a part of their public confession, and
do more harm by their secret treachery, then ever did Harding by his open
enmity. neither can there be a greater scandale, or dishonor offered to
religion, or the state, then that we should now alter the public confession of
faith made by our Church. Jewel says that the office of prince, and bishop is
distinct, and no man denies it. for no man by the office of bishop
challenges, as does the pope, sovereignty of both swords. but if any
conclude, because bishops and civil officers are distinct, that a bishop shall
do no civil office: he will conclude, that he may not look to his house, nor
do the office of a subject nor fight for his country, which is a nice point of
puritanisme, and little better then treachery: and by the same reason should
ministers be excluded both from government of colleges, and hospitals, and al
offices in the universities, whereto our puritanes ambitiously aspire, and are
as great canuasers as any, notwithstanding their ministry, or puritanisme.

Neither can master Nowels words be stretched against bishops. for what if
Christ would not receive riches, or dominion of the devil: may not a minister
receive a benefit of a Prince? or because Christ forbade them to rule as
Princes, may they do no offices of good subjects, but live like traitors, or
like puritanes, that live in open contempt of laws? if then the petitioner had
any conscience, he would not allege Mr. Nowel against bishops, whose authority
he mainteineth against Dorman, and whose resolution for this present
government is sufficiently known,

Master Bilson distinguishes betwixt apostolical government, and princely
government, but he takes not thereby away apostolical superiority over
ministers, as these manglers of scriptures do, that to build up one seat of
the consistory have hewn diverse scriptures in pieces, and racked men's words
against their meaning neither in word, nor conceit did he ever oppugn the
present government.

Bishop Elmar sometime, before he came abroad into the world, supposed the
livings of bishops to be too great. he knew not then the malice of men, nor
the state of things. now he confesses therein his oversight. is it not lawful
for him to amend his error, especially seeing some men think it lawful from
knowledge to fall into puritanisme, and from a right course to run into error?
yet do we not use the benefit of their doubling let them double as much as they
will, so they double not with God.

The like is to be said of bishop Bollingham, who if he erred in speaking
against bishops Rochets, (for against the state I see not where he speaks)
yet did he the same away by repentance but we stand not on men's opinions, nor
pamphlets, nor private writings. we would once the names of Calvin, and Beza,
and others were laid aside, and the cause were examined by scripture, and
antiquity, which is not partial. this T. Cartw. did once profess. but now he
has forgotten himself would he come back again to his old hint, he should
soon see his own error. if he strive against himself: no marvel it is, if
he strive with others. but if he come abroad, he must come better furnished
with scriptures and reasons.

Not content to allege some, the libeller ere he pass will needs belie
others, and among them in his defense of the princes supremacy.
Doctor Bridges. it may be the consistory has given him a dispensation to
lie. for he says, that Doctor Bridges does justify Aerius opinion. whereas
contrariwise he says, that albeit Hierome, and others did hold that a bishop
and priest was one: yet was no Aerian. whereby it appears, that he
confesses Aerius to be an heretic, and denies others to be Aerians.

He shamefully likewise belyeth my lord of Canterbury: Page 654. lin. 54.
whom he falsely quoteth and makes to confess elders. for such elders, as
these men would have, never entered into his conceit: only he confesses that
there were ministers in the beginning of the Church, that lived in community
with bishops: which now that the number of Christians is so increased were not
requisite. for then should there be infinite nonresidents. that he never
imagined, there ought to be elders of the Geneuian making, his reasons brought
against them do declare.

Neither did the author of the admonition made against the drunken surfeit of
Martins puritanisme set down any words, that import that there was an
Eldership under the law, as the libeller affirms. the words are contrary,
why then should he imagine that the authors meaning was contrary to his
words? it was says he, first so set down. admit it were. must all
compositers errors be allowed for text? I perceive these fellows are angry
when a man would correct a fault. and therefore I fear he will not amend
his fault in lying. but I have heard says he, that that book was subscribed
by the bishop of Canterbury, Lincoln, and London. as if any thing were more
common then untruth in the mouths of puritanes. and therefore no marvel if
he have heard a leasing.

The author of the remonstrance without any supposall says plainly, Page 166.
that there never were any Church consistory. and therefore what fondness is
it to suppose him to say, that which he denies? but admit he should say,
if it were in the law and Gospel, that it were to be continued: yet does it
not follow, that it was in the law or after. for of supposals no direct
assertion can be made, unless that which is supposed be granted. neither
can any man enforce any such conclusion, as the libeller imagines. nay he
shall sooner press the little wit he has out of his brains, then gain such
a conclusion. for the assumption, viz. that the Geneuian Aldermanshippe began
under the law, and was practiced under the Gospel, is but a frantic
conceyte in this discrasied man's brain. neither my lord of Canterbury says
it, nor any of our side, that I know. Why does not the man therefore prove
it? the reason is evident; for that untruth cannot be proved. let him
therefore press what he can out of the assertions aforesaid: he shall sooner
wring vergis out of a flint, then wring his Consistory out of scriptures.

But (says he) one Matthew Sutcliffe controlleth both. whereunto if he durst
have set to his name, I might have answered, that one W. St. and his promptors
are deceived. Now I must answer, that one certain worthless libeller
mistaketh: for neither is it true which he auoweth, That I protest there was
never any such government by elders under the Gospel (yea and such arguments
have I set down, that Th. Cartwr. and all the faction have taken term to
answer) neither do I controwle others, that have travailed before me in the
same argument. for all of us agree, that there was never any Geneuian Eldership
in the world before the erection of it at Geneua, and that the Eldership, that
was in time past, was composed of Bishops, or of Priests assistant to the
Bishops, which were Ministers of the word and sacraments: and such, as in part
in our cathedral Churches yet continue. The third untruth is, That he says,
I suppose if there were Elders under the Gospel, they were not now necessary,
Page 213.
which the author of the remonstrance affirms. For I do not speak of
Elders, but generally of government; and conclude most strongly against the
platformers, That they may not have their discipline. and why? forsooth because
first, it was never found in scriptures, nor practice; and secondly, because
diverse orders are found in scripture for external government, which now are
out of use. so that both the antecedent being false, and consequent naught, it
is not possible the conclusion should be good. but what should I talk of
antecedent and consequent with this companion, that understands neither
Logic, nor terms of reason? The fourth lie is, that I deface foreign
Churches, writing against the Eldership in Latin, and make the rent of our
Church deeper. For I speak in the defense of the state, to salve those wounds,
which these fellows have made, and to piece the rents of our church. I never
speak of foreign churches but honorably, neither am I curious in other men's
states neither do I deal with Beza, but as with a grave and learned man in
this point mistaken, and destitute in this cause both of wisedomect learning:
although I have been badly requited at his hands again. which course if Beza,
and others would have taken, these contentions that have troubled our Church,
would never have grown to this height. but they would be writing, and talking
against us, yea censuring us with their consistoriall presumption. and yet did
we not deal against their churches. For that I wrote against the presbytery,
I did it in respect, that the same was obtruded to our church, by a certain
unlearned, and bold Italian. that I wrote in Latin, the cause was the Italians
and Bezaes dealing for their presbytery in Latin: and also to let others
understand, that our cause is such, as we are able well to defend against Beza,
and all consistorials whatsoever. and therefore, seeing we mean not to obtrude
our government to them, and so profess in our books, let the^ keep their
consistory to themselves, and make much of it, that it fall not to the ground.
for it is in very weak case: and Bezaes simple discourse does yield it no
comfort. If any do come forth to reply, I do protest, it is he that makes the
stir, and not I. and therefore for common ease it were best for all to keep
silence. but if they mean to prate of the glory of the consistory, which our
platformers esteem as an idol: they must expect an answer and let not Beza
think, that his fond disputes against us in his late three half penie
pamphlet shall pass for oracles.

To return to the libeller, I answer, that neither is it true, that we handle
the matter doubtfully (for we are all resolved in our positio^s against the^)
nor that they hold their opinions resolutely. for neither concerning the
institution, parts, authority, nor office of their consistory do any two of
them agree: neither does it seem probable that ever they will agree. they are
at such contention among themselves. for neither do they know, what they
would have, nor wherefore. Secondly I say, that this argument is most simple,
and misshapen. for suppose that two or three should handle the cause of the
Church simply: it were no reason, for the ignorance, and simple dealing of two
or three, that the Chuch should be ouerturned, and that new laws and lordings
should come in place. yet this is his wise conclusion, because all do not
agree in all points, that the matter must be called in question, and bishops
be displaced, that certain coat cards in short ierkins may come in place to
rule all, either by their divine inspiration, or else according as Th. Cartw.
the oracle of discipline shall determine. which reason if it were admitted,
then howsoever we retain the present government, yet shall we for ever be
discharged of the consistory: the patrons whereof contrary one another most
absurdly in infinite places, and write most irresolutely, and strangely. Lastly,
to bring the ecclesiastical state into question, He alleges first, that our
laws expect a further reformation; and that such as have written against
papists, and puritans, have found imperfectio^s in our government. Which if
he mean in the frame of our discipline, or in respect, that we have bishops,
or want consistories; he is abused. they neither expect such a reformation, nor
auow any such thing. by a certain statute of K. Henry 8, power was given to 32
persons to gather into one body such laws ecclesiastical, as were nether
repugnant to the laws of the realm, nor prerogative royal. That they had (as
the petitioner says) authority to correct good laws, or to make new laws,
is the first untruth. The second un truth is, That D. Cranmer and other
learned men did collecte the laws into one book. for the book that came
forth with the title of Correctio legum Angliae, was gathered not by D. Cranmer
but by D. Haddon. and that very simply; and without judgment, insomuch as al
men of judgment disliked it, and afterward himself also was ashamed of it.
nay contrary to the authority given him by statute, he took upon him not to
gather laws together, but to gather a pack of new fancies together, and to
make new laws coontrarie to the Ecclesiastical laws of the realm, yea
contrary to equity and reason; as I shall justify, if any will challenge me
for it. The laws of nursing of children, and marriages will verify all that I
say; yea, and his own testimony given of it. Last of all, the law whereby
this collection of laws was authorized, is now repealed, and not necessary.
For albeit all do not: yet some know what is law. but suppose ecclesiastical
laws that are in force should begathered together, does it therefore follow,
that ecclesiastical laws must be all changed? howsoever it is, let not the
aldermen brag of these laws, for therein the authority of Bishops is
confirmed, and churchaldermen not so much as mentioned: they must therefore
look in some other place. for in this book, their Consistorial conceits are
not to be found.

In the book of Common prayer there is a Commination prescribed to be used,
until an order of discipline practiced in the primitive Church should be
restored. But what makes that for the establishment of the consistoriall
discipline, which was neither in the primitie Church, nor in the cogitation of
the authors of that book? the meaning of the book is only, that the
commination there mentioned, should be used until such time, as in the time of
Lent offenders might be brought to humble themselves, as they did in the
primitive Church, and that more favor might be given to the execution of
ecclesiastical laws, which is that discipline which they desire, and these
fellows withstand; and therefore hereafter I think will not call for
discipline. for if the same were once executed, then would not every
contentious person degorge his malice against law, nor libellers and
scismatickes be suffered to declaime against the state, nor every unlearned
mate be suffered to preach false doctrine, and revel at all antiquity.

Neither does it follow, because in the ordination of Mininisters it is
said, take thou authority to preach the word of God, that every Minister is
appointed a preacher, and that none are to be appointed Ministers, but such as
can preach, which is that they desire, And this libeller affirms. for the
exception which does abridge the law, is This practice is condemned by the
law, inciuile est. ff. de legebus.
cautelously, and maliciously left out, wherein he shows that his cause
cannot stand, but by forging and forcing. the words are, Take thou authority
to preach, where thou shall be so appointed. These fellows disdain
appointment, and would run before they be sent: but unless many had more
learning, and discretion: it were better, that some of those that take on them
to preach, were set to read: and such as run so fast, were made to sit still.

In Flaunders according to the rules of this discipline, they would needs at
the first have every one to preach: but when they saw the great inconvenience
that came of it, they put them to read Caluins homilies on Job. but suppose
that in the point of discipline of Lent, or in the number, and qualities of
preachers, we have not that we desire; does it therefore follow, that the
Ecclesiastical state must be ruinated, and al laws abolished, that the
confusion of the Consistory, and barbarism of this new discipline may triumph
over the church? In France and Scotland they want much of that discipline they
desire: nay the Ministers want means pore men to maintain themselves, and
their families, yea and the Church wants sufficient, and learned ministers,
and is glad to use the ministry of boys, and unlearned youths, wanting all
things save boldness: yet they will not say, that for these disorders, or want
of their desires, it is reason, that the ministry, and their aldermen should
be changed, and all overthrown.

The 1. Eliz. 2.
Statutes give power to her Majesty. and her ecclesiastical commissioners, to
appoint orders for the ornaments of the Church: does it therefore follow that
surplesses, and other ceremonies are to be abolished? By like reason a man may
couclude, that all laws are intended to be taken away, because the prince and
parliament have authority so to do. a reason well beseeming such senseless
fellows, as understand no reason. for nether is the consequent good a posse
adesse; nor if the conclusion were granted, would this man obtain his desire
concerning his consistorial discipline. for albeit alteration be made in the
ministers apparel: yet may the same be made, the state standing, and the
consistory falling to dust. so that if he look for no other alteration, then
that which is intended by our laws, he and his consistory may go, and
consider upon some better reasons. In the mean while he says, that some of
our chief defendors of religion against the papists confess, That diverse
abuses in ceremonies, and discipline were tolerated among us, the church
yielding to the infirmity of the weak, which were to be altered, when people
grew to riper knowledge. Wherein as in other things, he deals falsely. for
neither is it true, that Fulke retent. page 98.
Doctor Fulke says, That our ceremonies, or discipline is to be altered; nor
is he, though a most learned man, one of our chief defendors. But suppose it
were granted, that he then thought that some alteration in ceremonies and
discipline were to be admitted, does it therefore follow, that the church must
be spoiled, bishops and ecclesiastical persons put from their charges, and a
sort of hungry cormorants brought into government? again, suppose this one
man in his youth were of some strange conceit concerning the everlasting
blessed consistory: yet does not one make a number. where then be the rest?
forsooth in the intention of the libeller, that is now hatching of new
heresies, Can. 20.
and fooleries. But says he, the bishops confess in their canons, that non
residencie is a filthy thing, and diverse confess, that lay men should not
meddle with excommunication, and that diverse lewd, and unlearned Ministers
have entered into the Church: which were it supposed to be true, yet adds
nothing to the cause of the consistory. for we deny not that men be men, and
that there be faults in the execution of laws. therefore such as offend are to
be punished, and not, as this discrasied disputor would conclude, al laws to
be abolished, and a new government to be erected. in the law we deny, that
there is either impiety, or abuse: in men we do not deny. nay we wish that
such as give scandale were removed, that by their defaults the common cause
might not be hurt. if the consistorial faction could clear themseluelues of
impiety, and abuse in their government, it would be better for the^. but they
must think, that there are faults among them, as well as among others, and that
they are no angels, but men, yea, and many very odd men; and men made of very
strange humors.

Master D. Cousin confesses, that the punishment of adultery is too mild: and
others be of his opinion. for we do not say, that every point of law is so
perfect, or that things can be so stable, that there can be nothing added, or
detracted. if they should say so of their consistory, as some men douteth not:
they should but make a great leasing as is evident by the particulers of their
government. what then will the libeller conclude of this our opinion? does he
think that his consistorial discipline must come in place? if he do; he is
abused, for the imperfections, impieties, and injustice thereof is to to
notorious.

That in the consecration of bishops the pastoral staff and laying on of the
bible is commanded by law to be used, is one of the libellers lewd untruths.
for no such thing is found in the book of ordeining of ministers. neither does
any other law command any such matter. but suppose it were commanded, and the
same were omitted: were it reason as this libeller auoweth, because the
archbishop, unto whose discretion many things are referred by law, omitteth
some ceremony, that therefore every contentious companion should break all
orders? let this be put among the co^clusio^s of discipline, or rather
disorder. for such in deed is this discipline. a scholar would rather have
concluded: that he ought to be forced to observe law, the^ that others, because
he breaks law in one point, should take occasion to break law in all. to
conclude his unsavory tale against the ecclesiastical government, he says,
that a Advertisement to the Church of England. etc.
learned man and friend to the bishops notes as abuses, their urging of
subscriptio^, their oaths ex officio, and their exco^municatio^ for trifles,
and easy silencing of ministers: wherein he says not amiss, concerning the
gentleman's learning. for in deed he is both grave, and learned: and now
understands, and has learned, that neither in subscription, nor examination
of parties upon their oaths, ecclesiastical judges do any thing against
either laws of God, or men, or reason; nor that any is excommunicate for
trifles, or minister silenced, but for good cause, and by his own default: nor
that subscription is a new devise, being used in most ancient counsels, and
with great rigor exacted at Geneua, and in all France: which I would also have
the libeller to learn, and also to speak the truth and to deal honestly.
for no man is excommunicate in ecclesiastical courts, but for Quo minor culpa,
co mayor contumacia. Beza aduers. Erast.
contumacie: neither is any put to silence, but such as show themselves
rebellious. but what if some abuse were, would not reason require that the
abuse should rather be taken away, then that there should be made a dangerous
innovation in state? these things considered, I refer to every man's
judgment, what manner of disputor this fellow is, that either speaks no
truth, or else alleges such matters, as make not to the purpose. that the
fathers, or counsels, yea or late writers of name speak against such Bishops,
as we have, is untrue: that some malcontents have declaymed against the state,
is not denied: that there are abuses in execution of law, and therefore our
laws to be abolished, and the consistory to be established, does not follow.

Wherefore unless the author, and his partakers have better supply of reasons,
then he has brought here; there is no cause he should desire conference, or
disputation. If he desire to show his skill in writing, why does he not take
those books that have been written in this argument, in hand, and confute the^
from point to point? why does not T. Cartw. answer in the defense of his
consistory? If he say that imprisonment has hitherto been an hinderance unto
him: yet will not that excuse serve the rest, that were never in prison. why
do not W. Tr. Will. Chapter D. Sp. and others confirm their demonstrations of
discipline, wherein all their reasons stand confuted? having so much work to
do, why should he desire more? belike this petition was made to brag men
down. but if he think he can do it, he deceives himself. for as far, as
her Majesty, and laws will permit; they shall find a number ready in all
sorts to encounter them. but the libellers meaning is not to dispute, as I
think. for no man has worse grace in disputing, nor more simple faculty in
writing. by hiding his head he seems rather to be ready to fly, then fight.
his talk therefore of advised writings is idle. for both T. Cartw. and he has
written many things unadvisedly. and both fly the hammering of their cause.
only his purpose is to slander the state by libels, and to lurk in corners,
and to have all ecclesiastical laws, and government left without defense, so
that every man might speak against them without either fear of punishment, or
controlment: which neither is good nor commendable. for it would be most
absurd, if 3, or 4 difformed platformers should be suffered to dispute in
schools, that her Majesty's authority is unlawful, that our laws and
government is wicked, that the state is to be changed.

As for the course that Doctor Rainolaes used against Heart, it was lawful, he
being thereto authorized, and percase fitting for him: and might better be
suffered being in points of religion resolved, then in government doubted of.
yet was it long, and without effect. but this course of private conference by
writing which the libeller desires in this cause is leude, being against her
Majesty, the laws, and state: it would be a way to rebellion: it would make
more contention: it would be infinite tedious, and to no purpose. the godly
and Christian Emperors of Rome were of a contrary mind, to this libeller. for
in diverse express laws, they upon great penalties forbid any, to call in
question the confession of faith of the Church, Cod. de sum. trinit. and fid.
cath.
forbidding, vt nemode capublice contendere audeat. neither does the Admonit.
de de lib. concord.
author of the admonition to the Churches of Saxonye allow any such course, as
the libeller desires. nay his desire is, that matters may be discussed in
some synod of learned men. what shame then is it to devise leude means to
trouble the Church, and falsely to impute them to those, that never used them,
nor thought them convenient? the libeller therefore may do well hereafter to
leave to the wisdom of her Majesty and the rest of the governors of the
Church and common wealth, the composing of matters: which is best wrought by
good laws, and sharp punishment, that such as will not be answered with
reason, may like dizards be corrected with rods. wherein if he think himself
dealt withal unjustly: let him come forth when he will, either in advised, or
unadvised writing, his cause shall be proved wicked, and his consortes facts
auowed punishable.

CAP. II. That there never was any government by Church aldermen, or supposed
Ecclesiastical Consistory, either under the law, or in the Apostles times,
or after, nor can without great injury to the Church of England, to the
Magistrates, and others be admitted.
ALthough this positio^ has been so fully In the book de presbyterio.
proved, that neither T. Cartw. nor his scholars, nor the whole pack of our
adversaries have as yet made answer: yet because the book where the discourse
is contained, is in latin, which percase thou understand not, and the
arguments lie dispersed, so that without difficulty they cannot be gathered; I
will here make a brief of the^. So shall thou see what a clear truth this
wise disputer thinks to batter with vain show of men's opinions, and be
better resolved of the notorious vanity of the consistoriall discipline.

Exodus 18, and Deuteronomy. 17, are of an other sort: for they heard all civil causes,
yea causes of blood, and inflicted civil punishments upon offenders. Those that
are found in the 11 of Numbers were of the princes counsel. And other sorts of
Collegiat Elders and Judges are none found. Let them show them if they can. the
place of Leuiticus touches only priests in particular, and matters
concerning their only office.

any be^ch of Judges to determine ecclesiastical causes severally, neither are
there any laws prescribed in Gods word to direct them by: so that, if any
Judged in such causes they proceeded both without authority and also direction:
which were very absurd to think. for if God had appointed any such order of
Judges, he would no doubt have given them authority and directions.

Moses: nothing under the judges or kings or in the decay of the Jewish state,
not so much as the Sanedrin that condemned Christ to death is any precedent of
the ecclesiastical co^sistorie, whatsoever Beza can say to the contrary. for it
was the only remainder of the Jewish policy, and succeeded in the place of the
counsel Numbers 11, and of the Judges appointed Deuteronomy. 17, as is apparent by
examination of the authority, and acts of it.

Moses, of the judges, and kings made laws, and gave souereign directio^s. The
priests judged of things clean and unclean, and executed, and caused al
ecclesiastical orders to be observed. 2. Chron. 19. and exodus 18.
The priests and Levites appointed by the prince judged of right and wrong, and
consecrated others to the functions of priesthood. where was the^ the
ecclesiastical chimerical consistory all this while? or how could it be
supposed that others would encroch upon the priestsoffice being debarred by
Gods law, and not being mentioned in scripture or histories?



Rabbines, or the histories of Philo, or Iosep. make any mention either of
their names, life, acts, death, or any thing concerning the^: which were
wondrous strange, if any such extrauagant co^manders had been. for howsoever it
fares with others: the acts of governors cannot lie hidden.



The same reasons may also persuade us, that there were no such church
governors in the Apostles times, or after. There appears first no
institution of them: Secondly, no laws whereby they are to govern: Thirdly no
act of theirs: Fourthly no commendation or reproof of their persons, or
doings; Fifthly, their authority was invested in the Apostles by our Savior,
to whom also the keys were given, and not to these false aldermen, that come
in rather like burners of houses, then governors of Churches with counterfeite
keys: Sixthly, in the whole story of the Acts of the Apostles there is not the
least suspicion of them, neither do they stand upon any thing, but false
interpretations of 3, or 4 places of scripture: Nor to conclude can any thing
be more unlikely, then that our Savior Christ Jesus the wisdom of God,
having given the keys of Jurisdiction, and knowledge to his Apostles, and
their successors, would take the same from them, and hang them at the elbowes
of men without authority, knowledge or discretion: such as the Church Aldermen
are for the most part.

In the times succeeding next to the Apostles, all histories, counsels,
fathers, give witness to the government by bishops, in time of persecution:
and after the time of persecution by bishops, under the sovereign direction of
Christian Princes. Neither for 1540 years did ever this foolish conceit come
in any men's heads, that merchantes, men of occupation, musterd sellers, and
tinkers, were men sufficient for the government of Churches. Then which
nothing can be devised more absurd, nor inconvenient. It is the high way to all
heresies. for when matters be decided by voices of men that never knew
Scriptures; Fathers, nor tongues, how is it possible that they should teach
truth? or continue in truth, or meet with errors? this is the principal
cause of the multitude of heresies in the low Countries.

The same also would be a Seminary for schism. for when all parishes, and
ministers, and Consistories have equal jurisdiction, as these fellows teach
that they ought to have, who shall remedy contentions that fall out? the
synod? a mere conceit. for what need they to care for the synod, or the
censures thereof, that by no law are subject to synodes? All learning would
decay: for who should need to study, if a Tailor coming warm from the
shopboard be a man fit to govern the church? or who can have any courage to
study where this sacrilegious discipline that has made hauock of all the
revenues of the church, is placed; and the stipends that are allotted to
learded men shall be arbitrary, and may be taken away at the discretion of a
sort of ignorant marmarchants, clownes, and men of occupation?

Fourthly, where there is no law prescribed, how can the Judges be kept in
temper? even now, notwithstanding all laws and penalties that may be devised,
partiality, favor, hatred and other affectons bear sway. How much would they
sway more, if the Consistory should come in place, which is ruled only by
will, and plurality of voices, and not restrained but by pretense of God
word, which every man uses to construe to his own profit. Down would the
princes revenues fall, and the Realm be left without means of defense, and
made unable to resist the enemy. If any man think that the spoil of the
church should come to the princes hands, he abuses himself. The spoils of
other places do teach us, what would fall out: yea, our own experience may
herein sufficiently instruct us. For albeit in the overthrow of Abbeys the
Prince had some share: yet are not now the Princes of this land able to
maintain that force that in time past they were, when great no^bers of both
horsemen and footmen were maintained at the charge of religious houses, the
revenues whereof now are wholly employed, and yet scarce able percase to buy
some one mean gentlewoman a verdugal: so leudly are they spent, and so great
is the pride and waste of men. the reason of it is this, that what they spent
the^ in mainteining of men, the same is now spent in veluets, silks and
glittering coats. Suppose then that the church goods should come to spoil: do
you think they would be better spent? it should seem no: for all is now spent
in surfeit and excess, that in time past was spent in mainteining of men. And I
know where, in certain manors taken from bishops, thousands of men were
maintained: the revenues of all which do not now buy peticoates for my mistres
the owners wife, and her maidens, and not a man of al their tena^ts scarce able
to do her Majesty service at his own charge, they are so fined and skinned.

All those that live by learning, should be turned along to pick sallets;
whereby Popery having no resistance, would find easy entrance, and those
that are best able, being discouraged for want of means, make least resistance.

Unto all these points the Libeller says but little: only upon one point he
stands, that the hot pursuers of their pretended reformation have some
induceme^ts to think, that there has been in the world some such consistory
as he imagines, but where, or when, he knows no certainty: nay he knows
not what manner of beast the same is. His proofs they be so weak, that I
marvel he was not ashamed to make muster of them: scriptures he brings
none. Aworld to see, how those that in oppugning our state were so copious in
allegations of scriptures, to maintain their Aldermen, and Discipline, do not
so much as endeavor to bring any scripture, or by reason drawn thence to
confirm their cause. The Fathers, as him self confesses, speak obscurely.
his chief help is in Calvin, Iunius, Beza, Dancau, yea and such obscure
compagnions as Bertrand de loques, Bastinge, Charpentier, du Pleurre, Golart,
Iacomot, Pollan, and a rabble of others not worth the naming. But if the consent
of half a score base writers, and of bad alloy be so forcible, as to persuade
the good liking of the consistory; what reason have we to stand in defense of
our government by bishops, which has the consent of so many general counsels,
so many Fathers, so many ages, yea so many learned men also of our time as
these be, and as well learned, and godly as the other; diverse of whose piety
has passed fiery trials, and been sealed with their blood, namely Bishop
Cranmer, bishop Ridley, bishop Latimer, bishop Farrar, master Philpot, and
master Bradford, and many more martyrs that lived in good liking of our state,
and defended bishops: whereas few of these that are alleged condemned our
Bishops, and none of the ancient Fathers allow such an Eldership, as these
seek for? Add hereunto the learned men now living in England comparable to
the best, and far exceeding these Bastinges, Loquians, Golarts, Perots, and
such obscure, and unlearned, and unwise authors. Who will not, I say, rather
give credit to such consent, then to a few ouerweening late writers,
especially seeing all the Fathers join with us against them?

Ignatius speaks of an eldership of ministers of the word, men subject to the
Bishop, conversant in the ministration of sacraments: of these alderme^, that
albeit they meddle neither with word, nor sacraments, and are base begotten,
and misshapen creatures, yet take on them to depose Princes, and throw out
their Bishops at pleasure, he never heard any ynkeling, nor speaks one word
of them. To his Eldership Epist. ad Trallen. and Magnes.
Ignatius makes the Bishop superior: these give to the Consist orie power to
depose the Minister: yea and accordingly we understand that in France they
have thrust out many poor men, which either have perished for want, or
la^guished for poverty: and all, because they were so senseless, as not to
understand that Clownes are evil Judges of the merits of learned men, and
accord not with scholars, nor schools.

They allege also Apol. c. 39. and libr. de baptism.
Tertullian to the same purpose: but his words fit not their turn: for he
talks of elders that managed the word, and fed with doctrine, and means a
synod of bishops: or assembly of the ministers of the word (for those are
called presidents) and such presidents as dealt with the administration of
sacraments. Of these new aldermen which starting from their occupations, and
stalles, run rashly into church government, in Tertullians time there was no
news heard. That the Elders he talks of were ministers of the word, and
administered the sacraments of baptism, is apparent in his book of baptism.
so that alleging that book, the Libeller does nothing, but turn the point
of Tertullian against his motley, Tertul. de baptis. and de coron. milit.
and party-natured aldermen. For in in him the word Presbyteri signifies
always ministers of the word, subject to the bishop, and never any men of
trade or occupation usurping Church-gouernment, and chalenging equal power
with bishops: as in the places above mentioned is evident.

The places of Cyprian make no more for his purpose, then those before alleged
out of Tertullian, and Ignatius. In the 5 epistle of his second book he
declares how he and his Colleagues had ordained Aurelius a reader: but that by
Colleagues is meant bishops, is apparent, for that bishops did only ordeine.
Secondly, for that priests were not Colleagues to bishops; but subject to them.
Thirdly, for that priests of one church had not to do in another, but bishops
had. Fourthly because he never heard of, nor knew any temporary profane
churchaldermen, which were not ministers of the word and sacraments. Lastly,
for that he writes to the elders supposed to be aldermen of the new creation,
not to join with him, but to declare what he had done. he would have done
otherwise, if priests had been his Colleagues.

In another place he says, he purposes to do nothing without the counsel of
his Clergy, and consent of his people: but that makes nothing for the
consistory. for in all laws with us the consent of the people is adjoined;
yet have we no aldermen: (...) the Consistory does things without consent of
the people, albeit the same consists of aldermen, And Cyprian, albeit he
would not then do; yet sometimes did, and might do things by his own
authority.

Thirdly, it is one thing, to have the counsel of men; another, to be joined
in commisson with them. for the Prince has a counsel, but no joint nor equal
governors. Lastly these elders were ministers of the word, such as residing
now in Cathedral churches, were then living in cities about bishops.

Unto the words of Cyprian in his 18, and 22 epistle of his third book, we
will then yield answer, when we find any of that number: for there are but
15 epistles in that boooke. But this is an ordinary fault of this fellow, to
quote counsels, books, orations, and epistles that never were in the world.

He alleges also the 5 and 9 epistle of Cyprians fourth book: but in the 5
there is nothing, but the name of Elder without the thing: in the 9 there is
neither the name, nor any note of the supposed elders; but contrariwise diverse
reasons to show the government of the church to have been always committed to
the bishop, and the union of the same to be placed in consent of bishops, not
in supposed consistories. That Cyprian knew no elders but ministers of the
word, these reasons do declare: First, for that not only Deacons which were
under elders, but Readers also did deal in the word, and were accounted among
the clergy, which was not communicated to men of occupation: Secondly, for
that such elders as he speaks of, dealt in sacraments, and in the word: for
he Lib. 3. cp. 10.
reprehendeth certain for administering the sacraments to certain, that had
not declared sufficient signs of repentance: Thirdly, for that they had Vt
sportulis iisdem cum presbyteris honorentur. lib. 4. epist. 5.
wages: fourthly, for that they were not deposed at pleasure, nor were
temporary: which is a quality incident to the newfoundland aldermen.

Augustine never so much as dreamt of Lay or temporary, De verb. Domini in Mat.
ser. 19.
or occupacion aldermen: nay, himself diligently observes the distinction of
the ministers of the word conversant about the word and sacraments, into
bishops, Priests, Deacons. De cor. and great. cap. 11.
He calls the censures of the Church, Lib. de paenit. medic. cap. 2. and 3.
Episcopale iudicium: and affirment, that the keys were to be used by Prelates;
which can no way be drawn to be understood of Lay aldermen. This being
considered, the libeller says his Aldermen are in these authors mentioned, but
obscurely: but he had said far more truly, if he had said neither obscurely,
nor in any sort. for darkness is not more obscure, then the steps of these
surmised fellows, and nothing more clear, then that they are not there.

To illustrate the former Fathers obscurity, he brings others, which as he
supposes speak clearly. The first is Ambrose: but nothing does he speak to
the Libellers content. For he speaks of a counsel of Elders, that were
ministers of the word, and assistant to the bishop, whom he also calls
vicarios Dei, and antistites, which cannot be understood of these base, and
unlettered aldermen whose hands with gain, and other vanities are polluted;
and whose ignorance makes them incapable of ecclesiastical function. Those
elders which Ambrose speaks of assisted the bishop with counsel: these are
not counselors, but controllers, and gouerners, with voices equal to the
bishop. His elders were in cathedral churches only: these are in every So our
platformers would have it, albeit the Geneuians practice be far diverse.
paltry village. Those were men learned: these are ignorant merchants,
artificers, and clownes for the most part. Nothing can be more repugnant the^
Ambrose, and the Disciplinarians. Ambrose Lib. 8. cp. 64.
shows that excommunication belonged to bishops: these put the keys into the
hands of strange elders, yet very young in Gods church, and good for nothing,
but to oppress the ministry, and learning. such elders as Ambrose speaks
of were derived from the Jews: but such Aldermen as these have devised, the
Jews had none. Ambrose his elders were not temporary, nor all of counsel:
these are. Ambrose complayneth that the Bishop and his Clerks did not live in
common, as in time Inter Can. Syluestri.
past; yet such was the griedinesse of bishops, that it was necessary to divide
the church goods: and such was the negligence of priests, that they were sent
out of cities to dwell in the country, which now is observed, and that which
Ambrose complained of, restored: viz. that certain of the chief of the
ministry should be assistant to the bishop. what then would these fellows
have more? would they have all the ministers of a diocese to live in one
city, and to join in hearing of all matters? This would be a beginning of
singular non residence, and cause of great trouble and confusion; and not a
means to do justice, but to hinder justice.

After Ambrose succeeds Hierome a man most unfit to speak for the new
eldership. for if that be true which he says, that bishops and elders in the
primitive church were all one; then away go the aldermen that are no bishops:
which reason did so stick to Bezaes fingers De presbyter aduers. Erast. Epist.
ad Heliod.
disputing against Erastus for the eldership, that he could no way lay it
down handsomely without the ruin of his cause. Again, if in Hieroms time all
Clerks did feed with the word, much more did priests. Neither does it make
for these men's cause, that he says, that as the Jews: so the Christians had a
Counsel in every cathedral church, (for that is his meaning) for that was of
ministers, and is observed in our cathedral churches, and utterly overthrows
the presumption of these unlearned aldermen, that with unwashed feet tread in
the sanctuary, and with filthy hands, and leaden heads handle matters of
religion, faith and churchgouernment, without color or title taking the keys
out of the successors of ye apostles hands.

Possidonius In vit. August.
and Socrates, albeit they are said to speak of the consistory, and that
plainly: Lib. 5. cap. 21.
yet clearly overthrow the same: for neither of them ever understood or
heard of any temporary lay elders, such as are lately raised from the dunghill
to the highest tribunal of the church. Nor do they speak of others, then such
as lived in co^munity with the bishops in their cathedral churches, and such
as we have in our church. of which also the canon Did. 95. c. ecce. and 15. q.
7. si quid.
law makes mention, declaring their office to consist in preaching and
administering the sacraments: so that I cannot but wonder with what visage yt
libeller could allege the colleges of ministers of the word assistant to
bishops in their Cathedral churches, to prove Elderships in every village
assistant to every minister, and consisting of profane, and unlearned men, and
neither having salary, nor salt of discretion, nor continuance, as the other
had.

Of these allegations therefore this conclusion may be drawn out, that in
counsels, Fathers, and antiquity, there is not any argument or conjecture
found of all that Discipline, which these newfangled platformers desire.

Nay, there is not any proof for the same in the new writers: only I except
the Geneuians and their followers, that have shamefully applied scriptures to
their Disciplinarian dreams. The churches of Saxony, Wittenberg, Nuremberg,
Strausborgh, Ausburg, Frankeforde, Hamborgh, and other places of Germany, (the
county Palatine except) likewise the churches of Zuricke, Berne, Basil, and
other true christian churches in Zuitzerland, and Denmark, Sueueland,
Pomerany, Poland, and Hungary, and all the learned men that governed those
churches, both in their doctrine, and practice, are against the discipline of
the new Consistories.

Moreover, those that speak for the Consistories, are not all of one opinion.
In the state of Geneua there is but one co^sistory. there are not many that
agree about the proof, parts, office, or laws of it. In Geneua they do not
allow their consistory power to make, or disanull laws. In France they give
that power to synodes. The consistoriall discipline in France was at first
received of a few, and that not for evidence of Scripture, or proof, or
reason, but by suffrages of the Nobility and Gentry (whereof some too well
liked the sacrilegious doctrine) and by the earnest labor of Beza desirous to
conform other churches to that of Geneua, most of the learned ministers
dissenting from him, and disallowing his absurd discipline, and not yielding
before the Princes to whom they served, constrained them. What reason then
has any to plead for the consistoriall government which is unknown to all
antiquite, and repugnant to Apostolical practice, and the most flourishing
Churches in Europe, and was received with grudge of learned men, and only
rests upon the conceit of Calvin, Beza, Daneau, and some half score of
blind writers, as John Baptista that ignorant Italian, and Sneccan, and
Bertrand de Loques, and Oleuian, and Robert Stephen, a better Printer then
divine, and Perot, and de Plurre, and I know not whom, neither of mark nor
quality? especially seeing so many pregnant reasons are brought against the
translation of it from the Jews, and establishment of it among Christians, as
none have answered, and this libeller thinks it most wisdom, to pass over
with silence.

If this be a good argument, that Daneau, Bertrand de Loques, Bastingius,
Iunius, Piscator, Oleuian, Calvin, Beza, Sneccan, and John Baptista d'Aureli
think so: how good will this reason be, that all the fathers of all ages have
been of a contrary judgment, and diverse godly Martyrs, and learned men in our
Church, and other reformed Churches in Germany, Zuitzerland, Denmark, induced
with better reasons, have thought otherwise? Besides all this, it shall appear
that those authors which the libeller alleges never believed, that either in
time past there was a consistory of party coluored Aldermen, like to that
this libeller desires. or that such a one now ought to be placed in every
Church. That Zuinglius shoul de teach or believe that Christ did institute such
Aldermen in his Church, as these do fancy I can no where find. Neither is it
likely that he should teach that abroad, which he never delivered to his own
Citizens at home.

Aretius In 1. Cor. 12
speaks of certain elders in his Commentaries, but whatsoever they were, he
thinks that they ought to have no use under the Christian Magistrate: And
therefore by this testimony these fellows cannot win any vantage. That they
were not like the disciplinarian Aldermen, it may appear, for that during the
times of persecution, they supplied the magistrates office, and dealt in all
causes of the first Christians, as he thinks. Of such elders as Aretius
speaks of, it may be that Illyricus had some such like conceit: But far
were they both from the opinion of them of Geneua, concerning their lordly
consistory, that climeth up above princes.

Out of In 1. Cor. 12.
Hemingius there cannot any such fancy be gathered, as this of my young
masters the Church aldermen. writing upon the 1. Corinthians. 12. he does
interpret the word (...) ordinances of ecclesiastical discipline. which
amounts nothing to the account of these fellows; yea he allows the
Syntagm. Heming.
prerogative and authority of Bishops above other ministers, which can bear
no sway among these lordly commanders.

The place of In 1. Cor. 12.
Hyperius makes not to purpose. for albeit he be produced by the libeller as a
witness for the eldership, yet does he testify against it. for he says
not, that any such aldermen, as these conceive, were joined with the Bishop in
government, and equal authority, but that Bishops used the advice of ancient
and grave men, not these rough hewn aldermen, that are neither wise nor grave,
but rather grievous to Gods Church: But most of all do I wonder what reason
the libeller had to cite De reformand. abusib. ad Imperatorem.
Bucer, who in the place quoted, does not so much as mention any elders, much
less teach their office, quality and continuance: but contrariwise he
shows, that if there were no other difference betwixt the Papists and him,
he would easily yield to bishops their titles, and dignities, and wishes
that Metropolitanes, and other bishops would return to the observance of
ancient Canons.

And so far was Bullinger from favoring any such new pack of aldermen as
these would have, that he In libr. erast. de excom. in fine.
yielded his approbation to the opinion of Erastus, that denied both the
presbytery, and presbyteriall censures.

Zegedin another of this man's witnesses does say much against him concerning
the Loc. Com. page 202.
superiority of bishops, and new device of doctors, and other points. But
where he speaks any one word for the consistorial governors, the place
cannot yet be found. what should I stand long in tracing out the notorious
falsehood of this forger of false quotations in every paticuler? By these
already examined you may understand, how honestly he deals in the rest, and
by this also, that it is known, that the Churches of Only in the Palsgraues
dition they say there is some haunt of the eldership to be found.
Germany, Denmark, and Zuitzerland, do all repel the eldership: yea, when
certain factious companions coming from Geneua, would have made some stir
in the ecclesiastical government at Zuricke,, Gualter resisted them, and the
magistrates sent them out of their city to place their consistories in some
other quarter, in remotis.

Likewise does he report untruth concerning M. Nowel, M. Fulke, and M.
Whytaker. M. Nowell speaks some what concerning elders, but that he meant the
te^porary aldermen, that sprung up first at Geneua, and now use to come from
the merchants stall, and workehouse, into the Church to order matters of faith
and doctrine, it cannot be surmised.

Neither has the libeller any reason to build his fancies upon M. Fulkes
opinions. for in the confutation of the notes of the Rhemish Testament, he does
defend the government of the Church of England, as now it is: and albeit he
was sometime of other mind; yet did he afterward retract his former sayings. And
when John Field contrary to his mind did publish the pamphlet called the
learned discourse, he was offended with him, and if he had lived, would have
confuted the same himself. Neither do I believe that M. Raynolds being so well
conversant in counsels and fathers, does admit an eldership contrary to the
sayings, and practice of both.

M. Whitaker is a man of too great judgment, to believe the unlettered, and
improbable devise of the consistory: And well is it kowen, that he has
taught both publicly, and privately against it. Neither is it likely, that he
has now greater reasons to move him, since he married in the tribe of those
that favor these conceits then before, so that when al is come to all, the
authors of this discipline are 20, or 30, foreine authors, and half a score
English perfumed with the smoke of Geneua, and well read in Caluins
Institutions. And the grounds of it are not scripture, nor antiquity, nor
reason, but conceyte and foolish fancy, and the authority of such as deserve
no credit speaking in their own cause. If the libeller think otherwise, let
him (or else because he is but a man of a weak brain and small learning) let
any of the faction drawfoorth Caluins, and Bezaes reasons: nay let either Beza
himself, or any of them answer that which has been set forth against their
opinions already, and confirm Caluins and Bezaes weak and evil shapen
reasons: and then will the vanity of all the new platform, and also of these
allegations appear.

To prove the continuance of the government by Elders, he falsifieth also
diverse authors, as Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Capito, Melancthon, Bullinger, and
makes lies upon Fulke, and Reynoldes: for I think master Raynoldes holds no
such fancy: And I am assured that Fulke retracted his opinion, so that his
only reason also for the continuance of the Eldership, is because Miconius
and Micronius, and Calvin, Beza, and Daneau, and Calueton, Colladon, Tauergues,
Perot, Iacomot, Duple, Golart, Pollan, Perille, Henry, and others never heard
of in this horiso^ believe the continuance of the consistorial government, that
we must renounce scriptures, fathers, and al antiquity: which is neither a
good, nor learned kind of reasoning yet for any thing I can see, it is not
only the best, but also the only reason he uses. deny the new fa^cies that
they have devised, and embraced at Geneua, you mar the frame of their
consistory. why we should credit them against scriptures, fathers, stories,
there can be alleged no cause. Much less is there reason we should believe
Peter Carpenter a known Apostata from religion, or Bodin a man better
conversant in policy, then in divinity, and whose religion was al popery. yet
if we should, I do not find any thing in either that sounds to the honor of
the Aldermens cause. For Aduers. Fr. portum.
Carpenter. the matter is evident for he most bitterly inueigheth against them
of Geneua; and not very doubtful in Bodini methodus historiae. c. 6.
Bodin. For the words alleged out of Bodin his method of histories concern
the Aldermen nothing; He speaks of the censure of Bishops. and did never
imagine, nor could conceive, that the censures of the Church were put in the
hands of profane men. Illa pontificum censura (says he) nihil maius, aut
diuinius cogitari potuit. Secondly, he does not commend the men he speaks
of, but the censures, for that they were so strictly executed. Which
commendation, if magistrates were as willing to execute the censures of
ecclesiastical Judges with us, as at Geneua they are, would no doubt work like
effects with us, as with them. And if the magistrate should not favor them,
they would do little good in any place. Thirdly, he commends the same
censure, not as the institution of Christ, or as a necessary policy for the
Church, but as a very good pollitike and civil order devised by men, to keep
the common sort in awe. But what if Bodin should say somewhat of matters he
understood not, his authority is very weak in this case, being neither good
in divinity, nor excellent in policy, and neither understanding the state of
Geneua, nor our country: and therefore no fit man to make us here in England
new laws.

In the Harmony of Confessions, there are certain words inserted, sounding
much to the commendation of the Eldership. Neither is it to be marueiled, if
they of Geneua that collected the^ together, made the words to sound as
favorably, as might be for their own state and government: but that all the
churches, or most of the^, yea or any, save the disciples of the Geneuian
eldership, consent in one harmony of praises of that form of discipline,
cannot be proved. No, although the authors with See the notes in the latter
end of the harmony.
notorious falsifications, wresting, and forgerie, draw the sentences of the
confessions from their purpose, to speak for the presbyterial government.
Wherefore, unless the petitioner can justify this kind of practice, there is
not so much credit won by the vain names of Carpenter, Bodin, and the
confessions of Churches, as there is lost by forgerie, falsifications, and
gross leasings.

To strengthen the weak joints of this discrasied reason drawn from
authority: he says, Frist, that the consistorial government is also received
of the Churches of Heluetia, the low countries, Millain, Poland, and Hungary:
Secondly, that it is under the Turk, and among the papists: wherein he
shows, either singular malice in lying wilfully, or presumptuous ignorance in
speaking of matters he understood not. For it is well known, that the churches
of Heluetia neither have Geneuian elders, nor excommunication: And that the
churches of the low countries (to speak nothing of France nor Scotland) live
in great confusion, and disorder: a matter rather to move us to refuse the
consistory, then to embrace it. And likewise it is evident, that in Millaine,
and Hungary, there is no visible church, but of those that profess popery.
And albeit there be some few elders among the papists of France, Germany, and
Hungary, yet do they not show themselves, nor have they any allowance, or
thanks for being there. But what manner of conclusion is this: That because
among papists and Turks Elders are received, that we must also receive them?
There are also Anabaptists, Arrians, and I know not how many heresies among the
Turks and papists, which no reason requires us to embrace. Popery likewise
is professed under the Turk: not only this consistorial discipline. So that
nothing can be more absurd then to conclude, that therefore we are to admit
the Consistory, because it is crept in, in Turkey, and among the papists.
Likewise, it is a vain brag, to say, That in the Church of Geneua, Scotland,
France, there be thousands, and ten thousands of the best divines of the
world. I would the number of them were greater, and their learning more
excellent then it is; I do not envy their nombers, nor excellency. but the
reward of learning taken away, and the great decay that has happened of late
time in those churches, does both teach us what is now, and what we are to
fear; and that when the reckonnig of good divines is made, it will come far
short of thousands: much shorter of ten thousands. The ignorance and want of
ministers in France, and other Consistoriall places is too too lamentable, and
such is the blessing of this country, that one corner of England is able to
match them all, either in number, or quality of learned men, albeit we do not
reason from our own authority.

The conclusion therefore that this bedlem discourser makes, is too too
foppish: viz. that Calvin, and Beza, and Tauergues, and Chauueton, and Perot,
and I know not who are more likely to find out the truth, then the author of
the remonstrance, and my self. for no man stands upon the authority of us
two, though the simpler of us in this cause, fears not T. Cartw. nor W. Trau.
no nor Beza their patriarch, nor all their brags.

Neither do I desire any man to believe me, because I say so (this is only
the conclusion of the platformers, that beside the authority of men, can say
nothing for themselves) But seeing the interpretations of the consistoriall
faction are fond, fantastical, singular, and contrary to scriptures, to the
Jews histories, to all the fathers, and counsels, yea contrary to all reason,
and good concluding, and agree badly among themselves, and finally stand upon
the fooleries of the Geneuians and their stupide followers, and upon their
falsehood, forgerie, false allegatio^s, and abusing of scriptures: I do think
and auow, that neither divinity, nor human reason will permit any man, any
longer to be abused by them, or to give credit to those that use them.
Wherefore considering the weak grounds which the consistoriall government
stands upon, and the forgerie, falsehood, and impudency whereby it is
supported, and the disorder and confusion it would work in the church, in
learning, in laws, in her Majesty's authority, in her revenues, in every man's
private right beside, if it were received: and lastly the seditious, and lewd
courses that some men have taken to establish the same: If some have bin
punished; it cannot be denied, but that they have well deserved it, yea that
they have deserved more punishment, and less favor. For never was matter
preferred with worse course. which I do not speak, for that I would have
either the disciplinarians faults, or penalties aggrauated. (for the faults
are grievous in ough already, and the punishment I refer to our superiors:)
but least any should surmise they are wronged, or that the laws are rigorous,
or that the proceedings of her Majesty, and officers against them are
injurious. For further declaration whereof, I have thought good, not only to
answer the vain cauils of the petitioner against the proceedings of Judges,
and their sentence pronounced against Vdal, but also to maintain and justify
their upright and good dealing therein. It may seem strange, that law should
not have strength sufficient to defend it self against the malice of these
men. But seeing the vigor thereof is either dulled, or abated, and men
suffered to declaime against Judges and laws; let us assay, whether with
reason and argument we can defend law: A matter albeit hard, where the readers
are such, as repugne against law, and are led forth without reason, yet very
easy to be effected, where those that shall judge, understand both law, and
reason, upon confidence therefore of indifferent, discrete, and wise men's
judgment, I commend this chapter following to thy reading.

CAP. 3. That the proceeding against John Vdall was just and lawful, and that
the plat formers are justly charged with breach of diverse laws, and guilty of
faction, sedition, and diverse other crimes, notwithstanding the exceptions in
that behalf brought by the petitioner, or others, against the laws, and
Judges.
I Would not have thought, that any had been so lewd, as publicly to condemn
Judges of injustice; or so foolish, as to oppose themselves against the
execution of justice, had not this lewd libell declared the platformers to be
of a strange humor, and malcontent, both with Judges, and laws. By these I do
see, that it sorteth well, that men that desire innovation should speak
against laws, and that such as do live in disorder, and are void of reason
should speak against Justice, and reason. John Vdall, a man utterly unlearned,
and very factious was, as you have heard, condemned upon the statute of 23
Eliz. 2, And for diverse other disorders mentioned in the indictment: That it
was justly, and equally done, the greatness of the offense, being faction, and
sedition; the sincere and upright dealing of those honorable persons, that then
were Judges; the allowance of others the most reverend and learned Judges in
the land, resolving on the case; the indifferency of the Jury; the clemency
of her Majesty's government; the witnesses, and proofs; the favor offered to
the prisoner; the obstinacy of the party, the testimony of all that was
present, can declare. Against all these, a certain quidam libeller, lately
distracted of his wits, and yet not well recovered, takes on him to argue
boldly, malapertly, yea and very loosely, and foolishly. But his malapert, and
saucie dealing I leave to governors to be considered; his loose and foolish
dispute, I doubt not to make manifest to all that shall read this discourse.

His first exception against the sentence pronounced against Vdal is, For that
he diffamed not her Majesty, which the law provided for, but Bishops that are
no part of her Majesty's body politic, nor any of the three estates of this
realm. wherein he does not only deny things true, and affirm things false:
but also talk of law, like a stranger ignorant in law, and allege an
impertinent, and not concludent matter. That he diffamed her Majesty appeared
at the time of his trial by his writings, and out of his seditious sermons,
and speeches proved by diverse witnesses: and cannot now be called in question,
seeing he that speaks against her Majesty's supreme government in
ecclesiastical causes, her laws, her proceedings, and all those
ecclesiastical officers which rule under her, as John Vdall and his fellows
use to do, diffameth her Majesty. yea and that much more, then if he should
touch her private person. for that concerns her government, and therein is
she touched especially as a prince, and her princely authority and majesty
disgraced. And therefore, seeing that is the common case of all the puritan
faction: all they that write for their pure government against this state, are
diffamers of her Majesty's princely dignity.

Secondly, he denies the Bishops to be one of the three estates of
Parliament, and the Clergy to be one of the three estates of the Realm;
contrary to the reckonning of this Realm, and common speech, and acts of
parliament, whose common style is the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
commons of the realm, contrary to the use of the French, from whence we had
the I assemblee destroys estats. viz. le elerge, la noblesse, and cominaute.
word, and which call the parliament the assemble of the three estates: and
contrary to the reckonning of all Christendom, that divide the realm into
the ecclesiastical state, nobility, and commons; yea contrary to
Christianity. For who will reckon the estate without mention of religion, but
such as seek nothing but their cause and profit without consideration of
religion? in the acts of parliament made at Edingburgh anno 1584, these words
are often repeated. His majesty and the three estates. And again: Our
sovereign Lord and his three estates in this present parliament. The heathens
reckened but two estates, to wit,, the Senatum and plebem.
nobility, and commons. Christians ever reckoned the ecclesiastical state one.
neither does any lawyer say contrary. P. anno 36, and 37. h. 8. f. 60.
In a certain report of Judge Dyer, we read, that one certain lawyer is of
opinion (for reason he brings none) that the parliament consists of three
parts, the Prince, the Lords, the commons: but we reason of the parliament
considered as a body of it self beside the prince: as it is in common speech
considered. for so we say, the king in his parliament assembled at Westminster,
or the king to the parliament, or parliament to the king. In which kinds of
speech, if you make the king a part of the parliament, you make the prince to
treat with himself, which cannot be. Besides that, you iumble the lords
spiritual and temporal together and make but one state of them, which is
contrary to common speech. Last of all, you make the prince that is head,
equal with the parts, and make others as good as him: which is the endeavor of
this libeller. and therefore I say, that the prince is head of that body that
consists of three estates, viz. the lords spiritual and temporal, and
commons: which co^curring make laws to bind the realm neither is it true,
that the bishops by law may be excluded out of parliament. For in all
parliame^ts ordinarily their assent is set down in terms. What is done, or
what has been done in Jewel. def. of the Apol.
fact, I will not say. So the Certain statutes have been made by the king,
lords spiritual, and commons: others by the king, lords spiritual and
temporal.
lords or commons may also be excluded, but we reason of law. And if the
bishops may be excluded, the^ may the nobility be excluded also. For the
lords consist part of bishops, part of temporal lords: and both have equal
right. That the bishops cannot be excluded by right, appears by the
Throughout all statutes.
laws and customs of this land. Sometime they departed because they would not
be at judgment of life or member, which they supposed to be contarie to
canons, or because they would not decree contrary to canons; but that was
their wilfulnes. that they were put out, as the libeller holds, cannot be
proved. Neither Jewel, nor Bilson, nor any lawyer will say it: wherefore that I
have said, that they are one of the states of parliament, I prove by the
general terms of statutes, by common speech, by original of the phrase, by
orders of other nations, by common account of Christians, and the libeller has
said nothing to the contrary. For both in Dyers report, and 11. H 7.27. and 7.
H. 7.14.
also in other cases, under Lords, are comprised both the Clergy, and
Nobility: which all the learned make two estates, how soever some seem to make
of two one. And contrary to the report of the argument made by judge Dyer all the learned do recko^. For he makes the prince one of the three estates, which
of al other is made the head of them.

He affirms that many laws were made, the bishops either being neglected,
or not called to counsel: but he erreth. For it does not appear, that ever
any parliament was assum^^ (...) were called: and present, until they either
went out willingly, which they did sometimes where matters of life and death
were handled; or left their voices by proxy with temporal lords, sitting
still and saying nothing. yea al lawyers can tell him, that where there are more
bishops then other barons in the upper house, no act can pass against al their
voices: And that some acts have passed by the assent of the Lords spiritual and
commons; and many ancient acts without any voice, or assent of the commons;
and yet should the libeller reckon absurdly, if he should deny the lords or
commons, to be among the estates of the land, which some call Ordines regni.

In all this discourse of bodies politic, the libeller talks neither like
politic, lawyer, nor divine. for seeking the trouble of the state, and
overthrow of the ministry; little does he seem to understand what belongs to
policy: and neither yielding to her Majesty's prerogative, nor well defining
what bodies politic are, nor how they are made, nor what right they have: and
going about to dissolve laws, and call Judges to render account to private
persons, and to traduce trials, and judgments orderly passed, can it be
surmised that he understands any one point of law, and who will imagine, that
he understands any divinity, that says, that bishops have only authority
from men? for albeit, they be called externally by men, yet have they
authority also from Matthew. 28. and ephe. 4. and romans 13.
God. does he not understand, that not only ministers, but also inferior
magistrates have power both from God and men? if he have not learned so much,
the Apostle will teach him, that there is no power but of God: and Apostolical
writings declare that the power of preaching and of administering the keys is
from God; and that as Bishops and ministers have power, and an external
calling given them by men, so they have a warrant also for that calling in Gods
word, in which God now speaks to us; and that these two are not contraries
to have a calling from God, and another calling from men. And therefore, where
he charge us to speak contraries, he is much abused. The error was in his
own unstayed and blunt head, that could not pearce into this distinction.

But suppose there had been no error in all this discourse: yet is it absurd,
because it is not to purpose. for be there two general bodies in the Realm or
more: and be it, that the bishops are part of the politic body of her
Majesty or not: yet if John Vdall, and his fellows have diffamed her
Majesty, they are to be punished, and among the rest this fellow: which had
been greatly to be wished: for then had he not wearied the reader with his
frivolous discourse.

That they have diffamed her Majesty, the libeller proves by way of
objection. wherein though his skill be little: yet I grant the conclusion.
neither can he with all his skill answer that little objection, which
himself has made. what then need we use many words to overcome him, that
like a frantike disputer has wounded himself, and made such an objection, as
he cannot assoyle?

His second exception brought against Vdals condemnation is, for that he wrote
not advisedly. which if it were as concludent as true: I would yield he had
reason. for most true it is, that he wrote not advisedly. Nay it is a common
fault of this faction, that neither writes advisedly, nor soberly. But it is
no excuse for Vdals offense. for albeit he wrote not advisedly, that is,
discreetely: yet did he write advisedly, that is, of set purpose, those things
that tend to the disgrace of her Majesty's government. He wrote also
maliciously, and uttered in his books, and sermons seditious matters. And it
is not only his fault, but of diverse other of that sort. which three points
although he goes about to clear, yet does he nothing, but tell us a long
fable of his new discipline, enter larded with contumelious speeches, part
against king H. the 8, and William Rufus, and part against the present
government, filling up the measure of the factious consistorials iniquity.

But before he comes to the matter, he goes about to prove, that for words
spoken of simplicity no man is to be punished: And shows great eloquence in
that which no man, I think, sure I for my part mean not to deny. He tells
us a tale of Carmichell of Scotland, that was compelled to burn his bill, for
that he said in his sleep the devil take away the priests: which
concerns the matter in question nothing, but that he would have a glance at
the clergy, whom in disdain the factious sort call priests, when as the
name of priests is the best title whereby their elders claim their
inheritance. Another tale he tells in disgrace of king H. the 8, of famous
memory: whom he charge with great injustice for causing the execution of
Burder the Merchant that dwelt at the crown. for these are a kind of curres
that bite quick, and dead. A third tale he tells of William Rufus, whom
he charge with favoring Iudaisme, and forcing some to rinegue
Christianity: which is a little more then can be proved, and much more then
wisdom required to be uttered; tending to the slander of Christian religion.
this preludium made, he falls to his matter, and goes about to prove, that
he wrote not advisedly to diffame her Majesty

To prove this he says, Page 19.
that John Vdall and his companions only seek to have the corruption of the
time redressed, and write against ignorant, unlearned, negligent, presumptuous
ministers, against the remnantes of popery and Idolatry, and agaiust enormious
corruptions: wherein he auoweth they have done nothing, but as the prophets
of old time did, that exclaymed against dumb dogs, greedy dogs, and the
high places, and as in time of popery some did, which inueighed against popish
bishops: and affirms that they would write so much against their father, if
he were a bishop, or non resident: matters most absurd and false. for neither
have these leude and loose companions such a commission as had the Prophets,
nor is the ecclesiastical state to be compared with the idolatrous and wicked
priests, or popish bishops. Neither have the same followed the steps of
Prophets, or any prophetical persons. Gods Prophets they speak nothing but
truth: these are still telling us prodigious, and false tales of their
consistory, and counterfeit discipline. The Prophets never ray led against
authority, nor governors, these rail against ecclesiastical, and civil
governors, and all that withstand the^. the prophets showed not themselves
unnatural to their parents, these profess unkindness. they did not assemble in
seditious sort, nor go about to make new laws for the Church, as these did.
They never by wicked conspiracy went about to establsh any new fancies, as did
Wigginton, Hacket, Coppinger, Cartw. Vdall, and all that were acquainted with
that action. They never declaymed against others, being most guilty themselves,
as these fellows do, which being most negligent and loose in laboring, most
unlearned and ignorant, full of new fooleries, do notwithstanding inueigh
against others so bitterly, that as this wise fellow professes, they will not
spare their father: no nor mother: and why? forsooth because they are of those
which S. Paul speaks of, and tells us, that they are without 2. Tim. 3.3.
natural affection.

This defense therefore is insufficient: first, for that it is false: for they
do otherwise then they profess: And secondly, for that they confess in this
treatise at unawares, that they diffame her Majesty's government, affirming the
same to be full of enormious corruptions, and to have in it relics of
Idolatry, and impiety, and to maintain a wicked and insufficient The
ministry of England is better without comparison, then that of France,
Scotland, or Dutchland.
ministry: imitating therein, as underhand they insinuate, the wicked kings
of Israel, and cruel tyrants that persecuted the Church. And lastly for that
he avouches, that in those times, no man was accounted a diffamer of princes,
that spoke against the ecclesiastical laws and state: which cannot be proved.

To justify his companions doings, he tells us further, a long discourse,
how they pray for her Majesty, how they pay subsidy, how they fought for her
Majesty when the Spaniards were here. And how some whom England shall remember
while it is England, ventured as far as any. which is no more the^ the
papists profess, nor the^ Jews and Pagans do: which yield al duties to
princes, and fight when as the Puritanes played the cowards, and few showed
themselves, for I know diverse that being there, saw very few puritanes
armed to maintain this brag. But so deinty and nice they are, that they
exclame if they be not highly rewarded for every little duty: yea, for fighting
for themselves and their country: and plainly profess, that without their
desires for discipline, they mean to withdraw all duty. And therefore this
is but a vain brag of praying, preaching four times a day, and I know not
what. for their tumultuous praying, and prating in those times did rather
discourage, then encourage any: and was rather the beginning of tumult, then
any encouragement. and he that preached four times a day, had much idle
talk, and made many unsavory discourses. But suppose some few of these men
showed themselves loyal, and were so ventrous as to come to Tilberie, or rail
against the Spanyardes; yet others, as it may well be surmised, were framing
supplications, and providing horse and arms, to come to present them al in
arms. Then did Martin frame his seditious libelles; then others preached
seditious sermons, all tending to the weakening of those that willingly offered
themselves in that service. And Martin senior professes that when the enemy
was ready to assail us abroad, there were a hundred thousand hands ready to
subscribe the supplication of puritanes at home: which says he, in good
policy, (we being in fear of outward force) might not be denied, nor
discouraged. Then which there can be no greater argument of their disloyal
proceedings.

Where they are charged with railing against the princes government, they
excuse it saying, that therein they meant no more malice to her Majesty, then
the godly prophets, that under Ezekiah and Josiah reproved the abuses of the
Church. which is a point, which must be read with great patience. for who can
else endure to hear them compare themselves to the prophets, their doings to
the doing of the prophets, the comparison being so unlike? Gods prophets were
humble, meek, peaceable, and possessed with Gods spirit. These are proud,
disdainefull, contentious, and driven with other spirits. They never spoke
against the state, nor condemned the calling of priests, nor said that the
laws were antichristian and devilish: these stand especially on these points,
and abuse the governors, and rail against laws, and this fellow as
malepertly, as the best.

He would further make the world believe, that his clyents seek only for
reformation, and does every where dubbe them with names of seekers of
reformation. But great difference there is betwixt pretense and performance.
Jack Straw and Wat Tyler, and Kett of Norffolke, and all rebels pretend
reformation as well as these, but the courses, and deeds of both tend to
nothing but disorder, and confusion. the prince they would abase, the Church
they would spoil, the ecclesiastical state they seek to abolish: learning
and rewards in all places where they come, they take away. Moreover he goein
about to prove, that bishops may be hated for their doctrine: and first, for
that they impugn that, which heretofore they have taught. but neither is his
co^lequent good, nor antecede^t true. for albeit that bishop Elmar spoke
sometimes against the excess of bishops livings, as he then imagined, not
knowing in what state they stood, yet did he never condemn the degree and
dignity of bishops. nor did bishop Bollingham, as it should seem speak
against the manners of others then papisticall bishops: assuredly against the
degree of bishops he never spoke. Neither are the opinions of one or two, to be
ascribed to all: but if they which speak contrary to themselves, deserve
hatred, what does Tho. Cartw. deserve, that in many things speaks he
knows not what, in some things contrary to himselselfe, as in election of
ministers, power of the presbytery, and diverse points? And what does the
Libeller deserve that confesses he talks he knows not what, contrarying
his whole discourse?

Another reason he brings to prove that bishops may justly be hated, and
that is because they confess (says he) infinite abuses to be in the church.
But the ground of the reason is false: for no bishop did ever confess so much.
nor does it follow, because some one speaks untruth, that all the clergy
of England should be maligned, and hated.

Thirdly, he thinks them worthy of hate, for that having taught that a bishop
and priest is all one by Gods word: they now teach; that all that hold so, be
heretics. But he does us wrong for charging us to say, that a bishop, and
priest is all one by Gods word: the word Episcopus and presbyter in scriptures
is commonly used for one: but we speak english, and call those that rule
bishops, and others priests: which distinction we find plainly in scriptures:
and therefore hold the teachers of equality to be Aerians, and confounders of
government, and to be justly condemned not only by Epiphanius, but also by
Augustine, yea and by the consent of all the fathers, that distinguish priests
into 2 sorts, giving the name of bishop to those that rule, and priest to the
second that are ruled. And therefore most senseless is their reason, that
because they have all one name, will conclude of it aequalitie of all
ministers. For magistrates, teachers, subjects have all one name, and yet are
divided into diverse degrees. In vain therefore does the libeller bring proofs
that the words presbyter and episcopus are commonly taken for one, for that
notwithstanding there may be difference of degrees. howsoever they will answer
this objection: yet is it apparent, that the same overthrows, as I said,
their consistorial aldermen. Away the^ with the new church aldermen, and those
heretics that maintain them: for albeit Epiphanius erred in accompting them
heretics that prayed not for the dead, yet is ye same no reason to show he
erred in this, which not only Augustine mainteineth, but all the Fathers also.
and not only they; but the four general counsels, which this land approves:
so that by the laws of England they are heretics, yt hold the equality of
ministers. what shameless dealing the^ was this, for the libeller to allege ye
Syriake interpreter, or Chrysostom, or Ambrose, or Theodoret, when no one
speaks for equality, every one defends degrees in the ministers of the
word? but the word cashisha says he, comprehe^deth both bishop and priest,
what the^? so does a living creature comprise men and beasts: yet are not both
equal in dignity neither does it help him, yt the order of priesthood
co^priseth both bishops and priests: for it does not take away ye dignity of
some above others: what needed then so many names of Wicleffe, Marsilius of
Padua, Luther, Bullinger, Jewel, Melancthon, and others that speak as we do?
or Calvin and his fellows that speaks against al antiquity? or what needed
this compagnion to muster so many names either of protestant churches, seeing
they were not of Caluins opinion, or of papists: seeing we do not follow
Bellarmin, Stapleton, or papists, but antiquity that speaks as we do?
Neither does it follow, Chrysostom. Hierom. Augustine. in 4. ad Ephesians.
that the ecclesiastical state is to be maliced for teaching that Pastor and
Doctor are all one: for so has all antiquity taught: and their interpretation
by all antiquity is confirmed. Neither is it material what Calvin, Beza,
Daneau, Bertrand de loques, Villiers, and other say to the contrary, seeing
they talk contrary to antiquity, reason, and all practice. Finally, their own
practice and diverse reasons stand against Doctors, which neither the libeller,
nor his mates make any haste to answer.

The exposition of the word (...), Math. 20.25.
is most absurdly forced by these compagnions to make against superior degrees
in the ministry, for that the apostles notwitstanding Christ's prohibition,
(...), were superior to other degrees of ministers. And very absurd it were,
if Christ should suffer tyrants to oppress the people, and forbid lawful
authority to the ministers: by which also would fall the authority of the
consistory, and ministers live without controlment. And therefore as long as
these fellows interpret against all scripture, antiquity, and reason; yea
and themselves too: it skilleth not what they say against superior degrees:
Against which Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Calvin, Bullinger and the rest are
most peruersely alleged. They say, and so likewise Jewel, Sadeel, Bridges,
Bilson, Whitakers and others say, that bishops, as bishops may not take upon
them the rule of kingdoms, nor rule with force like Princes. But who is so
simple as to conclude hereof, that one minister may not rule another, as these
fellows do? But suppose some of our learned men should interpret (...),
otherwise then Calvin has done, must all the clergy suffer for one man's not
yeeelding to Caluins fancy? Or because some deny that sovereign princes may
be excommunicate defending therein the sovereignty of princes, against the
rebellious Papists and Puritans, must therefore the Ecclesiastical state be
dissolved? nothing is more absurd. for herein as the adversaries deserve
punishment: so our men deserve special commendation, in confuting the
seditious doctrine of factious persons.

They also consent flatly with the Papists in denying the princes supremacy in
making laws, judging of ecclesiastical matters, or appointing others to judge
them, and diverse other points. neither can the libeller sever their opinions
from the^: for first it is false that he says, that the Papists exempt their
clergy in civil causes from the princes jurisdiction; or that the
consistorials do give authority to the prince to deal with their consistories
and pastors in ecclesiastical causes, so long as they judge they have done
well themselves. for they take the dealing therein from the prince, and give
power of deposition to their eldership. And as the consistorials say, that the
prince may enforce their co^sistories making wicked decrees, to make better,
(which taking the judgment of those matters from princes, I see not how they
can well do) so the papists will have the prince not only to reform ministers,
but the pope himself also. Si Papa sit incorrigibilis, Imperator potest
procedere contra ipsum says Heruaeus. de potest. papae c. 13.
Heruey: papa potest accusaricoram Imperatore, says Zabarel lib. de schism.
and council.
Zabarel. The papists confess, that princes may make laws with ye advise of
the pope, as these confess he may with the advice of the consistory. They
confess that the prince may take order where the Pope is incorrigible, as
these say, where their pastors are wicked and ungodly: and therefore the
libeller does nothing but fable, where he would sever the co^sistorials from
papists. but what should we look for other at his hands, seeing he is not
ashamed to say, that the consistorials will subscribe to the apology of the
church of England, and the articles of religion authorized and published by
parliament, which deny the degrees of the ministry, and oppugn them which are
confirmed both by the apology, and by articles of religion professed in this
church? Lastly, they take exception against us, for that we teach that the best
All the ancient Fathers, and of late writers, Melancthon, Luther, and of others
the best
writers are against the eldership, as if it were not proved by such authors
and arguments, as these fellows as yet delay to answer. As for Daneau, and
certain pety compagnions defenders thereof, their authority is of no weight
speaking against such antiquity, and consent, and reason.

The Libeller would also have the ecclesiastical state made odious for their
misgouernment: a very malicious and insufficient course. for suppose that 3, or
4 should do against law, is it reason that law should be taken away? or that
many should suffer for a few men's faults? how much more unreasonable is it,
that the same should be oppressed, for supposed misgouernment? That articles
are ministered to parties conuented in law, and subscription required to laws,
is most consonant to laws: neither is any thing in the laws of England, or
the statute 25. Henr. 8.19. there to the contrary. The Libeller seems not to
understand himself nor others, when he talks of bishops devising articles,
and subscriptions, and publishing them in their own names: for there can not
be devised a more absurd kind of speech. Subscriptions are required of
others, and not published; and articles are objected as private means to bolt
out truth, and not as laws to be practiced. A course usual in all courts of
chancery, eschecker, and starrechamber: but what reason had this fellow to
object to bishops that which they do not, when Th. Cartw. and his At Warwick,
Cambridge, London etc. the acts thereof are evidence sufficient.
fellows contrary to the statutes and laws of the Realm, assembled in
secret manner, made laws, and subscribed them, and published them among
themselves, and yet are not punished for it?

They say, that bishops appoynting special prayers upon occasion of the
invasion of the Spaniards, and other special causes, do contrary to that
which they require in others: but they mistake. for those offend not, that in
every point of the Communion book observe not strict order, which the book in
some case aloweth: but such malicious fellows, as of malitiousnes refuse it,
and contemptuously oppugn it. Neither is the use of special prayers upon
occasion, contrary to the use of the book of common prayer subscribed unto
with exclusion of all other orders of common prayers: for both may stand
together. Neither did Bishops any thing in this behalf without her Majesty's
special commandment: But these fellows are of those, that allow not her
Majesty's godly orders, nor any thing done by Governors nor any prayers but
fond, loose, vain, and absurd babbling oraisons of Puritans: and seem to be
sorry, that any should pray against the Spaniards.

They think also, and the Libeller affirms, that it is as lawful for
contentious persons to refuse the surples, as for Bishops not to use pastoral
staves. But it is most absurd so to say, the use of the surples being
consirmed by law, the use of the pastoral staves not being required by law,
or custom: But were pastoral staves enjoined by law, is this a good reason,
because Bishops offend, that every lawless compagnion should pass without
controlment?

That Cawdry was punished by order of law is apparent for that the statute
does authorize the high Commissioners to proceed according to their
Commission. If any fault were therein committed, it was that he was used with
so His cause was almost two years in handling, his conformity continually
being exspected.
much lenity: Never was any more obstinate, nor could any man have more favor
especially without desert. for neither had he learning, nor other good
quality, nor was any more factious.

That felonies were examined before the high Commissioners Ec-Ecclesiasticall,
is a vain cavil. neither does it follow, because upon examinations of
matters, fellonious libels are found out, that they proceed to the cognition
and determining of felonies. Neither do the Ecclesiastical Judges contray to
law either in citations, or ministering oaths in causes ex officio, or punishing
lewd and factious perturbers of the state. If this fellow do maintain the
contrary: let him leave his idle quotations, and set down the words of law,
and enforce them by argument to his purpose. Otherwise all men may see he goes
about rather to calumniate good men: then to justify any accusation against
his adversaries. If he prove nothing, let him be ashamed to call his factious
compagnions seekers of reformation: their libels and frivolous pamphlets,
books of reformation: and cease to impugn her Majesty's laws, and sentence
of Judges against John Vdall, whose fact no man can defend, but such as
maintain sedition, and faction: nor praise, but such as are enamored of
senceles and unlearned hypocrites: and let him cease to charge the Bishops with
seeking his life. for they are not his parties: nay next to her Majesty he is
to thank some Bishops for his life. for if they had bin as he says, nay, if
some had not entreated for him, percase he had bin hanged, and all this
controversy taken up and ended. If he cease not, percase the world will think
that Vdall deserved rather more severity, then is now showed to him: and that
the libellers bold demeanor may procure him to have justice for his foolish
prating, rather then favor for any witty reasoning.

Hitherto all the Libellers dispute is without sequel. for admit some one or
more should teach falsely, or do against law: yet is it no reason, that
every base compagnion should with open mouth rail against her Majesty's
government and Laws, and call them Antichristian, and speak against the
whole clergy, yea against Judges, and all that favor the present government.
Let those that have taught falsely be refuted, and those that have done leudly
be punished. That the state should be dissolved for the misgouernment of
particulars, no reason will admit.

That the platformers offer their lives to prove their discipline, (which the
libeller alleges to excuse the^) is a senseless reason. for no traitors, nor
felo^s deal in any cause yt they undertake, but they offer and venture their
lives for it: yea, and Jack Straw and Hacket offered their lives, to prove
their reformation; whereas these fellows contrariwise, are very loath to loose
lives, lands, or goods for their discipline, and loose nothing but with much
grumbling and repining, and come far behind the Jesuits and Papists in that
point. And so simple is their proof, that if they be wise, they will not
venture any thing upon it: for the demonstrations of discipline stand confuted
without replye, and all their presbyteriall imaginations rest beaten without
answer: neither is any argument in all T. C. his great confused Chaos of
replies left untouched. His multiplicitie of words we leave to factious
Puritans that speak ordinarily without sense or matter, to play withal.

To excuse his fellows silence, the Libeller pretends want of liberty, and
Printers; which cannot justly be alleged: for how can they want printers,
having Waldgraue in Scotland, and others at Geneua, Middleburg and Leyden at
commandment, beside their private presses? Or how can they pretend want of
liberty, seeing none have been long imprisoned, and many came never in prison?
That which the libeller here inserteth again of other churches, whom he
would have us to conform our selves unto, he would never have mentioned, if he
had understood the grounds of his own discipline. for them selves say, that
all Discipline de l'esglise Francoise.
Churches be aequall, and it is apparent that every christian realm and Church
is to be governed by her own laws: but these be the fellows that would
translate the Popedom to Geneua, and have us fetch laws from new Rome. Seeing
then that John Vdall and his compagnions have maintained a lewd and fond
government never heard of in antiquity, and by wicked forgery and lies have
gone about to disgrace the present state and the governors, and have rayled
against her Majesty and laws; and that the Libellers defense is most
frivolous, it can not be denied, that they have written maliciously to diffame
her Majesty: And good is were, they had stayed in writing: but they would not
be ruled. for T. Cartw. Ioh. Vdall, and others were acquainted, but too well
with Hackets conspiracy.

His third exception against John Vdals condemnation, is for that he wrote not
against her Majesty's person. But the same is very frivolous, for the Majesty
of a prince consists in his power, laws, government, and not in his
particular person, or private qualities or behavior. Neither are the papists
punished for speaking against her person, but speaking against her supremacy
and laws. Therefore seeing he confesses he wrote against her laws and
government, he must also confess, that he offended against the statute that
made it felony to write malicious, and diffamatory matters against her
Majesty. The preamble declares as much, for that the same prete^deth, that
certain persons evil affected to her Majesty should be suppressed: In which
number these that would disanul her government, and would bring her in
subjection to Hackets prophets, or the prophetical consistory are especially to
be reckoned, and it was the special meaning of the parliament that the
malepartnesse both of papists, and puritans should be repressed: as some there
present in parliament do witness. Neither is it material, that penal laws are
of strict interpretation, for expound it as strict as you will. it cannot be,
but those that diffame her Majesty any way, either in person or government must
fall within the compass of the statute. That which is brought of the statute of
13. Eliz. c. 1. and 1. and 2. of Mary. 3. is idle talk, and concludes
nothing. neither is it true, that those that account her Majesty's religion,
and laws heretical, and schismatical are without the compass of the statute,
that makes it treason to call her Majesty schismatike, and heretic. fond
likewise it is, that he talks of stealing of horses, and contrary to his
purpose: Seeing he mainteineth a company of asses, that would encroch upon her
Majesty's government, and steal away the hearts of her people.

But says he, her Majesty is a body politic in fiction. which is untrue, for
she is in truth a politic body: That is has a resemblance of a body truly.
But were she not a politic body at all, should it be lawful to diffame her
laws, and government? This exception therefore is beside the law. for be she
body politic or no, if her Majesty be diffamed, then is an offense committed
against that statute.

that if it be a diffamation of her Majesty, to speak against her
ecclesiastical laws, they should also diffame her Majesty that speak against
the eldership. which is an argument like to the resolutions of the eldership,
that is, senceles, and foppish. for admit her Majesty tolerate the french
Church, yet does she not confirm their french laws, no more then they of
Geneua confirmed the orders of the English Church at Geneua: nor do other
confirm contrary religions which for some occasions they tolerate; so that,
to speak against the absurd government of that In king Edwards days the
Churches of strangers were subject to their superintendents: in this Queens
time to the bishops of Canterbury and London: against whom while unkindly they
spurn, they show themselves ungrateful, not only unmindful of her Majesty's
benefits.
company, that contrary to law and covenant have exempted themselves from the
bishops government, and erected synodes, is to speak in defense of her
Majesty's laws, and not against them: whereas these fellows offend in direct
oppugning all her Majesty's ecclesiastical government.

because it is not treason to kill bishops, or other subjects, nor felony to
write or to speak against bishops government, that therefore her Majesty is
not diffamed, when they are diffamed. A reason rather to kill the libellers
cause, when al men see his malice, and ignorance, then to hurt others. for no
man says her Majesty is diffamed, because libels are written against bishops,
or others, but because the same libels do touch her majesty's government, and
laws: and that not in one or two points, but in the very whole body and
government ecclesiastical of her majesty, and that in most disordered manner:
and that the authors thereof are therefore punished for perturbing the state,
not for their fond opinions of discipline. Neither does the libellers frivolous
talk of politic members, or of diffaming the Dukes of Saxony or high Almaine
pertain to this purpose. The seditious books of the disciplinarian faction
have been intended against her majesty, and nor the Dukes of Saxony, or kings
of Denmark, albeit they touch them in some sort, that maintain the
superiotity of bishops also.

that the intention of the parliament, was not to protect bishops: as if they
meant not to maintain the laws and state. But admit it be true: yet it makes
neither hot nor cold to this purpose. for these seditious fellows are not
condemned for speaking against bishops, but for that arguing against them, and
the ecclesiastical state, they proceed in such violent sort, that they neither
spare her majesty's honor, nor her government in ecclesiastical causes. that
the meaning of the parliament was to repress the malice of puritanes is most
certain. for it was expressly mentioned at the time of making the act by diverse
of the house. and therefore justly are they to be punished by that statute.

exception to certain canons in use, as he supposes, as that women may not sue
their husbands for adultery, etc. and that spiritual kindred hinders marriage,
and others concerning excommunication and fasting: and therefore concludes,
that if it be lawful for some to find faults with the^, and yet do not diffame
her majesty, that I. Vd. diffamed not her majesty. but both his reason is
naught, and his judgment in law simple: for albeit men are not accounted
diffamers of her majesty, that reprehe^d some law with modesty, yet can no man
call her majesty's government antichristian, nor rail against her laws and
government as idolatrous, and superstitious, without diffamation of her
majesty. Nor is the sufferance of some me^, that deal modestly, a cloak to
cover seditious persons that deal factiously, and maliciously. The laws and
canons which he me^tioneth are utterly mistake^. Behold I pray you the ma^s
simple skill. first says he there is a 32. q.r.c. apud.
law, that women should not sue their husbands for adultery. But in the place
he quoteth there is no such matter, nay which is worse, Gratia^ who^ he
quoteth, has no authority of law. In that place there is mention made, that
the woman shall not accuse her husband for adultery to have him put to death:
which this wisard understood not, but thought the^ to be forbidden to sue their
husbands for adultery. But the Gloss. ibid.
gloss tells him, that the contrary of that is law, and the practice of
ecclesiastical courts is contrary, and so has always been: and many at this
day do sue their husbands in causes of divorce, for adultery.

The 2. 24. q. 2. c. vlt.
Canon which he cites, and affirms to be contrary to Gods law, is that
heretics after their death should be excommunicate. But first it does not
appear that it is law with us. for as I have already told him, Gratian is no
law. So that I cannot but wonder what blockish conceit came into this man's
distempered brain, to talk of canon law, that knows not what is law.
Besides it does not appear that this was practiced before the statute of 25.
H. 8, 19. lastly the same is not contrary to Gods word. for to the memory of
wicked heretics, such as Arrius, Eutyches, Nestorius, Macedonius, Paulus of
Samosata, we say Anathema. And if the libeller say not so, he is a looser
companion, then I took him for.

The 3. Canon that he 30. q. 3. c. pitatium.
affirms to be contrary to Gods law, and not to ours, is that spiritual
kindred shall hinder marriage. But both is the same direct contrary to our laws,
that only respect the degrees of co^sanguinity, and affinity, and such like as
are mentioned in Leuit. and not to Gods law where they list to use it, we allow
no degrees of kindred to hinder marriage, but such as are noted in Leuiticus. Nor
is it an offense against Gods law for some civil or domestical cause, other
then degrees of kindred to forbid marriage for some time with some persons. And
therefore they of Ordonances de Geneue.
Geneua, albeit they account the marriage of cosins german lawful, yet think
them not convenient. He alleges also certain canons, that enjoin Clearks to
fast 7 whole weeks before Easter, and forbid them to fast on thursday. But
that they were usually observed in England before that statute, he shows not.
Neither does he rightly quote the places. So that if these maleco^tent
disciplinaria^s mean to speak hereafter against ecclesiastical laws: they
must send us forth some wiser man, then this libeller to speak in their
cause, for he is but a simple fellow to dispute, and understands just
nothing in law, and very little in honesty. That in king Henry, and king
Edwardes days order was taken, for the collection together of laws in use, is
granted: but that they meant to correct laws in use, which this libeller does
insinuate, or did confess, that there be infinite corruptions in
ecclesiastical laws, which he affirms, cannot be proved. I will not longer
stand upon this point, for that I have spoken of it already, and the same is
beside the libellers purpose; which should prove that Vdall and his consortes
offend not against the statute of Eliz. 23. above mentioned. But his reasons
are all too weak. for either stand they upon false grounds, or else are they
misshapen, and evil featured.

That which he says of Wickleffe, Suinderby, Tindall, Hooper, Barnes, Latimer,
and others whom he charge with speaking against the state of the Church, and
common wealth, is utterly untrue. let the places be showed, and their words
set down. For in these that already are brought forth, there is no such matter
contained: they do not call our laws antichristian, nor disgrace the
government of the prince, nor condemn the superiority of bishops: nor rail
at the preachers of the Gospel, and governors of Christ's church. they never
framed libels nor inuectiues against the state. nor ever sought to have a new
found government established in the church. and albeit they inueigh against
the manners of men, and corruptions of those times, yet shall you not find
any, that has written in Martins satirical and doogeon style: nor that sought
to have either Church or state turned vpsidedowne, or committed to the
direction of the common sort. compare them with these late rimers, libellers,
and firebrands of sedition: you shall see a wonderful difference.

Further says he, some find fault with the forfeiture of traitors lands,
some with the short return of writs, others with pluralities of fermes, and
engrossing of Manors, others with racking of rents, and diverse other laws and
customs. admit they did: yet is not the fact of one, an excuse for the offense
of others. we live by laws, not by examples. But it cannot be showed, that any
ever so raged with malice against laws as the Martinists did, and do. those
percase spoke against some one or two laws, and that modestly submitting
themselves to the controlement of their superiors: they railed not against
governors, nor lanced them with malicious libels, nor sought innovation, but
redress of things disordered. to all these examples therefore of Wickleffe,
Suinderby, Hooper, Barnes, Latimer, and those that have found fault with some
abuses in law; I answer first, that it is one thing to desire the reformation
of some one abuse, and another to desire the subversion both of all
ecclesiastical governors, and laws, which cannot be without a dangerous
innovation of state; and secondly, that the course of the proceeding of those
that have spoken against men's manners, and some one law, is far different
from these men's doings and writings, that strive for the new kingdom of the
Consistory: lastly that Wickleffe, Suinderby, Tyndal, Barnes, Hooper, Latimer,
spoke against the corruptions of papisticall Bishops, both in doctrine and
manners: yet never did they seek for a new consistorial government, nor did
they libell against the governors, the laws, the state.

This is but the Consistorian style lately found out, and practiced by lewd
lozels, and satyricall backebiters of good men. for which, if no other
punishment be laid on them, yet they shall surely answer at the last dreadful
day, if they repent and amend not.

Further it is a shameful course, though greatly pleasing these men's humors,
to take that which good men spoke against pompous and tyrannical Bishops that
governed at pleasure, and gave over preaching altogether: and to apply the same
against Pishops, that neither so excel in wealth, but that many base
scriuanos, and merchants, yea shoemakers and tailors surpass the^; nor in
power, but that mean companions abuse them; and are not popish tyrants, but
preachers of the gospel. If the libeller had had any modesty, he would not
thus have abused men's writings: nor if he had intended any other matter, then
to make libels, would he have drawn out certain rimes out of Pierce Plowma^,
and Chaucer, men far excelling him in all modesty and humanity. for albeit
they rimed against wicked bishops, yet do they speak more ciuilly of them,
then he does of godly and learned men, whom with rhyme dogrell, and dogged
railing, and many slanderous reports, and that in the presence of a prince,
he goes about maliciously to disgrace. Not that he would teach them any good:
For he sends them to the diuill to learn. Learn says he of the devil: of
which Master, the libeller has learned all his railing, and shameful
slaundering; and from him has he borrowed all his malice. Therefore I say not
as he says, learn of the devil; but learn not of him: he is a raylour, and
slaunderour, and so are all libellers, and reuellers, the right disciples of
Satan.

That these books pass with this approbation, Seen and allowed, it follows
not, that all things therein contained are allowed: but that they are allowed
to be printed, as having nothing in the opinion of him that allowed them
contrary to state. and rather, because we should reap some profit by that
which is good; then loose the good for the bad: or alallow that is evil because
it is joined with that which is good.

Neither are the consistoriall libellers punished, for speaking against civil
offices in bishops, or faults in them, albeit it be an uncivil part to
disgrace honest men in rimes and railing discourses, and sermons, and to
reprehend with such vehemency that, which they cannot disprove: but because
they bring in many pernicious doctrines, and ouerturne all government, and
deface the princes regiment, and bring in infinite lewd novelties, and that by
railing, reuelling, and faction. And therefore, if any suffer any punishment,
it is not for seeking reformation, but for deforming and diffaming, the frame
of this Church government, and common wealth, and that in shameful sort.
Neither does this libeller desire any thing more, then that learned men should
be set aside, that such sorry hines as himself might enter in place: A man
fitter to be scourged in Bedlem, then placed in Church government.

Neither is there any shelter for the libellers cause, under the names of my
Lord of Canterbury, Master Nowel, Master Rainoldes, and M. Bancroft: their
opinions and manners being so contrary, same was M, Bancroft from calling her
Majesty a pope, He reprehendeth Martin, for his rash assertion, implying that
she is a pope. All these men defend; the other oppugn the state: the one by
good means seek disorders to be reformed, the other by all injurious and
unlawful means, yea at length by conspiracy, sought to ouerturne the state.
And therefore, as the one deserves praise, so the libellers clyents deserve
punishment. And naught it is that he can say for them, their fault is so
foul, and his wit so simple.

They do I say, deserve punishment: first, for diffaming her Majesty, and
next, for plotting and working of rebellion. And that is gathered by their
doctrine, which does clearly show their meaning. for how should a man gather
a man's meaning, but by his words? Listen then first, what goodman, says a
patriarch of this seditious congregation. All men ( p. 73.74.77.
says he) Counselors, noblemen, inferior Magistrates, and people are bound,
and charged to see the laws of God kept, and to suppress, and resist
idolatry by force. Again: If the p. 196.
Magistrates shall refuse to put massemongers, and false preachers to death, the
people in seeing it performed, do show that zeal of God which was in Phinees,
destroying the adulterous; and in the Israelites against the Beniamites.
Further ( p. 4.
says he) to teach that it is not lawful in any case to resist the superior
powers, but rather to submit our selves to punishment, is a dangerous doctrine,
taught by some by Gods permission, for the punishment of our sins. He p.
63.43.59.72.
affirms also, that it is not sufficient for subjects not to obey wicked
commandments of their princes, but that they must withstand them also in
doing the contrary, every man in his vocation and office: And P. 3. and 35.
that it is the office of Counselors to bridle the affections of Princes and
governors. And Goodm. p. 99.
that it is lawful to kill wicked kings and tyrants. with him did he consent
that made the book of Obedience in Queen Mary's time. Queen Marie says he
P. 99. and 113. and good m.p. 180. and 184. and 185.
ought to be put to death, as being a tyrant, a monster, a cruel beast. And if
(says he) neither the inferior Magistrate, nor the greatest part of the people
will do their office (viz. in punishing, deposing, or killing of Princes) then
the Minister must excommunicate such a king. And again: obed. p. 110.
By the word of God in such a defection (or rebellion) a private man having
some special inward motion, may kill a tyrant. Whittingham that made a preface
to Goodmans book, affirms; That this doctrine was commended by the most
learned in those parts: which were Calvin, Beza, and certain English men.
The same doctrine, or disobedience rather against princes was taughr by De iure
regni.
Buchanan. Knox. appell. p. 28. and 30.
Knoxe says, that the nobility and comminaltie ought to reform religion, and
in that case may remove from honors, and punish. Unto these accorded Hottoman
in his Francogallia, and Beza de iure Magistratuum in subditos, vindiciae
contra tyrannos, Vrsinus, and the rest of the great patrons of the
Consistoriall discipline.

Secondly, the proceedings of the Consistorials, both in Scotland and England
declare the same. In Scotland the roades first of Ruthuen, then of Sterling,
where forcing the king, for safegarde of his honor and life, to take himself
to the Castle; they deposed Bishops, and erected Consistories. In England they
sent about their factors into every shire to procure subscriptions to their
newfangled discipline, they set up Consistories and Synodes, and watched the
time of the Spanish invasion, to begin their faites; and but that they saw
themselves two weak, would have by force (as many reasons make us suspect)
executed their purpose. yea notwithstanding their weakness, Hacket, Coppinger,
and Wigginton, with whom Th. Cartwright did communicate by diverse letters,
went about to raise a tumult, and to set up their discipline, which they called
their new kingdom. for which their new king was hanged, drawn, and
quartered, and Coppinger according to the puritan style, made away himself.

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly, Martin threatens force against those that maintain the state. The
author of the demonstration denounces great troubles toward, if they may not
have their will; and says, That the discipline shall come in by a way, that
shall make all our hearts to ache. And another of Martins Mart. se^.
whelps, braggeth of a hundred thousand hands, and threatens that they will
strike a great stroke in the setting up of discipline. And therefore, seeing
both by their doctrine, and words, and deeds they do declare themselves, and
their meaning; In vain does this lunatike scribe babble, that they entend no
rebellion. What should I believe words, when we may see deeds to the
contrary? yea, factes openly maintained in writing.

Add hereunto the drift of T. Cartwrights, Penries, Martins books, to move a
dislike in men's minds of the present government, and nothing will appear
more notorious then the bad meaning of these mutinous libellers.

But says the libeller, Whereas the adversaries do take as a principle: that
whosoever writes to work a coffeehouse in the minds of the subjects do
entend rebellion, that is a most untrue assertion, and sophistical
paralogisme. so little does he understand, either what is untruth, or what
is a paralogisme. for the truth of the assertion, I have already clearly
demonstrated: and well does it appear, that he understood not his Logike
terms, Arist. elench. 1.
that makes one proposition a paralogisme. for a paralogisme is a sophistical
syllogism, consisting of diverse propositions. but this assertion is neither
syllogism, nor sophistical assertion, containing a very plain truth, which
now themselves have justified by their actions, and always politikes have
taken it as an undoubted truth. for no man writes to move men's minds to
coffeehouse with the present government, but hatcheth in his own mind the
seeds of rebellion. First, the papists wrote diverse seditious pamphlets
against religion, and the state: afterward, they put on arms and rebelled. So
first came forth Martin and diverse pamphlets of like argument, afterward rose
up king Hacket the great emperor of the disciplinarian faction, and his
prophets. the only fault was, that their patriarchs were not ready to follow
them, or could not follow them, for the multitude of boys that gaped and
gazed upon them.

Secondly, they write in an humble, loyal, and dutiful sort. Of which let
Cartwrightes, Martins, and Penries books bear witness. for pride and spite,
and disloyalty, I never read books that matched them.

Thirdly, He would defend his clyents with the example of Christ, that
discovered many abuses, and Peter that stroke off Malchus his ear a servant,
or pursiuant (as he says) of the high priests. Percase he would have his
compagnions to cut off the pursiuants and the Queens messengers ears, yea and
head too, if they could. So little can he co^teine himself, that in the
defense of force and rebellion, he does nothing but breathe force and
rebellion; And is still talking of killing and cutting. But the case is unlike.
for Christ never spoke against the laws; these say that we have an
antichristian government. Christ condemns not the office of priests: these
condeme the office of Bishops, and the ecclesiastical state. Christ sought not
to erect any new Consistory, or government in dispite of governors; these
do nothing else. Peter struck off Malchus ear, which Christ healed: these
would cut men's throats for to have their consistory, and so leave them. In
fine, these neither are like Christ, nor Peter, nor good Christians: but rail,
revel, conspire, and raise mutinies. They do not speak to the governors,
where they may have redress of disorders: but mutter in the ears of the
people, as if they meant to renew a new massacre, or make the Vespres
Siciliennes. Match. Histor. Fiorent. lib. 1.
Sicilian euensong. which was evidently declared by that blasphemous wretch
Hacket. Neither may it excuse them, (which the libeller alleges.) That the
burgesses of Parliament are thither sent by all the people, which cannot
understand what to desire, unless they be taught before. For if they meant
only to obtain it by parliament, and not by force and faction of the people,
it had been sufficient to teach her Majesty, or the parliament: or any one
burgess. for so laws are framed. And as those that speak against the laws,
and civil government in every place before the people, cannot avoid the name
of rebels, albeit the same be afterward motioned in parliament: no more can
these excuse themselves of disloyalty in all places declaiming against the
present regiment. albeit they would have the same altered by parliament.

Further, he says, that if they pretended rebellion, then they would rise up
and reform things themselves, rather then write books to that purpose. As if
it were not madness to rise before they had prepared the peoples minds to
rebellion. Nay first a side must be made, and then matters must be executed.
So that it appears that his accomplices did take the direct way to rebellion,
and that this course could not be taken before that men were moved to
coffeehouse by villeinous books, like those of Martin, and his whelps.

Fifthly, he commends his clyents for teaching true obedienee, and that with
greater Zeal and sincerity then the bishops. But the vanity of this
objection appears, by the general doctrine of their chief patriarchs. for
killing of princes, raising of force, and rebellion, is simple proof of true
obedience. And albeit these latter do not so directly teach it, yet Fenner
whom He calls his doctrine (...) caelestis Canaan.
T. C. does highly magnify, does allow inferior Magistrates to bridle, and
depose princes, and gives authority to the people to reform religion. from
which opinions not only all bishops, but all good subjects are very far.

Sixthly, 2 Page q. 43.
that ever his consortes either by writing, words or acts, went about to make
any stirs for the bringing in of their new discipline. This man will percase
deny that the sun gives light at noone day, if it make for the cause of the
consistory: for the sun is not more clear, then the lewd practices of these
sectaries. Their doctrine does wholly tend unto trouble and rebellion. De iure
magistratuum in subditos.
Beza in his book of the power of magistrates, does arm the subjects against
the princes in these causes. The author of the book which is entitled
Vindiciae contra tyrannos, whom many affirm to be Beza or Hotoman, does give
power to the subjects, not only to resist, but also to depose, and kill the
prince if he oppugn Gods laws and religion: whereof they make their
discipline a glorious part. That this was the opinion of them of Geneua, is
apparent by the words of In an Epistle sent from Die p. hist. scotl.
Knoxe: who not only allowed the doctrine, but put it in fragrant practice in
Scotland. Neither may we think that our platformers have dissented from their
masters. Fenner in his book of divinity, which Th. Cartw. so well likes,
that he calls the doctrine of it, the vndubitable rules of heavenly Canaan,
Theolog. Fen p. 186.
says that in every common wealth there ought to be by the law of God certain
Ephori or magistrates which ought to have, as in Sparta they had, authority
not only to ouerrule, but also to depose the prince. According to their
doctrine, they have proceeded in writing, speaking, doing. Martin most
shamefully rayleth at the present government, and wishes Epitome of Martin.
that the parliament would bring in the eldership, notwithstanding her
Majesty's resisting it, viz. by a rebellion. They made diverse meetings: they
inueyghed against the state in their public and private speeches; in the end,
they procured throughout the Realm certain subscriptions: themselves bragged
of a hundred thousand hands: In plain terms they talked of Wight.
massacring of their adversaries. And Snape in one of his letters says, what
will you say, if we ouethrowe the Bishops, and that government in one day?
Their further malice appears in the Epistle before their leude demonstrations
of discipline. when all things were ready, out startes Hackets two prophets
to move the people to rebellion, that what they could not have by entreaty,
they might win by treason and rebellion. That they intended the delivery of
certain factious persons committed to prison, and to erect the presbyteries,
and to suppress the governors and laws, their letters, examinations, and
writings do declare. And yet forsooth this ignorant fellow holds, thar they
never went about to move any stir, or rebellion: percase he thought these
matters had not been known.

Seventhly he obiecteth further, that if his clientes intend rebellion, then
the laws also, and bishops do intend rebellion: for that they expect
likewise further reformation. But the case is unlike: Good men desire
reformation of manners by execution of good laws, and supply of
imperfections: They stand for the state, they withstand all innouations, they
proceed orderly. These fellows contrariwise seek the overthrow of infinite
laws, of infinite officers: and that by reuelling and disorder: they seek the
establishment of an uncouth and unknown government by faction and
conspiracy, odious to all states, and good men. Neither can he shroud his
clyents under master Nowels authority. for they want much of his learning and
honesty, and far diverse is that eldership, he means, from this pack of
elders, that they desire.

Neither because printers sell popish books, by which some are moved to
coffeehouse, does it follow that therefore it is lawful to move
coffeehouse. for neither may they sell them but to men known and licenced
without punishment: nor are all popish books of one sort. As for Doctor Percy
I think he does not set forth new laws, nor new common wealths, but for
ease and introduction of students does gather a sum of all laws in force.
but the libellers furious mates would burn them and utterly overthrow law,
that we might depend upon the variable oracles of the presbytery, which he
seeks to erect.

Eighthly he adds, that many do maintain papists and traitors, and yet do
not move coffeehouse, unto which I am content that he makes his clyentes
like. for I do not know any in England that has procured the discharge of
more recusants (and that not gratis) or more helped them, then certain
capital and principal puritanes. The libeller knows whom I mean. The
exception is frivolous and false for neither are they to be allowed that
maintain papists, nor puritanes: or that procure their discharge. Nor may we
think, but that they that maintain them, mean no good to the state: and
therefore let the gentle dunse advise hereafter what he says, and not
disgrace his best friends, nor lie to no purpose, nor benefit of his cause.
And finally let him not say, our arguments are naught, unless he reply
better, hitherto he has sweat and said nothing; yea and when he has
sweat out all his wit, yet can he not answer any one title of our reasons.
The reason that he sets down is his own reason, and is senceles in deed,
and proceeds from a man void of wisdom, learning and honesty, But the same
set down in good terms will make him in deed ashamed, but not as he says
to answer it, but because he cannot answer it. No, though he profess to
speak for the innocent. He should have said, in the cause of the dumb, for so
are the words of T. C. his masters text. But his clyentes they have spoken too
much, and wish themselves, they had been dumb. Now albeit they be not mute,
yet he takes them to be innocent, and that in his opinion. Is not this a
worthy fellow think you, that opposes his fond and loose opinion against the
evidence of witnesses, verdict of the jury, sentence of the judge? But what
should we look for other at these men's hands, whose brave consistory, and
all their learning stands on 3 or 4 men's opinions? But let us hear what he
brings to answer our objections, and for discharge of his clyentes that
stand at the bar.

He says, that Martin where he threatens, that Doctor Bridges shall have xx
fistes about his ears, means that many shall write against him: A goodly
comment: As if puritanes wrote with fists, rather then fingers: which may very
well be; for their writing is seditious, rude and uncivil. To prove that
Martin means so, he alleges first, that Martin is no Atheist nor papist.
But there is great doubt of papisme, and flat proof of atheism. for who
scoffeth at religion but Atheists, and peruerteth scriptures in scorn, but
such as believe no God? Secondly he says, xx is too few to make a rebellion.
But the patch might understand that one is enough to begin a mutiny: And that
if D. Bridges shall have xx fistes against him, their meaning is, that others
shall have many more about them. for I think their quarrel is not only
against D. Bridges. In the end the libeller seeing his cause desperate, says
that hanging is too good for Martin. which I yield unto, and assign the
libeller for his pains, to be the executioner. And thus the noble Martin, viz.
I. Penry, I. Vd. I. F. all John's, and I. Thr. that all concurred in making of
Martin, must by sentence of the libeller, if they had any evil purpose, go to
the gybet to feed Ravens.

That which is said of a hundred thousand hands, he answers, that it is
meant of a subscription to a supplication: which if it were granted, yet
would the same be very strange, if not rebellious. for what is such a
supplication, but a coniuration, or at least Armatae preces.
armed prayers? But says he, Martin does not there exhort to rebellion.
neither do we charge him with it: but we say, that he speaks seditiously,
and that he insinuates that puritans, if they should not have their
supplication granted, would either have gone away discontent, or taken part
with the enemy, and that the pack of puritans entend rebellion. for that
appears, First by confession of Martin, that insinuates they had many ready
to maintain that cause, and next by those vagrant rogues that came down into
all shires with bills craving subscription, which is nothing but the beginning
of a coniuration. for never did so many join but in rebellion; nor can such a
number confederate themselves without danger to the state. And if the Prince
were not exceeding clement, she would teach them the pain of subscriptions,
and confederation for to obtain alteration of State: especially when Martin
threatens, that so many would strike a great stroke; which is very true. for
so many, and less too, being well armed and governed, are able to fight with
any prince in the world. Neither will it serve, that he says, that the
speech is Tropologicall: for it is rather Diabolical, and traiterous.

The words of Vindiciae con. tyrannos.
Iunius Brutus, that for the eldership says it is lawful to move stirs,
are disclaymed by the Libeller: but little knows he who is the author of that
book. for it was made either by Beza, or Hotoman, and conteyneth nothing, but
consistoriall doctrine. Neither do I think, that he will disclayme T. C. that
means to fight so stoutly, that if every hair of his head were a life, he
would afforde them all in defense of his platform: Nor of Goodman, Gilby,
Whittingham, and the Geneuians, without whom this cause cannot stand.
Therefore if the Libeller renounce rebellion, and the doctrine of it, he must
also renounce the nource of rebellion, the Consistory, and all his dear
darlinges, upon whose bare names, as it were upon empty barrels, he buyldeth
his consistoriall barriquades and bulwarks.

Where they threaten troubles, if they may not have the discipline, the
Libeller answers, that thereby they mean scholasticall troubles, while both
parts write concerning discipline: but that cannot be the meaning of the
author. for he meant troubles that would ensue, and not which already were. But
the contention about discipline in writing before that time was at the hottest.
Neither is there any other sense to be drawn out of the words, but that
great, and bloody stirs would be about discipline, if the same might not
otherwise be obtained. finally, it is the common proceeding of the consistory,
that without wrack and force did never enter, either at Geneua, or in France,
or Scotland. Whereunto Th. C. in the conuenticle or synod in Warwickeshire, as
is supposed, laid a good foundation. for there the discipline was set down:
there subscription and promise was made, that all ministers should advance it
by all their power. No doubt they meant as well force, as fair means: for
therein they have never been scrupulous.

He answers also in defense of the Scottish ministers: but he says nothing
of the Road of Ruthuen and Sterlinge, and concealeth most dangerous matters,
wandering from the purpose in a generality of words. He did not remember that
A noble precedent of consistoriall excommunication.
Galloway at Saint Iohnston cursed both the men that should take part with the
King, and their horses and spears: and how James Gibson used the King very
homely: and how John Cooper refused to obey the King. And how Andrewe Meluin
used very tart speeches toward him: and yet obstinately refused to acknowledge
him self bound to answer his contempt. these matters the petitioner either
understood not, or would not call to remembrance. he also seems to be
ignorant, how upon such like insolent behavior, the King tendering certain
articles to the Scottish Preachers: as first, that they should yield their
obedience to the King: secondly, that they should not pretend Privilege:
thirdly, that they should not meddle in matters of State: fourthly, that they
should not publicly revile his Majesty: that they never yielded to subscribe.
A notorious argument of singular insolency in them, if it be as is reported,
and simplicity in the petitioner, that going about to clear his cause, gives
occasion of further matter against it.

Where we allege, that Brutus Iunius, a Consistoriall writer, or to speak
more plainly, Hotoman, or Beza says that the people of themselves may set up
Gods service, and abrogate superstition, and that it is lawful for the people
by force of arms to resist the Prince, if he hinder the buylding of the
Church: (which these men take specially to consist in the eldership) And where
also we set down many traiterous speeches out of Goodman, Gilby, Martin, T.C.
and others, the Libeller answers: first, that these authors wrote against
tyrants, and enemies of religion, as if the pretense of religon were sufficient
to arm the subjects to depose the prince. wherein is declared, that these men
accompting those that stop the eldership enemies of religion, hold that such
princes as hinder the eldership may be deposed also: which is an answer evil
beseeming a man professing allegiance to her Majesty, and pretending to be of
the best sort of subjects.

Secondly, he says that the same speeches are alleged by the Papists to
condemn our doctrine: but that answer makes much against the Puritans and
not us: for we condemn both that practice and that doctrine, and those that
have given such a scandale to the Church. They embrace it, and therefore are
condemned as perturbers of the State. And albeit now they alter their hint,
and teach obedience changing faith with time, yet that was their opinion once,
and I doubt not will be, as often as time serves.

Thirdly he answers, that the doctrine of the consistory depends not on
two, or three: which we do not affirm in this cause: for we say that these
opinions are generally embraced of that faction, and of the chiefest of them,
and that the same is so joined with the consistory, that without the same it
can not be maintained. for if the prince be chief governor of the church,
the consistory has no place: and if the consistory have place, away goes the
princes authority in ecclesiastical causes.

Lastly he gives out, that our English bishops, as well as the consistoriall
faction have rebelled against princes. which answer first is not concludent:
for the offense of one, is no protection for others: secondly, it is false. The
petitioner ought to have showed who these rebels be: and where their rebellion
is defended by bishops, such as now we have. If he cannot show them, we must
tell him, that where he talks of five hundred traitors, that maintain the
present ecclesiastical government, he is out of reason, and account, and
does nothing but rail, as well beseems his libelling humor. The state and
jurisdiction of bishops now in England depends externally on the Prince: to
him they are subject, and from him they receive law: finally, they think it
unlawful to rebel against him: condemning all rebellious practices, to pull
down his authority, and to bring them under. but the proud and insolent
Consistory claymeth power above princes, and renders in Ecclesiastical
matters account to none but God, as they profess, the same acknowledges it
felse subject to none, and prescribes laws to Princes, yea, teaches and
puts in practice rebellion against them: and therefore when there is speech
of loyalty and obedience, let the Libeller henceforth take heed, how he
compares the most, factious, and suspicious government to Princes that ever
was, to our ecclesiastical governors, which in their doctrine, and life
cannot be noted of any disloyalty. And finally let him hold his peace, and
thank God for the princes clemency. For it is not the innocence of his
Clients, nor the eloquence of the advocate, that can clear the disciplinarians
from faction. In such bad causes, repentance, and submission is best defense,
the next is silence. And therefore wisely did he pass over that offense for
which John Vdall was convicted, and condemned. Only this fault he commits
herein, that forgetting how before he had promised to answer for him, now
he leaves him to answer for himself, and like a man that had lost both
memory and wit, runs out into an idle discourse of oaths Ex Officio, and an
inuectiue against Judges, and furiously railing at the State, calls such as
speak in defense of it, Traitors, and Rebels.

To terrify the Judges, he cyteth certain Textes of scriptures ill fitting
his purpose. For neither as he says, are his consortes Saints, nor do they
suffer for holiness, nor are they put to death, howsoever they deserve it.
That sentence of James 1.
James rather belongs to them: If any man deemeth himself to be religious,
and refaineth not his tongue, but seduceth his heart, his religion is in vain:
or that rather, Woe be to Matthew. 23.
you Scribes and Pharisees, ye hypocrites, ye are like to whited sepulchers,
fair without, and within full of bones of dead men, and all filthiness. And
albeit John Vdall had the name vnwothy to be a Preacher: yet never any worse
deserved it, being every way insufficient; nor took a more factious course.

This fellow braggeth he was no murderer: yet if he had proceeded further,
I know what would have followed. So arrogant he is, that he imagines all
fools, but such as like his fancies. But if the Page 49.
Judges have so little skill in condemning such a Minister as John Vdall: why
does not this great Clarke show it? this is impudency to condemn such
reverend learned men of ignorance, and to show no reason. Besides this, in
law there ought to be no respect of persons. How then can there be such
difference betwixt ministers and others, if ministers offend as well as others?
Either this man means to challenge immunitie, or else he means, if ever he
be a Judge, to respect persons. Some have painted Justice blind, but this man
would have them judge with spectacles.

His accusation against such, as speak in defense of the state will never be
proved. he racketh and teareth their sayings, as a man lying without
conscience and shame, yet will they not reach to his purpose. Concerning master
Dalton, whom he accuses as the Bishops factor, it is an easy matter to
answer. he has more honesty, learning, and law, then is to be found in all
the Puritanes distempered brains. The cause he defended was not the Bishops,
but of religion, learning, and the Church.

He charge the Bishops, that they write in a certain Admon. a g. M. M. p.
252.
book, that it is not lawful to bestow such livings upon lay men, as are
appointed by law to preachers of the word. But neither do the Bishops say it,
nor is that book that is quoted the Bishops, nor is it likely that so grave
men had so little to do, as to busy themselves with the answering of such a
vain Libell as Martin and Martins barking sons. But whosesoeuer the saying
is, it is justifiable. for if the livings be appointed by law to preachers,
what law is it to infringe law? that the Queen does keep the temporalties of
Bishops in her hands during the vacation; is by law, not against law. So
likewise it is lawful to hold some Ecclesiastical livings that be appropried.

As for Wiclefs words against the excess of his times, they are evil extended
against the want of ours, and are void of reason: for what reason is it, that
for the default of one, a succession should be spoiled, as he would have it?

But says he, who would not think the superfluities of Bishops living
better bestowed upon such a man as Sir Francis Walsingham, that right
honorable Chancellor, and benefactor of the Church and Country, then upon
any Bishop. Wherein he does wrong to the memory of that good knight, and in
needelesse discourse brings his name in question. To his supposall I answer,
that there be very wise men, that think the livings of Bishops better as they
are, and I think he would so say, if he were alive, and were asked the
question. for no man was more desirous then he, of true honor: neither is any
thing more dishonorable, then to rise by the spoils of the Church, that he
pretends to love: nor to take that to him self, which was given to other
uses. Neither do we read of any, that has risen by the spoils of the
Church, that has long prospered, or enjoyed them: nor have the Papists any
thing to object against us more, then sacrilege and spoil of the Church. As
for the superfluities of bishops, there is order taken. Take four of the best
bishops in England, and there will be found eight knights, every one whereof
shall far ouermatch them in revenues. Take eight bishops next in living to
the greatest, and there will be found two hundredth esquires; every of which
shall ouerpasse them. diverse yeomen, clownes, and marchantes do far excel
the rest. Why then should any envy to men of learning and quality, the estate
and living of knights, esquires, yeomen and clownes?

It will be said, these have it by inheritance; but why should it not, as
well be lawful to have it, and win it by industry, as by inheritance? But I
am glad I know why all this while the petitioner barketh so loud. He would
have great men fall to spoiling, that he might light upon some reuersion, or
like a dog gather up crummes under the table, when men shall riot with
Churches rapines. well, for his good will, when churches come to be spoiled,
let him out of the belfray take a rope for his pains.

He belyeth Doctor Bridges shamefully: for he makes him to say, that a
Priest may have a moderate lordly jurisdiction over all the Lords allotment:
where in truth he does not so much as mention Lordly jurisdiction, but
superiority: and that over the Clergy in several Congregations, and not in
the whole Church. Therefore let him make proof how this superiority, or
maintayning of Churchliuings in their proper state can be drawn to prove,
that such as defend the state, diffame the Queen, or seeeke to move
insurrection: If not, let him remember that both he forgeth, and runs from
his purpose, like a babbling discourser wandering in a sea of words without
compass of style, or discretion.

Likewise he fableth that Doctor Bancroft writes, that her Majesty is a
petie Pope, which is a graceless or shameless assertion, or both: for who
would not be ashamed, but these swelling minds, that think they may speak
what they list, to ascribe that to Master Bancroft, that he reprehendeth in
Martin? His words are plain, his minor ( Page 68.
says he, meaning Martin) viz. that her Majesty is a pety Pope, may thus be
proved.

If the Libeller hold on this course of lying, he will prove many strange
and wondrous matters, especially among the Disciplinarians, whose consistories
is built on lies. But, if they diffame her Majesty, that hold her to be a
pety Pope, as the Libeller by many great words, and unnecessary proofs in a
matter confessed auoweth: then is Martin and his partakers felonious diffamers
of her Majesty: for he holds, that whosoever takes on him the authority
in causes ecclesiastical, which the Pope had, is a petie Pope, as before is
said. But that authority the whole parliament gives to her Majesty. May it
therefore please the Libeller to bark against the Parliament, or else against
Martin. Against Master Bancroft, that neither thought it, nor wrote it, nor
spoke it, but reprehendeth it in the person of Martin, there is no cause for
him to declayme. all this Libelling notwithstanding the petitioner calls his
consortes our brethren. but if his brotherhood consist in such scurrilous
railing, let him seek other brethren. The brotherhood and felloship of
Christians is known by love: The badge of puritanisme is unnatural, and
unkind, and unbrotherly dealing. And therefore I doubt, whether they be
brethren or no, both considering their heretical opinions, and also their
uncharitable and unchristian railing. And yet I say notwitstanding all this
unnatural dealing, that the bishops so much as they might, yea too too much
have dealt remissely against such contumatious, and worthless disturbers of
the Church. And that not for any thing which appears in this accusers
wtitings, wherein they see nothing but velliacry, and presumption, and vanity;
but in respect of their own mild natures, Christian affection, and desire of
peace: which these fellows scorned.

In the end he concludes, that considering the doubtfulnesse of these
controversies, he trusts her Majesty will take some good order for the
peaceable debating of them. having I say reuelde at full both against
ecclesiastical, and civil jurisdiction, and that before so mighty a prince,
whose presence he ought more to have reverenced: having also at such time as
he was to speak to her Majesty talked against all decorum with by standers,
yea with those that were absent, now as it were before his death, he comes
home to himself, and prays her Majesty to take some good course for the
peaceable ordering of these controversies, as if all her former laws, all her
care, all her proceedings were not to be valued in one hair: And as if
railing and accusing deserved favor, or his dispute credit, or his
insolency, pardon. I doubt not buther Majesty of her wisdom sees the
impudency of the man, the weakness of the cause, the wrong done to others,
but especially to her self, her government, and her lawes-that others may see
it, I have lightly framed this answer, lest the fool should enter into
conceit of his wit, and others be abused by his malice: not in many words. for
what should I stand about that, wherein is nothing but pride, ignorance and
choler? Now because, by alleging their opinions, he would make the world
believe, that his clients are slandered: I will show, that he (...).
smootheth some things that are hard, and concealeth many things that are
worse, and therefore, that he and his clients are to be taken as they are. The
words I have set down, and by them my answer. read with judgment, judge
with equity, show equity to truth.

Observations upon certain opinions commonly holden by the puritanes and
collected by the said author of the petition: with answers to their petitions,
and desires joined with the foresaid opinions.

The words of the petitioner.

TO the end it may appear how unjustly the seekers of reformation are
slandered by the bishops, Petitioner.
and others: I have thought good briefly and truly to deliver the opinions of
such as sue for reformation, which I have gathered out of their books, and
seen in their practice, and heard in conference which I had with them.

Neither has the man delivered his consorts opinions truly, Answer.
nor was it sufficient, if he had meant to clear them from slander, to
deliver some part of their opinions, unless he had also delivered their whole
doctrine concerning their consistoriall discipline. for what excuse may it be
for an here-tike, to believe well in some points: or for leude men to do
something well? But this general doctrine of theirs, neither does he, nor
durst he deliver: it was somewhat too hot and saucy. The sovereignty of the
aldermen in making laws, judging and excommunicating princes, dissoluing the
laws of the land, taking away her Majesty's prerogative in pardoning offenses,
and depriving her of the argument she has to show her clemency in, in
diminishing her revenues, he concealeth: Neither does he reveal unto us
those mystical rules, whereby the consistoriall faction does overthrow the
parliament, the apology and faith of this Church, the Universities, and many
private men's interest: Likewise has he passed over in goodly glosing words,
and not once mentioned other dangerous points. That therefore which he
wants, to the intent (that we may have a perfect draught of the alestond of
this new brewed discipline,) I purpose to set down, and to declare unto you,
both their doctrine, and their practice. So that you may perceive that they are
vainly termed seekers, and sewers for reformation: And that the cause we
defend, is not the cause of bishops, whom we leave to defend their doings
themselves; but the cause of God, of religion, of our country, of the prince,
of learning, of the whole ministry, against factious mates, and heretical
schismatikes, and enemies of the ministry, and learning, that in these
dangerous times, go about to make an vproare in their country, and a spoil of
the rewards of learning. If then that which is best in all these men's devises be
naught worth: how little is the rest thereof to be valued? sure if that which
themselves confess, be not sufferable, the rest must needs be intolerable.
which if the petitioner know not, he is but a nouice in his own cause, and
knows little, or nothing: if he knew, he is very impudent, that dare defend
such manner of persons.

They openly profess and acknowledge that they be sinful men. Petitioner.


A great matter: Answer.
for albeit they should neither profess nor confess so much, yet would the
same appear but too too evidently. In doctrine, their lewd and heretical
opinions: In manners, their pride, malice, cruelty, covetousness, usury,
gluttony, and chamber cheer, which they call fasting, and color with terms
of godly exercises, do notoriously convince them. neither do I yet tell all
for other matters I have thought good to keep for an ariere ba^quet: for that
I would not have the libeller surfeit: which he would percase do, if too much
were set before him at once.

They call not themselves puritanes. Petitioner.


Untruth. Answer.
for both Martin, and this petitioner calls his Page 83.
consorts puritanes: yea, and others more honest men, then either of the two
(which we are rather to believe then the petitioner) call them so, and that
rightly: for commonly they appropriate unto themselves, the name of the saints,
of godly brethren, and such like, and account and call others that be not of
their faction Martins hay any work, and his minerals.
profane. They esteem also the T. C.
eldership, a pure government, and other corrupt, and T. Cartw. calls his
cause, the cause of sincerity. why then are they not justly called puritanes?
percase they will answer, that they are impure, and filthy fellows. which in
deed is true. for their purity neither consists in life, nor doctrine, (for
none therein can be less pure: unless it be in bare conceit) but in outward
shows, false semblant, vain protestations of reformation, gogling of eyes,
and painted hypocrisy. this excuse therefore, that they do not call
themselves puritanes, were it true, yet is it insufficient, seeing they take
upon themselves to be more pure then others, as did the puritanes of old time.
for we may not think that the Cathari, or Nouatians accounted themselves
without sin: but were called puritanes, for seuering themselves from others,
which they accounted less pure then themselves.

They do absolutely yield and subscribe to the Articles of Christian faith,
Petitioner.
and doctrine professed in the Church of England. And therefore offend not
against the statute made 23. of Elizabeth, c. 12. concerning that purpose.

This is a palpable untruth: Answer.
for both do they put out certain articles, and add others unto the Apostles
Creed. And T. C. and Fenner confound person and essence in the Deity, and
make the son to proceed from God the Father. The article concerning
bishops, and homilies, and Ecclesiastical government they utterly deny,
and therefore are both schismatikes, and heretics, and offend against that
statute most directly, and deny it shamefully, and cavil most absurdly. for
where the Parliament calls all the book, and the points therein contained,
Articles of Religion: These subscribe only to the Articles of Faith, and
Sacraments: Expounding faith strictly, and discharging themselves easily, and
expounding statutes contrary to the opinion of Judges. Call you this
consistoriall interpretation?

They give to her Majesty all that power, Petitioner.
that is recognized to be in her highness by the oath of supremacy, as it is by
her Majesty expounded, and therefore be no traitors.

How can this be, Answer.
seeing they deny her power to nominate bishops; to make ecclesiastical laws;
to determine ecclesiastical causes, or to delegate others to hear and
determine them: and take away the last appeal, and cognition from her, and
give her not any tenths, or subsidies? how I say may this be, seeing they take
away both her ecclesiastical authority, and her reuennues, and give this
power partly to Elderships, partly to Synodes, partly to Deacons, new found
creatures? And therefore, albeit they take the oath of supremacy: yet they
deny her supreme power, under color of the interpretation of the iniunction,
which abridgeth not her power in cases expressed. Beware therefore Libeller,
and touch this string no more: for it sounds but badly in all loyal subjects
ears.

They profess all obedience to the Lords of the counsel, Petitioner.
the Judges and civil Magistrates, and therefore be not Anabaptists.

He says, they profess all obedience: Answer.
but if he would have excused his clyents; he should have said, they perform
it; for the Jesuits do in terms profess obedience, yet none more factious.
this is a point that does nearly touch his cause, and would have required
more diligence in clearing of it. For whatsoever they profess in this
petition, both their doctrine and behavior is contrary. They set the
subjects against the prince, as has been showed, and have wilfully oppugned
all her Majesty's ecclesiastical laws: they use her with bitter terms. Martin
says, her Majesty is Epist. p. 10. and 53.
seduced, and that God Hay any work.
allows not her government, and that she bids Ibidem.
battle to God; They teach, that Ministers ought Regist. p. 48.
not to obey the prince, when he prescribes ceremonies, and fashions of
apparel. They accuse her majesty, either of ignorance being abused, or
unthankfulness to God, and negligence Motion with submission. pap. 41.
in her duty. They resemble her to Gilbie.
Jeroboam; Achab, Iehoram, and other wicked princes. They that wrote the 2.
Admonit.
Admonition acuse the high court of parliament of iniquity; and affirm, that
it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha, then that court, and calls the
Lords, politic Machiauels. Penrie accuses Supplication.
them, of betraying God, and his kingdom, and prophecieth of the Spaniardes to
come and wast the land. They affirm, That our counsel Epistle before
reformation no enemy.
may truly be said to delight in injury and violent oppression of Gods
saints: And that the Lords cannot possibly be said to deal in Ibidem.
matters of Justice: They charge them with maintenance of impiety, and say
that with Ibidem.
Pilate they crucify Christ. They affirm, that the Magistrates, and Ministers
have walked hand in hand in the contempt of true religion. They call, the
Judges wicked lawyers, and Atheists. Upon ecclesiastical Vdals dialogue, and
Martins Epist.
governors they rail most impudently, calling them robbers, wolves,
simoniakes, persecutors, and such like. And therefore if they be not accounted
Anabaptists, they have the more wrong, seeing in all disobedience, and uncivil
reproaches they pass the Anabaptists. This is the only difference, that
Anabaptists revel against all Magistrates; these against such especially, as
withstand their rebellious deseignements,

They hold it lawful before Magistrates, Petitioner.
to take an oath, so it be not taken in vain, or in matters unknown to them.

So likewise the Jesuits, Answer.
and Rhemistes do thinde it lawful: yet to accuse their fellows, or to hurt
themselves, they think it unlawful to take oaths. and say, That such oaths
Annotat. Rhemens. in act. 23.
that are so taken do not bind, and must be broken upon pain of damnation:
which is also the case of puritans. for either they refuse to swear, or to
answer concerning their brethren, as they call them; And what a vain oath is,
that themselves will also judge, overthrowing the ordinary proceedings of law,
and best means of trial. yea diverse of the^ have very small regard of their
oaths, as the records of their answers will testify: for either they answer
untruth, or else refuse to answer so far as law binds them, yea albeit
the matter be declared unto them. The authors of this book, they have
forsworn the telling of all truth.

They seek not to pull down the courts of Justice, Petitioner.
etc. only they would have bislops and ecclesiastical persons shut out from
them.

Yet if the eldership did shine in his glory, Answer.
all the courts of Justice might pull down their seats. For if that the
consistory may orderal matters contrary to the law of God and wherein is
breach of charity, what shall be left for other courts? Herein therefore they
show not only singular presumption in themselves, but also great malice
against other. Themselves would entermeddle in all causes: Ecclesiastical
persons they cannot suffer in any: yet are bishops a principal part of the
court of parliament, and Starchamber, and by the governors of this
realmethought fittest, and by no law debarred to be there, unless it be by
the laws of the co^sistorie made for the extinguishment of religion, and
learning. Whereas contrariwise, the new churchaldermen have no warrant of law,
but overthrow all laws, and her Majesty's prerogative: And yet would be
admitted in Declaration of certain acts, made anno 1584. and in a certain
pamphlet spread abroad by them.
parliament, and consulted with in courts of Justice, and seek that al men
should depend upon the^ here, as upon Beza at Geneua: and endeavor to suppress
men of learning and gravity authorized by law: that certain worthles men,
under pretense of authority from Christ may tread down laws, and rule as
they list. At Geneua they pretended first religion, but they overthrew civil
magistrates in the end, and expulsed the Bishops of Geneua, which were
governors of that state.

They deny not that matters of testaments and marriages, Petitioner.
may be determined by ciuilians, or temporal lawyers.

It skilleth not greatly what they affirm, or deny, Answer.
using to do both very impudently. The laws of this land have thought
fittest, that both matters of marriages, and wills, and also causes of
benefices, of tithes and slander, and other ecclesiastical controversies,
should be handled in ecclesiastical courts. The privileges of the Church
princes bind themselves to observe, and the statute of Magna Carta confirms.
What shameless men then are these, that would overthrow so ancient courts
of Justice, so ancient laws, and give cognition of matters to those that have
no skill, nor law to decide them by; And of a certain state to make a most
uncertain and wavering state, and to overthrow the most excellent study of
the civil laws, yea civility it self; to bring in barbarism? But let them
settle themselves, they are men fitter to part a booty taken by force, then
to divide the offices of government. every man let him go to his occupation,
clownes to the plowe, merchants to their shops, Clerks and scribes to their
pen and ynkehorne, and this petitioner to Bedlem. As for the jurisdiction of
bishops, it is not only confirmed by law, but by antiquity, and reason.
whereas the whole frame of discipline stands upon a few men's fancies,
neither wise, nor learned, and is repugnant to law, and orderly government,
yea to Gods word.

They teach that the Ministry nor people ought to make any general
reformation. Petitioner.


Mark I pray you, Answer.
how nicely he minceth at matrers. He will not say that either Ministers or
others shall by force, or other means of their own authority, make a
general reformation: but that they may every man in their several parishes
make a reformation, he will not deny. so the envy he would a little decline,
but his hope of rebellion he would not loose. but all comes to one
reckonning. for whether this reformation, or rather rebellion be made all at
once, or in diverse particular places at several times, all comes to this
pass, that private men shall disanul laws, and erect new orders, and rule as
lords, and neither prince, nor law bear sway: so that were it as this man
sets it down, yet were it too too bad. But I will show that the
consistoriall doctrine, yea and proceeding is far otherwise. Noblemen, says
Histor. Scotl. appellat. Knoxe.
Knoxe, ought to reform Religion, if the king will not. the same power he
gives to the Histor. Scotl. page 49. 50.
comminaltie. If the Prince will not yield to his Knoxe appellac. p. 28. 30.
nobles and people: he armeth them with power to depose him. Nay says he
further, If princes be tyrants. Knoxe to Engl. and Scotl page 78.
against God, and his truth, their subjects are freed from their oaths of
obedience.

With him accords De iure regni.
Buchanan: he says the people is more excellent then the king, and has right
to bestow the crown at pleasure: and may make such laws, as it pleases
them: that the people may arraigne the king, and that Ministers may
excommnnicate him, In which case most wretched is the king, and the people most
puissant. He says further, That albeit Saint Paul commanded obedience to
tyrants: yet it was in respect of the times, and people that were weak, and
not able to take arms.

The same doctrine is maintained by De iure magistrate.
Beza, by Francogal.
Hottoman, and others; and it is the sweet reformed doctrine (as they call it)
of the perturbers of our state. Goodmans book.
Goodman sounds the trumpet of sedition to the nobility and people, Theolog.
sacr.
against the prince: and holds, That if princes will not reform religion,
yet others might reform it themselves. The same argument is handled in that
traytorous dialogue, which Ghylbic published. And Th. Cartw. although he
denies it, as it should seem, has taught this mystery of discipliue to his
scholar Fenner, that there are certain Ephori, that ought to have authority
above the Prince, which not only may controlle him, but also settle matters
which he neglects.

And according to this doctrine they proceeded first at Geneua, shutting their
gates against the Bishop, their prince, and seasing his reuennues, and altering
the state: and afterward in France, and Scotland; which example was as good, as
a law to those that here admire the^ of Geneua. Privately they whispered in
men's ears, and in country parishes prepared the multitude to sedition: In the
end, at Warwick they set down laws, and every man bound himself by promise,
and subscription, to the advancing, defense, and exercise of them. Th. Cartw.
In his answers on his oath.
being examined upon his oath confesses, That so much of their discipline as
concerned the order of preaching and assemblies, they meant to put in practice.
Last of all, by Coppingers extraordinary calling, they had meant to have done
some strange feate, if God had not wrong the sword out of such desperate
fellows hands. Seeing then this is their common doctrine, and practice, and
that diverse assemblies have been made to this end; in vain does the libeller
go about to clear his consortes of conspiracy, of unlawful practices, routes
and revels, made for the obteining of their conceited government.

They detest all such as diffame her Majesty. Petitioner.


Here the Petitioner renounceth, Answer.
and defieth all his consortes, the most notorious diffamers of her Majesty,
that ever wrote or spoke in our times, the Jesuits and their partisans only
except. for they do not only diffame her ecclesiastical laws, but also her
parliament, her Judges, her religion, her justice; Her majesty's government of
the Church (says Supplicat. to the parliament.
one) is traitorous to the majesty of our savior Jesus Christ. another
calls the government Antichristian, 1. Admonit. page 25.
and deuilish; A Hay any work.
third calls it, false, unlawful, and bastardly: generally, they revel at
it, as if we lived not in Christ's church, but in the confusion of Babel.
Penrie says, Supplicat. to the parliament.
That we are never the better for the reformation we have by her Majesty. What
speeches they utter against her majesty, her parliament, and Judges, before I
have noted. Yea, T. Cartw. used so uncivil a term in regard of such a prince,
that I would be ashamed to utter it, if their rude and shameful dealing might
otherwise be discovered: He says, the Archbishop is a baud to all manner of
sins in princes; you may your self collect the sequel of so lew de terms:
loyalty will not suffer me to say what it is. Against laws they bitterly
declaime, one says, Penry supplicat. to the parliawent.
Impiety is suffered to bear sway against the majesty of God, and that by
law and authority. The Epist. before reformat. no enemy.
Judges are called Atheistes. Nether do they spare our religion. For Gilby
says, We have mixed the religion of Christ, and Antichrist together, and the
say our Sacraments are wickedly profaned and mangled. to make a sum of many
particulers, 2. Admonit. page 42.
not the papists have spoken against her Majesty, and her religion, and
laws, and our communion book, and prayers more wickedly then these. Wherein,
if the petitioner hold that her Majesty is not diffamed, he is very
ignorant. for true honor consists specially in the maintenance of true
religion: if he confess that these are diffamatorie speeches: let him not
only in words detest them and his fellows, but also in fact leave them,
otherwise all goodmen will detest both him and them, and in the end, some will
punish them both, as diffamers of her Majesty, and the state.

They say Princes are to submit themselves to excommunication, Petitioner.
and censures of the Church.

If they say so, they maintain an opinion very prejudicial to princes, and
not justifiable by any scripture, Answer.
nor holden by any, but by the papal, and puritan factions; which thereof have
made their profit. for thereby the Popes have raised up themselves, and
thrown princes down upon the ground, and opened ways to many rebellio^s.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that they will also follow their steps, that so
stiffly hold the same opinions: and that against all reason. for there is no
precedent of it in the new, or old testament. That Azarias went out of the
temple, was not by the sentence of the Judge, nor for matter, wherefore men be
cast out of heaven. Ambrose pronounced no sentence against Theodosius,
whatsoever the Canonists say contrary. neither stands excommunication of
princes upon any good ground. for seeing sovereign princes have no superior
Judges upon earth, who should excommunicate them deserving to be so used? Those
therefore that abase the prince under the becks of a pack of clownes, and
clowters called churchaldermen, are not to be suffered to pass without
controulement.

They maintain, that a Magistrate excommunicate, Petitioner.
ought to be obeyed, and honored in all points of subjection.

They maintain they know not what. for if he that is, excommunicate, is
thrown out of heaven, Answer.
and made the slave of Satan, as Aduers. Erast.
Beza roundly teaches, what reason have Christians to obey him that is Satan's
slave? Or how can the same that is the slave of Satan, and no member of the
Church, be supreme governor of a christian common wealth? And if, as Buchanan
says, He do not deserve to live upon the earih, that is by excommunication
cast into hell, How can he be thought worthy to enjoy the greatest honors that
are upon earth? This is also contrary to our laws, that deny action, or
benefit of common law to persons excommunicate; and it is one of those
heresies for which Beno Cardin. in vita Gregor. 7.
Gregory the seventh was deposed, that excommunicating the Emperor, he did
notwithstanding disspence with those that kept him company. Neither skilleth
it, that the Canons will have obedience given by the wives to the husband, by
the servants to the Master, notwithstanding any excommunication against them.
for that right is the interest of nature, which remains, when civil bonds
are dissolved. That all civil bonds are dissolved, or at least suspended by
excommunication, the Canonistes do agree. And those that say the Prince is to
be excommunicate, confess also, that their subjects are assoyled from their
obedience. And it is the practife of papists, and doctrine of Goodman, and
follows necessarily upon the common assertions of puritans, howsoever for a
time to cover the shame of their opinions, they are now content to lay down
the premises without conclusion, and to separate the conclusion from the
premises; bad logitians, worse subjects, most insolent commanders. Simple
princes they are therefore, that will voluntarily submit themselves to their
government: and presumptuous subjects that dare require such things at the
princes hands.

Their suite is, Petitioner.
that the Church maybe ruled by Christ's officers, laws, and orders.

Away then must the churchaldermen pack, Answer.
for they are not Christ's officers: and the supposed holy discipline must
depart, for it is but T. C. conceit, and two or three other threedbare witted
companions. Away likewise must this forger be packing, that without authority
makes out new commissions, and new laws.

Their desire is, that every congregation etc. might have one, Petitioner.
or two sufficient teachers etc. faithfully laboring in the word of God, or
doctrine.

If their congregations be as great as shires: Answer.
two would be too little for every such congregation; and besides that, the
course that is already taken for preachers is better, then they can devise
any. For now in diverse shires there be hundreds of preachers distinguished in
parishes. If every parish be a sufficient congregation, as in deed it is, how
shall two be maintained in every parish, where as now not every tenth parish
with the living that belongs to the Church, is able to maintain one
preacher? Does he think men will enlarge their living? If he do; he does but
dream. And as for the devises of him that cogged us forth the motion with
submission, sounding an alarm to the sacrilegious spoil of the Church: they
would be the overthrow rather of learning, then the maintenance of the
ministry. for other great birds gape for that pray. As for these poor dawes,
when they have made way for others, they may go pick worms, for any part they
can get thereof themselves. when Abbeyes were overthrown, That appears by
the preface of the statute concerning that point.
erecting of schools, hospitals, and colleges of preachers was pretended but
whither the spoil went we do well understand, and do not think, that there
will be other provision now, then was then, or that men will in spoiling be
more religious now, then some were then.

They would have assisting elders, Petitioner.
etc. that should not encroch on the magistrates authority, and they would
have the most honest and sufficient men togather for the poor, and keep the
treasure of the Church.

The treasury of the Church would be so thin, Answer.
if this devise of elders, and lay deacons should take place, that they
should not need to take any care for the keeping of the treasury. At Geneua,
and in the reformed Churches of France, as they call them, the treasury is all
but one poor alms box. They need not fear robbing: why then should any
that favors the Church, like of their beggarly devise, or of assisting
elders and proctors for the poor, that are but new conceits calculated by a
glass of wine, unknown to scriptures, fathers, and antiquity, and borne out
with sacing: and savor of naught but sacrilege? Neither can his aldermen, nor
lay deacons be proved, nor do they abstain from encroching upon the
magistrate: nor will any such men as he supposes take on them the base
function of lay deacons: and therefore all these desires are nothing, but a
fardell of foolerie.

They would have old helpers so quallified, Petitioner.
as the Apostle commands, 1. Tim. 5.

Do they know what they would have? Answer.
Let them show either commandment in scripture, or practice in the primitive
Church, or Church of Geneua, of their old widows: and then I would hope they
had some care, or knowledge what they desired. if they cannot, then I would
pray some young helpers to help us away with such old fablers.

They would have all these ordained in such manner, Petitioner.
and by such persons, as the word of God, practice of the primitive Church, and
modern Churches does warrant.

What if these modern Churches neither agree among themselves, Answer.
nor with the word of God, nor primitive Church, will you not then confess
that you require things not coherent: and that cannot stand together? Look
where you find any lawles counterfeite lay elders in the ancient Church, or
where any ordained but the bishop: look whether at Geneua there be
consistories in every parish, and what authority they have: And see whether
Scotland does not condemn imposition of hands, and diverse orders which Geneua
allows. All these devises cannot stand together. and therefore if you had
learned any thing in law: you might well understand, that forasmuch as you
allege things contrary: your libell and petitions are to be rejected.

They desire synodes particular, provincial, and national, Petitioner.
and moderators of them.

They must show better reasons, Answer.
or else no man will regard their desires. Oecumenicall synodes, and synodes
of diverse nations they exclude, and ridiculously distinguish particular from
provincial synodes, and make parti-colored synodes, and a mash of laws fitter
for sick horses, then men: And by the same they go about to overthrow the
ancient government of the Church, the laws of the Realm, the prerogative,
and revenues of the Crown: and to say all in one word, both religion and
learning.

They would, Petitioner.
that the party grieved might appeal from the particular congregation, or
synod, at the first instance to the magistrate.

This seems to me a point, that will hardly be proved: Answer.
for the common received opinion is contrary. Beza does flatly deny it, and
others exclude the prince from all judgment, yea, and office in
ecclesiastical causes. This fellow therefore is the only singular doctor of
discipline, that gives cognition of appeals from synodes to the prince. But
mark I pray you the ridiculous ignorance of this simple fellow. first he
would have the appeal from the synod, or particular congregation in the first
instance: And yet every man may see that the first instance was, where the
cause was first begun, that is, in the parish or consistory, and not before
the synod: Secondly he will not say, that any man may appeal in the last
instance, for that were too much, as he thinks: so that still running on in
the disloyal tunes of puritanes, he takes from the prince the last
cognition, and gives it to his synodes.

They desire that such people, Petitioner.
as be already capable, and willing to live as becomes Churches of Christ,
might live as they be commanded by Christ.

If every man might live as he list, Answer.
so he colored his pretense with Gods word and Christ's commandment, there
would neither papist, nor other heritike be repressed. for every man makes
religion and Christ's commandment a cover for his pretenses. But gladly would
I, he should answer me this question; whither he does think that none do
live as becomes Churches of Christ, but such as have his dogbolt devises of
elders; and their doltish government? if he answer so, as here he seems,
then must I tell him, that there can be no greater slander of this state, or of
her Majesty, and the government. If not, what does he tell us here of people
capable, and willing to live as becomes the Churches of Christ, as if the
people of England were neither capable, nor willing so to live? Again, let him
tell me in good sooth, whither he does believe, that the consistory, and
new discipline thereto belonging was in deed commanded by Christ: and if he
believe it, let him show the place, and the words of the commandment, and
declare what father ever so thought. if he believe it, and cannot bring forth
any place, but wrested: he will be taken for a man building his faith on sand:
and shall be had forth for a forger, and deviser of strange novelties, and
condemned in amends for making leasings of his consistory.

They profess and protest this reformation to be most agreeable to scriptures,
Petitioner.
to learned writers, yea commanded by Christ, and not prejudicial to the
state, if they may be heard.

But we look for proof, Answer.
not for protestations, the vanity whereof is too too apparent in the
puritanes: proofs must carry away the matters, and not brags. But proofs can
they bring none, for we have showed that both scriptures, and fathers are
against them: and nothing can they say to the contrary, yet have they bin heard
to the weariness of al their readers, and scorn of their discipline, and
shame of their actions. neither is it to be presumed, that they can speak
better then they have written, nor will perform more, then they have done, or
any part of that they have promised. they have none that takes part with them
in this cause, but the Geneuians and their followers. whether these be to be
heard against all antiquity, let all men judge. and therefore if they be wise,
let them take heed, that their cause come not in hearing: for then both the
novelty, fondness, and injustice of it, of every reasonable man will be
condemned.

This is the sum of their professed opinions, and reformation. Petitioner.


No reformation by your leave: neither any perfect sum: Answer.
for there wants a good part of all. for the chief point that they desire,
is that bishops livings, and cathedral churches may come to division, that
these hungry hines that have spent their wits, and wealth in vanity, may now be
relieved with sacrilege.

Next to this, they desire that certain factious mates under the name of
elders may have the disposing of all ecclesiastical matters, that when the
first spoils of churches are spent, they may by their elderly wisdom command,
and work the sack of the Nobility also. They would also, if they durst speak
it, crave that the Prince, Parliament, Counsel, and Judges would give over
their charges in ecclesiastical matters, that their synodes and consistories,
and people might either rule as they list, or live as they list. A small point
in these men's conceits: may it therefore at these men's requests please her
Majesty and all officers to give up their estate, that these new lords may
rule?

Fourthly they desire that all laws that make against them, being abrogated,
their word may be accounted good law: and that all law may proceed out of their
divine breasts. and good reason: for like young Popillions they say, that they
judge in Christ's seat, and sit as Christ's vicars, and that their sentence is
Christ's sentence: and yet is the same no more but the conceit of four, or
sieve beetleheaded Clownes, or Merchants guided by one blind man that never
looked out of schools, called by them, pastor, and president of the consistory.

Fifthly, they seek the overthrow of the state, of religion, of learning: they
would make the prince subject to themselves, and dispose of her revenues and
crown.

Lastly, they desire that all arts, and study of divinity ceasing, only me^
would profess discipline, which is that divine state, as they think, which
Plato speaks of in his vtopicall common wealth: and these are their opinions
for government. Their opinions for doctrine are also diverse, and very dangerous
to the state, and heretical in respect of christian faith, as before I have in
part noted. put both together: there is no man either wise or learned, or
loyal to the State, that will either yield to grant them their desires, or
else to hear the^ motioned being so unreasonable. Neither is it true, that he
says, that men do intollerably slander his consorts. their words bear
witness, their writings and doings convince them, neither shall they ever be
able to clear themselves. I have not alleged any thing without reason: why
then do they not clear their devises accused of falsehood, imperfection, and
notorious injustice? why did not this author, if he meant good dealing, set
his name to his book? how can he excuse himself, either for his libelling, or
slaundering? his excuse is most wicked: marvel not, says he, good reader,
that I do not affixe my name to this my Treatise: it is not known who was the
writer of the epistle to the Hebrews. As if that epistle were to be compared
to this Libell, or the author thereof to this raylor: nothing is more contrary.
It is well known, that that epistle was written by the spirit of God: this
dogrell treatise is known to be devised by Satan the sower of contention, and
lewd opinions, among brethren. The writer of that epistle is not known; yet
no man doubts of the authority of it. The writer of this Libel is well
known; I would he so well knew himself. His bedlem fits also, and helpers he
had in his writing, are known. A child may see that in the whole there is
neither wit, nor learning, nor ought but frivolous railing, and libelling, and
slaundering, and therefore no man gives any credit or commendation to it. But
this it pleased him to allege, because Th. Cartwright alleges the same
excuse for not putting his name to his first reply. Let them therefore be put
both together, for they are birds both of one plumage and quality: and
percase if they write books whereto they dare not affixe their names, may have
their ears affixed, where they would be ashamed.

He alleges further, that no indifferent welwiller may scarcely be heard to
speak the truth, charging her Majesty, and the governors not only with
notorious injustice, but also with resistance to the truth: and that most
untruly, and disloyally. for her Majesty has but too much heard them speak,
albeit against truth: yea, against her dignity and government, and suffered
their Legendicall tales of their elderships: of which if they were not ashamed,
they would not fly the light like owls, nor walk abroad in libels in the
night, like night walkers, and other evil disposed persons: nor would they send
us forth such fra^ticke and lunatike persons, as this author, that barketh at
every shadow: yea, at shadows in mooneshine, to speak for this glorious
cause, as they call it. nor would he desire men to hide him, as Rahab did hide
Gods servants, wherein he does shamefully abuse this whole State, comparing
the same to Jericho, and the Magistrates to the wicked Cananites, accompting
only those that are of his faction for Gods servants. Would we suffer such
co^tumelious speeches, yet all posterity will cry shame on these raylors, and I
doubt not but the Magistrates will consider of them. In the mean while, let him
understand, that this example fitteth him not: for Rahab did hide no libellers
nor railers against the state: nor are the women he freque^teth so honest as
Rahab: nor is it a seemly matter for such a brave challenger to make a brag,
and so to run away: nor decency for him yt prefers a supplication to the
Queen, and yt kneeleth before her Majesty, to hide himself and his name: nor
can it stand together, that a man should kneel before her Majesty, and yet
conceal his name and person.

He promises when his appearance shall be found more profitable, then his
concealment, that he will come forth, and try himself a proper man: but he had
best come forth in time, lest if, as he says, he be in concealment, some one
or other beg him of the Queen: for to her belong both concealements, and the
custody of Idiots. He braggeth, that he williustifie his words in such manner
and form, as he has written them: but goodman, he neither understands what
he has written, nor has furniture nor stuff in him for so hard an encounter.
for he holds more of Luna, then Mars, and is rather lunaticall, then
martial. It is not long since his Bedlem fits left him. Of Logic he has no
taste, nor yet of Divinity: why then should he like a desperate sotte, or like
a man without arms, or order of war venture into so dangerous a battle? His
good masters are quite fled out of the field, and all their new
disciplinarian devises are vanished away like clouds, and only remain in
certain idle men's brains, who may in time percase digest them: and therefore
if this sentence nubecula est, cito transibit, please him; let him write it
upon the door of the consistory: for like a cloud it has been lift up, and
like a cloud it has been tossed with contrary opinions, and like a cloud it
is almost vanished away.

And thus much concerning the petition. Now let us consider his Articles and
Questions: not that they contain any new matter, (for both his petition,
articles, and interrogatories proceed from the same malice, and tend to one
end, and contain the same odious accusations against the State) but for that
we mean not to leave unto these men any shadow, or pretense for their cause.
If the same things be often repeated; blame him that so often objected the
same, not them that answer their calumnious and vain objections. accusations
are often odious: defense of orders and laws cannot but favorably be esteemed.

WHEREIN IS CONTAINED AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN Articles and Questions annexed to
the foresaid Petition, wherein the Libeller has spread diverse slanders
against Ecclesiastical governors, and their proceedings.
The Title to the Articles.
Certain Articles, wherein is discovered the negligence of the Bishops, their
Officials, Favorers, and Followers, in perfourmance of sundry Ecclesiastical
Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances royal, and Episcopal, published for the
government of the Church of England.

Ecclesiastical laws, and by what autthoritie they stand; and calls them
Ordinances royal, and Episcopal, when it is evident, that there is no law in
England, but Royal; and that no bishop may make any ordinance, or Law.

By the statute 25. H. 8.14. it is accounted by the Parliament against equity
and due order of justice, to bring any man in danger of his life, name, goods,
or lands, by any intrapping Interrogatories, without verdict, witness,
presentment, or confession etc. for making, printing, or dispersing of
seditious books, and sundry other grievous crimes. etc.

heresy, this accuser tra^sferreth to printing and writing seditious books:
as if it were to be presumed, that as innocents by that statute were delivered
from trappes of heresy; so such seditious offenders and libellers were
protected by law against, law: whereas there is no mention, nor intendment of
any such matter in that statute. The second appears, for that the Accuser
does not once charge the high commissioners, at which he aymeth, with breach of
this statute. He knew very well, vt there is nothing in their proceedings
contrary to this statute. For they do not, as this libeller surmiseth, minister
captious interrogatories. Secondly, they do proceed to punishment against none,
but convicted by lawful witnesses, evidence or confession; neither otherwise,
then by warrant of their commission: which I would gladly see the libeller
whether he dare to oppugn. That which is set in the side, Of oath ex officio,
pertains not to this matter: for in this statute there is no word concerning
any oath. And therefore he that put the same there, did like him, stroke a fair
blow, but touched not his adversary.

All men are baylable, that are not prohibited by law to be bayled. 2. West. c.
15.

Ed. 3. c. 15. yet is there no such matter. for there we find rather, who are
not to be bailed, then who are to be bayled, which is to be gathered out of the
statutes and common laws: against which if he will charge the honorable
persons of the high commission to have proceeded, why does he not note the fact
and time, and other circumstances? If he think that either those that are
taken by the writ de excommunicato capiendo, or such as are committed by the
high commisioners ecclesiastical for contempts, are bayleable, he neither
understands law, nor statute: for law auctoriseth both. And if it should not,
then would penalties be frustratory, and offenders be rather protected by law,
then by law punished.

No official nor other officer should take any more, the^ three pence for the
seal of a Citation: else they forfeit double costs, etc.

Officials and others do take more then they ought for seals of processes, I
know not: if they do, I defend them not. But sure I am, that no officers take
less. To let others pass, I know certain Pettifoggers and Scribes like the
forgers of these articles, that by taking are grown to wealth: and a Scribe,
that for signing and sealing a letter, has had not three pence, but three
pounds, and a good gelding for expedition: neither is any thing more usual,
then the bribery and extortion, and coosinage of these companions, that are
most busy in watching, and accusing of others. Let them therefore take heed,
that they may be able to clear themselves: and for ecclesiastical officers
that have taken more then ordinary, spare them not. In this taking world, it
were good, that takers of all sorts were looked unto.

No forreyn constitutions etc. have any force in our state. 25. H. 8. cap. 19.
yet the Bishops in their consistories practice Romish and Imperial
constitutions.

Romish, and Imperial constitutions together, as if ye same were both one, or
as if the law of the Pandects were called Constitutio^s. secondly, he calls
her Majesty's laws, foreign laws; making this realm and crown to depend
upon foreign power, which is derogatorie to her Highness authority, and
contrary to practice of Law. For whencesoeuer any law is derived, yet is it
the law of that country, where it is practiced. The laws of the Romans for
the most part were borrowed of the Athenians, and Spartans: yet were it absurd
to call the laws of the twelve tables, the Laws of the Greeks.

Thirdly, ignorantly he supposes, that the statute condemns forreyn laws;
yet does it not speak of any forreyn laws, but only of the ecclesiastical
laws of England: the equity whereof is so apparent, that if twelve
Consistories, and so many Scribes and Proctors should all join their heads
together, yet could they not devise any one law so equal, as the worst of
these, that are in use. and those that have gone about to make other Laws, and
correct the old, have committed such errors, as their friends may be
greatly ashamed in their behalf. The Ordinances of Geneua, and articles of
French discipline, and that pelf that ours call Holy Discipline, shall
testify this to be true, as by particulers I will show, when need is.
Lastly, they charge the Bishops for putting in ure forreyn Constitutions, and
yet cannot name one. In their meetings at Warwike, Cambridge, Oxford:
especially, when the new discipline was upon forging.
But if the Bishops offend, that execute her Majesty's Laws; how will this
Accuser answer for his Clyents, that have in secret conuenticles enacted, and
also practiced Canons, and Laws directly contrary to her Majesty's Laws, and
Prerogative, and therefore are to suffer imprisonment, and pay fine at her
Majesty's pleasure, by the same statute they allege against us.

Such Canons and Constitutions only as be not repugnant to the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, ought to be put in practice. 25. H. 8.
c. 19. But the bishops give sentence in infinite matters, which would be
otherwise ruled by the Common Laws.

would the reverend Judges which are to grant prohibitions in that case, permit
it. If they do against the laws of the Realm, why are not the laws named,
and men charged, and the fact noted? This silence of the babbling accuser is
their sufficient discharge: and his vain discourse void of reasons, a
condemnation of his babbling.

The Bishops have reckoned such men as have been ordained ministers in reformed
Churches, to be lay men.

Eliz. c. 12. debarred from the ministry: and for their hatred to the Church,
most unworthy of any ecclesiastical function, or to live in the Church which
with all their might and malice they have oppugned.

The law requires a subscription to articles of religion only that concern
the confession of true faith and doctrine of sacraments. 13. Eliz. c. 12. The
bishops urge a subscription to the books of homilies and diverse ceremonial and
transitory matters, neither concerning faith nor sacraments.

parliament meant to confirm, is void. which were to euert laws by cauils
(as these do) not to interpret law. Neither does it help the platformers,
that the title of the book is, Articles concerning faith and sacraments. For
things are denominated of the greatest part: and in our account, matters of
government are directed by the word of God, which is the ground of faith,
Neither would it be taken, if any papist should take exception to any article
in that book, and not subscribe, for that it apperteyneth not to faith, nor
sacraments. Besides the allowance of laws and statutes, the Bishops for this
subscription that is required unto three articles, have sufficient warrant. In
vain therefore would the articulators oppugn laws by law: and disloyally
do they spurn at her Majesty's authority, yea in cases, wherein they cannot
take any just exceptions, bluntly subscribing to all the fond discipline of
Geneua, to the which we can take so many sufficient exceptions. But if it be
such a fault to make men subscribe to laws, whereunto every man is supposed to
yield his consent in parliament, and whereto every one ought to obey: what
punishment does T.C. and his bold companions deserve, that subscribed to canons
and constitutions, made in a corner, and directly overthrowing her Majesty's
supremacy, and ecclesiastical laws, and a great part of the laws of the
realm, if they were received? And if subscription be so heinous a matter, why
is it required at Geneua and in France to most simple orders, not for
government, but for the utter debasing, impouerishing, and overthrow of the
ministry: as too late now the ministers themselves there begin to feel? why
should it, I say, be more lawful there, then with us?

If the bishops publish any Canons, or orders to be practiced without the
royal assent of her Maeistie, they should be fined and imprisoned. 25. H. 8.
c. 19 yet notwithstanding this statute, they publish subscriptions in their
provinces, and articles in their Diocesses without any assent of her Highness.

and fined according to the rules of puritan charity. But the means and
proofs, whereby the articulators endeavor to effect it, are all too weak. For
they can neither prove, that they have published Canons, constitutions, and
provincial ordinances without the princes assent, nor that they have done any
thing therein against law. nay albeit in their subscriptions they require
nothing but obedience to law: yet did they not require them without special
warrant. But (says the accuser) they publish new subscriptions and articles.
Goodly stuff. As if either subscriptions or articles were canons, or
constitutions, or ordinances: or else such as minister private articles about
matters in civil courts, could be said to make new laws. It appears the man
is but a nouice in law, that knew not what is law. That he err not, let him
understand, that the ordinances of discipline made by T.C. and his fellows,
were made contrary to this statute. And therefore if they desire Justice to be
done: let the law be executed upon offenders, and let innocents be no more
wronged.

Ecclesiastical officers extort from schoolemasters sometime 7. s. sometime
more, and make them subscribe: both contrary to law.

Done at Geneua. Ordon de l'esehole de Geneua.
as but too many factious and puritan schoolemasters have done to the great
prejudice of this Church, and state? the more have they to answer for, that
have suffered them: and more care ought men to have, that such nurseries of
rebellion be not suffered. But what reason has this pettifogger, or the
scriuano his suggestor to condemn subscriptions, seeing both of them win more
by scribbling, and subscribing, then any ecclesiastical person I know in
England.

By the great charter none may be imprisoned, but by the lawful judgment of
his Peers, or by the law of the land.

Magna Charta, what presumption is this, that he and his companions directly
oppugn them? on the contrary side, he cannot charge any justly with the breach
of laws. let him if he can name any, that has imprisoned any contrary to the
laws of Magnacharta. if he cannot, why does he speak of imprisonment to no
purpose? If he affirm any such matter of bishops, he does them wrong. For they
imprison none by authority Episcopal. If he speak against the high
Commissioners in causes ecclesiastical, he is to understand, that diverse of
them being of the most honorable persons, and Judges in the land, they will not
do any thing against law. Nor do they commit any, but contumacious offenders,
whom no law may spare. That they punish men for not swearing vainly, is a
vain lie. To say, that an oath offered by a magistrate is vain, is both
disloyalty, and Anabaptistrie. But all this rigor is clemency, in respect of
the consistoriall proceedings. For there men are censured by opinion, and
ministers disgraced upon suspicion, and Calvin put a syndicke and diverse
chief men of Geneua to their oathe, to answer whether they had been daunsing
at widow Baltazars house: and after that removed diverse of them from their
places. he that likes these orders, must needs commend ours.

By the common law, a man shall not be examined upon his oath in matters that
sound to his reproach. Crompton. 182.

Cromptons word is no measure of law. The contrary hereof is law, by the
opinion of the most learned Judges in England. It is the practice of the court
of Chancerie: in the court of the counsel of the marches, and principality of
Wales: in the court of Starrechamber: whereas the parties are examined upon
their oaths, upon periuries, forgeries, and many other misdemeanors. Suppose it
be at the instance of parties, which notwithstanding is not always: yet it
appears, that oaths to discover things reproachful to a man's self, be
lawful and very common, and most necessary: And a simple lawyer was he, that
understood not so much. Likewise in other courts of record at Westminster,
the judges by corporal oath examine any person, whom they have cause to
suspect to have dealt lewdly about any writ, return, entry of rule, and
such like matters. By the statute of inquisitio^ Stat. de Exon. de Inquisit.
super Coronat.
upon Coroners, the enquirors shall make the Bailiffes swear that they shall
conceal nothing; no, though it be penal to them. Masters of ships are to
be put to answer on their oaths, upon the statute of money. 9. Edw. 3. c. 9.
Whether they have committed any fraud. So likewise, they that are charged upon
the statute 8. Edw. 4. c. 2.
of liueries, must answer the bill upon their oath, though the matter be
penal. The same is apparent by the statute of wines. 24. H. 8. c. 2. of
banckrupts. 34. H. 8. c. 4. by the statute of supremacy: by the statute of
Fugitives. 13. Eliz. c. 3.

In appeals at the Common law, the defendant before battle is driven to
Stanf. Pleas of the crown. lib. 3. c. 14.
swear. A Iuror departing from his company, was examined on his oath, whether
he had talked with the defendant. yet if he had confessed it, the same had been
penal. M. 34. Edw. 3. fol. 3. In an action of formedon, couin being found by
oath in the defendant, he was punished by the Judges discretion. T. 7. H. 4.
fol. 19.

The oath of supremacy may be given 5. Eliz. c. 1.
Ex officio by any Ordinary to a Clarke; the refusal whereof is very penal.
In the register, in the title, Consultation, diverse cases are found, where the
Judges ecclesiastical procceding ex officio is allowed. Why then may not
ecclesiastical commissioners proceed Ex officio, and minister oaths? For that
which this accuser says, that for matters of felony, they examine men upon
their oaths; is false. For with these cases they do not meddle. If the
articulator can prove they do, why does he not declare it, seeing he may
thereby procure them that hurt, which he desires.

No man should be cited to a spiritual court, to depose therein as witness.
For this is extortion, and tort to the party. Fitz. just. ofp. p. 172. Cromp.
219.

ad iurandum, or to depose, but ad testificandum; which neither the author of
the Articles, nor any else can deny to be lawful. For neither is this
libeller, nor any man to be credited without an oath. Somewhat this smatterer
has heard, but he cannot cite it right. For both the Register, and
Fitzherbert the author of this opinion does allow oaths in causes
testamentarie, and matrimonial. And it is the common practice, and ever was in
all causes and courts: And himself confesses so much in the next accusation.
But the objection he cannot hit. When he obiecteth right, he shall have his
answer more at full. Now it is sufficient to say, that which every lawyer that
knows any law, can tell him: that seeing by the laws of England, many
causes are heard in Ecclesiastical courts, which cannot be decided without
witnesses, the calling of witnesses is necessary.

No Bishop ought to appoint a man to appear before him to take an oath ex
Officio, saving in matters of marriages and wills.

ex officio; but that the Judge proceeding sometime Ex Officio, sometime
otherwise, does minister an oath to the party. Again, the bishop does not
appoint men to appear before him, but calls them by process of law. But
these are but errors in terms. A grosser fault it is, that he mistaketh law.
For not whatsoever Fitzherbert sets down, is law; in this case especially
of prohibition. For nothing is more ordinary, then to reuerse prohibitions by
consultations. The meaning of the words of Fitzherbert, or rather of the
Register, whence he drew his writ, was: That men should not be called into
ecclesiastical courts to confirm any contract concerning goods or chattels
by oath: by which means, the ecclesiastical court encroched upon other
courts. Only causes Matrimonial and Testamentarie in that case (for to other
it cannot be extended) were excepted. That in matter of Tithes, and other
causes men answered upon their oaths, is evident; for that the Art. Cler. 9.
Edw. 2. c. 12.
Kings tenants as well as others, answered before Ordinaries, and were by them
also excommunicate for their contumacie. In matters of Tithes, the 27. H. 8.
contemners of the ecclesiastical process by statute are condemned, and may
be forced to obey. And in another statute it is decreed, That the 32. H. 8.
Ordinary may convent such, as withholde Tithes, according to to the laws
ecclesiastical. Likewise the ecclesiastical Judge may by statute proceed
against those that Eliz. c. 2.
violate the laws concerning uniformity of Common prayer. yea, Fitzherbert
Nou. Nature. breu. fol. 63.
grants, that an ecclesiastical Judge may exact a caution iuratorie, before
he deliver a man that is in prison, upon the writ De excommunicato capiendo.
False it is therefore, that this bold and blind bayarde says; That bishops
boldly presume against law. Nay, he and his companions boldly presume, both
against law, and common humanity. for both do they run into fellonies and
treasons, and also speak against laws, and defend their doings, and rail
against others, that gently put them in mind of their faults.

Morning and Evening prayer should be read every day throughout the year, but
are not.



The Curate must toll a Bell: yet does not he, but the Sexten.



The people are to answer the Priest, and to say, Amen: Yet does the Clarke
answer alone in most places.



Where there is singing, there the lessons should be sung in a plain tune,
etc.



The names of the Communicants before they receive, should be signified to the
Curate: yet this is not regarded in most places.



Notorious lewd persons be admitted to the Communion: yet should the Curate
repel such.

most putitans notorious lewd persons, that are commonly suspected for such;
and not without cause. For further answer I say, that such as by sentence of
the Judge are pronounced culpable, which are in deed notorious offenders, are
repelled; and that to repel others, were a course full of disorder and
injustice. And lastly, that hereafter such notorious railing puritans, as do
slander religion, shall be better looked unto, and be repelled, both from the
Communion, and all honest men's society, being enemies of learning, and
scandales of religion.

The Minister should use the ornaments appointed by King Edward.

Giles Wiggington has some little wit, that this libeller has none. The
meaning of the law is, that such ornaments shall be used, as were appointed by
king Edward, where other order should not be taken. For later laws abridge the
former. If then the accuser can show, that laws are not herein observed, he
shall do us great favor to name the offenders.

In Cathedral Churches the Communion should be ministredeuery Sunday at the
least.

Geneua, that communicates only quarterly. Better therefore it were for malice
to keep silence, then to say that, which is nothing. Let him (if he can)
detect those that are culpable.

The Godfathers do not their duty, neither do Bishops urge them.

conscience of Godfathers, to do their duties, why should the Bishops be
charged with other men's faults? Forsooth, this libeller means to lay all
faults on the Bishops backs. I would to God for my part, there were no
faults, but in Bishops, so far am I from envying any man's purity. But this
purity (I fear) is but hypocrisy. For many puritans mislike Godfathers: and
are very impure in life and conversation.

Bishops are commanded to confirm children, yet few do it.



Curates do not instruct servants, and youth upon holidays.



None should be admitted to the Communion that cannot say the Catechism.
Therefore Curates should examine communicants, and seelude them that be wanting
in knowledge.

any that is more ignorant in their Catechism, then puritans: that never enter
deeper, then the paraphrase of their Creed, and pater noster,

Banes should be asked three several Sundays in the open Church, yet the
Bishops dispense with banes.



The party presented to the Bishop, should wear a plain Albe: yet this
garment is not used.

Geneuian fashion? would this libeller were a yellow cote, it would become him
better then an Albe.

The Deacon by part of his office, ought to search for the poor, sick, and
impotent of the parish, and intimate their estates to the Curate. But now the
office is accounted mere spiritual.

out. That he should only attend the poor and sick, cannot be proved either
by scriptures or fathers. In Geneua the Deaconship is turned into a vain
office of Proctorship for the poor, managed by men of base trades. Why then
does he accuse others, that is guilty himself?

The Deacon must read the Gospel in the day of his ordination, putting on a
tunicle: but this vesture is scarcely known at this day.

Anno 1559. and confirmed by parliament, has no such matter. And therefore
unless he can show his author for his tunicle, let him wear the tunicle
together with his four elbowed iacket himself. But admit some piece of
apparel were omitted in deacons: yet is the fault not great, nor to be
ascribed to any, but to those that commit the same.

The bishops at the ordination of ministers, do tell them the weight of their
charges, and what labor they ought to take: yet most of them are never
resident.



The law would have them give themselves to their function: yet many attend
civil and worldly affairs.

T. Cartw. to meddle with the charge of his hospital, a matter mere civil,
and wherein he has done more good, then in ecclesiastical causes? For he has
bestirred himself so, that what by rewards, what by auailes of his hospital,
and pinching those that are committed to his charge, and what by buying and
selling, the man is grown fat and rich. Of his ministry we see no fruit,
but contention and trouble. Percase he will say he is no minister. But why
then does he meddle with the ministers office? like to him are his followers,
men very stirring and busy in all matters of state, howsoever this man
misliketh them therein. Contrariwise for subjects to execute the
commandments of the prince, and to see their ministry also discharged, is
commendable, and not only allowable. The laws of God and the land allow it.
Wherefore then should he maliciously condemn that, which he cannot
disprooue?

Bishops only excommunicate and suspend: yet by the book of ordering ministers
every one is to administer the discipline of Christ: And Christ has given the
keys equally.



The Bishops Chapplaynes, and Doctors, use not private admonition in their
Cures.



The bishops admit not preachers to preach without license, and make
unpreaching ministers, and ordeine ministers without Cure, and preach out of
Apocrypha against law.

sort, that preach not Gods word, but their own conceits. Thirdly, it is not
unfit nor against law, that men learned should be made ministers, though
presently they have no cures: nor does the book of making ministers condemn
it. For albeit the word congregation be used: yet names it no special
congregation. Finally it is not usual for any to choose textes out of the
Apocryphal Scriptures. yet if any do so, the offense is not great, seeing for
manners they are to be read, and having confirmation of Canonical scriptures,
are to be received. That which he says of bishops, that they take away letters
of orders upon every supposed misdemeanour, is untrue. For neither do they
offer it, nor may they do it by law.

Seldom do bishops at the time of their consecration use Coapes: and never
use they pastoral staves: yet both required by law.

Anno 1559. shall witness with me that I say truth. yet in mine opinion, it
were not amiss to use pastoral staves, if for none other cause, yet to beat
such barking curres as this, which without reason baull at laws and
antiquity: (and if they had might) would bite also.

There be many Churches in England, that have scarce had 12. sermons in 12.
years.

livings of Churches, are cause of this disorder? Wherefore to answer him, let
him this understand, that there are mo learned Preachers, and Sermons preached
in England ( proportion for proportion) then either in France, or Scotland;
howsoever the same seem to him to be reformed.

Erasmus paraphrasis should be had in all Churches.

brother-hoode of Puritans, that condemn all good learning, and care for none
other books, then the Geneua Bible, Caluins institutions, and Bezaes Comments:
excepting always Caluins Commentaries on Job, and Martyrs common places in
English; Nor have other cause to like of Erasmus paraphrasis, but that now all
their exercises be nothing but light and fantastical paraphrases: except
always some heavy and malicious inuectiues.

Ecclesiastical persons should not play at unlawful games, as Cards, Dice,
etc. but they offend more, then any other that pretend conformity.



Non residents should distribute the 40. part of their living to the poor of
the parish, which they do not. Likewise they should maintain scholars.

Puritans: nor more bountiful then the Clergy to the poor. As for
Pettifoggers, and Scribes, they do skin the poor, and help them not.
Nothing therefore could be more unseasonable, then this accusation. For albeit
the Ministry (by the spoils of Patrons and griedie Gulles, and wicked
vexations of Puritans) are almost now the poorest of the parish: yet are they
not sparing to give every man according to his faculty. And as for some
bishops, it shall be proved, that they are as ready to maintain and prefer
learned scholars, as the Puritans to impouerish them and spoil them: the rest
let them answer for themselves. Blush therefore you sacrilegious
Church-robbing Puritans the ruinors of all churches, and shame to talk of
liberality, and maynetenance of scholars. For by your barking, and by your
spoils, and by your crying out against the reward of learning, and by that
poverty and contempt, you have brought the ministry into: you have almost
overthrown the ministry in Scotland, religion in France, and would overthrow
both in England. And what should we else look for at their hands, seeing in
racking of Rents, exteremitie of dealing, usury, and unlawful practices of
gain, and Turkish and inhumane cruelty, diverse of these zelatours of
puritanisme pass both Turks and Heathen?

The Queens Injunctions are not read quarterly, as they should be.

Puritans, that bring all laws into contempt: sure they are contemned more by
them, then any. for they openly impugn them, not only neglect them. But admit
they should be read very often: yet would not the Puritans hear them, nor obey
them. For they neither respect her Majesty nor her laws; but in despite of
both, seek to establish a new government, and new Injunctions. for which if
they do not shortly reform themselves, there will be such penance enjoined
them, that they will better remember Injunctions all their life long.

Holy Days should be spent in godly exercises. Bishops bestow them
profanely in playing at Bowls, hearing Comedies, and Tragedies.

hypocritical sect of Puritans, that in slaundering, factious declayming
against laws and governors, in chambring and chambring exercises, yea and in
worse matters do bestow their time in corners, doing things which you may
conceive, I may not utter: and therefore these are profane and wicked
hypocrites. As for honest exercises, why may they not be used upon holy days,
so it be not in times of serving God? Wherefore unless the Libeller can show
both better law and reason against bowls and other exercises well used, and
show cause why Tragedies may not be heard; his accusation will rather seem to
proceed from malice, then other cause: and he will be taken for a profane
senseless hypocrite, that is offended with bowling, and exercises of learning,
and yet thinks it lawful to make an occupation of lying, slaundering, and
defacing of good men; and allows the secret and parlour conferences of his
fellow Puritans, and many other bad practices: whereof some are comicall,
others tragical; and most of their discipline fabulous, or a comicall fable.

The Bishops be not without superstitious paintings in their chambers; and
diverse Churches have them not abolished.

Turcisme. Other uses of painting, bishops have none: neither is there now any
superstitious use of payntings in church wyndowes; but those that are (if they
displease the Libeller) he may have down at pleasure, when he will set new
glass in their place. The paintings that do more harm, are in apparel,
ruffes; yea women's faces, and their furniture: wherein I would the Puritans did
not commit both Idolatry and other folly. Wherefore seeing he is in the way
(as he pretends) of Reformation, let these abuses of pricking pride, and
painting be removed: and also let him take heed that superstitiously he do
not make an idol of his discipline, that both out of church and common wealth
is to be abolished.

The wives of Ministers and Deacons should be allowed by the Ordinary, and two
Justices of peace. But many forward Chapleyns regard not this.

Ministers, Chapleins, sparing neither his adversaries, nor friends the
Puritans, that are for the most part trencher Chapleins: nor others. But what
such lewd mouthed Libellers and enemies of the Ministry professed do call
honest men, it is not material. I know none marieth, but such as have
allowance sufficient of their choice. If they have not, let the offenders be
corrected, and not innocents be disgraced for others offense. why they should
be called forward, I know not; seeing none is so forward in marrying as the
Puritan sort: of whom I know none that has the gift of continency. but would
they cease to disgrace others, I could for my part be content they should use
their liberty. provided always, they make not too great post haste, nor
without regard and consideration of their future wives qualities, leap into
sudden mischief.

The clergy people go not in their habits, and square caps.

Puritan people? forsooth they square it out for the most part in new fashiond
and conceited apparel, and are all clad in Satin, and velvet, and costly
apparel, and brave it like people of a new government. some for humility sake
go in flat caps: others go like clownes in russet clokes, and well they may:
for their religion is a russet religion, good for none but russet cotes, and
such as favor populer government, and fitting none but our rusticall
platformers, whose manners are rude and uncivil. that men go not more orderly,
this faction is cause, which makes war against the ministry, and by all
means seeks to offer them scorn.

The Bishops Officials allow none to be absent from their own parish, unless
they will pay a Mark for a license: yet law suffers men to hear Sermons
other where.

taking money for lice^ces, I see no cause, seeing his dear friends, yea
himself too, uses more taking then giving; and considering that Pettifoggers,
and Scriuanoes, such as the authors of this book seem to be, live by taking,
and take without license, and contrary both to license, and law, and have won
more by taking, then others by long service: and for all their pretended
hypocrisy will neither spend nor loose commodity for their puritan cause.
why men should not be suffered to frequent factious sermons, there be diverse
causes: it is the way to faction, sects, heresy, and tumults, and diverse
other disorders.

Songs in Churches should be distinct, and modest.

Puritans.

None of the Queens subjects should call one another heretic, nor
scismaticke: but we are so called, and Puritans too, by certain Libellers.

T. C. and others: neither are they Libellers in so calling you: nor does the
Iniunction protect factious mates, but quiet and good subjects, such as you
will not show your selves to be, railing and reuelling at Laws, and governors
in most shameful sort. and therefore disdain not to be called by your names;
nor wonder, if you be beaten with your own weapons.

Bishops and their Chapleyns seldom make a leg at the name of Jesus, unless
it be at the reading of the Gospel, nor remember Jesus, but when they lustily
swear by Jesus.

Puritans utterly mislike this bowing at the name of Jesus: this semypuritan,
and demychristian misliketh the omitting of it, therein condemning all his
companions, as contumacious lawbreakers, and not proouing any matter against
his adversaries, for which both one and other have cause to mislike him: but
especially for lying, and slaundering of Governors: wherein he shows his
full malice, and choler in charging them, and want of matter in conuincing
them. The Puritanes speak nothing without protesting: do you not call that
swearing? no, it is forswearing. for when they protest deepest, then commonly
they dissemble most, and perform least: yea, many of these seem with the
Priscilianites to have little regard of oaths, as appears by their
examinations. If he knew any of his adversaries, that offends in swearing, I
doubt not, but they should hear it.

The Queen accompteth them good subjects that acknowledge her Majesty to be
sole supreme governor over all her subject in all her Dominions. The Bishops
do not.



The Bishops have not punished offenders against Injunctions, but are only
careful to urge subscriptions, oaths ex officio. etc.

that offenses must first be known, and then punished: and secondly, that
bishops have suffered as few known offenses to escape unpunished, as any
other officers: thirdly, that those offenses that tend to the overthrow of the
State, are most narrowly looked unto: and lastly, that he is a lewd mate, that
does pick quarrels with others for not executing those Laws, which himself
does mislike. As concerning their urging of subscriptions, and conuenting
those that are disobedient to law, the Bishops have offended in nothing more,
then that they have not been more peremptory in urging them. no State nor
Governors ever suffered such notorious disloyalty so long unpunished.

Bishops take extraordinarily for licenses to preach contrary to their own
aduertisements: of licentious Preachers no license is required.



Many are absent from their cures without lawful cause.



Ecclesiastical persons do not wear in iourneying clokes with sleeves.

Puritans, and scorn offered by them to those that obey laws. for while they
break laws themselves, and scorn obedience in others, these points have been
slackely observed of diverse. yet is not the matter capital: for when ministers
go most indecently, yet do they not come near the flatcapped, short cloked,
russet clothed, and lether breeched brood of Puritans.

The household servants of Bishops be not of so good life, as they should be.

Puritans house so orderly? this I dare auowe, that the lewdest man they keep,
is more honest and discreet then this Libeller or his compagnions, and has
more government of his tongue, and actions.

Bishops make blind Porters, and outworne seruitors Ministers.

T. C. lives now all by speculatio^: except always some little gain he has by
interest.

Bishops should not as they do, grant Presentations, and Aduowsons of livings
before they be void.

bestow them better, then many of the best lay patrons. if they did their duty
herein, there would not be such buying and selling, as there is, and so many
learned men destitute of living. it is not the bishops, but the wicked
generation of sacrilegious Churchrobbers, that sell aduowsons, yea and would
sell both Church and soil if they might, and next to these such petit
incornifistibulat pettifoggers, and scriuanoes, as the chief authors of this
libel, that must have bribes under hand to help to procure the patrons favor.

The book of Martyrs should be in Cathedral Churches, and in Deanes and in
prehendaries houses, but is not.



Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials, should be learned in the
ecclesiastical law: but are utterly ignorant.



Unpreaching Prelates should teach children to write, etc. but yet the
parishioners are burdened to find schoolemasters for these matters.

none bound to teach without wages. neither can he charge any for not
teaching, that has competent wages allowed. what wise man then was he, to
allege that for law, wherein is neither law, nor truth?

The election of Church wardens by the ministers, and people, and the
admonitions which they should use to offenders are omitted, and accounted
seditious, and schismatic.



The bishops keep non residents about them, though by law confessed to be
odious, and spoken against in parliament.



No man should have above two benefices at once not distant above 26. miles,
yet many have 3, or 4, scattered an hundred miles one from another.



The bishops say that excommunication is a civil discommuning, and company
with excommunicate persons, and if our Prelates were examined: then were they
excommunicate, and worse then publicanes and heathen.

jolly prelates, and in changing scorn into railing calls them excommunicate
persons, yea worse then publicanes and heathen: into such a streine of madness
is he entered. look Allen, Stapleton, and other traitors discourses, yet shall
you find no such. scornful, nor spiteful speeches. and wherefore does he so
revile them? forsooth because he supposes they offend against canons. yet
neither does he prove any fault, nor can he show that those canons are law,
nor can he excuse his consorts, that notoriously contemn all
excommunications: nor finally can he disprove the common distinction of
excommunication; that one sort is ecclesiastical the other civil, and
therefore as a furious for railing without learning or wit, against men of so
high place, he is rather to be corrected in Bedlem then refuted with long
discourse. I doubt not but the consistory it self will be ashamed of such
kind of dealing; and all other reasonable men condemn it. why the
disciplinarians should talk of excommunication, there is no reason. forthey
commit the same into profane men's hands, and are therein worse then heathen,
that never committed such holy things into so base men's hands.

This is the sum of all those articles, that he has gathered against the
ecclesiastical state: a plain justification of all their doings. for if he
could have said more against them, he would not have spared: and charging them
with matters either tryfling, or else utterly untrue, declares them to be
innocent, himself to be malicious, and furious. for the sum of all is
nothing but a pack of unruly words, as Chapplaines, Priests, jolly Prelates,
hangbyes, excommunicate persons, worse then heathen and publicanes, licentious
preachers, extortioners, bribers and such like. I could requite him with
better, and as bitter terms: but to answer his articles; I will only
return him but these few articles following.

A BRIEF COLLECTION OF DIVERSE haereticall, and strange opinions, lewd
practices, and fond fancies and devices, which certain factious, and light
headed persons have lately colored, and advanced with glorious titles of
discipline, and reformation; set down in form of Articles.
TH. Cartw. does call the rules of his new discipline, the In the Epistbefore
Fenners new divinity.
Axioms, or irrefragable principles of heavenly Canaan. whereby he would in
sinuate, that they are without doubt to be received. and yet can he not show,
that ever the eldership, or the strange government thereof was practiced in
Canaan, unless it were of the Cananites, and enemies of Gods Church, to the
rooting out of Gods people, and overthrow of the Ministry.

2 The disciplinarians hold, that the government of the Eldership is Christ's
kingdom, and that they, that withstand the same, are enemies to Christ, to
religion, and to Christ's kingome; and apply these words of the Gospel; Th.
Cartw. in a certain table.
Those mine enemies that would not have me to reign over them, bring them, and
slay them before me. Aplaine evidence, that if with entreatie they cannot, they
mean by wars and bloodshed to set up their kingdom. and yet William Hacket
their first king, was crowned in Cheapeside with an hempen coronet, or diadem:
and his guard, and followers dipersed.

3 They teach, That the Church is only to be governed by Christ's laws, And
yet are they not able to bring forth one word for proof of their consistory,
or the parts of it, or the office of every several part of it, or any part of
their government: and seem to rest only upon men's bare conceits, and
fancies, contrary both to scriptures, equity, and reason.

4 They profess great loyalty in terms: yet doubt not to say, that the
simplest Consistory they have, may give the prince to Satan.

5 They take from the magistrate, power to make ecclesiastical laws for the
government of the Church: and yet at Geneua they have no ecclesiastical laws,
but made by the magistrates.

6 That authority which statutes give to princes, In calling and assembling of
Synodes, and appointing ecclesiastical commissioners to hear, and determine
Ecclesiastical matters, and appointing delegates to repress wrongs offered in
Ecclesiastical courts, they take away and deny the supremacy of the prince
very presumptuously.

7 They overthrow her Majesty's reuennues: and dissolve the office of first
fruits and tenthes.

8 They deny her all authority to nominate Bishops, or other officers of the
Church: and utterly take away her right of patronage in all ecclesiastical
livings.

9 They dissolve all ecclesiastical laws, and all those statutes, that
concern Bishops, or other Ministers, or other ecclesiastical livings, person,
or cause.

10 They deny that her Majesty may pardon, and grant life to any offender,
Fenneri Theologia.
whom Moses law commands to be put to death, and bind her to the
observance of Moses judicial laws.

11 They seek the ruin and overthrow of the whole ecclesiastical estate, by
abasing the Ministers of the Church beneath all others, and laying infinite
burdens upon them, and taking away all rewards of learning, a point, which
you my masters of the university are to look unto.

12 By overthrowing of the Ecclesiastical state, they do deprive her Majesty
of many thowsands of able and most willing men to do her service, and make way
to inward faction, and foreign invasion, and all manner of heresies, and
disorders.

13 They teach, Th Cartw. reply.
that all magistrates are to lick the dust of the feet of the Eldership,

14 They go about to bring in foreign laws, and foreign and uncouth
governors.

15 They teach that in every common wealth well governed, Fenners holy
divinity.
there ought some magistrates to be appointed, to depose and ouerrule princes,
if they do not their duties, like the Spartain Ephori.

16 They teach that the prince may not determine any weighty matter, Ibidem.
without the assembly of the estates.

17 They deprave the ecclesiastical government, Martin.
and religion of this Church, and call it antichristian, and devilish.

18 They traduce the public justice of this land, Martin, and Epist. before
reformat. no enemy.
and rail against the parliament, the lords, the Judges, the laws, and
whatsoever misliketh them,

19 They have confederated themselves together, That is evident by theit
subscriptions.
for the over. throwing of the ecclesiastical laws, and state, and have
subscribed certain articles for the establishment of new laws, and
government.

20 Cartwright, and Egerton, seem to have had intelligence with Copinger, one
of Hackets prophets: as for Wigginton, it is apparent that he was a chief
slirrer in that action.

21 Being co^uented for diverse misdemeanors, they refuse the ordinary trials
of law.

22 In the Universities, by bringing in the study of Ramus writings, a man
ignorant in Logic, and arts, and fantastical in all actions, they have
almost overthrown all good learning; by studying of naked comments, all sound
divinity.

23 In living lewdly themselves, Rescij in ministromach. and Sanderus de
schismate, and Rosseus.
and by infamous libels disgracing the Ministry, they have given advantage to
the enemy, and brought religion into contempt.

24 They are but made instruments by some persons to work the spoil of the
Church, whereof they are like to have small part.

25 In all places where this discipline is settled, they have overthrown the
authority of the Magistrate, the state of the Church, and universities.

26 Nay by diverse strange positions, they go about to bring in diverse heresies.

27 They have in their lewd In their new Communion book.
paraphrase upon the Creed, taken out two Articles out of the Creed, viz.
that of Christ's burial, and of his descending into hell, and have added a new
Article of their discipline.

28 They affirm, that hatred as it is an attribute in God, Fenner Theolog.
lib. 1.
is the essence of God: and teach very badly, of the essence and persons.

29 Penrie holds, that Christ Jesus is the word preached.

30 They do generally believe, that the word read, is but a dead letter, and
no ordinary means to engender faith: which is the opinion of the Bozius in
libr. de signis ecclesiae.
papists.

31 Martin does scoff at the holy virgin Saint Mary, and Saint Peter, and
calls them Sir Peter, and Sir Mary in scorn. and makes a scoff both at
government, and religion.

32 In leaving the study of fathers and ancient writers, and school learning,
all the puritans are become verbal divines, without soundmatter.

33 To prove their devises, they have offered great violence to the holy
scriptures, expounding them contrary both to ancient fathers, and histories,
and common reason: as namely their common places alleged out of the 18. of
Matthew 1. Timothy 5. Romans 12.1. Corinthians 12. Ephesians 4. upon the
false interpretation of nine or ten places all their devises do stand.

34 Themselves do not agree, either in the exposition of these places, or in
their rules concerning the presbytery.

35 Some interpret the words, If thy brother offend against thee, of private
offenses, others of public offenses, others of both.

36 The Elders that are mentioned in the 14 of the Acts, some expound
Ministers of the word, others churchaldermen.

37 The words Dic Ecclesiae, some expound of the Consistory, others of the
Synod, others of the conferences.

38 Themselves confess, that they are not resolved in many points. I have set
down otherwhere infinite matters, which they can never resolve.

39 Themselves do many ways contrary to their discipline. they condemn the
reading of Apocrypha in the Church, yet do they allow verbal sermons,
wherein often times fall out strange doctrines, and many uncharitable
discourses. which no man is so senseless, I think, as to prefer before the
Apocryphal scriptures, that are read in the Church. They interpret Caluins
Catechism, and other such like books, which they cannot show to be
canonical.

40 They teach, that he that bears not the Church, is to be accounted a
heathen, and publican, yet do they not so accept him, when the Synod judges
contrary to the Consistory.

41 They say, that every Church has equal right, yet the parishes about
Geneua have no Consistories, nor doctors, nor execution of discipline, but
depend upon them of the city of Geneua.

42 They say, no man may enter the ministry without lawful calling: yet have
Th. C. and Wat. Tr. and diverse of this sort, here taken upon them the
ministry without lawful calling, and intruded into others charges, to the
great disturbance of Gods Church.

43 In Bishops and other ministers of this Church, they condemn the mingling
of matters civil and ecclesiastical, and account the same unlawful, yet do
none meddle with matters of state, more then this faction, yea diverse of them
do deal in base trades.

44 Here they condemn civil honors in ecclesiastical persons, yet is Beza one
of the chief men, both for revenues, and honor in the kingdom of Geneua: and
our puritanes receive his letters like Apolloes Oracles.

45 At Geneua and in all this new government, lay men intrude into church
government, and are made aldermen and Deacons.

46 They condemn the authority of Bishops here, yet do they give their
consistories twice so large authority. for here Bishops can do nothing but
according to law; there as often as it shall please the Consistory, without
law or color, they may turn out all their Ministers, and pastors to seek
pasture other where.

47 Here they teach that Doctors, and pastors are distinct officers: yet at
Geneua, Beza is both pastor, and doctor. and others have sustained both offices.

48 All of them do hold, Fruitful sermon.
that widows and deacons are members of Christ's body, as they stick not to
auowe; and yet in no churches have they widows, nor ecclesiastical deacons,
but only certain counterfeit almesgatherers, that are good for nothing, but to
stand with a box at the Church door: wherein the living, and hope of many
poor pastors in diverse places consists.

49 In the disciplinarian kingdom, the Ministers commonly live in extreme
contempt, and poverty, so that few of worth take on them the calling. which
if order be not taken, will be the ruin of religion.

50 By the ordinances of Geneua, only the Ministers life in their visitations
is looked unto, and no article set down for inquiry of others conversation:
so that it appears, that this discipline is nothing, but a devise for the
abasing, and overthrow, and treading under feet of the Ministry of the
Gospel.

51 There is no means given to the ministers to maintain themselves, much
less their wives and children. awake therefore you my masters of the Church.
your enemies seek your ruin.

52 All matters wherein is breach of charity, the Consistories do take upon
them to order: and to moderate rigorous dealing in law. this touches your
freehold, my masters, that study the common laws.

53 They take on them to moderate likewise all rigorous dealing in private
contractes: which concerns all merchants, and men of trade very nearly.

54 They take upon them to apoint what rewards shall be given to learning, and
how long they shall enjoy them: and yet you my masters of the University do
favor these conceits, which are the ruin of your selves, and your succession.

55 They give the managing of Church goods, into the hands of men of
occupation, and make the Ministers to depend on their devotion. a matter not to
encourage, but to discourage al men of learning.

56 In the rules of French discipline, it is enacted by the Synodicall
assembly, that no Minister shall possess lands, houses, or tithes: wherein
they declare, that Ministers must live on alms, and their wives and children
be turned on begging. what man then has not good cause to detest this odious
discipline, that does not only overthrow the Ministry, but the marriage of
Ministers also by a necessary consequent?

57 Finally, to shut up all in one Article, these men if they be not looked
into, will overthrow religion, her Majesty's authority, the honor of the
state, the rewards of learning, the study of arts, and divinity, both the
universities, the hope of virtue, the laws of England, and many private men's
interestes: I would say, the Church also, but that every man is desirous, that
the same may he ruinated. but let them that seek the spoils of others, take
heed that they be not afterward made a spoil themselves. It is a common
saying, (...), and oftentimes the spoylers are spoiled.

If I should prosecute the whole course of their proceedings, and lay it down
in Articles, as the Libeller has begone, I should but weary you with
needelesse repetitions, as the Libeller has done already. this is sufficient,
to show unto you, that we want not Articles against these fellows, whenever
their cause shall come to audience: yea, Articles material, and concludent,
and far unlike to the frivolous, and ridiculous Articles devised by the
Libeller. His Articles have no sequel: Judge I pray you, and consider of them.
all of them tend to this end, to show that some of the Ecclesiastical state
have offended against laws in small trifles, and are to be punished, which
were it granted, yet does it not follow, that a new government is to be
embraced, and the state altered, which is his principal desire and seeking.
Contrariwise, our Articles do show, that both their government is unjust and
disordered, and their opinions lewd, and fantastical, and their practices
seditious, and therefore neither to be tolerated: which is that, which not
only we desire, but the peaceable maintenance of the state requires and
enforces. And I doubt not, but all those that give themselves to the study of
laws, or other learning, or favor the state, considering these matters will
hereafter discern, who they are that would overthrow her majesty's laws; and
that not in vain, diverse have gone about to withstand their lewd proceedings.

Having made an end of his Articles he declares, That his purpose was only to
redeem her majesty's laws from captivity of the clergy. But he abuses
first his reader (for his whole book declares that his purpose was rather to
overthrow laws, then to establishe them) and secondly the whole Ministry of
of the Church, whom he charge with suppressing of laws, when all men know,
that their only desire is that laws may be executed. He would also make them
more base and odious; and yet nothing can be more contemtible, and miserable,
then they have made the whole ministry, by their odious practices. For wealth
and riches, merchants, artificers, and husbandmen commonly go beyond the^.
Few leave any thing behind them. they pay four times more to her majesty
the^ any state of me^, that are most charged, and pay it most willingly. They
are wronged of every man. what would these men have more, unless they seek
their lives? how the^ did he not shame to say, that ye clergy keeps her
majesty's laws in captivity? or how shamed he not to speak of captivity,
seeing not they, but ye Lords of the co^sistorie keep laws, ministers,
subjects, yea princes in captivity? Trauers in his book against Bridges,
does vaunt, that they had already brought diverse princes under their yoke,
and excommunicated them. They say as the Pope said, that they have power to
give over all princes to satan: to bring in their constitutions, they would
overthrow all laws. their only will against all laws must prevail. He
further calls the Clergy, carnal worldlings. He I say, whose works are
fleshly, and whofe consortes are swollen with surfeit, and whose portion is in
this world, calls others, carnal worldlings, and as if he were in a bedlem
fit, cries out in his lunatike style: O England England, how long will thou
endure these carnal worldlings? A strange matter, that such presumptuous
companions should either dare, or daring be suffered, to rail against the
whole Ministry, or that any that is in the Ministry, or toward it, should
favor this faction, that bends all their force against learned men and
Ministers: or finally, that any should either imagine, that these men did
entend reformation; or endure to hear such lewd companions, to call
themselves authors of reformation. can malicious libelling, seditious
practices, counterfect hypocrisy, notorious cruelty exceeding pride and
vanity stand with reformation? no, no. and therefore let this libeller, that
desires to have faithful true English hearted men to examine these things,
obtain his purpose. and let them examine, both the ecclesiastical state, and
these hypocritical pretenders of reformation, what bribes they have taken,
what extortion they have committed, what tenants they have racked, what they
have purchased, what they have spent in ryote, what lands they have received
from their ancestors, what they have left to their successors, what offices
they have borne, what wro^gs they have done; and I doubt not, but all the
factious sort will soon repent them of this course. especially when it shall
be showed, that their hearts are scarce English, that misliking all English
laws, embrace a pack of outlandish vanities, and that they seek nothing, but
the desolation both of church and country, and the overthrow of her majesty's
laws, and honor, and the confusion of the universities, and all men of
learning.

And thus much suffices to have answered concerning the petitioners articles:
rests now that I answer also his interogatories, and questions, that he
may be the better satisfied, and you may the better conceive of the man's
ignorance and malice. If diverse things be again repeated: and rubbed over,
blame not me, but blame the babbling fellow, that drew me to it. seeing he
obiecteth, I could do no less, then answer. you that have heard his
demaundes with patience, hear I pray you, my answer, he calls himself
Putcase: under the name of Putcase, you shall hear the sum of his demandes,
and questions.

CERTAIN QVESTIONS AND INTERROgatories, Putcase.
drawn by a favorer of reformation, etc. Wherein he desires to be resolved:
which the Printer has thought good here to annexe.
THe course is very odious, and not to be suffered. Answer.
for if every lewd questioner might frame cases against religion, or laws,
neither shall religion, nor law maintain due credit. And if every libeller
might lawfully make demands, sounding to the infamy of governors and
magistrates, and their doings be traduced by infamous interrogatories: it
would work in short time great hatred and confusion. His first fault therefore
is this, that he frames an articulat infamous libell. A second fault it is,
that such leude and shameful practices are notwithstanding said to be drawn
by a favorer of reformation: as if there were no difference betwixt slandering
and reforming. A third fault he commits, in affirming these questions, to
be annexed by the Printer. But the greatest fault is, that such shameful
libels are commonly sold, and the authors passed over without punishment.

Quaere, first, whether Justice Wray did not affirm, Putcase. Quaest. 1.
that men should incur no penalty for opinions which they held doubtingly:
and whether a man may not without breach of law, make Quaerees and doubts:
whether I may not be a Putcase.

I have enquired of those, Answer.
that were present at the time when these words are pretended to be spoken:
and they do assure me, that he never uttered any such words. which I have no
reason to doubt of. for it is not probable, that so reverend and learned a
Judge should mayntaine or deliver so strange an assertion. for in matters
fundamental of faith, to doubt is haeresie, as all divines do agree. And in
external matters the Apostle says, that whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
And who would not detest him, that would make a doubt, whether these
disciplinarians be impious and flagitious fellows that affirm it to be
lawful to make doubts and questions in those cases? The very Paganes were
far more reasonable then this impious Putcase. For the Athenians banished
Cie. de nature. Deor.
Protagoras, for doubting whether there were a God or no. As for matters of
state, I doubt not, but whosoever shall doubt and make a question, and not
categorically affirm, that her Majesty has right to her crown, and is
supreme Governor within her dominions in all causes, and over all persons, is
a rank traitor. Let therefore Pierce Putcase look to it a little better, and
clear himself of doubting and questioning, least he be taken for a traitor
out of doubt. To come to the matter in question: it is also evident, that
whosoever does make questions, to the diffamation either of the government or
governors, or of private persons living in obedience of laws, he is to be
punished as a libeller. And therefore I would wish the man to shut up himself
in a case, and to take heed that he be not taken abroad. For he will be in a
very bad case, for his libelling and putting of cases, if ever his reuelling
against her Majesty, her ecclesiastical laws, her officers, and many other
good men shall come in scanning.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 2.
whether the form of prayers and administration of sacraments, attire of
ministers, and other ceremonies in England, do more agree to the Apostolical
and primitive order, or to the use of the Romish church, and whether popish
orders be more seemly the^ the Apostolic?

The questioner supposes, that I will answer that, Answer.
which makes for his purpose, not doubting but to cut us down with the next
blow. But in vain does he feed himself with his own conceit. For I answer,
and will show, that our liturgy and ceremonies agree nearer to the liturgy
and ceremonies of the primitive Church, then to the popish orders. And that is
apparent, first in quality: for that we have purged out all idolatry and
superstition, and false doctrine, in which the papists do most differ from the
ancient Church. Secondly, in form. For as the Jews had readings of the law,
and certain hymns and prayers interposed: so no doubt the Apostles kept the
reading of scriptures, with prayers interposed: which form we keep. the
papists keep not. The papists read no scriptures, and have other forms of
prayers. Thirdly, in the language, for as in ancient time, so now we use our
mother tongue. Nay, further, we come nearer in our forms to the primitive
church, then the consistorial orders. For they have no set reading of scrptures
nor form of liturgy, as they had in the times of the first fathers, and are
so unlike them, that they have abolished all the orders of the ancient Church.
They have no set prayers, but leave al to ye discretion of their speaker, as
they call him: who co^ceiueth prayers either so confused that they are not
understood, or so uncharitable, that a true Christian may not say Amen.
Contrariwise, ancient counsels decreed, that no prayers should be said in the
church, but such as first should by common authority be allowed. And albeit,
apparel is a matter indifferent, yet in public liturgy, we come nearer to
the Apostolic Church: whereas the puritanes have abolished al Apostolic
orders, as they have abolished al Apostolic government. To the last part of
the question, whether popish ceremonies be more decent then Apostolical: I
answer, that where they are contrary, there the Apostolic is more decent.
But I deny, that either the new consistoriall government, or the ceremonies
by the same appointed, are Apostolical: or that our ceremonies are
papisticall. Nay I say, that their new orders are not Apostolical, but
fantastical, and that our government is Apostolical. neither shall they ever
be able to prove the contrary.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 3.
whether our rites and ceremonies do not give offense to the papists: and
whether indifferent things causing offense ought not by Paul's doctrine, to be
removed out of the Church?

Whether they give offense to the papists or no, Answer.
we are not to respect, nor to omit ancient and Apostolic orders to please
them. To good men the use of our ceremonies cannot give just offense. Nay
rather, the confusion of the new government, and absurdity in the new
liturgy gives offense. for it confirms the papists in their opinion, and
offends all that are coming forward to join with us. For they see not how
that can be the Church that refuses all ancient government and ceremonies,
and is nothing but a bundell of novelties. And therefore in vain is the latter
part of the question propounded, whether matters that give offense be by S.
Paul's doctrine to be removed? for we deny that our ceremonies do give
offense.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 4.
whether the square cappe, surplesse etc. condemned in general by the Queens
Injunctions, bishops articles, and doctrine of England, and other Churches,
misliked by Bullinger, Alasco, Bucer, Pilkington, Bale, and other learned men,
be decent and comely for a preacher: and being uncomely, whether they should
not be abolished out of the Church?

First it is denied, Answer.
that the attire of ministers in England now, is condemned by the Queens
injunctions, or bishops articles, or doctrine of England. A shameless man was
he, that affirmed it so impudently, and so to be credited accordingly. for the
contrary is evident, both by doctrine of the Church, and law of the realm. And
never shall this bold bayardlike Putcase prove them, either to be monumentes
of popery, or defiled with idolatry: let him begin when he will. What other
Churches mislike in themselves, we do not curiously enquire. if they were not
too curious, they would no more meddle with us, then we do with them. At
least, they would remember, that all Churches are equal, if they say true. As
for the learned men that are named, and others, they may speak what they
please of Popish apparel: it concerns us nothing. But that they have
condemned the apparel of ministers now used in England, it cannot be showed
of the most learned. Nay, the opinions of Bullinger, Bucer, Gualter, and others
are to be showed to the contrary. Of the rest, the authority is not so great,
as may weigh down the orders of our Church without reason. Finally, what is
seemly, what not, neither Beza nor his followers, are any judges in matters
concerning our Church. In this Church this apparel is thought decent: and
therefore let the newfangled Disciplinarians wear their Flat-caps, and Russet
clokes, and go disguized like good fellows, that come from the Cart, or from
the market, and so content themselves. Why we should refuse our ancient
orders, or follow them in their new fooleries, as yet, we see no reason.

Quaere, if Majors, Bailiffes, Stage players, and others, Put-case. Quest. 5.
may not as well be forced to subscribe to the Bishops three Articles, by the
statute of 1. Elizab. c. 1. as Ministers, seeing the Statute urged by Doctor
Bridges to that purpose, does reach to them as well as Ministers?

This is a Question put to disgrace subscription, Answer.
by a man that neither allows the Queens supremacy, nor Communion book,
nor Articles of religion. And therefore he iumbleth bishops, majors, and
stageplayers together, setting forth his folly as it were on a stage: for
which if he had his desert, he would be brought to play a part on another kind
of stage. Why ministers (and not these) should subscribe the reason is, for
that they teach others, and must be known to be sound of religion: the others
teach not. And the same is confirmed by diverse laws and practice of all
Churches: neither does Doctor Bridges give the least occasion, for him to
ground his doubt upon him. Surely a Stageplayer may easily show more wit and
modesty, then this pild Put-case.

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 6.
whether Bishops upon occasion prescribing certain prayers to be said, besides
the prayers in the Communion book, do not offend against their own Articles,
and the Statute of public Prayer: and ought not therefore to deal more
mercifully with their brethren offending in like quality?

A profound question: Answer.
and yet of no man asked, but of those that sin of malice. for who knows
not, that the statute of public prayer provides against the malicious
contemners of the Communion book, such as the Papists and Puritans are: who
think they can conceive extemporall prayers far passing the reach of that
book, and bring in new Liturgies; and not against such as allow that book,
defend it and use it, and only add some Prayers, according to the diversity
of occasions and times, being also authorized thereto by her Majesty, and
doing the same according to Law. But this wicked fellow is loath that any
should pray for the Queen, or against the Spaniardes: else would he not
condemn it. Put-case. Quest. 7.


Whether are not the Questions and Answers at the baptizing of Infants in the
Communion book, like to the questions of the Marcionites, that baptized the
quick for the dead, Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. 15.
one answering from under the bed, where the dead lay.

The last Interrogatorie was for the Communion book, Answer.
this is against it: of so contrary pieces this work is wrought. But if the
Put-case that framed this question mean to prove any thing, he must show some
better reason. For there is not like reason in answering for Infantes and for
dead men. Those are to be baptized, these not: those have says in habit,
these are passed. Neither is it strange, if he that undertakes for the childs
education, does answer for it. The Ceremony is ancient, and not lightly to
be esteemed, unless like to these newfangled Innouators we mean to bid
war to all Antiquity, and plainly with them to run into manifold new
heresies.

Quaere, whether with safe conscience, Put-case. Quest. 8.
a man may subscribe to the Communion book, that it contains nothing
contrary to scriptures, seeing the translation of the Psalms differs from
the truth of the Hebrewe, in 200 places or more?

It is out of question, Answer.
that the Consistorian faction denies not to subscribe to that book, because
of the faults in the translation of Psalms, but for other matters which they
would hide under this goodly gloss: for by ye like reason they might deny to
subscribe to the Bible, seeing the Geneuian Bible does differ much from the
original text: yet they use and embrace it, and have none other divinity,
then the Geneuian phrase. Further, I say, that it is not the meaning of those
that require subscription, to confirm either errors of translation, or of the
print: and therefore they do but cavil without cause, and object this without
ground. But suppose, the intendment of subscription were strictly to tie men to
the words of that book, (whether they were well couched or not:) yet will it
not fall out in reckoning, that there are more faults in the translation of the
Psalms, then in the Geneuian Bible. Whether there be or no, this Put-case
cannot tell: for he understands not the tongue, neither shall his companions
ever be able to justify either two hundred, or one fault contrary to the
analogy of faith.

Quaere, whether it be agreeable to Gods word or law, Put-case. Quest. 9.
to punish Libellers with return of Libels, Ribauldry etc. and whether Martin
offending in Libelling, they offend not, that made the Almond for Parrat,
Martins months mind etc.

Whatsoever those did, that answered Martins ribauldry-bookes, Answer.
they did it of their own heads, without either knowledge or allowance of
their superiors: and therefore let them answer themselves. and I doubt not but
they will answer reason; for it is nothing so great a fault to answer, as to
make challenge. And further they will say, their books be very honest and
civil in respect of Martins Atheistical Libels. For he rayleth against laws,
against governors, and against men in authority: they revel only against
Martin and his barking curres, and according to their reach do speak for the
laws. He wickedly sporteth with religion and matters of State: these only
play with Martins dizardry, and his dizardlike companions. If this Questioner
reply and ask, why are they not called in? it may be answered, that if he will
make himself party, and show any thing in them against religion or law, they
will be called in: yea and some of them have been called in, and others of a
more biting style and nature have been stayed. If he can show no such thing, it
will be thought, that this kind of vain (considering the intolerable pride and
haughtiness of that faction) is fittest to answer such scurrilous Puritans.
and so fit it seemed to me, that if some had not thought otherwise, I would
also have commended this Petition, with the Articles and Interogatories
annexed, to their answering. for such biting stuff is to be answered by those
that will rebite again. First then I answer, that the books which were
written against Martin, are more tolerable and witty, then Martin, although
they were not allowed. secondly, that it is as absurd for Libellers to
complain of Libelling, as dogs that byte, of biting: those that go to
wars in this sort, must look for blows again. And lastly, that not only
Martins mad devises, but also this Sycophantes writings are against law,
yea, against common humanity.

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 10.
of Math. Sutcliffe ( who is always carping at master Cartwrightes purchase)
why master Cartwright may not sell the Lands he had from his father, and buy
other with the money, as well as some of the Bishops, who by Briberie, Simonie,
Extortion, Racking of Rent, wasting of Wooddes, and such like Stratagemes wax
rich and purchase great Lordships for their posterity?

Seeing you ask of me this question, Answer.
I take my self bound to answer you, especially having undertaken to answer
many other questions, as impertinent and bad as this. Pleases it then master
Put-case to understand, that I do not carpe always, no nor once at master
Cartwrights purchase. Let him purchase and buy at pleasure: I hinder him not, I
envy him not. Only thus much I must tell him, as I did once, that Tho.
Cartwright, a man that has more Lands of his own in possession, then any
Bishop that I know, and that fares dayntily every day, and feeds fair and
fat, and lies as soft as any tenderling of that brood, and has won much
wealth in short time, and will leave more to his posterity, then any Bishop:
should cry out either of persecution, or of excess of Bishops livings: whose
poverty I might, but I will not disclose. Secondly, that he is a most happy
man, that with selling a cottage and so much ground as would scarce grase three
goslings, worth at the uttermost but twenty Nobles yearly, can purchase two
or three hundred marks land: and gladly would I learn that secret. Thirdly,
that seeing he has such authority with a pack of Sots that follow him, that
every word of his should be deemed good law: there is no reason, why he should
compain of the superiority that is in our governors, and yet continue his
bitter inuectiues against the State. As long as he repents not himself, of
the wrong that he has offered to the church, nor renounceth his fond conceits
of discipline, nor forbeareth to maintain a confederacy to revel against al
such as are well affected to the State; he must look not only to be carped
at, but also to be launced, if he be not otherwise dealt withal, If he keep
himself private, and seek not to advance himself by pillage of the Church,
I for my part will let him alone: neither shall his Frierlike begging, nor his
covetous dealing with his Hospital, nor his disloyal dealing with his good
friends, nor his Usury, nor any other matters be touched or carped at. To
the question therefore I answer, that it is neither lawful for Tho.
Cartwright, nor for Bishops to wax rich and purchase by Extortion, and
Briberie, no, nor Usury, nor Friponnerie, nor by any unlawful practice. And
therefore if he know any Bishops that he can charge with Simonie, Briberie,
Extortion, Racking of Rentes, Wasting of woods, etc. let him name them: I
defend them not. Only thus much I say, that for one whom he can prove
guilty among his adversaries, there will be found twenty among his friends
most guilty, viz. Pillars of the people, Raueners of the poor, and Spoylers of
their country: and among these, certain Quidammet companions, living all by
scraping of quilles, that have by force and fraud won great wealth: besides
other Pettifoggers and parasites, that have purchased more, then any bishop in
England: and yet not so much as this Putcase, for he may percase purchase to
himself a gibbet, for reuelling at laws and governors: at least he may
purchase shame for abusing men of honor so shamefully.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 11.
whether the Bishops that affirm it is unlawful to give Livings (appointed to
Ministers) to Lay men: and Doctor Bridges affirming, that a Priest is Lord of
her Majesty: or Doctor Bancroft, that affirms her Majesty to be a
Petit-Pope, do not diffame her Majesty, and be not therefore Felons? Answer.


The slanderous and shameless reports and opinions of the Puritans
concerning the things touched in this question, I have refelled before. Now
it will be sufficient to say, that this Sycophant belyeth these good men: and
if he be not therefore a Felon, yet is he a lying companion: and unless he
use the matter better, he will neither clear himself of Felony nor Treason.
For he and his companions are most guilty in those crimes, which he would
impute to others. They teach that things once Complaynt of the comminaltie. c.
6.
consecrate to God for the service of the church, belong to him for ever.
Appropriations and the spoil of Abbey lands, they call Admonit. p. 33.
sacrilege. Unto the revenues of the church they challenge immunitie, and
impositions laid upon them, they call Eccles. disciple. p. 87.
impiety and barbarism. Martin says, that they which challenge
ecclesiastical superiority, such as the Queen has, are Petie-Popes: and all
of them do teach, that Princes are subject to the jurisdiction of the
Consistory, which things how they may be taught by good subjects, I do think,
our platformers will take some large time to declare.

Quaere, whether those that say, Put-case. Quaest. 12.
the oath of supremacy imports that her Majesty may devise what government
she pleases, be not malicious persons: and those that yield to the oath with
the exposition, good subjects.

Who be malicious persons, Answer.
and who be good or disloyal subjects, appears in part, by this treatise:
but especially by the disloyal and malicious treatises and practices of
Puritans: and therefore this is a vain and doltish question. The Injunctions
surmisse those to be malicious, which think that a Popedom is attributed to
her Majesty by the word of supremacy: such are the Papists, and the Puritan
hypocrites. for both do hold, that we do and may as well give unto her
authority to preach and minister the sacraments, as the points of her
supremacy. The law reputeth none for good subjects, but those that acknowledge
the several points of her Majesty's supremacy, as power to make ecclesiastical
laws, to appoint ecclesiastical Commissioners, and so forth, which the
Puritans deny: and therefore by law and the Injunctions they are reputed
malicious persons. That any man did say, her Majesty might simply do as she
list in government of the church, is not probable, nor ever did she desire it,
nor can the Libeller prove it. Only she desires, that according to the laws
of God and the Realm, as she and the learned judges do interpret them, and as
the words do signify, she may rule the Church. This they do deny, and do
attribute this power to the factious Consistory: and therefore are factious
Puritans.

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 13.
whether the Archbishops of Canterbury should not rather be called Popes, then
Primates of all England, seeing that a Cardinal gave them the name of Primate,
as master Lambert says, and a Pope assigned them the name of Popes?

Here I must also ask the Put-case a question or two: viz. Answer.
why Tho. Cartwright is not called Tho. Wheelewright, seeing he would turn
all round as a wheel: and why W. Staw. is not called John Daw? like reason is
in both. Names are given, some by Law, some gotten by use. And therefore
seeing Archbishopsare called Primates, ever since before the council of
Carthage: great absurdity it is to dispute, whether the Archbishop should be
so called or no. And far was master Lambert from his recknoning, when he
imagined the Cardinal Hugo to be author of that name. Neither can he show,
that the Archbishop was ever called Pope by Urban, before the factious Puritans
in their railing vain devised that name for him in scorn. But whatsoever was
given sometime, or now is in scorn cast on him, he renounceth the name Pope
for the abuse of it, and is far from clayming the Papal authority. If he
had the authority either of the Pope, or of a mean Bishop, yet durst not
every Sycophant play with his name and style, neither would such base fellows
so shamefully abuse him. He rules by laws: he deriueth his authority from
her Majesty: he can do no man wrong: he is utter enemy to all papal
authority. Contrariwise, the Lords of the consistory take on them like Popes
to judge in Christ's seat, to be Christ's vicars, to control and
excommunicate Princes, to dissolve States, to give law to Kings, to throw to
hell: and no man may once speak against them where they rule, without danger
of their liberty and life. These therefore are popes in deed: and seeing they
are so, why may they not be called also Popes, seeing they are dubbed with this
name by diverse?

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 14.
if Wickleffe, Luther, Calvin etc. were now alive, and should speak against
the Lordship of Bishops, as they do in their writings, to which prison the
Bishops would send them: and whether do books seen and allowed, contain
matters of Felony, and diffamatorie to the Queen?

Quaere also, Answer.
if the sky should fall, where would be best catching of woodcockes? both
questions are alike. For as the sky will not fall in haste, so would not these
learned men mentioned in this question ever open their mouths against godly
men, or the state and degree of bishops. That is only proper to the
foulemouthed puritanes. They speak against the tyranny and vanities of popish
bishops with whom our puritanes do not much meddle, but rather treacherously
strike good soldiers that fight against the^. Our puritanes declaime against
holy bishops of times past, and preachers of the holy Gospel, such as those
learned men never condemned. Let the libeller (if he can) bring forth one
place, which is not meant of papisticall bishops. And therefore let them go to
the Fleet themselves, as mutinous companions: the fellowshippe of those
learned men they cannot have. whose books although they be allowed for
diverse good things found in them, yet can it be no warrant for the platformers
high styled declamations, nor any justification for that which is evil. For
there can be nothing more unlike, then bishop Latimers book, and Cartwrightes
replies defacing the bishops. Neither are the words seen and allowed
sufficient to warrant seditious writings. For sometimes printers are too bold,
sometime the authors, sometime the correctors: and it cannot be denied but in
Wickleffes books there be faults. Chaucer and Reynold the Fox are allowed
to be printed, and many books more, for the good they have, not that any part
of the lewdness of them is allowed. And therefore let the Putcase leave
pleading of seen and allowed, seeing we can neither see his consortes much,
nor allow them, nor approve whatsoever by their favorers is printed, though
it be with seen and allowed.

Quaere, why papists should find more favor, Putcase. Quaest. 15.
them the seekers of reformation, and why they should not be condemned as
felons, for their abominable doctrine?

If all should be punished, Answer.
that maintain abominable doctrine, it would go very hard with the puritanes,
whose haeretical and lewd opinions are very many and very abominable. The
particulers I have in part touched before, and shall (if need be) lay them
down more amply elsewhere. Let not therefore this Putcase repine at her
Majesty's clemency, wherein her special honor consists: and seeing they enjoy
it and live by it themselves, let them not envy it to others. That papists
are more favored then puritanes, is a bold and impudent assertion. for it is
well known that diverse of them have been executed, some as traitors, some as
felons, others have paid for it as recusants: whereas none of this faction
have been punished in like degree, save Hacket: albe it they deny her
Majesty's supremacy, and many of them refuse to come to church. If there be
any that have favored papists, let them sustain the shame of it. for the
ecclesiastical state has been most diligent to suppress them, whereas
contrariwise by entreatie, favor and means made by puritanes, and by some
one, that has his finger in this petition, many have been dismissed. First
therefore, I answer, that it is untrue, that papists find favor more then
puritanes. Secondly, that the favor which is procured for them, proceeded
specially from puritanes and their favorers. Thirdly, that neither of them
both deserves favor. Fourthly, that seeing her Majesty's pleasure is, to show
them favor for their lives, they are not to repine at it, nor malepertly to
traduce her doings. Lastly that the puritanes in terms do more maliciously
oppugn her Majesty's proceedings and ecclesiastical laws, then the most
treacherous papists that are fled for the same out of the land. And that
therefore they are to quiet themselves, and not to stir in this their bad
cause. for the more it is opened, the worse it sauoureth.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 16.
if the bishops proceedings against men per ordinem inquisitionis, do not
resemble the papal order in the time of cruelty?

Nothing is less like, Answer.
for the Judges now proceed by authority of her Majesty, and according to her
laws, and yet are abused by every base fellow. In times past they proceeded by
other authority, and by orders from the Popes, and then no man durst abuse
the^. These punish according to the Queens laws: those according to their
directions. Neither is the inquisition, which we have, derived from the pope,
but used of al nations, contrariwise the inquisition of the co^sistorie is like
to the Spanish inquisition, and the papal proceeding. For as in the Spanish
inquisition, so in the consistory a man is called, knows no accuser, and
whether he confess or not, he is sure to abide the order of the consistory,
and what they command, the civil Judge performs. And therefore if all must
away, whatsoever is borrowed from the pope, away must the consistory go, and
their excommunication of princes, and their absolute tyranny.

Quaere, if Christ were before the bishops, and should answer, Putcase.
Quaest. 17.
being demanded of his doctrine, I spoke openly etc. Ask them that heard me,
whether he should be committed, as M. Bambridge, M. Johnson, and other godly
ministers?

This question touching Johnson and Bambridge concerns the ecclesiastical
state nothing at all. Answer.
For their cause was heard and ended at Cambridge, before the Vicechanceller
and his assistants: so that it should seem to be a case put besides the cause
in handling. But in the same we may see, that these fellows mean no less to
overthrow the state, privileges, and jurisdiction of the Universities: then of
the bishops. Mark it therefore you my masters of the Universities: These
fellows whom you foster in your bosoms, mean to touch your freehold also,
neither can they conceal their malice against all men of learning. To answer
this absurd question, I say that I cannot choose but wonder, that any should
be so blasphemous and wicked, as to compare Christ Jesus the son of God,
unto Johnson, a factious companion, and a wicked heretic. Out of Cambridge he
was expulsed, for his mutinous Sermon, and other leude behavior. From thence
he went to Middleborough, a retrait of such kind of fellows. There he
declined into Barrowisme, wherein he now continues, having augmented his
opinions with many new fancies of his own. Bambridge a man somewhat wiser
then Johnson, yet neither to be compared with Christ, nor any very discreet
or modest Christian. Christ never declaimed against the state of priests, nor
did he spread new doctrines, nor did he spurn against governors. These
have done al these things, and it is the common practice of all such as be of
this sort. Christ did not refuse to answer directly, and confessed, that he
was the son of God. These stand not upon their innocence, but upon terms
of law. Neither does the example of our Savior fit them. For he being asked
of his doctrine in general, could not otherwise answer then in general:
These refuse to answer in particular points, which he did never: and
therefore justly were committed. A matter justifiable both by the laws of God,
and also the laws civil, canon, and common. If being to answer in the Star
Chamber or Chancerie unto certain articles, they should answer, That they
delivered nothing but publicly, and will the examiner to ask them that heard
and saw, they would be sent to other places to advise upon the matter. Further
I say, it will not fall out in proof, that those men which have been conuented
before the high Commissioners in causes ecclesiastical, are either godly or
wise, or ministers: and therefore false it is, that he affirms them to be
godly ministers, and very scandalous to the state, whom he sets forth as a
state persecuting Christ Jesus: whereas in deed these men by defacing the
Church, and the governors thereof, by teaching of erroneous doctrine, and by
raising of stirs about a new government, which was never heard of in Christ's
Church, do show themselves enemies of Christ, of his Church, and of his Gospel:
and therefore together with Johnson of whom themselves are now ashamed, to be
cast out of the Church, unless they show more signs of amendment.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 18.
if by the judicial laws, by the Court in Chauncerie or Star Chamber, any
man be forced to swear, before he know the cause, (at least in general)
whereunto he is to take his oath.

Suppose a man should grant so much, Answer.
albeit the use be not always so: what will he conclude? That the high
commissioners proceed contrary to law? His purpose is so to do, but his
argument will not so conclude, unless he show, that they do not also declare
in general the sum of the matter, to which every one is to answer. But that
he cannot do: and therefore I return him back to his prompters, to frame his
case better, and do reject him as alleging matters not concludent. In the
mean while, let him understand thus much, that the proceeding of
Ecclesiastical courts in exacting of oaths, is not only confirmed by all
laws, but also by the practice of Geneua, the patriarchall sea of puritans.

Quaere, whether Bishops be not bound to confirm children, Putcase. Quest. 19.
as well as Ministers to marry with a Ring? And whether may not popish young
men, not being confirmed, refuse the Communion?

He would conclude, Answer.
that because Bishops neglect some part of their duty, it is lawful for his
consortes to break all laws. but the sequel is naught. That children are not
confirmed, the fault is in parents that bring them not, and of these seducers
that preach against confirmation, and not in Bishops. And therefore, if any
refuse to receive the Communion, it is no reason he should receive benefit by
his own negligence, but rather be punished for both faults. In that he
joins popish young men together with fantastical young Ministers, which
refuse to marry with the Ring, he does not amiss: for they do both consent
in oppugning the state: and therefore are both to be punished: neither will the
pleading of the Bishops negligence (if any be) serve either of them.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 20.
whether an Ecclesiastical Judge may punish Bristowe for writing, that our
Communion book is an apish imitation of the Masse-booke: seeing the statute
gives only that authority to Justices of peace? and whether Bristowe
deprauing the Communion book, may be deprived of all his spiritual promotions
for his first offense? etc. Item, whether the law does not favor the
puritan, as much as the papist.

The case is absurdly put: Answer.
for it supposes matters improbable, as that Bristowe should have certain
spiritual promotions in England, and had only offended in speaking against the
Communion book: whereas the man did wilfully fly out of his country for his
mislike of the state, and practiced diverse treasons, and for the same being
apprehended and committed to prison, died there. Only this thing is herein
commendable, that puritans and papists are very fitly joined together in this
case. Both deny the supremacy alike, both deprave the gouernme^t-alike, both
rail against our Communion book alike: and therefore (that all may be alike)
both deserve to be used alike. To the question I answer, That the law
accepts not of persons, but whether Th. Cartwright, or Penrie, or Bristowe,
or Allen, or any other offend, it does decree them to be punished, if they be
caught. Neither have they wrong that are deprived of their ecclesiastical
livings for their first offense in deprauing the Communion book. For the
statute does not only authorize civil Judges to proceed ciuillie, but also
ecclesiastical Judges to proceed to deprivation according to ecclesiastical
laws. But this companion either did not read the statute, or would not report
it. for then his falsehood should have appeared, and his calumniation in leaving
a prouiso out of the statute, should have been reproved. Concerning the
Communion book, I say, it is not material what either Bristowe, or this
Put-case says of it, being both enemies of the state, and lying without reason
and conscience. The puritans have gone about to reform it: but their new book
is such, as they may be greatly ashamed of it, being full of false doctrine,
and favoring a fond and loose government, and fraught with most vain
discourses and verbal speeches.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 21.
whether adultery is to be punished by the Ordinary, seeing the punishment
thereof, without any saving to the spiritual court, is given by statute to
Justices of peace: and whether a man may be punished, by two corporal or
pecuniarie punishments, in two several Courts, for one and the same cause.

The put-case tries himself to be a very proper fellow, Answer.
to become a procter and speaker in the behalf of adulterers, and fornicators.
Percase it concerns him nearer then I am aware of: but let him against the
next time understand the case better, that he speaks in. For it is a shame
for a procter, in these cases, not to understand the difference betwixt
adultery and fornication; and also to say, that the law gives the
punishment of adultery to Justices only. for in that statute, there is not so
much as mention of adultery, but of bastardy. And how bastards may be gotten
in lawful wedlock, he will hardly define, considering the Common law, which
says, that all children borne in matrimony, the husband being Intra quatuor
maria, are lawful. For my part, so that adultery and fomication be punished
severely, I do not care. That the statute does not hinder the ecclesiastical
Judges proceeding it is evident: for that there is no clause to annull his
course, neither is it the intendement of the statute to favor such lewd
persons. But (says he) it is no reason that one should be punished both in the
ecclesiastical and civil courts for one fault. wherein he does not only
contrary us, but Th. Cartwright also, who gives the cognition of felonies and
treasons to his new consistory, and would have offenders herein, to
acknowldge their faults there also: which is directly contrary to the
statute laws. To answer his question, I deny that offenders, which are for
incontinencie co^uented, are twice punished for one fault. for both the
Ecclesiastical and civil court, make up their full punishment. Neither do
they against law, that for reasonable causes, the party consenting, do
commute the penance. This I wot, if the ecclesiastical Judges would deal, as
some Justices of peace have done in this case, that fornication and such
matters should for the most part pass without examination, or controlement.

Quaere, if any Ordinaries have contrived, promulgued, Putcase. Quest. 22.
and published Articles in his own name, without assent of her maiestic under
seal, and enforced her highness subjects to subscribe unto the same? and for
not subscribing, have suspended or deprived them? and whether an Ordinary thus
doing, 25. H. 8. c. 19. 1. Eliz. c. 1.
may not be imprisoned and fined at the Queens pleasure.

If the Put-case would have made any inquiry, Answer.
whether Th. Cartwright and his fellows have offended against the statute,
prohibiting the making of ecclesiastical Canons, he might have found it out
easily. For the acts are every where extant, and their doings known. And yet
are they not fined, nor al of them imprisoned for it. Neither do the
ecclesiastical Ordinaries refuse to be punished, if they can be convicted of
any such notorious offense. The subscriptions, which have been required, were
no new laws, as these fellows conceive, but confirmations and allowances of
the old and yet nothing has bin herein done, but by allowance. As for the
proceedinges used against the Consistorialls, they have been most mild and
gentle, not for denial of subscription (as this man pretends) but for other
factious, seditious, and lewd behavior objected to them, and remaining in
record. whose cause let him move as often as he will: yet shall he never have
honor by it.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 23.24, and 25.
whether an Ordinary may cite a man to appear before him in his court, to
depose as witness? etc. Item, whether a man shall be examined by oath, of any
thing that sounds to his reproach? etc. Item whether if an Ordinary cite men
Ex officio, to swear to accuse themselves, in causes neither Matrimonial, nor
Testamentary, a prohibition will lie against him or not? Item whether the cause
depending in the Star chamber, the Ecclesiastiall Judges should not cease
their proceedings? And last of all, whether the Judges and wisest lawyers do
not condemn the proceedings of prelates?

To most of this I have already spoken, Answer.
and doubt not, but thereby there appears neither reason, nor honesty, nor
law, nor ought else save malice, in this demaundants questions. Yet thus much I
answer further; First, that if the Judge could not call witnesses before him,
there would be no trial nor proof in matters of doubt. Secondly, that in
diverse criminal causes, both Gods laws, and the laws of this realm do
require, that the party answer upon his oath. Thirdly, that there lies no
prohibition: for that the Ordinary deals in causes orderly, and according to
warrant of law. Neither is it reason that the Ecclesiastical Judges should
cease doing of justice, against all the perturbers of this Church, because
there was sometimes one matter depending in the Starrechamber against some few
of them. For where the ecclesiastical Judge is prohibited to proceed in one
cause, yet does he notwithstanding proceed in others of like nature concerning
other parties. Much rather then ought they to proceed, not being prohibited,
and in cases that are diverse especially now, that the cotumacious dealing of
the Puritans, is by the judgment of the reverend Judges and most sufficient
lawers in England, condemned, and the cause now dismissed the court, and
diverse consultations brought, after prohibitions granted out of some courts in
that cause. Neither do I think, that either master Cook, a man too learned
not to know, and two wise to favor such perturbers of the state, as the
sear, or any Judge or learned lawyer, will condemn the proceedings of
ecclesiastical courts in these cases, as being contrary to law. The writ
in the Register, which seems to give leave to Ordinaries to swear men in
causes Testamentarie and Matrimonial is proved to be misco^strued by
Fitzherbert. For otherwise that writ should be contrary to infinite other
laws. Upon this error, what marvel is it, if Crompton, a man of no judgment,
has been deceived, seeing Fitzherbert has also mistaken such matters. Neither
is it marvel, that lawyers speaking for their clyents, do speak otherwise
then law. For never before this time was it heard, that the pleading of
lawyers should be accounted to be law, further then they bring law and
reason out of law. To make a sum therefore of these matters: Master Cook,
who now for his manifold good parts, is made her majesty's Solicitor, shall
yield no thanks to this Libeller, for bringing his name in question to be a
favorer of malcontentes, and an enemy to the Ecclesiastical state. Neither
shall any credit you hereafter, for this your notorious belying the Judges.
For it is well known, that the Judges have resolutely both condemned the
disloyal practices of this sort of men, and also allowed the proceedings of
the Ecclesiastical courts. Nor shall any allow your malice, that with false
reports go about to enkindle a dislyking among Judges. And therefore unless
you set down the state of the controversy better, and reason more
sufficiently, both your self as an ignorant Put-case, and your cause as
repugnant to law, will be condemned.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 26.
if the high Commissioners for Ecclesiastical causes may cite men Ex officio,
to accuse themselves in matters neither Testamentarie nor Matrimonial, and may
commit the Queens subjects to prison, especially for refusing to take the
oath? And whether they ought not to take bail? and whether the writ De
homine replegiando, does not lie in that case? Item what satisfaction Doctor
Coosin, Doctor Stanhoppe, and Doctor Bancrofte will make to those, that are so
wrongfully imprisoned? Item whether for that matter, they may keep men in
prison without calling them to answer? and finally, whether they deserve not
like punishment therefore themselves?

Here is great noise, Answer.
little wool: many words, little wit: much malice, little or no reason. For
the high Commissioners, they be (many of them) men of great honor, and such as
will do no wrong to any: nor will proceed without sufficient warrant. If they
have passed the limits of their Commission, why is not remedy of law sought?
For satisfaction to these doughtie demaundes, I answer; First, that no man is
called to accuse himself but to answer accusations objected by others,
Secondly, that they have power to call offenders before them, and to examine
them, and that their jurisdiction were vain, if they might not punish the
contumacious. Thirdly, that if such, as are committed to prison for contempt,
might be bayled, there were then no means to punish a contempt: and that
offenders put in prison for contempt, are not baylable. Fourthly, that the
writ De homine replegiando, is not in this case grauntable, as all lawyers
can tell him, Fifthly, that they may deal in many causes besides Matrimonial
and Testamentarie. Sixthly, that the learned men there mentioned have great
wrong to be thus contumeliously abused by this libeller, they having done
wrong to no man. Seventhly, that men committed for disobedience, are not to be
released but upon their conformity: And finally, that such libellers as take
upon them to rail at Judges, and to oppugn lawful proceedings, are to have
their mouths muzzeled up, and their malice repressed.

Quaere, Whether any Ecclesiastical Judge has conuented, Putcase. Quest. 27.
examined, and committed any for matters felonious, touching the Queens crown
and dignity? And whether these practices do not instanter, instantius, and
instantissime, crave the Praemunire?

That his companions are in case of Praemunire, Answer.
it is out of question, for that they have contrary to the prerogative of the
crown, brought in foreign laws, and foreign jurisdiction of more then
papal Elders, and made diverse Ecclesiastical constitutions, contrary to the
laws of the realm. Nay it were to be wished, that they had only offended
against the statute of Prouisors. But their denial of the supremacy, is a
further point. What then does that crave? Let him speak in his Proctors
style. It craves consideration, and the perturbers of the state crave a wiser
Proctor. As for Ecclesiastical Judges, it is well known, that they do not
deal in matters of felony: their acts are clear: if any man doubt, they
will refolue him.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 28.
whether any may be imprisoned without warrant of law, etc.

Can this libeller show any warrant, Answer.
he has to accuse men unjustly? If not, why does he proceed in accusing, and
is so slow in proving? If any be imprisoned unlawfully, the law is open.
Neither needs he to tell us of Sir John Markeham, in this case. For that
which Sir John Markeham says, we acknowledge. for it makes nothing for the
libellers cause.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 29.
whether it be not less danger to blaspheme the name of God, then to speak
against a Lord Bishop? And whether more Ministers have not been deprived within
this seven years for ceremonies of men, then for drunkenness, whoredom, etc.

If it were so dangerous to speak against bishops, Answer.
as this fellow pretends, they would not be so reviled, nor reuelled at by
such reuellers as this. The comparison which he makes is odious. More be
punished for abusing the Consistory, then for abusing the name of God: and
more do these consistorials strive about the authority of their seat, then
about Gods honor. But what then? because some of them offend, will they have
all Consistories abolished? And therefore let him cease to talk of Bishops,
and look bakeward home to the Consistory, that it be well swept and
garnished. To the second I answer, that none are deprived for ceremonies, but
such as be rebellious against laws, and with no admonitions will be reformed:
which contumacie is a most odious crime: and further I say, that the offenses
which come to the cognition of ecclesiastical Judges, are as strictly there
dealt withal, as in any other of her Majesty's courts.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 30.
why the Ministers may not refuse to wear a Surplesse, as a Bishop to use a
Pastoral staff?

Because the one is commanded by Law, Answer.
the other is not. The Rubrike, whereby they would prove the Pastoral staff,
concerns only orders, and ornaments to be used in Sacraments and service of
the Church, and none other matters. but suppose both were commanded: yet is it
no plea for offenders to say, because Judges offend in some things, that they
may offend in others: which is the course of these men. Belike these are the
times, wherein offenders call Judges to answer, and felons give sentence
against their superiors.

Quaere, whether seekers of reformation suffer for religion, Putcase. Quest. 31.
and conscience in matters of discipline: seeing their life is offered them by
bishops if they will recant their opinion? And whether the Popishbishops
persecuted any that differed from them in external form, and ceremonies?

As Papists do make treason religion: so it may be, Answer.
that these schismatikes for their misdemeanors would be accounted
religious. Otherwise it is evident, that neither Papists nor Puritanes suffer
for religion in England. And therefore evil does it seem, that they seek
reformation, or deserve to be called seekers of reformation: and well does it
appear, that they have a bad religion and conscience, that color their
lewdness with religion, and lie without conscience.

As for persecution, it is a term ill applied to the proceedings of our
Bishops, and lewdly are they compared with traitorous papists, against whom
they stand in continual warfare. For neither do they convent any but for
transgressing the laws; nor do they impose punishments, but upon the
rebellious, and those very easy punishments which in time of popery were
death, even for denial of the least ceremony. which this Putcase not
understanding, he shows himself to babble of matters, that he understands
not. That bishops did offer life to Vdal (for I know none but him, and Hacket,
and a traitor in Suffolk condemned about these matters) it is absurd to
affirm. For not they, but others condemned him.

Neither is it in their power to grant life, nor in their wisdom to offer
that which they cannot grant. And if they should be so remiss, as to be
means to her Majesty for them, yet would it argue their elemencie, in going
about to procure their lives, that seek the bishops overthrow: nay, that most
factiously go about to overthrow the Church, the state, and the rewards of
learned men.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 33.
whether he that publishes books with long premeditation, does publish the
same with a malicious intent?

True, Answer.
if they be malicious books, such as this libel is, and such as the
Demonstration of discipline, and Martins ribauldrie was. Neither is the case
alike of a Sergeant arguing against the truth in his Clients cause, and of
these that with out fee argue against both truth and state. For it is well
known he does it for his fee, and takes heed how he offends against
law: but these leaving the case, do argue or rather rail against the person,
yea against law and honesty.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 33.
whether ecclesiastical Judges do not give sentence contrary to the common
laws, and statutes of the realm? and whether prohibitions do not lie in such
cases.

No doubt, Answer.
there lies a prohibition, if they proceed contrary to law. But men learned
will take heed they do not: and especially seeing they have such Canarian
birds as this looking upon their doings, and watching for the spoil. But let
them take heed, for in wars the spoyler is often spoiled, and those that
dig pits for the innocent, fall into them themselves.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 34.
whether hishops are not in praemunire, or at least desere to be imprisoned and
fined for practicing popish and civil laws in their courts: seeing all
foreign authority is banished, and those canons and constitutions provincial
and synodall only authorized, that have been made in England?

Little does this dolt know, Answer.
what the praemunire means. If he did, he would not so often flourish with
the sword, and do no hurt. Those incur the praemunire, which draw the
Queens Subjects into foreign courts out of the Queens courts, and seek to
defeat judgments given in the Queens courts. Likewise he is ignorant, what
laws are practiced in the ecclesiastical courts. For there are no laws
practiced there, but the Queens laws: viz. such canons as were practiced in
England before the making of the Act. 25. Hen. 8. ca. 19, and not (as this
fondling says) such canons as were made in England. Good it were therefore,
that some of his company would either admonish him, or premonish him hereafter
to leave babbling of matters which he knows not. For it is either plain
impudency, or lunacie so to wrangle.

Quaere, whether the bishops, or the consistory, Putcase. Quaest. 35.
encroch more upon the civil magistrate?

That is a matter most easily answered. For the bishops, Answer.
albeit they deal in testamentarie causes, tithes and marriages: and have
Baronies, and sometimes deal as Justices of peace: yet all this authority
they have under the prince, and from him they derive it. Contrariwise the
consistory draws no authority from the prince, but contendeth with the
prince about supreme authority. It gives law to the prince: it does chastise
and judge the prince: under color of the breach of Gods law, it does encroch
upon all causes, and controlleth all that are subjects to Gods law, whereof
the same does take it self to be judge. It chooses and deposes all officers
of the Church, nay it deposes princes, if the fautors of it say true. These
therefore be the fellows that encroch, nay that tread down princes, and (as
Th. Cartwright says) make princes to lick the dust of their feet. As for
that which this Putcase alleges, that the Archbishop gives the prince
dispensations under his hand and seal, it is a fable. Let him show any of
these licenses so granted. But (says he) the law says, he may. well,
then let him quarrel with the law, and not with the Archbishop, who
challenges nothing, as these do, but by the princes grant: Besides, that law
was made to exclude all forreyne jurisdiction, which these men would gladly
bring in. That which the libeller says of excommunication for money, is a lewd
calumniation long since answered. Forwel it is known, that no man is
excommunicated for money, but for disobedience to the Judges decree and
sentence. And as those that will not yield to the civil Judges sentence even
in the smallest matters, are compelled by imprisoment; so those that refuse to
obey the ecclesiastical Judge, are compelled by ecclesiastical censures. For
they themselves do interpret these words, He that will not hear the Church,
etc. to be understood both of great, and small matters.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 37.
if Moses under the law, and Timothee and others under the Gospel, needed to
have a form of government of the Church prescribed to them by the Lord,
whether it be likely that the Lord would commit the Church to M. Whitg. M.
Cooper, M. Bancroft, and others, to frame a government for it, at their
pleasures?

The Lord does not commit his Church to be governed by any at their pleasures:
Answer.
least of all to the aldermen and new consistories, things like toodestooles
the last night risen out of the ground, and ruling al things without reine or
restraint of reason. It might have pleased this libeller in naming these men to
use other names, if not for authority they bear, yet for common ciuilities
sake. but he will perchance show, that he neither respects authority nor
civility, but means to revel at all that resist his fancy, and that
injuriously. for neither these excellent men, nor others do hold it lawful to
frame a fond new government at pleasure: nor does any of them doubt, but that
the government of the Church of England, is Apostolical, and that the
government by elders, is both new, and fantastical.

Quaere, Putcase. Quaest. 36.
if John at Style should grant there was a government by elders in the
primitive, Apostolical, and best Church, and should call the same government
a popedom and tyranny, whether this did not rankly smell of detestable
atheism.

If John at Style should say as much as this libeller has said in his libell,
Answer.
he might percase change his style, and be called John at Gibet. for these
be matters worthy Gibets. but concerning this matter, I think John at Style
will not say that there was ever such a pack of Church-aldermen, as this
faction uses in their Consistories. And if he should say so, he should say
untruth. neither were the Elders in the primitive Church or after, other then
Apostles, and ministers of the word. All the ancient Fathers were ignorant of
this new government: yet was it not Atheism in them to say it, as this wicked
and hypocritical Atheist auoweth: nor are these Atheistes that impugn the
fond Consistory, or that affirm that the new government is tyranny; nay,
which is worse, that it is mere foolerie: but those that wrest Gods word, and
lie shamefully to prove it. For what more sottish, and senseless government
can there be, then to make clownes judges of learning, religion, and
controversies of divinity? or more absurd then to refuse that government,
that ever was in the church?

Quaere whether the Churches in Scotland, France, Put-case. Quest. 38.
the low countries, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, Saxony, Heluetia, and the
County Palatine of Rhene, and whether Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Melancthon,
Bucer, Calvin, Zanchus, Martyr, and infinite other the most excellent divines
in all the world commending the continuance of the Eldership, be all
Anabaptists, Puritans, rebellious Traitors, Marstates, Marlawes, Marprinces,
and Maralles, and D. Bancroft, M. Sutcliffe etc, the only good subjects in
all the world?

As we do not willingly condemn other churches in their government: Answer.
so we think Beza and others might have done more wisely and discretely, not
so rashly to have censured ours, especially pronouncing without hearing both
parties, and sitting judge in his own cause, and speaking neither good
divinity, nor good law, nor good reason. yet we say, if any of these above
named should in this state go about to place the eldership so contrary to a
monarchical regiment, he should have done therein no good office, nor
discharged the ductie of a wise man. this I say further, that this libeller
does make most shameful lies, where he names many churches, and many
learned men, as favorers of the new Eldership; whereas in truth they never
knew what it meant. It is not in Saxonye, Bohemia, Polande, Hungary, nor in
many places in the low countries, and where it is, the same continues with
small profit, and much displeasure. The county Palatine of Rhene has after
many styrres co^ditionally received it. Heluetia never had it. neither
Oecolampadius nor Zuinglius, nor Melancthon ever knew it, nor I think the
rest. What a shameless fellow then was this, thus impudently to lie? nay,
Saxony has superintendents, and so sometimes had Scotland, and Tossane they
say, is general superintendent of all the Palsgraues dominions, concerning
Church causes: and the Churches of Strangers in England in King Edwardes days
had superintendents, and Melancthon, and Zanchus liked our bishops. and
therefore none of these are like to our factious Puritans. And as for Doctor
Bancroft and my self, they cannot say, but that we are good subjects, nor
note us with any disloyalty. But beside us, the least of thousands; there are
infinite more good subjects, and learned men (of which number the Puritans are
none) all which stand against the factious government of the Elderships, and
maintain the ancient apostolical orders of the Church. That the best Divines
in the world should hold with the Eldership, is a fancy: for all the ancient
Fathers were ignorant of it, and the godly martyrs of our land in Queen Mary's
time refused it, and beside them infinite learned men: all which hold with
bishops, which these condemn. choose you therefore whether you will follow all
antiquity, or Th. Cartwright, Giles Wigg. John Penry. Tauergius. Caluetus, and
such tagrag fellows, percase great favorers of the church-aldermen, but
neither wise nor learned.

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 39.
whether the Kings of France and Scotland, the princes of Conde, and Orange,
the duke of Saxony, the county palatine of Rhene, the States of the low
countries, many other Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and other
christian and noble potentates, who have maintained, favored and preferred the
Ministers that stand for reformation: and whether here in England, the right
honorable sir Nicolas Bacon Lord keeper, the Earls of Bedford, Warwick, and
Leycester, Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Amias Paulet, Sir Walter Mildemay, and
other right noble Lords, Counselors, Countes, and Countesses would have
countenanced and protected the Ministers that seek reformation, if they had
perceived them to be enemies to the Queen and state, worse then papists, and
miscreants? and whether our Prelates be more trusty to her Majesty, and
provident to avoid danger, then these excellent personages were?

This argument for the consistory is drawn from the opinion of courtiers, and
men of war; Bellipotentes sunt magis quam sapientipotentes. Ennius apud
Cicer. 2. diuinat.
and therefore seems to me strange in divinity, howsoever it is approved as
good in the consistory that depends on opinion, and is turned as the clouds
with the wind. If the same were any thing worth, then might the heresy of
Arrius, yea, Paganism be confirmed also to be as good religion, as the
consistorian discipline. for many Emperors, Kings, noble men, dukes, countes,
countesses, captains, yea, whole States have embraced Paganism, and condemned
Christian religion, and favored idolatrous priests, and persecuted christians.
Constantius and all his court for the most part, and most of his dominions
embraced Arianisme. And what wonder if diverse noble men and women embraced this
fantastical Discipline? for whom would not the demure countenance, and sober
sighs, and out drawn speech of these hypocrites abuse? wherefore let this
libeller ground him self upon these men's courtly favor, and muster an army
ready to fight for discipline: let him have his captains and officers, his
marshals, lieutenants, ensigns, sergeantes, corporals, drummers and fifes: and
let him make his aldermen gunners: for if they could look with one eye, they
would prove most excellent in that faculty, shooting so well at randon about
interpretation of scriptures, and having so long layne battering down our
State. I say, all these men's opinions without authority of Scripture wey not
one pepper grain. He is a simple man that will die in that religion, that
most of these favorers of Discipline which this man has named, did: and most
simple, that will think the consistorian faction good, because some here
mentioned favored it. for some had one respect, some another, and were men of
strange Divinity for the most part, which I could justify by particulars, but
I will not trouble the rest of those that are dead, nor disgrace those that are
alive. Let them be as good as they are supposed, yet do I believe one Father
in matters of Divinity before them all.

Besides that, diverse men here named, never favored the Consistory: as the
last French kings, the Dukes of Saxony, and other Christian potentates: neither
did the Frenchmen contend for the Consistory, which came to be afterward
established, but for religion. And well it is known, that both the Earl of
Leycester, and Sir Francis Walsingham in their latter times renounced these
men, confessing that they had been greatly abused by their hypocrisy. Neither
do I think that Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Walter Mildemay, and such noble
counselors would favor factious fellows; or suppose these whom the
Libeller defends, to be good subjects. Nay, one of them has spoken most
earnestly in open Parliament against them, and their Elderships; so that this
argument that stands on such false assertions and weak authority, cannot be
good. If this argument be sufficient to prove them good subjects, albeit they
deny her Majesty's supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, and slander her
government, then Papists and traitors may by the same be proved to be good
subjects: for great Princes, states, and potentates favor their cause.

The Bishops, and other ministers that live in obedience of Law cannot with
those faults be charged, and therefore are wronged to be matched with these
mutinous mates, that with multitude and power, rather then reason, seek to
prevail. Yet have they against them all the ancient fathers, all counsels, all
learned men of time past, yea all antiquity, yea, and many learned men of our
time, with whom neither for number, nor authority are these fellows to be
compared.

Quaere, Putcase. Quest. 40.
whether a Minister ought not to admonish the mightiest Prince of his duty,
refuse to administer the sacrament unto him, if he be a notorious offender,
and pronounce him to be no member of Christ in the communion of Saints, if
he continue obstinate in open crimes? and whether under the Law David, and
other princes were not subject to ceremonial expiations, and the spiritual
power of Priests and Prophets? and whether Ambrose did well in using like
authority toward an Emperor? and lastly, whether Zanchus, Calvin, Bucer,
Nowel, Jewel, Bilson, and Bridges approouing the like, be traitors, Popes and
tyrants?

If a minister may do all these services against a prince, Answer.
what should any need to desire the Eldership? forsoothe belike one is too
few to suppress a princes authority. for this cause it is not fitting, that
any such power should be granted either to ministers, or to consistories: for
that which is alleged, viz. that ministers may admonish princes; makes
nothing for the consistory, nor excommunication of princes by ministers. for
betwixt public and general admonitions, and excommunication, there is no
small difference. every minister may use that according to his place and
calling, but it were somewhat too saucy a matter, for every hot braynd fellow
to use this, especially against princes: neither did either the priests
excommunicate David, nor Ambrose pronounce sentence against Theodosius, he did
only exclude him from his own communion: nor do I find where any of these
learned men ever did make the sovereign prince subject to a cock braynd
fellows curse. If he were subject, then were he no sovereign prince: and then
should every minister controlle the prince: which is absurd, and repugnant to
state. but as this fellow does insinuate, David was subject to ceremonial
expiations: admit it were so; yet great difference there is between these
expiations voluntarily undertaken, and excommunication violently pronounced, as
learned men have showed. There is no other means whereby the Machiauel histor.
fiorent. lib. 1.
Popes grew great at the first, then by excommunication: shall we then recall
again the Papal tyranny? shall we establish the instrument of so many
rebellions? shall we admit such foolish conditional sentences, which all
Laws condemn? As for Nowel, Bilson, Bridges, and others writing against
papists, they do not simply auowe such excommunication of princes, as these
would have, but prove that other bishops may proceed therein, as far as the
bishops of Rome, and that with them they have equal authority.

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 41.
why there may not be under a Christian Magistrate, Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons, and Widows, as well as Parsons, Lecturers, Schoolemasters,
Churchwardens, Collectours for the poor, and Hospital women, seeing these
do, and may execute in authority and power, the whole form of Church
government desired, though their practice thereof is infinitely corrupted,
against the Canons of the Apostles, to the danger of the Church, and dishonor
of the Realm?

First it is false, Answer.
that they may execute the same authority that the Eldershippe may. Who would
not be ashamed to affirm, that our Churchwardens may excommunicate any
person, or that any with us beside the Prince and parliament, might make Laws
and orders, but he that shameth of nothing? But suppose they do some things
which the aldermen do: yet were it no reason, because these do somewhat by
law, that we should admit a government contrary to laws, to state, to her
Majesty's prerogative, to al scriptures, fathers, antiquity, yea to sense and
reason. That which he says, that the offices of our churchwardens, and
hospital men are corrupt to the danger of the church, and dishonor of the
real me, is nothing but a sound of great words without reason: for neither are
the offices so corrupt as he pretends, nor is there in the^ danger, or
disgrace. nay the worst of our churchwardens are as honest, wise and learned,
as his church-aldermen, and as fit to govern as they. yea and our collectors
be as good as his deacons: and that hospitals be not corrupt, T.C. will look,
that is a master of an hospital, and a man voy de of all corruption, and good
dealing.

Quaere, whether the Ecclesiastical high commission be not in effect an
Eldership, wherein some govern with Ministers, Put-case. Quest. 42.
who by profession are temporal Lawyers, Ciuilians, mere lay men? and
whether this government consisting of spiritual and temporal persons, be a
meddley, and lynsey wolsey discipline, as the Remonstrance calls the
Eldership, which is now desired?

Nothing is more repugnant, Answer.
nor with less reason compared together, then the high commission, and
eldership. If I did not tell them so much, yet me thinks, that their
continual declayming against the high commission, as proceeding contrary to
laws, might teach them so much. for if they be so like, as this fellow now
recanting his railing against the high commission pretends, why should not
we take exceptions against the imperious aldermanship of the church, as these
do against the high commission? especially seeing that the high commission
deals only by authority from the prince, and is limited with laws, and is
subject to the princes commandment, and deals only in extraordinary
cognitions, and may be revoked, and cassed as the prince shall think meet:
And where only Ecclesiastical persons meddle with the censures. whereas
contrariwise the imperious church-aldermen claim no commission from the
prince: nay, they challenge the power and vicarage of Christ Jesus, and
superiority over all princes, and deal in small and great causes: yea,
clownes, and doltes dispute of relgion, and throw out excommunications, and
rule all without law or reason, by the only instinct of their unclean
spirit, or rather changeable fancy: and therefore the Remonstrance says well,
that it is a lynsey wolsey, and motley discipline patched together by men of
motley ierkins, and consisting of contrary pieces, iumbling both Church and
common wealth together, while ministers are sent abroad to beg for their
living, and artificers and clownes rule like Lords in the Consistory,
prescribing Laws to princes: so that if the Libeller desire this goodly
gallimafrey of discipline, he is more fit to wear a motley cote with an
addition of hawks belles, then to govern a Church, or any part of the common
wealth.

Quaere, Put-case. Quest. 43.
if the sole government of a bishop in a diocese be sufficient and most
agreeable to Gods word, why is there an ecclesiastical commission standing of
many persons civil, and Ecclesiastical? or if an Ecclesiastical commission
be needful in a Realm, why not in a Province? If in a Province, why not in
a Diocese? If in a Diocese, why not in a Deanrie? If in a Deanerie, why not
in a Parish? Lastly, why might there not without absurdity, and breach of
true uniformity, be planted in some places already capable, a Consistory, or
Commission of Elders, though the like cannot be accomplished in all, seeing
there be new Ecclesiastical Commissions erected, Deanes and Chapters broken
music, and Organs in some places, not in other?

To these three questions, Answer.
which are the very crisis of the Put case dreaming fury, I answer first,
that seeing the prince by ye laws of God is sovereign governor in all causes
within her dominions, that beside the ordinary jurisdiction of Bishops within
their several Diocese, it is very requisite that there should be a superior
authority to assist them, and to strengthen them, and to supply that which is
wanting, and in case they do not their duties, to correct them: secondly,
that as the Prince is one, so there ought to be but one supreme authority,
although by that authority her Majesty may appoint diverse Commissioners: and
yet nothing comes thereby to the Eldership that claymeth authority not from
the prince, but from God, and would altogether break the union of her
government, while every consistory would rule the congregation under it, as
best pleases my lords the church aldermen.

As for the gradation of the libeller, if he had understood any logic, he
might have learned, that no kind of argument is more faulty by this reason a
man might thus conclude against the libeller, that if he will libell against
authority, he will not spare the counsel, if they withstand him; if not the
counsel, neither will he spare the prince: if he contemn all humane laws,
he will not greatly esteem Gods laws; if he care not for Gods law, then
will he not in the end care for God himself. likewise if the Sanedrin was at
Jerusalem, then in other cities; if in cities, then in boroughs, and so in
villages: and if the consistory be required in parishes, then in villages, if
in villages, then in hamlets; if in hamlets, then in houses; if in houses then
in the kitchen, where the cook is chief moderator which follow as well as
his reasons. many do think that one high commission is enough and too much
for all England: what then would they think, if they should see in every
parish high commissioners? yea what if there were but such commisioners as the
aldermen of the co^sistonie be, that claim a most absolute and high commission
from God, planted in every parish? it would then be time to run into some
other country a remotis. for it would be hard living. in England. thirdly, I
say that there is no place in England capable of the aldermanshippe, but such
as is very capable of faction, and disloyalty: and that his reason drawn from
organs, and broken music is very weak. for albeit there is broken music in
some places, and not in other: yet can there be no elderships in any place. for
if any should be placed, the music of that company compared with other
places would sound like a pair of broken organes, not only like broken
music. and that government would break both Church and common wealth in
pieces, and bring all out of tune. they have done it already in places where
they be settled: and were unknown to all antiquity, and therefore, what reason
have we to make trial of that, which is like to prove so dangerous?

Thus you have heard all those contumelious cases, questions, and demands,
which this railing Putcase in his malicious fury has thought good to propound,
not only to disgrace, and hurt the ecclesiastical state; but also to overthrow
law, and government. if the course be lawful, and honest, who may not as well
propound questions to the dishonor of any state, or noble personage in the
land? there is no man of so rare merit, nor so honorable, but might, if this
course were suffered, be brought into envy, and hatred. and if I should
follow him in this course, good Lord, what shameful and ridiculous matters do
the public and private actions of these factious persons offer to men's view?
al which albeit they deserve to hear: yet it is not for me to speak; neither
do grave men desire to know. I will only for requital frame certain
interrogatories concerning the cause, and those persons which are principal
agents in this cause; that seeing how open they lie themselves, they may
hereafter deal more modestly with others. if they follow this course I do
assure them, that for every one they have propounded to us: there will be by
some or other, twenty propounded to them. in the mean while let them content
themselves with these, and blame not me: for I do but answer, and follow
them. seeing they have begun to come into this kind of field they must have
patience to stand to the hazard of wars: if they would have dealt ciuilly
with me, they should not have overcome me in courtesy.

CERTAIN QVESTIONS PROPOVNDED to the Putcase and his adherents; wherein
diverse well affected to the state desire to be resolved.
QVaere, whether he that makes doubt of the principles of our Christian
faith, be not by the opinion of the ancient fathers an haeretike; and whether
the laws do not condemn him for a traitor, that makes doubt of her Majesty's
right to the crown: and for a contumacious, and rebellious person, that makes
question, whether he ought to obey such laws as her Majesty, and the whole
parliament, and wisest men of England have thought to be godly and convenient?
and lastly in what case the Putcase, and his fellows are, that in broad
speeches openly, and in printed books directly oppugn them; and by calumnious
questions pinch at them?

2 Quaere, whether those that would overthrow not only the privileges, and
liberties of the Church of England, but also the whole ecclesiastical state,
their jurisdiction, and livings, seek not the overthrow of Magna charta, and
infinite statutes, and of a great part of the common laws of this Realiue, and
seek the dishonor of her Majesty and the state by requiring at her hands
things that tend to the violating of her oathe taken at the time of her
coronation, and the overthrow of the rewards of learning? and whether such as
are chief doers in these causes, are longer to be suffered to proce do in
their presumption?

3 And because the Putcase makes mention of that reverend Judge Sir
Christopher Wray late lord chief Justice of England, let him also answer,
whether he did nor both in his opinion, as a judge, and in bitter re^mes, as a
man in utter dislike of these men's obstinacy, coudemne those that obstinately
refused before ecclesiastical judges to take their oaths, or to declare being
examined, mattens concerning themselves, or others, so far as then concerned
had life or member? and whether the reverend, and learned judge and lawyers of
England, have not resolved the proceedings of ecclestasticall courts to be
lawful; and disallowed the notorious contumacie of those men, that refused
notwithstanding upon their own vain conceits to answer?

4. Quaere, whether the book of Fenner, that is entitled sacra Theologia, and
came forth with the Pythagoricall allowance of T. C. contain not strange
divinity? and whether it be likely, that the resolutions of the consistory
should bemore learned then the positions of two such omniscient divines?

5 Quaere, whether it be not reason to make T.C. recant those dangerous
opinions he has published in that book, and whether those that made the new
communion book are not to be called in question for publishing of new
confessions offaith, and new doctrine?

6 Let also great inquiry be made, by what law or title the churchaldermen do
claim so large authority both in ecclesiastical and domestical matters, as
lately they have taken upon them in some churches?

k Quaere, what is become of the acts and memorials of the consistory, that
is supposed to have been both in the Church of God under the law, and under
the Gospel? and what may be the reason, that so famous men should neither
have their names, nor doings mentioned in any history, holy, or profane, or
other writing?

Quaere, whether such as suffer their children to die without baptism, because
the time of the assembly of the congregation comes not between their birth,
and death, are not guilty of contempt of baptism? and whether they that teach
this doctrine be found christians: that rather then they will break a
consistorial rule, will suffer christians children to depart without the badge,
and mark of christianity?

9 Quaere, whether they that call those scriptures, which are commonly called
Apocryphal, lies and fables, do therein declare themselves to have the
judgment of learned men, or modesty of civil persons. seeing the fathers of
old time, and diverse learned men of our times also do honor them next after
the Canonical scriptures? Zanch. confess.
and whether T.C. would not take it in evil part to have his voluminous
replies called lies and fables: which notwithstanding are far inferior to the
worst part of the Apocryphal scriptures?

10 Quaere, whether the consistoriall constitutions do not bring into use the
judicial laws of Moses: as for example that of retaliation, of capital
punishments of adultery, and blasphemy, and whether felonies, that were by
Moses law punished ciuilly, may not be punished with death? and whether that
the Consistoriall faction does not deny her Majesty power to pardon
offenders, that by Moses judicial laws are to be punished with death?

11 Quaere, how it happens, that the disciplinarians shame not to speak
against Bishops, which themselves deny not to have been ever in the Church
since the Apostles times, and which we offer to prove to have authority by the
word of God, seeing they commend a fond, and new found government, that has
neither authority of law, nor confirmation by ancient practice: the laws
whereof are most absurd and unreasonable?

12 Quaere, by what authority they interpre the words, Dic Ecclesiae: and
presbyteriqui been praesunt, etc. and the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.28.
and Ephesians. 4.10. and Romans 12. contratrarie to all the ancient fathers, to
histories, to themselves, yea contrary to the text it self, and common reason?

13. Quaere, why Ministersshould not be forced as well to subscribe to the
government of the church of England, as the ministers of France to the French
discipline, they of Geneua to the ordinances of Geneua: these being so lately
invented, and established, and having so notorious exceptions against them, and
being no way to be compared to the orders of our Church, for authority,
antiquity, or other good condition or quality?

14 Quaere, whether the Consistory decreeing and proceeding contrary to the
discipline of France, and Geneua, and their new Zion is to be allowed, or
obeyed? and whether every act of the Consistory be law to bind the rest of
that congregation? and if it be, then what certeintie can be in that
government? and whether that government be not worse then papal, seeing the
Popes proceed according to their own laws: these fellows will not be bound
by any laws, either of their own, or others?

15 Quaere, if the Consistories sentence be the sentence of the Church,
whereunto every one is to obey, and he that obeys not to be holden as a
heathen, and publican, how it chances, that the Synod sometimes is so bold,
as to reuerse the Consistories sentence, and not to hold the disobedient, as a
publican and sinner?

16 Quaere, if by the words, It shall not be so with you, all power of
ordination, judgment, making, and executing of orders, deposing of ministers,
and such like authority be taken from Bishops, by what reason the ministers of
the new discipline in their new Consistories, and Synodes take on them so
peremptorily to put in and out, and to make laws, and to determine most
absolutely, and imperiously?

17 Quaere, what time of the year, and under what sign the resolutions of the
Consistory are most ripe? viz. whether when the sun enters into Aries, or
Capricorn, or in harvest time, or midsommer moon? and whether a madman that
has Lucida interualla, as one of the authors of the petition has, be a sound
man to make a pillar of the Consistory, and what order is to be taken for such
men, when Luna is praedominant in their heads?

18 Quaere, whether it be a matter tolerable and beseeming wise gouerners, that
clownes, and men of occupatio^, should determine matters of religion, or that
idiots should judge of law, and govern all matters ecclesiastical; and by
what rule of divinity it may be surmised, that an ignorant man being chosen an
Elder, should suddenly be endued with new graces, and as Th. Cartw. the great
disciplinarian patriarch faith, become a new man, as if he were new perboyled
in Peleus his tubbe?

19 When the Consistory consists of 13 good men and true, whereof six look
one way, and seven another, Quaere, why the odd voice should make the sentence
of seven, to be the determination of the Church? and whether this be not an
odd discipline, where one odd man makes a determination to be called the
Churches determination?

20 Quaere, by what law Doctors, Pastors, and Deacons make one corporation,
seeing in no place of scripture they are mentioned together, nor by any
authority or commission are linked together?

21 Quaere, by what authority the Ministers of foreign churches take on them
to prescribe forms of discipline, and new laws unto our Church, seeing they
teach, that all churches have equal power? and whether this be not a
foundation to a new popedom?

22 Quaere, whether all the errors of Barrowisme do not follow, and may be
concluded of Th. Cartw. Wat. Tr. and Dud. Fenners positions? and whether this
sort of men is fit to deal with those sectaries, and ought not rather to be
driven to make a public recantation of their foul opinions?

23 Quaere, in case a musterd seller, or chandeller should be chosen a
churchalderman, and thought worthy to judge of the highest matters of
religion, who should all that while furnish the common wealth with musterd, and
candels? and whether that their sentences would not savor rank of musterd,
and tallowe: and how many candlesellers or men of occupation, they find to
have been present in Synodes of old time, at the debating of points of
religion?

24 Quaere, whether the disciplinarians do not flatly deny the principal
points of her Majesty's supremacy, and take from her power to ordeine rites,
and orders, for the church, to nominate Bishops, to appoint Ecclesiastical
commissioners, and to delegate learned men to hear the last appeal from the
Ecclesiastical courts, to call Synodes, and other authority given to the
prince by the laws of England; and endeavor to bring in foreign laws, and
jurisdiction repugnant to the statutes of supremacy, and her majesty's
prerogative, and the laws and liberties both of the Church, and all her
majesty's subjects?

25 Quaere, if the establishment of the consistoriall discipline in the Church
of England, would not overthrow infinite statutes, most of the Common laws,
diverse courts of Justice, the two Universities, and innes of court, and
finally the whole state? and whether the Universities in places where this
discipline is entered, be not decayed, and the state shaken, notwithstanding
that the power thereof by diverse laws contrary to the rules of discipline is
abridged?

26 Quaere, how many sound divines or learned men there are, that have been
bredde in the places where this discipline is received? and whether they have
not parted the Church goods among themselves where they were masters, as the
soldiors parted Christ's coat, giving some little portion back again of the
whole, least they should live all together without religion?

27 Quaere, whether it be likely, for the vain hope of a hundred pounds
pention, depending on the uncertain pleasures of merchants, men of occupation,
and husbandmen, that young men of towardnes will give themselves to the study
of divinity? and what brave youths are made ministers within the
disciplinarians jurisdiction?

28 Quaere, how the spoils of the Church which these men have made in all
places where they rule, are bestowed? and what portion thereof is come to the
maintenance of learned men, or learning?

29 Quaere, what commodities her majesty does receive now by renthes,
subsidies, first fruits, patronages, lapses, custodies of bishops
temporalities, and how much the same amounts unto: likewise, what services
she has now by the Ecclesiastical state, and their followers? and whether
she should not loose both great revenues, and make many faithful seruitors
unable to serve her, if this inkepot discipline, should come in place? and if
any man say, that the same should be bestowed upon noblemen, and knights, and
gentlemen that should succeed in the place of others, let inquire be made,
whether some puritan dame do not spend in apparel, more then the revenues of
diverse cathedral churches? and whether it would fall out, that the revenues of
the Church would be wasted vainly, which now mainetaine many able men to do
the prince service?

30 Quaere, whether in all places where the factious disciplinarians have set
foot in this Church, they have not set the people against their pastors, and
divided the people among themselves, and hardened men's hearts, and made them
without natural affection, and lifted up their followers in pride and vanity,
and made the people far worse then before, and sought nothing but their own
profit and advancement?

31 Quaere, whether it be not a dangerous point to this Church, and state, that
we are so much urged by some to imitate the course held for reformation by
them of Geneua, and Scotland heretofore: considering the dangerousnes of their
plattes, and the effects that followed upon them, and the unsound divinity
whereupon they are grounded?

32 Quaere, by what point of discipline they of Geneua expulsed their Bishop
and liege Lord, and right County of Geneua? and what revenues of the Church
they seized into their hands, and what portion they allowed back again to
the poor ministry? and whether it be not capital in that state, to speak
for the estate of Bishops? which points cleared, it will appear, what reason
they had first at Geneua to inueigh, and declaime against the state of Bishops.

Quaere, whether the peremptory dealings of the ministers of Geneua, and some
others adhearing unto them, and the greedy sacrilege of their abbettors, and
followers, and the utter subversion of the ecclesiastical state, which this
antischolasticall, and fantastical discipline does every where work, have
not greatly hindered the reformation of religion in France, and other places,
and is not still likely to hinder the same, unless the same be newly recocted,
and reformed?

34 Quaere, whether the disciplinarians do not deliver doctrine as dangerous
to princes, as Rosse, Sanders, Allen, and other papists: namely concerning
excommunication, and deposing, and murdering of princes that withstand the
religion and reformation, which each of them respectively desires?

35 Quaere, whether History of the Church of Scotland. page 213.
Knoxe said truly of Calvin, and certain other Ministers then residing at
Geneua? and if he report their doctrine truly, whether they hold a sound
point of doctrine, teaching, That it is lawful for subjects to reform
religion, when princes will not: yea rather then fail, even by force of arms?

36 Quaere, Ibidem, page 217. 234. 256, and 258. etc.
whether John Knoxe and other his adherents, grounding themselves upon the
foresaid opinions concerning violent reformation, did not by private motion
without any authority put in practice a strange manner of reformation in
Scotland? and whether our disciplinarians do not intend such a practice in
England? and if they do, whether they think, that this course of theirs, and
these their rules of discipline, will stand with Gods word, or good orders?

37 Quaere, whether Beza was not the author, or amplifier, or publisher of the
book entitled, De iure magistratuum in subditos, a book which overthrows
in effect all the authority of Christian kings, and magistrates; and whether
the doctrine therein contained, be agreeable to the rules of that discipline,
which they have so greatly urged? the same question is demanded likewise of
the book called, Vindiciae contra tyrannos; a book containing no less
pernicious matter against the authority of princes, then the former.

38 Quaere, Epist. to Goodmans book.
whether Master Whittingham that affirmed, that the doctrine of Goodmans book
printed at Geneua in queen Mary's time against the regiment of women, and for
exciting the subjects to take arms against their sovereign princes in some
cases, was approved to be good, and godly by the chiefest men of learning,
that then were in the city: said therein either truly, or Christianlike, or
schollerlike?

39 Quaere, whether the English disciplinarians, that were at Geneua in Queen
Mary's time, according to the said Goodman page 73. 74. and sequ. and book of
Obedi. page 99. 103.
doctrine then there allowed of, taught not, that the nobility of England
ought to reform religion by force of arms, and rather then fail, to put the
Queen then Goodman page 99. 114. 115. and sequen.
reigning to death, and whether this point of doctrine, be one of the
principles of their new discipline, and disciplinarian kingdom, holden of
most, and professed of those, that live in free cities, and states not subject
to kingly regiment?

40 Quaere, whether the said disciplinarian ministers and faction, did not
hold it lawful according to the said Goodman. page 196. 87. 34. 35 185. 180,
184. etc.
Geneuian doctrine, That if the noble men and other inferior Magistrates for
fear should refuse to reform religion, as is mentioned, the rest of the
people might do it in that case themselves, and whether this be one of the
axioms of Th. Cartwrightes heavenly Canaan, and a decision of their
disciplinarian Synodes.

41 Quaere, whether the said disciplinarians have not taught publicly in
books, rather then there should be no reformation, such as they wished, that
any private man having forsooth, some extraordinary motion or calling (like
that percase of Hacket) might embrewe his hands with the blood of his Goodman
page 115. 199. 200. of obedience page 116. 110.
sovereign, according to the examples of Phinehes, Ahud, and such like?

42 Quaere, whether the reasons alleged by Knoxe and Wollocke against their
gouerner, and prince, were sufficient in law for the subjects to depose a
prince, Histor. of the Church of Scotland page 272. 278.
or a regent lawfully appointed, as they and others their followers did depose
the Queen regent of Scotland? and whether their allegations, and doings are
catholic rules of discipline for all times, and all Churches?

43 Quaere, whether by the laws of their new disciplinarian kingdom, it be
not as lawful to depose a king from his seat and crown for dealing in causes
ecclesiastical (which they entend and affirm not to belong unto him) as it
was for them of Geneua to depose their Bishop, which was also their liege
Lord, and prince, from his temporal right and living for Calvin to Sadolete.
dealing in causes temporal: albeit he was by right of succession the
temporal Lord, and owner of that city and territory?

45 Quaere, whether the doctrine contained in a Declaration, anno 1582.
Declaration printed in Scotland, why certain persons mere subjects, repaired
to the king at Ruthuen (one reason of that forcible repair being, for that the
king took upon him to deal in causes ecclesiastical) be agreeable to the
catholic doctrine of their discipline?

46 Quaere, whether the practices of certain ministers in Scotland, for the
setting up of their presbyteries by their own authority, as they are
described in the acts of parliament held there, Anno 1584, and published in
print, are justifiable by Gods word, and to be held for general rules of
discipline, to be practiced in all Churches?

47 Quaere, whether that be true, that is reported in the Chronicles of
Scotland, which were perused and corrected by Master Randal, Master Killigrew,
and Doctor Hammond) concerning an other repair made to the king of Scors at
Chronicle page 446, and sequent.
Sterling: and whether the proclamation there mentioned, and the actions which
then happened be agreeable to the doctrine of the disciplinarian kingdom,
taught every where, or else be but extraordinary and local, and only there to
be put in practice, where there is good opportunity offered?

48 Quaere, whether in France, and other where, they do not contrary to their
opinions for violent reformation of religigion, by noble men, by the people, or
private persons, taught for 30. years and upwards, teach now, that it is
utterly unlawful for any subject, under any pretense of any extraordinary
calling, so much as once to lift up a hand against the prince, be he tyrant,
idolator, heretic, or whatsoever? and whether all the rest of the rules of
this discipline, may not as well be varied by time, as this point is? and what
manner of disciplinarian faith this is, that is so inconstant and variable, and
teaches sometime obedience, and sometime rebellion, and like the Chamelion,
changes hair so often?

49 Quaere, whether the wise authors of this petition do not show themselves
to be of the disciplinarian humor in this behalf, when they think it a
sufficient answer in the behalf of Beza, Hotoman, Buchanan, and others that
published the doctrine of stirring the subjects against their princes, to say,
they write so against popish kings, and such as they judged tyrants: as if it
were lawful for subjects to rebel against such as they account tyrants, and
popish kings? and of T.C. let it be enquired, whether he allow this for one of
his cananitish laws of his celestial consistory?

50 Quaere, whether Conspiracy for discipline, and examinations taken in the
Star Chamber, published.
T. Cartw. and certain ministers here his disciples, have not entered into the
very same course for setting up the discipline in England, which you shall
perceive by the said declaration, by the acts of parliament in Scotland, Anno
1584, and by the English Chronicle, that the ministers of Scotland took for
the establishing of theirs?

51 Quaere, whether T. Cartw. and his fellows have not assembled in synodes
and conuenticles, Examinations in the star chamber, and their own confessions.
and there enacted and decreed certain rules, and orders contrary to her
Majesty's laws, and subscribed them, and procured others to subscribe them,
and by all means possible gone about to put the same in practice, and to
discredit and disgrace the laws of her majesty, and ancient government of
the Church?

Quaere, whether in their said Disciplina sacra.
orders, which they call holy discipline, all authority in Church causes is
not taken from the Christian magistrate, and given to their assemblies, in so
much, that the magistrate is not so much as mentioned when they talk of their
new government? and how the sufferance of these proceedinges may stand with
the majesty of a prince, or with good government?

53 Quaere, whether they do not T.C. page 162 and 163 and 417. and discourse.
of eccl. discip. page 148. 174.
hold, that the authority which they challenge to their elderships, and
synodes, by their said platformes of discipline, is neither increased, nor
diminished, whether the prince be Christian, or heathen; and teach not that
the authority of a Christian, and heathen prince is all one in ecclesiastical
causes?

54 Quaere, That is in part evident by their confessions in the Star chamber.
whether Cartwright and his adherentes have not put the greatest part of their
discipline in practice without her Majesty's consent, and authority? and
without the said authority have not both made secret meetings, and
established diverse orders, and broched new opinions all contrary to the
doctrine, confession, and government of the Church of England?

55 Quaere, by what presumption he durst do these things, and why he is not to
be brought publicly to submit himself for his faults?

56 Quaere, whether the same seditious proceedings be not condemned in
certain acts made in the parliament holden Anno 1584, at Edenborough?

57 Quaere, In his examinations in the Star chamber.
whether Th. Cartwright swear truly in the Star chamber, when he affirmed
on his oath, that he never affirmed or allowed, that in every Monarchy there
ought to be certain magistrates, like the Spartaine Ephori, with authority
to depose the king, etc. seeing the same point is in Fenners book of divinity,
which one Th. Cartwr. in his Epistle printed before the book does highly
commend, as a profound piece of divinity, and heavenly axioms, and doctrine?
and whether if some other had so sworn, they should not have been accounted
perjured persons? and whether by the rules of discipline, it be lawful for
the edification of the consistory to swear falsely?

58 Quaere, Examinations in the Star chamber published.
whether have not T.C. and his fellows confessed on their oaths, that
notwithstanding all the care that has been taken for the perfecting of their
platformes of discipline, they are not yet resolved upon diverse points? and
whether they did wisely to subscribe such orders, or duetifully to animate
certain gentlemen of mean understanding in divinity, to present such a
confused platform of government to the parliament, that it might be
confirmed, and received throughout the whole Realm? and finally whether
wisdom will permit men to dissolve a state already settled, and to embrace a
government whereupon the authors themselves are not yet resolved, nor I think
never will be, and wherein others see notorious absurdities, imperfections,
and injustice?

59 Quaere, Ibid.
whether T.C. and his companions do not say upon their oaths, that they meant
to have been suitors to her Majesty, and the parliament, for the approbation,
and receiving of their draught of discipline before mentioned, and subscribed
unto by them, as a perfect plat of Church government commanded by Gods word,
do not utterly disclaim by a most necessary implication her Majesty to have
any pre-eminence and authority in ecclesiastical causes, by the word of God,
seeing they do not give any authority in their perfect platform to the
civil magistrate, but yield all that power to their synodes, classes, and
consistories?

60 Quaere, whether Cartwr. and some of his fellows, and followers, were not
acquainted with the conspiracy of Hacket, Conspiracy for reformation.
Coppinger, and Arthington, and whether they knew not, that these fellows, or
some of them pretended to have an extraordinary calling, which moved them to
attempt matters which might prove very dangerous to themselves? whether also
they knew not, that the actions which they purposed to attempt by virtue of
their calling did tend to their deliverance out of prison, and to the
advancing of the holy cause, as they termed it? and thereupon at Coppingers
motion did hold a puritan fast wherein prayers were made to this effect, that
God would give success to all such means, as should be attempted for the
deliverance of the Saints of God, and for the setting up of their discipline?
and whether T. Cartw. and the wiser sort of them, did not understand whereto
the foresaid allobrogicall, and outlandish propositions of extraordinary
callings did tend? and finally whether all these points being such as in part
have, and may fully be proved against them, they have not been mercifully
dealt withal, and far above their deserts, that they have not hitherto been
called therefore in question?

61 Quaere, whether Cartw. and his fellows challenging to their eldership
authority to excommunicate princes, are not like to prove as dangerous
subjects, as Sanders, Parsons, or Card. Allen are in maintaining the popes
excommunication of her Majesty? and whether it is not likely considering the
inconstancy of their discipline, and resolutions, that although some of them
pretend now to hold, that excommunication does not take away civil
subjection, they will notwithstanding for their advantage teach contrary to
their present resolutions?

62 Quaere, whether some one of the reformed Buchanan de iure regniapud Scot.
page 70.
brotherhood have not mainteyned in books printed, that princes standing
excommunicate, may be put to death? and that when princes will not reform
religion, subjects ought to do it, and that saint Buchan ibid. page 56. 57.
Paul's precepts of obedience to tyrants bind no further, then until such time
as the people is strong enough to resist, and be able to master them by force
of arms?

63 Quaere, whether Sanders, Rosse, Allen, and other papists, do not in the
behalf of popery maintain the very same points of rebellion, together with
Goodman, Whittingham, Knoxe, and their teachers Beza, Hotoman, Buchanan? and
whether both factions have not made princes subject to the people, and populer
fury, and taught the same doctrine of the beginning of the authority of
princes? the papists seeking to erect their papacy, the disciplinarians
endeavoring to set up their papal presbytery?

64 Quaere, whether some of the doctors of this new discipline do not mislike
with the titles of civil honor given to princes, as that of majesty,
highness, grace, and such like, Buchan. de iure regni.
and with the title of Lord given to Noblemen? and whether this point of
discipline does not show, that these fellows mean to deal with Lords in
time, as well as now they are busy with bishops?

65 Quaere of master Egerton the renowned paraphraste at the Black Friars,
whether it be agreed upon in any of their synoddicall assemblies, that it shall
not be lawful for her Majesty, or the princes of this Realm, hereafter to
go to the Parliament with such honorable attendance, as heretofore they have
used the first day that it is holden, in that he did write to his brother
Fenne, as misliking the same, and said, Eger. to Fenne.
that she went thither (...), that is, with great ostentation and pomp. which
words Saint Paul uses, condemning the vanity of Acts 25.23.
Agryppa, and Beronice?

66 Quaere, why Ecclesiastical judges may not proceed in causes ex officio,
to examine men upon their oaths, as well as Caluins epistles fol. page 64.
Calvin did at Geneua, who put the chief men of the town to their oaths,
whether they had danced, or no in widow Balthazars house?

67 Quaere, whether it be not as lawful for every consistory to depose a
civil magistrate from his place, as it was for Ibidem.
Calvin to cause one of the sindickes of Geneua for dancing privately in the
widow Balthazars house, to be deposed? and if dancing be so punished, whether
greater offenses in princes shall not be more deeply punished?

68 Quaere, whether that godly and zealous man of God, as they call him, Giles
Wigginton, was not Conspiracy for discipline.
acquainted with Copingers pretense of extraordinary calling, and confirmed him
in it? whether he brought not Hacket first acquainted with Copinger and
Arthington, and justified unto them Hackets pretended torments? and whether he
was not acquainted with their cries made in the streets, and did not under his
hand set down certain reasons to prove, that upon occasion men of
extraordinary callings might cry up and down the streets? and whether also
he made not certain rimes, and caused them to be printed, and sent them
abroad a little before Copingers, and Arthingtons proclamation, wherein is
contained, That a country clown should teach a prince to wear a crown? And
whether Hacket was not that clown? and whether Hacket, Copinger, and
Arthington were not with him in the counter the morning before they began to
rise? and whether these practices and seditious rimeries be sufferable by the
laws of the Consistory?

69 Quaere, whether Hacket in sondrie of his examinations confessed not, that
the godly and zealous preacher of discipline Gi. Conspiracy for discipline.
Wigginton affirmed, That if the Magistrates governed not well, the people
might draw themselves together to see a reformation made? whether Hacket
casting some doubts, and as it should seem mentioning her Majesty, Wigginton
answered not thus: you speak of a Queen of a maygame? whether Hacket also
affirmed not, that if Wigginton were well sifted, he would declare matter of
treason, which if the rest of his fellows had not been in time reueiled, would
have cost a number of innocent men their blood? and finally, whether these be
holy practices for the glory of their discipline?

17 Quaere, whether Pet. Wen. writ not a letter to Copinger dated the 25. of
January 1590. wherein he takes notice, That Copinger was laboring about
matters of importance, and prays that God would direct his labors both in
matter and manner, and wills him to use good advice, and then says as Iosuah
said sometime, but in a far diverse course: be bold and of good courage,
fear not to be discouraged? And whether he be not to be dealt withal, as an
abettor to the soresaid treasonable practices, for the glorious cause of
pretended sincerity?

17 Quaere, whether Io. Thr. was not well acquainted with Hacket, Copinger, and
Arthingtons intentes, in that Copinger writ thus unto him: My own dear Note
the brotherhood of puritans, whereto it tends.
brother, my self and my two brethen, who lately were together with you in
Knightrider street (he means Hacket, and Arthington) do much desire
conference with you. the business is the Lords own, and he does deal in it
himself in a strange, and extraordinary manner in poor, and simple
creatures. much is done since you saw us, which you would rejoice to hear of:
Likewise let it be inquired, whether he be not an abettor, and concelour of
their treacherous practices? and whether he holds that he ought not in
conscience to reueile his dear brethrens treasons?

72 Quaere, whether the said Io. Thr. did not write a letter with his own hand
to Copinger dated the 18 of the fist This is the new absurd consistorian style.
month (he means as I suppose May) which was little more then six weeks
before the outrage committed by the new disciplinarian prophets? and whether in
the same letter devised as may be suspected in answer of Copingers letter, He
rejoices not, that Copinger would All this is in his own letter to be showen
under his hand writing.
vouchsafe to call him brother: and says, that at his being at London he heard
some buzzes abroad of a sole, and singular course, and wishes that all that
bear good will to the holy cause in that perilous age, would take both their
eyes in their hands, and be sure of their gounde, and warrant, before they
stirred to put matters in execution. and proceeds in these words: I know my
good broiher that the greatest works of the Lord are wrought by the weakest
instruments, etc. and therefore were it not for my sins, and unworthiness, I
could easily persuade myself in regard of my weakness, that the Lord might
effect something by me, etc. but this work that you speak of (howsoever the
instrument be compassed with weakness) must sure be wrought by a more A
sanctified puritan.
sanctified heart, then myself can yet boast of. and therefore though in
affection, and goodwill I join, yet I resign the honor of the work to those
that the Lord has more thereto enabled, etc. Salute good Giles with many
thanks, whose debtor I am in the Lord. blessing upon Sion, confusion upon
Babell: Quaere, I say these things considered, whether the writer was not
accessarie to the said conspiracy, and a principal man in encouraging the
actors which he calls brethren in their wicked courses? and whether all his
Libels, and scoffs published under the name of Martin, as namely his theses,
protestations, dialogues, arguments, laying men out in their colors, and all
his doings tending to the advancement of the holy cause, as they call it, did
not tend wholly to an insurrection? and whether he lives not under merciful
governors, that call not the man to answer for his manifold lewd
demeanours, and trecheries?

73 Item, because the Petitioner stands so much upon Vdals innocence,
refusing presumptuously, as it should seem, any manner of favor; let him also
answer, whether the said John Vdall was not acquainted with Hackets,
Copingers, and Arthingtons conspiracy, seeing that Copinger a little before his
outrage writ unto him, that now the Lord had enabled him to fight, to
vanquish, and overcome: that there was a Fast toward, in regard of the
afflicted Saints in general: that he assured himself, that God would bless
the actors in that cause: that there were diverse out of prison lying hid, that
in this great work were hammering their heads, etc. that the same persons
hoped in short time to be brought forth into the sight of Vdals brethren, and
their own enemies: that their presence would daunt the enemies: that God would
use base men in this work, lest men should boast in the arm of flesh: that
Vdall and his fellows in prison should cheer up their hearts, for that the
day of their redemption was at hand; and that Vdall and his fellow prisoners
should pray, that the hand of the Lord might be strengthened in them, whom
he had appointed to take part with them: quaere I say, whether John Vdall be
a loyal subject, that never reueiled this practice, and be not guilty of
far more, then ever was laid to his charge?

74 Quaere, whether the Petitioner has not greatly hurt the cause of his
clyent Vdall, in giving occasion to mention matters forgotten, and almost
forgiven? and whether taking part with such fellows, himself is not an
abettor of felony?

75 Quaere, whether Th. Cartwr. and master Eg. did not receive letters from the
conspirators concerning their designements, and did not also conceal the same,
and whether the said master Eg. did not will the said Copinger to take heed,
that he did not by his extraordinary calling, hinder the great cause in hand,
and say, that himself being an ordinary minister, could not judge of Copingers
extraordinany calling, and therefore would be loathe to quench the spirit in
him? and whether these paraphrases of discipline stand with loyalty, and good
divinity?

76 Quaere, whether T. C. and other disciplinarian teachers did not allow the
scornful, and wicked Libels of Martin, and also certain seditious dialogues,
and inuectiues against the State: and whether their disciplinarian rules will
bear them out in it?

77 Quaere, whether any is received, or suffered to continue in the Ministry
at Geneua, or other places governed like Geneua, that make any scruple to
subscribe, or that speak against the orders of the church? and whether
certain were not banished for speaking against wafer cakes there used in the
Communion, and against Usury? and why factious persons should be more
tolerated here, then there?

78 Quaere, whether it be a good course to suffer such as do give probable
suspicions of coffeehouse with the present government, to continue
governors of houses in Universities, and to teach schools, and to live in the
church, which like vipers they seek to ruinate?

79 Quaere, whether to procure a learned ministry, it be a good course to
take away the rewards of learning: or at least to hazard them?

80 Quaere, how many of the ministers of the reformed churches have been able
to leave so much to their wives, as to maintain them from beggary, and whether
any man of worth can endure that indignity? and whether diverse for want of
maintenance have not fled the country of their habitation?

81 Quaere, of Pierce Putcase whether a pretended godly brother, as you would
say W. St. who is a piece of the putcase himself, may by the laws of this new
kingdom, like a thief or murderer, lie in wait by the high way side, with a
caliuer ready charged, to kill his own natural brother, for that he is not
sufficiently reformed, and whether this be a sanctified course to win a
brother to this melancholic reformation?

82 Let also this question be asked of the same man, whether a disciplinarian
brother, whose wives misgouernement made the poor man run horn wood, may
notwithstanding be choosen an alderman, considering that Daneau a noble
founder of this kingdom, does in his Isagogicall instructions hold, that all
the precepts that Saint Paul gives of bishops, 1. Tim. 3. do belong to the
Church aldermen also, and that it is required that such bishops be chosen as
can govern their house well? and whether it is likely that he that has no
good head in governing his own house, should have a good judgment in
governing of the Church?

83 Item, Quaere because he asks me certain questions of Th. Cartw. by what
mystery, or science, a man may sell a coat and 3, or 4, acres of land, and
purchase therewith 3, or 4, good lordships, and yet maintain a great family,
and fare well, and keep a pedant to teach his daughters Hebrewe?

84 Quaere also, whether a learned sister that understands some Greek, and
Hebrewe, may not in a parlour, at a tables end paraphrase upon a text of
scripture, according to the puritan style, and whether it be not time for
scholars to turn their books, when such paraphrastes take on them to abuse
scriptures?

85 Quaere, whether a trencher paraphrast, I mean these that degorge
discipline at full tables, and upon full stomachs at their benefactours tables,
are among those callings that saint Paul mentions Ephesians. 4. and not being,
how they dare presume to handle Gods word, or rather to abuse holy scriptures
in that sort?

86 Item, whether certain sanctified brethren attained unto 24, carrats of
perfection in discipline, may notwithstanding practice the Jews trade, and
take 10. in the hundred, or more if they can get it?

87 Quaere, whether a man may grow to that extremity of burning zeal, that
every spring and fall, he shall renew like a serpent that casts her skin,
as it happened to a certain holy brother at Ipswich, not many years since?
and whether such a fellow be a fit man for a president of a consistory?

88 Quaere, whether as in Italy, and other places of popery, desperate wicked
men run into the order of Theatins, or Capussins, so certain desperate
bankeruptes and loose livers, as Bar. Fl. and others have not suddenly run
into puritanisme? and whether this alteration be not ab extremo in extremum, by
such men as will never come into medium?

89 Quaere, why it should be more lawful for ignorant men of base trades,
and occupations to take upon them the decision of matters of religion, and
government of the Church, then it is for Giles Wig. to become a malster, and
others of this sect to become grasiers, and wiredrawers, and such like?

90 Quaere, whether a godly brother rather then by selling his living he
should overthrow his house, The doubt of Th. Sa. of Yorkshire.
may not by the laws of discipline break bond, and promise, and suffer his
sureties to lie by it? and in case the synod should determine, that he should
pay some part, whether godly brethren, or profane men should first be paid, or
else for avoiding of controversy none at all?

91 Quaere, of John Penry, whether if Moses laws have such continuance as they
hold in this new kingdom, a bastard that is excluded out of the sanctuary,
may notwithstanding intrude without calling into the ministry?

92 Quaere, of those that make braggs of T. Cartw. great work against the
Rhemists, whether there be not many points therein contained contrary to all
the fathers, to the faith of this church, and all good Divinity? and why if
all be clear with him, he dare not suffer the same to abide the censures of
learned men? and lastly, why any should wonder that such things should not be
published, considering what dangerous effects do follow printing of
heretical, and schismatic books?

93 Quaere, if a certain consistoriall president at Middleburg, when a
merchant did pursue a certain servant of his in law for wasting his goods,
did not threaten to excommunicate him, if he would not desist his pursuit, and
let fall his action, and whether the consistory may serve for a sanctuanie for
bad men and bankruptes, if they profess reformation? and whether this manner of
discipline dissolve not civil contractes, and hinder justice?

94 Quaere, whether that the Church-aldermen do not sometimes meddle in
domestical matters betwixt man and wife, and hinder the fathers correction of
his servants, or children? and whether this be not a way to dissolve the bonds
of nature, that gives authority in this case? and whether the discipline that
uses this practice be not uncivil and unnatural?

To conclude, Quaere if the Put-case had not done his clyents, and their cause
more good by silence, then by this weak, and calumnious speaking?

It were an easy matter to frame infinite Questions of like sort: but these
may suffice, to let the Libeller see his own folly in charging others, when
himself, and his fellows lie so open. besides that, I would not weary thee,
nor disfurnish my self of new matter against the next encounter. let him
article, and play the Put-case as often as he will, he must not think he
shall walk up and down without answer, or controulment. in the mean while,
Page 83.
because he appealeth to judges, and craves justice, to them we are also
content to submit our cause, and do also instantly crave justice. judge we
beseech you, all to whom the execution of justice is committed, whether it be
fitting, that such as declame against the ancient government of the Church,
ever known to be in the Church since Christ's time, against the authority and
pre-eminence of her Majesty, against the laws of the realm, against the
proceedings of Judges, and take on them to control, and reuerse the sentences
of judges, and seek the trouble of the realm, and maintenance of lewd
factions, destitute of all ground: and speak for a government never heard of,
but of late, nor that has confirmation of scriptures, or fathers: judge I say,
whether such intolerable pride, arrogancy, and disloyalty, and those that
defend these treacherous dealings, and opinions in books printed in corners,
and without names, are longer to be suffered? the inconveniences that may
grow of these courses, I need not to declare unto you, that are men of
judgment, and experience: the weakness of their cause I have sufficiently
declared. Why should you doubt to do justice in so clear a cause, and
against such factious persons? For their doings have no defense, nor their
doctrine support, beside the bare opinions of Calvin, and Beza, and their
followers. they have not so much as any ground of reason: no scripture, no
father, no history, no law, nor example of good government: nay they have both
scriptures, fathers, histories, law, and reason against them most evidently,
and clearly and therefore I say again, let justice be done. if any of the
ecclesiastical state have done against law, let them be punished: let not
religion, and learning suffer for the sins of particulars: the innocent, let
them not be disgraced for others offenses: nor let malice, and faction, and
sacrilege prevail against law, and government. that which is now their
case, may be likewise yours. if you respect not the cause of men: yet consider
that it is the cause of religion, learning, and government: and so proceed as
you may declare your selves to be men careful of the advancement of religion,
and learning, and the maintenance of a peaceable government. and God so belsse
you, as you show your selves studious of religion, learning, peace, and justice.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
WHereas in the former discourse somewhat has been said in answer of the
Petitioners lewd calumniations concerning the trial of John Vdal, and the
judgment not long since pronounced against him, which he pretends to be
disorderly and injurious, it may be that such as list to cavil at such things
as they mislike, will take exceptions against the same, as if I meant to abase
the high authority of Judges, or make the proceedings of the highest courts
of Justice an argument for the rude populasse to dispute of, or to subject the
ordinary trials of law to the controlment, or at least canuases of private
persons. Least any should either in this behalf except against me, or enter
into any such conceit of me, I thought good expressly here to advertise thee,
that both my words and meaning are contrary.

Concerning matters of common Justice betwixt party and party, I know that no
judgment is reuersed but by writ of error, and that in matters concerning the
Crown, the verdicts of Jurors and sentences of Judges for the Queen are
final, and that the law does intend, that Judges and Jurors will proceed
with that indifferency and equity, that it will not have their doings
controlled nor examined by private persons. Neither is it any part of my
meaning to call any law in question, or control the doings of so honorable
persons as in that fact sat Judges. Nay this is the thing which I do so much
reprehend in the Petitioner and his faction, that most saucilie and arrogantly
they take upon them to examine the doings of Princes, the acts of Parliament,
the sentences of Judges, the verdicts of Iuries, and all records of Justice.
Neither is there any companion among them so base, but he takes to himself
liberty to censure and control Princes, Parliaments, Judges, Laws, yea
whatsoever, and whomsoever. Among others, the author of the Petition has
behaved himself as presumptuouslie and proudly, as the best. Ignorance belike
makes him bold: (...).
the rather for that it is joined with impudency. What through presumption,
and what through impudency he has taken upon him contrary to the Jurors
verdict and Judges sentence, to prove that Vdall offended not against that
statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 2. whereupon he was condemned.

This notorious impudency and presumption, I thought good to lay open before
men's eyes: and therefore having undertaken to answer others of the man's bold
assertions and forged accusations of the ecclesiastical state; I thought it
not amiss withal to touch his bold demeanor against Judges, and
presumptuous censure of their proceedings. Not that I meant to make private men
Judges of their superiors, but that you may see the boldness of them that
spare none that are not of their humors, and revel both at the Clergy and
Judges.

If the proceedings of magistrates were not justifiable, yet is this course
which these men have taken very lewd and offensive. How much more offensive
then will it seem, when it appears that the Judges have proceeded according
to law, and done not only Justice, but showed great mercy and favor to the
party? And how wisely does this man seem to have pleaded for his client,
when I think himself will not deny, but that he lives rather by mercy,
then demerite? that he was most favorably dealt withal, all that were by will
witness, and himself I think will not deny: if he should, very many
arguments would convince him.

For first, whereas diverse seditious Sermons might have been objected against
him, he was only endited for his seditious practices in making and publishing
the book of Demonstration of Discipline, as they lewdly call it.

Secondly, whereas Chatfield could have spoken diverse things very material
against him, yet was he not forced to come to testify.

Thirdly, being by diverse witnesses, and great evidence, sufficient to induce
any Jury to pass against him, convinced, yet had he this favor, to be asked,
for satisfying the Jury, and clearing himself, if he would take it either upon
his conscience, yea or credit, that he was not the author of that book, and
might percase have escaped, if he durst have denied so plain a matter. Seeing
he would neither affirm upon his conscience, nor credit, his innocence, what
reason should the Jury have had, to take that upon their conscience, which the
party himself would not take either upon his conscience, or credit?

Lastly, although the sentence of law be passed upon him, yet is the execution
of law differred. Wherein if he do not acknowledge himself favorably dealt
withal, all men will acknowledge, that he deserves little favor.

The objections and exceptions brought by the Libeller, are most false, and
frivolous. He says, that there is no offense in writing that book, committed
against the statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 2. Wherein he crosses the sentence of
the Judges, and most wise men of this land: and speaks most evident
untruth. For if railing against her Majesty's Ecclesiastical laws, and
government, and seeking the subversion of it, be no offense, these fellows
challenge to themselves great impunitie and license.

He auoweth, that it was not proved that one man made the book, and the
Epistle before the book, which is not material: for if he writ the words
contained in the enditement, then was the enditement truly found. Besides, the
same is untruth: for it is absurd to surmise, where a man publishes a book,
that another sets to the Epistle. and he that made the Epistle, does in
terms auowe the book. Neither skilleth it, that some have thought that Penry
had his hand in it, for that does not hinder, but that Vdal might also be a
doer in it. But what need we other argument to prove this withal, then that
Vdal would not disauow either Epistle, or book? or what need any dispute
about the difference of the Epistle, and book, seeing the enditement
compriseth both under the name of book, and both do follow the title?

That which he says, that he was convicted for the Epistle, and the evidence
brought for the book, is untrue: for the evidence was brought for both. And
very improbable it were, that any should be condemned for matter without the
enditement, or that there should in the enditement be made a difference betwixt
the book and the Epistle.

These things considered, let all men judge whether it be likely, that John
Vdal should be condemned guiltless? and whether the bare affirmation of a man
lying desperately, should be taken against the deposition of witnesses,
records of the Court, verdict of the Jury, and sentence of so grave and
religious a Bench, especially the man being so guilty, and the case so plain?
His very friends condemned him, and his own conscience accused him.
Chatfields deposition.
Chatfield deposes, that he saw papers in Vdals Study, containing libellous
matter, which himself wished Vdal to make away: and confesses, that Vdal
said to him in choler, that the Bishops had best to take heed how they
stopped his mouth, for if they did, he would fall on writing, and give them
such a blow, as they never had in their lives. Which blow could not be
understood, but of that whereof he was convicted. In his Sermons he fell often
upon the argument of his book, which considered, with other circumstances, may
show him guilty: yea, and so guilty, that being demanded by the Bench, he
could not deny it: no, though he might have saved his life by the denial, and
renunciation of the book.

Seeing then all this notwithstanding, the man's innocence is in a book
(publicly diuulgued) defended against such notorious evidence, and upright
proceedings; who does not see, that I have reason to detest the notorious
presumption of such censors? If any deserve blame, not they that speak in
defense of justice, but those that traduce it are to be blamed. That therefore
which was well meant, without injury to any, receive with favor: and if in
this matter thou will show signs of displeasure, let not the innocent, but
such as presumptuously reprehend, and by faction seek to overthrow law, and
justice, feel it.

Faults escaped.
IN the Epist. dedicat. page 5. lin. 7. read, valued. page 13. l. 16.
aldermen. page 18. l. 22. never was. page 20. l. 5. wisdom and learning. page
22. l. 1. contrary. page 25. l. 1. themselves. line 11. doubt not. page 31. l.
17. learned. line. 18. dele mar. page 82. line. 27. bring him under. page 84.
l. 18. say it, nor. page 85. l. 2. worthy counselor. page 92. l. 28. think.
page 95. l. 23. now denies it. page 107. l. 20. reproaches. page 134. l. 33.
they are naught in law after their death or cession, if they. page 141. in
margin, read Rescius. page 155. l. 5. that there is no reason, that Th.
Cartwright. page 167. l 22. too wise. page 167. l. 23. as these are. page 181.
l. 4. as good fellows, as his deacons. page 90. l. 20. sin, but.


