A TRVE AND FEARFVLL pronouncing of War against the Roman Imperial Majesty,
and withal against the King of Poland, By the late Emperor of Turkey, SOLOMA
HOMETH.

Which said Turk is since happily prevented (of his cruel purpose) by death;
but by all appearance the now surviving Turk that succeeds him has the like
bloody purposes to prosecute his designs against Christendom, as may appear
by the approaching of his formidable Army upon the frontiers of Poland at this
present.

Confirmed by diverse Letters from several places, which you shall find here
truly set down.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1640. With Privilege.

FRom the Great commanding God in the Heaven, We alone SOLOMA HOMETH, god upon
earth, of great grace and mercy; invincible Great and mighty Emperor of
Babylon and Judea, from the rising of the Sun to the setting thereof; King of
all Kings upon earth, of great grace and mercy; King of whole Arabia and Media,
Duke of the Noble Race in Greece and Armenia, a borne Triumphator, as also King
of Jerusalem, Lord and protector of the Sepulcher of the Crucified Christ.
Challenging you Emperor of Germany, King of Poland, and all your Princes and
Peers; as also the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops and all your Adherents, by oath
of the Crowns of all our Dominions, give you to understand, with great power,
that we will come before your City of Vienna with 13 Kingdoms and Nations, and
with 1300000 men, both horse and foot, with tyranny and Turkey power and
Armours, yea with our Imperial strength (more than ever you have seen or heard
of) and will pursue you Emperor with fire and sword, and your helpers; and
your neighboring Polander, with military power and force, with burning,
robbing, and murdering and destroying of the whole Country, and put you to
the miserablest death that ever we can invent, banish you into great misery,
detain you prisoners, and use you like dogs. This we absolutely purpose to
force you (being you your selves do cruelly tyrannize amongst the Christians,
and possess but a small Country) and to take your Kingdoms with the sword, as
also we will suppress the Seal of Rome, together with the golden Scepter: this
we thought to give notice of unto you Emperor of Germany* and King of Poland,
and all your Adherents, that you may regulate your selves after it, because you
shall find it so indeed* Given in our mighty City of Constantinople (which
comprehends in her 1658 Streets, 100 Hospitals, 800 public Hothouses, 997
Conduits, 112 Markets, where all sorts of wares are sold, 115 appointed places
and Stables for Mules, 400 Innes for strangers, 1652 great and small Schools,
1600 Mills, 417 great and small Churches: this great City comprehends in her
walls, 4 German Leagues; of the great Steeples standing upon the wall are 3600
Which City our Ancestors have taken by force, according to our will kept and
maintained to your great shame. Done after our Nativity 39 years, after our
mighty Reign the tenth year.

Venice the 13.23. of March.
It is confirmed, that the Emperor of Turkey being 33. years of age in the 17.
year of his reign is departed out of this life, and that in his place is
chosen Emperor, the 10. of February his Brother, being 27. years of age, and
was called Ibraim the first, who would not accept of the government, unless
they did show him first the body of his deceased Brother, and having looked
upon him, said, here lies dead a good Soldier, a mighty King, but also a great
Tirant, and although he refused the government till such time, notwithstanding
he is now resolved, (being the peace with Persia is now concluded, and the
Primo Vezier confirmed in his high Offices) to go against the King of Poland
with an Army of 500000 men, to which end 70000 Tartarians are sent already into
the Wallachey.

Stetin 12.22. of March.
Is written that the Tartarians have defeated in Podolia the Podolian troops.
The Lord Koningspotzky levieth at Dantzick and Prusia a Regiment at his own
charges: It is likewise certain, that the Emperor of Turkey is resolved to
war against the King of Poland, wherefore the said King has sent the Lord
Palatin in embassage to Rome, in the mean time great preparations for war
are made in Poland. Gen: Baudis has likewise commission to leavie 2000.
Curassiers for the King of Poland, the Count of Denhof is likewise to leavie a
Regiment of foot.

Venice 20.30. March.
It is written the Turks have taken not far from Cadix two English ships with
some 100 bars of Silver to the value of 800000. Crowns, which were appointed
for the Cardinal Infant in the Low Countries: two Turkey Pirates which were kept
blocked up by our galleis at Modoy, are got out of the harbor by a fair
wind, but our Galleys pursued presently after them, and sunck them: and from
Constantinople they certify, that forty thousand Tartarians have already
made an invasion into Poland, whereof the King of Poland has sent already
diverse troops and pieces of ordinance toward the frontiers to oppose the
Tartarians. He has likewise called a Diet against the 3 13. April.

March 21.31.
From Marseilles is written, that the Turks of Tunis and Algiers are gone to sea
with 60. Galleys and sail of ships. The report goes, that they are setting out
yet a Navy, 120. Galleys; wherefore the Knights of Malta keep a watch full,
and cause diverse harbors, where they might land, to be paled up, and diverse
sconces and watch-houses to be made.

Venice March 27. April 6.
From Constantinople is written, that the new Emperor of Turkey, with great
joy and triumphing, and and the Tartars strengthen themselves more and more,
and lie but five leagues from the Polonian frontiers, which fell unawares about
12000. strong upon the Polonian Genesis Laska, who was gone with 400. horsemen to
descrie the strength of the Turks, slew the most part of his men, and the said
General Laska himself came shrewdly wounded back again.

April 4.14.
Another letter from Poland is written, that in the same Kingdom great terror
and fear is, because of the Turk which lies very strong upon the frontiers of
Poland: wherefore the King of Poland levieth in his Dominions, as also in
Prussia, great forces; and that the said levying may go the speedier forward,
all other levying about Dantzick is prohibited: And in the said City diverse
Fasts have been kept, that God may turn off the great danger of the Turk.

March 31. April 10.
From Dantzick is written, that before the Diet in Poland, the 27 of this
month, a general meeting is appointed to be at Moriaberg in Prussia, because
the King of Poland was warned again by the King of Persia, and the Emperor of
Russia of the Turks, and that already 80000. Tartars are already arrived near
the Nippe on the frontiers of Poland.


