A rich Storehouse or Treasury for Nobilitye and Gentlemen, which in Latin
is called Nobilitas literata, written by a famous and excellent man, John
Sturmius, and translated into English by T.B. Gent.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in pater noster row at the
sign of the Star.

Anno Domini. 1570.

To the Right Honorable, virtuous, and my singular good Lord, Lord Philip
Howard Earl of Surrey, all felicity and happiness.
I HAVE RIGHT virtuous and right Honorable Lord, being led by the singular
zeal and great desire, which I know you have to obtain unto learning, and
earnestly moved by my service and duty appertayning unto your Lordship,
adventured the translation of this small volume, more excellent and precious,
than long or tedious: wherein I trust, if you vouchsafe but to employ small
traueyle, that you shall reap infinite and exceeding great commodity: neither
do I desire you to bestow part of the day in the reading and study hereof,
because I have translated and dedicated the same unto your Lordship: But rather
for the golden and Honorable precepts therein contained: and for the Noble and
high estate of them, for whom it was first of all composed. But peradventure
my evil and unskillful handeling hereof, may after you have begone to read
it, in short time and before you reach the end, wearye your mind, and hinder
your good and praysewoorthy disire: which, as I fear, may unhappily come to
pass, so I trust your Lordship will warylie prevent the same by adjoining the
Latin thereunto: that ever as you are discouraged by my rude and vnfyled
phrase to go forwards, you may by the other, which is precious and goodly, be
made loath to give over till you come to the conclusion thereof: which if your
Lordship vouchsafe to do, I shall think my pain and traueyle, to be but
pleasure and pastyme, and receive a good and ample recompense for the same, and
you reap such fruit and commodity as I wyshed you should: and thus vnwylling
to be tedious or troublesome unto you, I end, wishing all joy felicity and
happiness unto your good Lordship, that may be wished to any, as the love and
favor of God and the Prince, long life, prosperous success in your affairs,
and after the change of this life, the greatest happiness of all, life
everlasting.

By your Lordships to command, Thomas Brown, from Lyncolnes Inn.

To the friendly Reader.
LEarned and most friendlye Reader: if Books gain credit or discredit by
their translators, I may justly fear that this worthy work by my evil
handling shall be disgraced and be but of small account with thee. But sith
that works be not accounted good, neither are they contemned as bad for their
translators or reporters, but be praised for their excellency and goodness,
or condemned for their baseness and nakedness. I move not thee to like this
treatise, because I interpreted it, but I beseech thee to allow it for the
goodness and excellent matter, plentifully flowing therein. But our time
(alas) is so inclined, and as it were naturally bent to bestow upon barren and
dishonest fruits, precious and golden names, that neither can virtuous and
praise worthy works enjoy their due and deserved tytles, being forestauled
and defrauded by the evil, neither good deeds possess their own, and worthy
terms being prevented by the mean. And now men rather labor to declare how
much they can: then, what and how much they ought to say: yielding
themselves sooner subjects and bondslaues to their lawless lusts, than truly
publishinge their vpryght judgments, and to utter rather in unseasonable time
painted words and smooth Rhetoric, than matter good and precious, so that
neither the condition of the cause, whether it be good or badde, can move them
to say either more or less. For if the excellency of this small Treatise,
either for the golden precepts herein, the like whereof has never erst been
taught by any, either for the profit hereby to thee (gentle Reader) ensuing
should with deserved commendation be rewarded: I of necessity must either
coin new words, the ancient already being employed on lewd and
peradventure wicked matters, or wish that the vulgar speech of commending
might be kept until some worthy matters were invented, whereon well and
happily to bestow it. Wherefore having no plenty of goodlye words, I am
enforced to keep my judgment to my self, beseeching thee to give unto the
worthynesse of the matter due and deserved honor. Thus doing, thou shall not
only encourage me hereafter to adventure the translating of some larger matter,
but in the mean time give me just cause to think my traueyle herein to be
very well employed: wishing that it may yield thee, semblable profit, that
will vouchsafe to read it, as it did pleasure to me, that took the pains
to translate it: and thus as thy friend I bid thee farewell, and wish thee
happily to do.

By T.B.

A rich Storehouse or Treasure for nobility and Gentlemen.
LOng (O Phillip) have you entreated me, and now your Broother Anthony does
join with you in the same request: that I would show you some way, order,
and trade of study: in the which, men of learning have in my judgment been
exercised: and therewith may be also fit and apt for your years, family, and
nobility. Wherein I would gladly yield my self to satisfy your wills: if I
might be able to conteyne in one small volume to so large theames. Whereof, the
one would require a long and copious discourse, to declare what I take to have
been the use and custom of the learned, and chiefly of the Greeks and
Latins. But in the other I will endeavor to further you in this your praise
worthy and earnest traueile in study: and from ye one I will choose out to this
purpose: even so much as the matter it self shall seem to require: meaning to
entreat more largely of the other at another time, when I shall have leisure,
and when it shall be necessary for your studies. But truly at this present we
are to consider of you and your brother: between whom there is small
difference of years, as also a great agreement and similitude in disposition
and wit. For in you both there appears one will: equal knowledge, and one
self same contention: to the which, you are now moved, as well by your own
inclination and zeal to good learning: as long since you were by the endeavor
and example of your teacher George Fabricius, after whom succeeded Wolfangus
his brother: who so lived two years with you, that he thereby has reaped
trebble fruit: ye and that right honest. For he was greatly delighted with his
brothers most pleasant company: and taught you by his example and recognized
his woonted studies of learning, and has so obtained those three commodities
(as you know) that it seemed he absented himself, from Beichelingo, and from
his friends, not so much for himself as for your cause: and for the same
reason is now resident at Lutecia: not only to give you ensample, but also
seeming to have gone thither before purposely for your sake.

But that I may return from whence I something have digressed: I will appoint
and prescribe you a special time when to study, and also what your study and
exercise shall be: wherein all my consultation shall consist, and in the same I
will have consideration both of your years, capacity of wit, and such your
understanding in learning as you have gotten already: I will foreshewe what
order you shall aquaynt your selves withal, these three years next ensuing,
and what to take upon you, that when the Calendes of January by course has
returned thrice, wheresoever you shall become, your talk may be discreet,
good, Latin, eligant, and plentyfull. Which in mine opinion is one of the
ends whereat you shoot: I mean a learned life, wherein you have demanded my
advise. The other end pertayneth to virtue, which requires to be handled at
an other time. And surely if you join to the Nobleness of your house, and to
your riches and other commodities, virtue and learning (even as you erst have
begone to do, and as all Gentlemen ought to do) what thing is there
apperteyning to felicity and a happy life but you have it already, if it be
in your power so long as those things which God has given you are not taken
from you, neither by fatal mishap, nor by force, nor fraud, and yet virtue,
and godliness, and the knowledge and understanding of great matters, does
help much both to the preservation of these things while you have them, and to
the comfort of your mind, if you fortune to lose them: so that you can not be
driven from the chiefest step and degree of felicity: but shall always have a
place wherein to abide. And truly although it be not my purpose to discourse
of virtue, wherein religion must have the chiefest honor and souereigntie: yet
least virtue should be accounted of other men as a thing vnnessarie for the
learned, or least men may deem me so to make account: therefore in this our
beginning we have made mention thereof: principally because in this part, and
in this our purpose we have need of three virtues above the rest, without the
which neither our meaning, nor your desire can take any great effect. First,
therefore diligence is very requisite, without the which, even goodly wits and
singular capacities do not attain unto much: Secondly, temperaunce and an
honest measure in delights, which is the Garden or keeper of diligence, and
the preserver both of the wit and soundness of nature: Thirdlye, constancy in
them both: that those things whatsoever are begone, may be perfited and
brought to effect. The which virtues shall then be thought to be in us in
deed, when neither our diligence shall ouercharge our strength: nor
temperaunce shall hinder our health: nor constancy shall breed in us to great an
obstinacy: not that virtues are vices, but for that, that vices do deceive us
oftentimes with the similitude and image of virtue, we will that virtue be
cheerful, sound, and wylling to follow: and it beseems a student to be of
behavior amiable, of body helthfull, of mind tractable, not loly wanton, nor
womanly delicate, nor frowardlye stubborn.

Therefore ye first two virtues which I have recounted and may not be secluded
from this our discourse, ought to be agreeable to the strength of the body,
and as for constancy and steadfastness they do not only respect the end of
our study and life: but also they are to be used in all and singular actions,
which are discretely begoonne. Now therefore since there appears excellent
signs and tokens of these virtues in you: the which in these years I have
often perceived, I do willingly accept you: and as I shall be able, I will
aid you in this your great endeavor and very honest traueyle well known to me.

But I am first to consider: how far you have waded in the study of letters:
yt I may not only avoid the escaping of any thing: but also to provide that I
do not seem to give you council in some points, when the matter is achieved,
and past already. You have learned therefore as I am informed by your brother
Wolfango: and as I perceive by your letters all those precepts and rules of the
Latin tongue, specially which are necessary for the understanding of writers.
And in the same tongue you have gotten such store and choice both of words,
and phrases (which are the Images of things and of sentences) that therewithal
you are sufficiently furnished to the use of writing, and practice of your
Pen, so that some skill in Logic and Rhetoric be not wanting thereto, by the
which two Arts, the style has been always directed and governed: And surely,
if you remember still those things, as I trust you do: which you first heard
of me in Rhetoric and Logic: and the which afterward you recognized with
your teacher Seueno: I require nothing else, but diligent annotation in
reading: and in writing painfulness. Now in the Greek thus far you have
proceeded, that in the precepts of the tongue there remains no labor, I
mean either for the single word, or for the phrase. To the perfyting whereof,
the labor in understanding is not so painful, as the observation shall be
delectable and pleasant in comparing and apploying of the same. Yet I am not
ignorant that something is unknown unto you in these precepts which you
understand not: nevertheless, yt knowledge which you have, is sufficient for
my purpose, and for the thing you require of me. For although Homers Ulysses
was (...), that is to say a man of great experience and (...) that is, had
seen diverse countries and knew the dispositions of a number of men as Homer
writes, yet it is credible that in every country and City, some there were
whom he desired not to know: neither would he understand what was done in
every family: But only learn those things, which should lead him to that,
which he had devised and purposed in his mind before. Nay rather he never
erred nor offended more: than when he was ouerlong holden with the love of
Calypso: And suffered his endeavor and active courage with noble praise, to be
buried in the darkness of the dungion. As therefore it is likely that this
man, whom Homer does make most wise, did traueyle through sundry countries:
so also we must traueile in these Arts, whereof we have already spoken,
neither ought we to make longer stay in the particular precepts, than shall be
sufficient to understand the words and phrases thereof. And as he in all his
adventures and traueyles, had his mind fixed on stony Ithaca his native
Country, hasting thither by all means he could: in like manner must we go
forward, toward the end of our studies and scope of our life: the which for
the most part by nature is placed aloft, and is hard to atchieue. Whereof, we
have to speak hereafter, and to consider which way we may atteyne and come
unto it, neither am I in doubt: but that in this abundance and plenty of
wealth, your intent is to attain to honesty and learning: of the which two,
one belongs to the discipline of nurture: the other pertaynes to our present
purpose: and brings great help unto the former: and truly in this world,
that life is blessed in mine opinion: which to the antiquity of parentage,
joins godly manners and good behavior: and does garnishe and bewtifie
abundant wealth with excellent learning. Therefore will I deuyde this my
treatise of precepts into two parts: whereof the one concerns the knowledge
of things which polisheth the mind: the other pertayneth to the exercise of
the tongue and practice of speech, which is to be vttred discretely and
eligantly, and being represented to the ears of the hearers, it does show a
sweet and sugared consent of the mind: which we may more easily understand
than that musical harmony of the heavenly Spheres, which we never heard,
though Pythagoras taught it long ago. But to begin with the first part, that is
to say, with the knowledge of things: I see not what may more become you, or
better set forth your nobility, than the understanding of civil policy,
which the Grecicians term Politicen. Which if you obtain as you ought to do:
you shall greatly beautify both your country, and also your house and
kindred. For what is better or what more excellent: than for a noble man to be
learned and politic: which two, do contain all learning, virtue, and
Religion: wherefore whether it be an Art or science, or else a virtue and
fealty, we will declare by what way you may attain to the knowledge thereof,
that you may not only live profitable to others, but also pleasantly to your
selves: and that you may appear to have been acceptable and welcome among your
friends, at home pleasant and gentle, and abroad honorable: now this
knowledge of civil policy, may well be learned in those books which Aristotle
has written of a commonwealth. But because the foundations of noble Cities
consist in the virtuous manners of the Citizens: moral science may well be
joined with civil policy: which Aristotle has also handled in many books,
but of all the knowledge of stories does specially help. Wherein we may see
the diverse and variable beginnings of common welthes, and how the same have
been preserved, and how they have been altered and overthrown, besides store
of good council in doubtful and uncertain matters: and sundry examples to
frame our life by, verilye I know not wherein you should better bestow your
traueyle, than in this study: specially after that you are sufficiently
furnished with the precepts of Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric. In obteyning
whereof, you must have a regard of the Latin speech: that it be not corrupted
with the variety of tongues, and diversity of words: which are proper, and
peculier to every Art and language, and to every writer and in every kind:
for often times in the handling of one matter, diverse Authors do greatly differ
one from another, both in placing their words, and in the whole order of
framing their sentences: for Herodotus is a Historian, and in the same country
and language, I mean the Greek. Thucidodes, is also a Historiographer: and
the style of them both is goodly and bewtifull, yet how greatly do they differ
in sweetness, in gravity, in placing of words, in figures of Sentences,
and as it were, in a certain transforming of parts, members, and periodes:
and finally, of the whole order of composition: The acts of the Romans were
written by Caesar, Liuius, and Tacitus. But what diversity is there betwixt
them in all these ornaments which I now rehearsed: But yet does Tully more
differ from them all: and even Ciceros own books, have in them very great
diversity. Write you an Epistle in that kind of style, in the which Tully
wrote the Proaeme of his Dration, that he made in the defense of Milo, although
you shall find some among the unskillful that will commend your doing: yet
those that be of right judgment will disalowe it, and think you have passed
the rules and bounds of that which is meet and seemly. Wherefore, we must
take heed that as knowledge of things do store us with substance to the
handeling of diverse matters: so it do not hurt our style with strange words
and phrases. Not as though either these were no Latins, or the other no
Grecians: but for this reason that as horsemen and footmen went not a like:
nor the Romans, nor Grecians did not always wear one kind of garment, both
in the Senate, in the Court, and in their houses at home. So in the handelyng
and writing upon diverse things, they follow not one manner of style: nor used
not always one form of speech. I commend some man for seeing of Rome: and I
like well that you have heard Cratippus at Athens: I also am content and praise
you with others, that you be called Atticus: but for you to wear at Rome a
Greekishe cloak, I cannot praise: For I judge it a token of lightness, and an
argument of folly. So al these writers with all other are good to learn: but
every one in his kind: for every one of them had some* thing proper unto
himself that best lyked him: which they all of their own authority might
desently do. Now touching the know ledge of the greatest matters, that is of
God, religion, piety, charity, and the residue o^ the virtues and praise
worthy manners, and of man's salvation: what is more godly o^ more necessary
than those things which Moses, the Apostles, and Prophets wrote (...) yet may
these things be better bewtified i^ due polishing, and the purity of the
Latin^ tongue be adjoined thereunto, so that the Roman speech and Latin
eloquence, b^ not corrupted with Hebrew phrases: which are in their own tongue
very pleasant: bu^ in an other offend the ears, and do make plain matters
seem obscure.

Therefore, Thucidides and Herodotus, Xenophon, Polybius, Halicarnassius, and
Herodianus are to be learned among the Greeks: and among the Romans Caesar,
Liuius, and Tacitus ought to be read, and diligently to be understood: that
your judgment may be confirmed, your memory augmented, and the knowledge of
things may be increased. Chiefly we ought to study that doctrine which was
first delivered from heaven unto the Jews, then after the death of Christ ye
same was more clearly set abroad. But always provided, that even as our
minds ought to be cleansed and kept undefiled, and pure by the reading thereof:
so would I wish our tongue should not be hindered but amended thereby: for it
is not ungodly, and chiefly in this our age: that our tongue and heart should
be pure, clean, and neat alyke: And perhaps, it were much more convenient
that Christ's religion should be set forth with cumlynesse of speech, than
with great and gorgeous buildings of Temples: not that I take no delight in
these: but for that I am more delyghted with the other kind of bewtifying, and
do think it to be more seemly and meet. For as the picture of GOD, which is
painted by an excellent Painter does more recreate and refreshe us, than that
which is done by such a one as wants skill. And the Image of Jove graven by
Polycletus was wont more to move the senses: than those which were made by
other workmen: so also when religion and ceremonies have gotten an eloquent
expositor: they are more plainly taught, and more bewtifully set forth: and
thereby the love and fear of God, which by heavenly power is stirred up in us,
is not suffered to abate nor faint away. Wherefore, cyuill knowledge, which
most beseems a Gentleman, is greatly furthered by those writers, whose books
we have that treat of the commonwealth, and of manners moreover by Histories,
as well Greek as Latin: and also by expositors of other languages, when time
either serves or requires. But specially by ye Authors, Doctors, and
Historiographers of our religion. And because we call yt civil knowledge: which
of the Greeks is termed (...): whereof (...) that is to say, the science of
the law is no small part: it is requisite that again we read those excellent
monuments which Plato has written of laws, and Tullies two books, treating
of the same matter. Which being well understood, will easily instruct us what
we ought to judge, and what to answer, when question is moved of such matter
as Lawyers have compiled and set forth in writing. But that you be not troubled
with a multitude: neither hindered with the variety of languages and handling
of many matters: before I shall come to the exercise of the tongue, I will
show you a way wherein I think you must walk, that you may ariue at the
place appointed. Therefore I will divide my whole treatise into three times, one
in hearing, the other in reading, and the third in considering and devising.
In which three, if measure be used, and the order kept which I shall prescribe,
you shall both attain the thing you labor for: and there shall remain a
sufficient time every day, after every action, to the recreation of the mind,
refection of ye strength, and confirmation of the health: whereof I wish great
regard to be had, because that the mind is most pregnant and fresh when the
body is in perfect health, and does then more quickly apprehende, and sees
further, and does keep those things more diligently which it has learned,
perceived, and devised. I will therefore return to that, that is proposed in
the first place: I mean the time of hearing in the which are two kinds of
persons to be considered: for both we use trachers as M. Ciceros son
Cratippus at Athens: and also we have repeators. And Cicero in an Epistle to
Atticus lamenteth the death of his Sositheus, whom he calls a pleasant boy.
Writers that be hard to understand, and such as treat of high matters: must
be learned at the hands of those whom we at this day term readers,
professors of the tongues and Schoolemaisters. Of this sort concerning
Philosophy are Platos books called Gorgias and Protagoras, and diverse other
of his Dialogues. Such are Aristotle's first books of ye commonwealth and of
manners: Such is Thucidides among Historians: Such is Lucan amomg Poets: For he
does also make a wise Citizen and a politic governor. Such among Orators are
Demosthenes and Tullie: not for that their sayings be obscure, but because
their Art is secret and close. And as the eye sight is often glimsed by the
beams of the Sun: so is the sharpness of the wit sometime dulled with
the brightness of the sentence being amply adourned and beawtifully set forth.
You may read by your selves Caesar's Commentaries, and Xenophons, Cyrus, and
Herodians Emperors, and also Polibius.

The office of the repeater is to rehearse those things both which we have
learned of others as also which we have read our selves, and it is good
sometime to have the repeater recite that thing that we mean to read: and to
have him in few words expound the darkest sentences which must afterward
be recognized of us both in reading and devising. Hitherto have we showed what
ought to be expounded by our teachers, and what is to be repeated of our
domestical repeaters. And what we ought to read our selves. Now we will
declare what order is to be used, and what choice must be made, and what
measure at all times must be kept. That teacher therefore is chiefly to be
chosen which professes the Art he teaches: and has long exercised the same.
It is a pestilent thing in the Universities to have one man a teacher and a
learner all at once, and that they should begin to teach who never began to
learn: the which in my time was overmuch used. Notwithstanding I deny not but
there are many of goodly wits, which even when they learn, are better able
to teach, than some others that long before have both learned and taught the
same. But we speak of that time when choice is given us of twain that we may
always elect the best learned and of most experience. Howbeit if it happen
contrary, we will follow the example of great Capitaines and noble Emperors:
who are wont to prefer a valiant young soldier before an old Cowarde or
Crauen. But in the choice of two or more: consideration must be had, not only
of their learning, but also of their order in teaching, and facility in
dispatching their matters. In the which notwithstanding, we have to weighe what
is the ability of the learner, what capacity he has, and how much he has
profited. When I was at Paris, Peter Danes and James Tusan achieved one
purpose, though by diverse means, that they might have many auditors. They both
dispatched a great number of lines in one hour. Tusan did examine them aptly
according to ye rules of Grammar, and Danes did so interpret Demosthenes, so
much as was in him to do: and as far as the tongue would give him leave,
that he made him seem a Roman, beautified and set forth with Tullies words
and sentences. Therefore the learned gladly heard the one: the other had for
his scholars such as would from the first foundation be taught that tongue,
of a learned Schoolmaster: It is a sign of great judgment and a token of
much learning, a signification of diligence, and a sincere meaning, not to
stay longer in teaching a thing than need requires: and ouerpasse nothing
that is to be expounded: as well for the matter as for the words and the Art,
and the comparing of it with other writers. And thus much touching the teacher.
Now we have to speak of the order and choice which you must use: and of the
manner and way which in reading and hearing you ought to follow. Wherein
eftsoons I must call to remembrance the end of your studies, which is the
knowledge of excellent learning, joined with an honest life, and a well
pollished style, and a pure and vncorrupt speech, beautified with ornaments
both of words and sentences.

And because you understand for the most part the first Arts of speech, and
the precepts and variety of the two tongues, I mean Greek and Latin,
whereunto is joined the knowledge of words and matter: for that that words
are the images of things. Therefore from this time forward you must join
together and combine the study of them both: and to that end tends all my
talk.

Wherefore, we will divide the day into two parts or times, of which the one
is the morning, the other the afternoon. Now as the morning must be bestowed
upon Tullie and writing: the time that remains after dinner shall serve for
other Authors, such as may teach us other good Arts and knowledge. Not as
though these other Authors were not commended among learned men for their style
and speech: or as though Tullie were not full of excellent knowledge, fetched
from the very depth and bottom of Philosophy and wisdom. But although they
are both helped the one by the other: yet because I judge that Cicero at all
times is chieflye and most principally to be followed, when we seek for
example: I must make this difference, that it may be understood to whom at
sometimes it is lawful to digress, and from whom it is not lawful to depart
at all. For seeing you accept me herein as a teacher, thus think with your
self, that some things there be which I accoumpt lawful, whereunto I give
you leave to divert sometime, and some other things which I account unlawful,
wherein if you make default: I shall think you unmindful of this benifite,
which you have received at my hands, which is a foul vice in manners, and not
to be named. For notwithstanding that I in the beginning did only crave of you,
temperance, diligence, and constancy: yet I will not that the other virtues be
neglected of you: and for mine own part I crave a faithfulness at your
hands, and a mindefulnesse of the council I give you: which I account to be
the certain token of thankfulness. And but if you believe that I give true
council, my talk shall be but of small authority with you. For as much then
as a City is a society and fellowship of men one with another: and seeing no
society is larger: nor is more wider spread through so many peoples and
nations with an incredible virtue and strength, than the fellowship of
Christians which is called the Church: to the which fellowship Jesus the eternal
son of the true God who has a surname of a Kingly Majesty, and is named
Christ, has called all mankind out from every part and corner of the world.
Since therefore I say this is the true society: needs must it be that civil
knowledge be grounded chiefly on the doctrine of Christ and God: and that a
Christian man should most trust upon this doctrine, seeing it is ordained for
the obteyning of the heavenly society, and does agree to the heavenly laws
and the government of God. The Philosophers sought after this: neither could
they find it: If Minos of Crete, or Licurgus of Lacedemon, or Solon of Athens
had known this, they had left their Country men in more blessed estate than
we see they have. This was unknown to Socrates Plato his master, to Plato
himself, yea Aristotle also wanted this doctrine to make his civil knowledge
perfect. Yet I say not this to that end, that they have not written
excellently and well: and that in many places or rather in the most part: but
because they were ignorant of that divinity, whereby they might call men to
heavenly concord, and bring their Citizens to that end which they have
purposed in their books, I mean felicity, and such a life as is perfect of
it self. And surely if these things be true, as in deed they are, it is to be
thought that there be some things which are to be read all our lives long: and
some things that once reading suffices, so that the memory decay not: and
some things which are to be recognized at certain times. Which order you must
observe for ever: and you must neither suffer nor be content to be withdrawn
or driven from it: if ye will continue in that constancy, which you promised.
Religion therefore and the cogitation thereof is perpetually to be retained.
For often times most noble, wise, and most virtuous men, after things done with
great glory, and sometime after high honors achieved by governing the commonwealth, have left that charge either because of sickness, or by reason of
years: who yet from virtue, Religion and the godly ceremonies of their
forefathers, could not be driven. And I believe that Cicero and other Orators
good and virtuous men, did not purpose always to plead causes in the Court by
reason of their age: yet they intended never to forsake an honest life. But
always to be doing some thing, and as much as they could to write of such
things in the Latin tongue as might both profit their Countrymen, and
pertain wholye to the setting forth of Philosophy and wisdom in their
native tongue. Wherefore if Religion in all the life is to be regarded and
chiefly when we draw toward our end: and if a wise man ought not to cast
away the pen out of his hand, we ought perpetually to acquaint our selves
with those writers, whose style we are desirous to follow, and through whom we
may be the better instructed, to virtue, Religion, and wisdom. Now if this
may not be denied, then we may conclude that a wise man ought to spend his
life in holy writers: and an eloquent man ought to be daily conversant in
Tullies works. For as Religion makes holy the society of men, so does
eloquence make it pleasant: and both joined together, cause it to be helthfull.
To this study of religion I do join the discipline of manners, and all civil
doctrine and hystories: and in this I think a wise man ought to end his life.
And these are those things which I deem worthy to be read and studied for
ever: now such things as it, suffices to read but once, are in this manner to
be discerned. For what soever is of that kind, has this nature, that either
it is not worthy to be read for the foolishness thereof, or for the
shortness, or easiness not needful to repeat: of these two kinds, that
which is foolish must be shunned: And the other which is short and easy to
understand and remember, must be applied to further that end, whereunto the
variety of our study is referred: and is then chiefly to be used, when the
mind being wearied with the study of weightyer labors for recreation sake
does withdraw it self: and in this refreshing, it is very good to have a
repeater whose voice does show some learning, being clear and distinct that
it may be easily understood: and that the pronunciation may breed no
lothsomnesse but rather a pleasure, which chiefly is to be considered of in
this time of leisure and recreation. There remains yet a third kind of
writers: I mean those which are sometimes to be recognized, which is done
chieflye at two seasons: whereof the one has an honest necessity: of the
other, a learned man must have an accoumpt. For it comes often to pass, that
writing and reading of stories must be intermitted for a season, when we write
any thing of religion, or when we frame a work of some part of the commonwealth, or when we devise some Poem. When that is done, if we list to finishe
the story that we have begoon of some certain time, or of some war, we must
resort unto that Author, whose order and manner we mean to follow in vttring
our matter, and to whom we would be counted like. And if after the finishing
of that work we be disposed to write of Philosophy: it were good to repair
to the same Author from whom we are digressed, and whose steps we mean to
follow.

But for as much as we have appointed three years, within which compass this
my co^sultation is comprehended, I will now come unto them: and first I will
recompt in number what things they be, wherewith we must be furnished within
this space. For the Latin tongue therefore we must know Tullie throughout, and
Caesar's Commentaries, Salust and Virgill. In the which study if we have any
time to spare, we may intermingle some part of Plautus, Terence, Varro,
Lucret. and other, so much as may easilye be understood, and brings
pleasure when we know it. In the Greek tongue we must read Xenophons
treatise that he wrote of Cyrus, and the Commentaries wherein he discourses of
Socrates, we must read also Herodotus, Thucidides, Demosthenes, and Aristotle's
books of manners and of the commonwealth. Beside Homer and Hesiodus. And when
we may conuenientlye intermit some of these, we must now and then common with
Theocrit, and Pinder, Euripides, and Sophocles, or some other Philosophers, or
Hystorian, or Poet, which shall best delight us. But evermore when we study
for knowledge and understanding, we must use our Logic rules, whereby we
examine and try the troth. And moreover, we must hear the Masters and
teachers of Geometry, Cosmographie, and Astronomy, so far as shall be
necessary for the end of our study. And we must gather out of all these,
store of matter to furnish our style, which daily must be sharpened. The nature
whereof is such that with idleness and intermission it waxes blunt, but with
exercise and as it were with continual earing, even as the Plowesharde
becomes brighter, so this is made more shining and sharp. You see the
burden that I have purposed to lay upon your shoulders, which if you do
carry till the Calends of January do this time three years return again, we
shall atchieue the thing we would: that is, that your talk may be both wise
and eloquent, and that the tongue and mind may sound alyke, which I think to
be more sweeter than any Music. I have named to you in gross, and
peradventure not distinctly nor fullye enough what Authors you must read and
understand. Wherefore I will also speak a little of this matter before I
declare unto you my opinion on touching observation, imitation, and style: that
you may in like manner understand at what time every one is to be read: and
also that you may perceive what way you ought to take for the perfect
understanding of all these Authors, which I have appointed you to read within
the time and space prefixed.

First, therefore otherwise than we commonly do, we must observe and follow
that ancient and noble rule: that biddes us to have a special care and
regard of time, and that we make good account of it: and that we our selves
do constantly continue in diligent reading and hearing of other, which rule if
we keep, we must chiefly avoid three kinds of vices: whereof the first, is
intemperance in eating and drinking: the second, is the unseasonable companying
with our friends, and much conversation with idle persons: the last, is
walking abroad. Where of rises such inconvenience that even those that be
painful and industrious by this evil custom in gadding are drawn to sloth.
And they that write of husbandry, have also given this lesson, who forbid a
Farmour or Bailiffe to be a walker: yet nevertheless the eye as well of the
Lord as of the rich Farmour does feed the horse: and where the Master
walks about the work it causes the workmen to take more pain. Howbeit,
because this custom does oftentimes deceive the unwise: it is diligently to be
looked unto again and again, least the sweetness of walking do make us
neglect the time and beguile us of the care we should have of study, and
overthrow and effeminate good natures, and by deceytefull custom should
wring good purposes out of the minds and thoughts of those that be studious.
For neither does the name of the Peripatickes drive me from mine opinion, nor
mine own custom move me that am naturally given to walk. But the Peripatickes
did walk in the time of their disputing: as for our precepts they appertain
to reading. And for mine own part I had done more good and gotten more
profit, if I had accustomed my self to sitting still. I like not therefore
these walks and paces in time of reading (for there are other times for health
and recreation) but in recording, or devising, or conferring one with another,
I do not mislike them, if they be moderately used: that after a small walk
and within a short time we may return to reading again. Nevertheless, when
you are in your study and have occasion to search in many books I do not
disallow that you stand at the Deske. And in conferring of Authors, and
comparing many textes together we must needs fleet from place to place: But
yet as we would have a measure in eating, drinking, and in familiar meetings:
so must we here also require the like. That we consider well what is
necessary, and what is enough: whereof the one is measured by profit, the
other by pleasure. And whatsoever does profitably come in place while we are
reading: we do not refuse it.

Now since I have showed you these three kind of vices: let us see what is next
after to be done. And peradventure the next is to consider whether all these
Authors which I have named, may if you avoyde and abandon these three vices, be
dispatched by you in these three years, and in what time that may be done. For
the times are to be distinguished, like as men do measure every action, not
only by that which is done, but also by the space of time wherein it was a
doing, we will therefore begin with religion, to which we attribute the first
and last hour of the day. And there is no doubt, but in these two hours
within three years space, we may be able to understand and remember much that
shall be commodious for our instruction in religion, and for the framing of a
Christian and godly life. Chiefly when as our style shall be the better
furnished with matter taken out of the holy writers, so that of good Latin
we may make better, and for the Greek we may either interpret it into pure
Latin, or so handle and polish it, that there may appear some goodly matter,
and yet men should not epsy from whence it comes: or if it be espied, it
should seem more beawtifull, and bear a show of greater learning. These
three times I say, of reading and writing, will breed in a man store and
variety of matter, and as well for religion as other learning, though he have
but a mean wit, so that he join thereunto continual help of diligence. The
other hours in the morning I assign to Ciceros works, and to the style, not
doubtinge but Tullie may be all read and understood in three years, which if
it be granted, this is also true, that in the afternone hours as much may be
gotten out of other writers as well in the Greek as in the Latin tongue:
besides those books which shall be recited by the repeater, of whom we have
spoken before. Wherefore these three years space shall bring great knowledge
of religion: and of a great part of Philosophy in Tullie besides, many
ensamples and hystories of his time, which in his Epistles and Orations are
learned: and further al kind of sentences, councils, deeds, and sayings. And
all this may be done with the mornings traueyle, which shall neither be great,
nor yet unpleasant if order and measure be observed. Now the afternones study
shall give and yield as much matter out of Aristotle, Plato, Demosthenes,
Xenophon, Herodotus, Thucidides, Homer, Hesiod, Euripides, Sophocles, Pindar:
and out of the other Orators and Greek Poets: also out of the Latin, as
Caesar, Salust, Cato, Vergil, Lucretius, Catullus, Horas, and though you join
none other to these, yet you easily perceive how much learning and variety may
be gotten out of them. Howbeit, I wish no writer to be ouerpassed: but that we
taste somewhat of his doings, and run over some part of him, and diligently
observe some things in him. But yet in such wise that we have care and regard
of the time, with due consideration of the three year, and of the end of our
study which we have appointed. And for this cause neither have I named all
writers: neither bid I you to read all these: neither forbid I you to know
those which I have not named. Plautus is a pure Roman Poet: and Ovid a Poet
by nature both plentiful and neat: and both the Plinies very profitable, and
Liui is a lofty writer of an history: and Tacitus is a true reporter of
things. And as for those that have written of husbandrye, building, and of
warfare: who denies but a learned man should be acquainted with them: but my
prescription is of three year: and is agreeable to your age, calling, and
nobility. For I write this work for your sake: wherein I consider what manner
of Gentleman I would train up, that may be meet to be a counceller of
Emperors and Kings, and to have government in the commonwealth. And yet
nevertheless I do not doubt if you get those things which you ought partly
to understand, and partly to have in memory, as well out of holy writers, as
out of all Cicero: and out of the best Orations of Demosthenes, and out of the
books of Plato and Aristotle, written of the commonwealth and of laws, and
out of those which I brieflye named a little before: although you may
ouerslippe some of them if the time so require: nevertheless I say if with
care and order you atchieue but only these things, I doubt not but you shall
be welcome to every learned company, and to every wise assembly: no less
than Cotta and Sulpitius were acceptable auditors to Sceuola, Crassus, and
Antonius in their three discourses of an Orator: even as Tullie was glad also
of the company of ye young man Triarius in his disputation that he had with
Torquatus concerning the ends of good and evil. But it is now time that I
come to the order of reading and writing, which is the principal part of this
our purpose. For now all men know almost what Authors are specially to be
read, and what every one may read to his most utility and profit: but how
they ought to be read: First, few men know: secondlye, those that know are
of diverse judgments. For as he says, how many heads, so many wits. But I
will declare my opinion as I think best, and after mine own manner, chalenging
nothing as proper to my self, which other have used as well as I: and leaving
to every one his own judgment. Councelling you, not bindinge others to these
my precepts. Now in reading we ought specially to follow the same order, which
we use in writing and speaking: that first, we care for things and matter: then
after for words. But as in devising and writing we are first to consider what
we will teach, defend, or utter: and then by what means we may attain
thereto: so in readinge we must run over the whole Book, or Oration, or
Epistle, or some whole work: and after we must take in hand by peecemeale to
consider and judge, and weigh every point, least any thing should escape our
understanding, without the which, all memory is weak, and observation is
uncertain, and imitation is deceytfull, although it is true that oftentimes we
meet with some places in old and ancient writers, which are of such
difficulty and so obscure that they cannot be understood at all, or else
after they be understood, the profit thereof is not worth the pains: such
places do I think best to ouerpasse. I remember that being a young student at
Loueine, and reading at home in my Chamber the Oration of Tullie for Roscius: I
lightly passed over the allegory of the Seruilian Lake: but when I publicly
interpreted that Oration at Paris, I endeavored all that I could to expound
the same Allegory, having before asked Budes council and advise therein. Yet
I remember that I then gave this council also to my auditors, that if they
fortuned to meet with the like rocks and obscure places, they should do as
good Plowmen do, as well in seed time as in harvest, who are wont both in
plowing and reaping to ouerpasse the thornie thickets, and deep roots of
trees, and craggie stones, if the cost surmount the fruit. So also students
should note those places which cannot profitablye be understood at the first
reading or present time. Nevertheless, as husbandemen ouerturne stones, and
dig up stumpes of trees, and pluck up thorns when they can so do, and when
any gain may come thereby: so also it is good for students to stay at those
sentences which may be understood, although with some hardness, specially if
they bring light unto the rest, which without them would be obscure. Therefore
the first traueyle of reading does consist in these two points: the next,
touching order and placing of things: the third concerns the handling of
the matter. In placing we note what is first set, as in a show or the
forefront of a battle, and what is reserved to the end, and what is
handsomely conveyed into the midst. In handling we observe what is largely
discoursed, what is shortly discussed, and how often any thing is repeated, and
that with what kinds of words and forms of sentences: moreover, after what
way and manner of method. In these points consists the whole reason or
cunning of understanding, of imitating, of writing, of speaking: to the
atteyning whereof, we must provide three kind of Books, the one for things
and matter, which are called the books of common places as may represent the
precepts of Art. The places of things and words are almost one:
notwithstanding how they differ, I have declared in other books. The places of
Art are taken from thence, from whence we learned the rules and precepts of
the same, which of all other are best set forth by Aristotle and Cicero. Now
this practice is called (...), and consists in resolution, whereof you have
heard me speak oftentimes: which practice we ought to begin in our young
years: but we must continually exercise and constantly go forward in the same,
if we mean to follow those Greeks and Romans which have been praised for
learning, and have been counted wise in government, I mean not only
Rhetoricians, or Orators, or Philosophers, but also Consuls, Emperors, and
Kings: who have now no less fame and glory through learning, than they have
obtained by their notable and valiant deeds. Wherefore the barbarous custom
and rusticall opinion of our Gentlemen is the more to be blamed. Who for the
most part think themselves not worthy to be accounted soldiers, nor warlike
enough, if they seem skillful in letters, who are ashamed of learning, and not
of manners, what manners I mean, specially in some of them, I am ashamed to
report. How much more is it to be praised when in a noble house there be noble
Gentlemen, whose lives and learning are aunswereable to their birth and
nobility. Who as they take ensample of a noble and commendable life, either of
their own elders, or of better houses: so do they give an ensample of the
like to their posterity that shall succeed them, and encourage other men to
follow their virtuous steps. What did more hinder the true glory of the
noble Athenian Alcibiades, than that he followed not the council and good
lessons of Socrates. Pericles in the same commonwealth obteyning great prays
and high renoume, has to thank eloquence and learning for the greatest part
thereof. The Romans envied and had in great hatred the new usurped kind of
tyranny of Julius Caesar: yet is he the less envied therefore, and the less
dispraysed of honest men, by reason of his books which are called his
Commentaries: wherein is expressed his Martial prowess, which is no more
renoumed by his valiant doings, than adorned and worthily set forth by his
excellent writing. But that I may return thither from whence I am digressed:
it behooves us to have these three kinds of volumes whereof I have spoken.
That is to weete, of things, of words, and of Art. And notwithstanding,
there be all ready set forth many Commentaries of the Latin tongue: and
though some men also have endeavored to gather together common places of
things, and to store us therewithal: yet is it both profitable for memory:
and the gaynest way to perfection that every man should gather and dispose his
own places whereby he shall have occasion to add or detract, or change
something in ye inventions of others. And for because I have often both spoken
and written at other times of the places of words, which are almost all one
with the receptacles of things: it shall not need at this time to repeat the
same. As for the places of Art they are gathered out of the books of
Rhetoricians: as for example, concerning the parts of an Oration, and the
kinds as well of causes as of reasons and Rhetorical figures, and Periodes.
And because the observation of these things pertayneth to the second labor of
reading whereof, we began a little since to speak: and because the times of
reading, observing and noting, ought to be joined and knit together: we will
declare somewhat more at large this manner of observing and noting. This
practice I now speak off, begins with marking, and ends with comparison. I
call marking, that which the Greeks term (...), when we consider and
understand as well the matter, as the handling thereof. Likewise I call
comparison as the Greeks would say (...). Which is when we compare one thing
with an other, to see how either they agree or differ. For first we have to
consider what is said, and how it is said: Then after forasmuch as one thing
has often a sundry kind of handling, for comeliness sake, the present
things are to be compared with other, which are written and set forth either by
the same Author, or by some other. After this bypartite and double labor we
must go to noting, and look what we have marked and understood, we must apply
the same to our places of Art, and note it in our books, distinguishing every
thing as it were in the proper forms and seats. Again there are three kinds
of noting, one when we write out whole places, another when we gather the sum
of the same places in few words, which the Grecians call (...), we may term
them abridgements. The third kind is when we draw out every part in figures,
which for the more playnnesse in teaching I am wont to call (...) that is to
say figurative draughts, or if I might so term the^, defigurations. For
figurations do more properlye pertain to the Authors themselves: our
draughtes may aptlier be called defigurations. Neither is this a toy devised by
us, but a certain thing which has been long since used in Greece and Italy
of the masters of Logic and Rhetoric there. For both the Peripatickes
distinguish their kinds of conclusions and the contrariety of Propositions by
figures: and likewise the Rhetoricians call their Periodes of three members,
some of them (...), which have all three parts of equal length, and some of
them (...), which have only two parts of like equality: Likewise when
Orators and other writers diversely amplify matters, as a man would say,
exedifications or buildinges. And in the second of those three books which
Tullie entitled De Oratore, that is to say, an Orator. Anthony makes
mention of framinge and buildinge of an history, because all these things
may be drawn out and framed as buildinges are: that the foundation may
appear, the roof may show forth, the entraunces may be seen, the Chambers
may be severed, and that the doors, windows, pillars, and other parts may
cunningly be set before our eyes, so that the whole building may be vewed. The
like whereof, Lucillus and Sceuola did note also in Albutius and Crassus in the
building of their words.

How feately are these words set out,
As pauing stones by Art no doubt:
In beauty brave, and color gaye,
Thy bostes and bragges do then away.
My son in law fine Crassus is:
Is thy Rhetoric as pure as his?
For example therefore let us make a draught of the first Periode of Tullies
first Oration which consists of three members as follows. There be two
things which in a free city are most of force. Thus far goes one member
having the number of fouretene sillables, the next member that follows has
just as many, and is thus expressed: And both ye same do chiefly hinder us at
this present. Now the third member is shorter, and comprehended in ten
sillables as thus: The One is great favor, the other is eloquence. Hermogenes did
make this kind of Period with the figure of a Triangle called (...), reered up
in this sort. But because that same short member is sometime placed first:
sometimes put in the midst as may seem most delectable to the mind and ear:
it may also be figured by the drawing of lines: whereof, two be of equal
length, the third is shorter, as thus.



The like manner of practice may be used in Periodes of two or four members,
and also in long sentences, or circumductions, of the which, you have heard in
Rhetoric, neither were it hard for me to bring many ensamples, if the
Printers would give me leave, or were it appertayning to this place. For in
deed this treatise requires an other time: and it is enough that I now show
unto you this order a far of. Chieflye since before this time you have heard
me tell you of the like. Howbeit, not only Periodes and long sentences may be
thus figured, but we may in like sort note in Orators the handlings of
things, which they call (...) This Summer I expounded unto you the Eclogs of
Vergill: and I showed you how artificially and finely poor Melobeus sorrow and
misery was expressed in verse. For the first four verses have a comparison:
but how trimly are they handled, how cunningly are they framed and set together.

O happy art thou Tityrus,
that under Beechen tree,
Thy song in Pipe of slender Ote,
doste sound with voice so free.
He sings the felicity of Tityrus in two verses: but of himself he
complains in a verse and a half.

But we al as our country costs and pleasant fields forsake.
We fly our native soil.
After, he returns to the happiness of Tityrus, and finisheth the imperfect
verse and adds the whole.

But thou in shade thy case doste take,
And make the woods for to resounde aloude fair Amarill.
This exposition has a compass in manner of a circle: for even as in words, so
likewise in things there is (...) and (...) that is to say a circle, or a
circlelik handling and setting forth of the matter. Therefore they that follow
the Mathematickes do note this with a circle: yet may it also well enough be
marked with this figure.



And so Melobeus at Tityrus begins and at him also ends. But peradventure
some man will demand what commodity is in this devise and practice: seeing
it is not only long, but also almost infinite, and besides it is free and at
the liberty of the writer. And that I may first make answer to the last
point: that it is not algates free, nor at the writers liberty, that ought
both to satisfy the ears of the hearers, and the judgment of the learned,
and must be agreeable to the matter. Secondly, although there be infinite
examples (for many are extant, more have decayed, and many new peradventure
shall be invented) yet is the order of this practice comprehended and limited
within certain forms: even as this comparison is whereof we speak, which is
either of like things, or of contrary things, or of things that differ in
some points. Furthermore, either both parts are shortened or enlarged alyke:
or one part more than an other, or the first part is again repeated in the
end as we see for example in this beginning of Vergil. And as it is not the
first part of a Master Carpenter to vewe and know all the buildings that are
in the world, but it suffices him to have suruayde and taken a pattern of
some of the best in every kind: so also ought a writer to do: that amongst a
number he make choice of some, whom he may follow, and with whom he may
contend at his pleasure. Now touching the commodity hereof, the first profit
is this, that we shall hereby the better understand the matter, and so keep
it the longer in memory: the observation of the Art or workmanship breeds
a pleasure, whereof rises a constancy and an earnest desire to read other men's
writings: which two virtues are repugnant and contrary unto other two vices: I
mean lightness and lothsomnesse, than the which nothing is more pestilent and
pernicious to honest study. Thirdly, this diligence does much help judgment:
and oftentimes the marking of the Art in an easy place makes us more able to
fetch out the deep and hidden sense of harder places. As Tityrus in his
Antistrophe or Counterverse in the first verse he acknowledges both God and
his own quiet state.

O Melibey our God to us this quiet state did will. After he renders a reason
thereof in two verses, and promises to honor him as God.

For he, for aye shall be my God, upon his Altar stone
Often shall the tender Lamb be slain from sheepefoldes of our own.
In the two last verses he returns again to his quiet state, whereof he had
spoken before, and declares wherein it consists.

He did permit my beasts to graze at randon as you see,
And bade me play on homely Pipe what best delited me.
Therefore may these five verses also be drawn with lines in such sort that
the very frame and casting of the work may appear.

There is yet also a further profit of this practice consisting as well in
those Annotations, which I called (...) that is abridgements, as in these
Aposchematismes, which we englished figurative draughts or defigurations: and
that profit is this, that hereby we perceive how the kynds of speaking differ
one from another, and by what means we may attain to discern every kind,
for without this practice, whereby shall we judge how the three beginninges of
Vergils works differ one from another: I mean of this Eclog, of this Georgiks,
and of his Aeneidos. For this first beginning of this Eclog is finely compact
by reason of the comparison that he uses, which agrees well to the songs of
the shepeherdes: the second beginning is moderately enlarged by particion,
which besemeth a good sparing fellow of the country, and a thriftie
husbandman: the third, is set forth and adorned in ample manner, as the
gravity of a noble personage did require. And these three kinds may be as
well distinguished by diversity of lines, as by different words and terms of
Art: wherefore, this practice brings this commodity, that though things
differ but a very little, yet wherein they differ, we may plainly perceive.
For these two Latin verses have like feet as Grammarians term them.

Tityre tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi,
Protenus aeger ago, hanc etiam vix Tityre duco.
Which I put into English in this sort.

O happy art thou Tityrus that under Beechen tree.
I sick do drive my Gotes a far, scant able this to lead.
Yet do they differ both in the conjunction of the words and letters, and
also in harmony and tune. Whereof springs the Poetical number, and that may
be understood by this draught.

!...!..!...!..!.

For the first foot and the last have semblable harmony and time. For the
sound of the voice is in the first syllable, that is to say, in the third
syllable from the end: and the second and third foot have the sound in the
midst. But in this verse it is otherwise.

Protenus aeger ago, hanc etiam vix Tityre duco. For though it be measured with
the like feet, yet does it differ in the sound and placing of the letters, as
appears in this draught.

!..!.!!!..!!..!.

For the first and second heroical feet has two sharp soundes: and the
third has a contraction of vowels: and the two spondaicall feet are more
sounding: so that this verse as it is in matter more doleful than the first:
so is it also grauer in sound. These examples are taken out of the Poets: but
because I interpreted and showed you these foresaid things this last summer: I
purposed to use such examples as you were already acquainted withal, and as
you had lately heard. The same order we ought to follow in Orators and
Hystorians. For all writers have among themselves many things in common. As
for example, if I would thus frame a sentence: A wise man always follows
honesty, and for the maintenance thereof does willingly offer himself to the
death, but a fool esteems pleasure more than honesty. Whereas a wise man
measures not his pleasure by the wanton delight of the senses, but by virtue
and honesty. This kind of speech or sentence is philosophical: but it is
framed according to the pattern that we took of the Poet: which thing either
can not be done, or can hardlye be perceived without this Art, practice, or
observation, or else howsoever you list to term it. And this sentence
differs from Vergils verses, in kind and nature of words, but in form and
shape, it is almost all one.

For as two cotes differ the one from the other, which are shaped both of one
fashion, the one being green and of a fresh and pleasant color: the other
black and more sadder, and the one has an elle of cloth more or less than
the other, at the discretion of the Tailor. To observe these things, and to set
them in order in their proper places (does greatly help us to practice and
imitate) and of it self is very pleasant to understand. And although it be
variable and copious: yet by bestowing one hour diligently every day where
neither wit nor teacher wants: it is wonderful how much man's traueyle may
atchieue and attain unto in three years space. But dulye considering your
condition of life, and what your calling is: I council you chieflye to bestow
this your traueyle first in the Orations of Cicero and Demosthenes: Secondly in
Tullies books of philosophy and in hystories, although also his epistles are
even at the first to be taken in hand. In reading all these betwixt times we
must make a step to Poets. Howbeit, it must be done, sparingly, neither may
we tarry in them over long before our style be made both copious and meet for
an Orator. For, I like well the council of Anthony in Tullie, who did
diligently and usually exercise himself in civil controversies, and matters
of Court: Hystories he read for his pleasure: and as for Philosophers, although
he read them, yet he did not follow them, by reason of their short and brief
disputations: But from Poets he utterly abstayned, as from those that spoke in
a strange tongue. Howbeit, Anthony did much dissemble his study, as he did
also his Art in pleading. And whereas he says he understood not
Philosophers: nor dealed not with Poets: he does declare, what is to be
followed in imitating, and what is to be shunned, specially of an Orator, whose
talk ought to be liked and allowed of the people. And I write this to the
end, that you may see in what things you ought chiefly to bestow your
traueyle: whereby you might come unto that end which you shoot at. But now
because all observation, and all noting and marking of examples is prepared for
the style, and is directed and referred unto writing and other exercises:
hereafter we are to treat what order in writing you ought to follow. Wherein
this is the first precept that you consider well the Argument and matter
whereof you will write, which Aristotle calls (...). That same must be such
as we must fully and perfitely understand, neither can it be that we should in
writing express any manner of thing except we know the nature thereof: no more
than if a Paynter would paynt the buckler of Ajax, or the Armor of Achylles,
or the honorable meeting and gifts of Diomed and Glaucus which he had never
seen, no never heard of. Therefore let this be the first precept, that the
whole nature of the thing be known. Out of this precept rises another, that
is, that we make choice of things: that in the beginning of this our exercise
we choose such matter, as may be easily understood and handled and uttered
without any tediousness. For in tediousness when things be long and obscure,
it is to be feared least the traueyle should be to painful and laborsome for
a young beginner, whereof rises a lothsomnesse of this practice, which we wish
to be delectable and pleasant, and not heavy or lumpish. For as he sings not
so well that is compelled to sing: so also he writes not so cunningly and
skilfullye which is loath and unwilling to write, as he which writes with a
prompt and earnest desire: Therefore the style is to be applied in the
beginning to plain things, and not to those that be tedious and obscure. To
which two precepts is joined a third, and that is that our matter may be
quickly dispatched: for I will have the diligence of this practice measured by
the number of lines, and not by the whole nature of the matter. This rule also
may well be given in this place: that the first year be spent in Cicero, out
of whom, we gather matter for the style: neither do I mean that we should
write whole Orations to the imitation of him: but first some small parts, such
as be of the shorter sort. Which have either some necessary, or some notable
place in them. I call that necessary that is almost ever to be used: notable,
which is commended for that it is seldom used, because of the singular
finenesse and passing show, and in longer matters does not appear. Wherefore
we account the first year for the reading of Tullies books and for the framing
of our style: as for other writers, as well Greek as Latin, it shall be
sufficient for the time, if we only read them to understand them. And let
this year be only bestowed upon Orators and Proes: the other two years that
follow may join therewithal Hystoricall and Poetical exercises, so it be
sparingly done, that the other principal exercise be not hindered, nor the
senatorie and Courtlike speech of an Orator be not infected and corrupted
unawares, either with unwonted exercises of Hystorians, or with strange
tongues and terms of Poets. Now all this they shall most easily and most
surely obtain, who have instructors to direct and teach them: And because
there are few which can do it, we must diligently take heed, least instead
of a learned and a skillful teacher, we provide one that has neither learning
nor skill.

And thus much touching the style and the use of writing: whereunto the ancient
men joined meditations and declamations before they would deal with civil
causes, and matters in Court. But because al these things without imitation are
to no purpose, we are from henceforth to speak of that, wherein these
questions may be demanded. What is Imitation, and what authors are to be as
examples and patterns for to imitate: and whether we ought to take ensample of
one, or of many: moreover, what things are to be imitated, and how: lastly, at
what time we should begin this imitation. Of all which points I will show
you mine opinion, and that briefly. For in this small volume, and to satisfy
your purpose it is not seemelye to discourse at large of all these matters. I
do not teach what is requisite for all Imitators to do: but what way you
ought to take: who both in nobleness of birth, and in state and calling differ
from other learned men, that purpose only to spend their life in learning. I
call Imitation that which the Greeks name (...), wherein is (...) that is to
say, an ardent desire and love to attain to that in the Oration and speech of
an other, seems worthy of praise and admiration. And is nothing else but a
means and way how to express in your own talk those manners and forms of
speaking: which the Greeks call (...) and (...), which be commendable and
beautiful in the talk of an other. We will have an Art to be in this
practice, that nothing be done contrary to comeliness, which is to be observed
with great care, and there is in it a science of an universal thing, and of
all things: and not of some one thing or one part alone. For who does commend
that paynter, which only can paynt the hand of a man and not the other
parts: or that can only draw the heads of men: and cannot represent other
living creatures with meet and apt colors and convenient shadows. This
practice requires no small art nor slender science: but in this doctrine is
to be observed whatsoever is requisite to all kinds of eloquent speech: to the
which, all imitation is to be referred, and hereby we may the better
understand the second question: to weete, who is most chiefly to be imitated,
whom we may count for an ensample and pattern to follow. For he whose
virtues are most in number and greatest in excellency, ought chiefly to stir
up our desires to attain to the like: not that these beautifications are so to
be applied, that every man may easilye perceive them: but I speak of you and
such as be Imitatours, who can spy and discern these kinds of Rhetorical
speeches, and the figures of the same, though other men can not see them. But
forasmuch as amongst the Latin writers, I mean those old Romans, whose
speech was both round, pure, and eloquent, there is none that has more
plainelye expressed to us all these (...) and forms of speaking then Marcus
Cicero: and seeing that both the writers of his time, and also those that did
afterward succeed him, have yielded unto him the chief price of eloquence: who
can doubt, but he ought to be accounted as the standardbearer in all examples.
There is no form either of Rhetorical eloquence: or of physical discourse, or
of daily speech, but that he has either wholly expressed it, or he has left
such a draught of some part of it, that a mean workman may easily perceive
how the other parts should be devised and framed. Therefore let this be
granted as a certain principle, that in the latin tongue there is no
ensample either more certain, or more excellent than this writer: but let us
see also whether he be the only example, and whether other be not excellent as
well as he. In the which question, if a man will demand this of me, whether
Tullie has written of all matters or no, and whether all his writings are yet
extaunt: I must needs say that I am demanded that which neither can be
unknown, nor ought to be asked. For we want his books, entitled of a commonwealth, as all Gramarians do know: we have no hystories written by him:
neither wrote he any of those things which Varro has written of husbandry,
or Pliny of natural things, or Vegetius of warfare, or Vitruuius of
buildings. Furthermore, how many things are there in the Greek Philosophers,
and Hystorians, which Tullie has not touched: but we speak of the science of
imitation, which only makes a perfect Arts man, and is the Moderatris and
ruler of the style: although the style it self is called the maker and master
of speaking. I permit that all Authors and all things he read: but with
discretion and judgment: having always this opinion, that we may gather great
store of good matter out of other writers, yea, and words also: but the style
whereof we spoke being an imitator of the best examples, should ever use a
choice, and should apply such forms as are most agreeable to the things: the
kinds and properties of the which forms can be found no where better than in
Tullies works. Although I ought to confess, and gladly do confess that
there be some things in Demosthenes, the like whereof you cannot easily find
in Cicero. And in Platos dialogues there are many notable and divine things
worthy imitation, whereof though Tullie have showed now and then a shadow,
yet has he expressed no perfect image. Besides, who would deny that, as if
we had verses to make, we should imitate a Poet: so if we had an History to
write, we should make choice of some Hystorian, with whom we might contend,
endeavoring to come as near as we could to his pattern and image. How is it
then? verily look what order must be kept in reading, the same must be
observed in imitation. The first and chief travel must be bestowed in Cicero,
and whatsoever he wants, we must seek for it in other places. But first
learn Tullie, and exercise your self in him: and so long as you go forward
and find profit, repent not of your example. I made mention before of
comparing of writers, which the Grecians call (...) and (...), which practice
does much profit our studies. Who denies that Tullie and Demosthenes do
handle and set forth many things oftentimes in like sort, and oftentimes also
who does not think it lawdable when you find in other writers that which is
good and singular, to note and mark the same: and to refer it to the places
of Art and imitation, whereof I have spoken: thereto draw out the handling of
the matter, to name the Author, and to gather in brief that thing which is
treated off. Therefore since our question is of the Latin speech, and our
purpose is to pollish and file the tongue and voice of a Senator or counselor:
and seeing always we make chiefest account of Cicero: neither has any man
expressed so plentiful the kinds and forms of speech with all elegancie and
comeliness of talk as has this Author: who will say that he is not worthy
to be retained and embraced so long as we learn of him excellent matters, and
such as we knew not before, and so long as we find in him even what we can
wish or desire: and yet were it a madness not to take of others if we may,
that which wants in him. Nevertheless, after that you be well furnished with
the store, wealth, and substance of (...) ^^^tor, if you happen to come unto
o^^^^^ it shall not be hard to see what you (...), and what is needful for
you. And after your taste is well seasoned with the wholesome lyquors of his
eloquence, there shall be less danger and less cause to fear that the same
should be corrupted with other strange matters. Wherefore, after we are
acquainted with Demosthenes that strong brawned Orator, we may profitablye go
to the fine and neat writer Isocrates: or else we may join them both together
at one time. In like manner, I do not only permit you to make an orderly
passage from Tullie to Demosthenes: but also I council and wish you, betwixt
times, to make startes from the one to the other, and oftentimes to compare the
one with the other: and even so, if we purpose to write a story, we must use
another kind of style than before we did: which is also Tullies opinion and
judgment.

For, a story is written in a soft and tractable kind of style, as Anthony
says: and flowing with a certain gentle equabilitie: as contrariwise, in the
Court and at the bar we speak more roughly, and our sentences are more
sharp and poynant. Therefore an history requires an other kind of enditing,
as we may see and perceive in the best authors. But nevertheless, to attain
to this grace no man can better further us nor furnish us then Tullie, who as
he could have done it as well, and peradventure better than Salust, Caesar or
Liui so will he also sharpen our judgment that way, that we shall be able not
only to do the like, but also as it may sometimes happen peradventure
better. Pollio as Quintilian reports, spyed a certain patiuinitie in Liuies
style, which he could not have judged nor considered, if he had not learned of
the best authors, the true properties of the roman, and of the patauine
speech. And he which has his mouth well washed and seasoned with Tullies
waters: shall be able with the same to feel in Liuie, as Pollio did a kind of
strange speech, and a certain peregrinitie, if I may so term it. And
hitherto of that question in which was asked: what is most chieflye to be
imitated, and what other besides him. For Cicero must be followed first of all:
and besides him the best of every one in his kind. It follows, that we
declare what thing we should imitate: and what order is to be observed therein,
which part, although it be long, and pertain to all the precepts of
eloquence: yet will we conclude it in a few points. For all this deliberation
begins of one head, and that is immediatlye divided into two branches. For
first of all, we must consider whereunto the matter or argument does tend,
which we have taken in hand to utter and express. Next this, we must see
after what manner it should be handled, and what words and sentences are
requisite for the beautifying and setting forth of the same. And for this cause
in the definition of imitation, did I comprehend and include the manner of
handling, and the kind of vtteraunce: And plain it is, that if we mean to
write a Dialogue, and to bring men in to commen together, we should not seek
in Tullies Orations for a pattern to follow, but rather in his Tusculande or
Academicall questions, or in his other like disputations. So if we have an
Oration, Comodie, Tragidie, or Satire to write: it is evident, whither we ought
to look, and whither we should direct both our eyes and our mind. This
practice therefore begins at the argument or matter, and then it goes out,
as I said, into two branches. The argument I have often termed (...), other
name it (...). The kind of speech or form of utterance, I call (...) and as
for the manner of handling we may at our pleasure either call it (...) not as
though there were not a kind of handling also in the forms of utterance (for
every one is handled after a peculier manner) but we apply handling properly to
the things which be apt and agreeable for the same. But concerning the
Argument, we must use a choice. Wherein we must follow the council of Horace
who does advise us.

To choose such matter when we write,
as fit is for our strength:
And long to wey and payse the same,
until we know at length
How much our shouldiours may sustain,
and what they will not bear.
Which strength of ours is greatly increased with diligence, for these which
are inferior to other in wit, and learning, ought by the example of good
Orators, and of the best writers, to help themselves with diligence. Whereby it
comes to pass, that strength is to be measured by three things, that is, by
wit, knowledge, and by diligence. For he which is endued with sharpness of
wit, and has gotten learning to guide and accompany the same: If he add
diligence, and continual exercise thereunto, it must needs be a hard matter,
that he shall not be able to set forth in writing, and pollish with his pen. But
we cannot fully declare this part of our consultation before the time of
imitatio^ be known: And for because mention is made of ability, wit, and
learning: we will brieflye speak of this last point, that is to say, at what
time imitation should be begoonne: which is not so much to be measured by age
and years, as by strength and ability.

Therefore, as Aristotell did exclude young boys from his Ethickes: So I also
remove from this artificial practice not only children and boys: but also
those men which know not the preceps of Rhetoric, neither have attained to
any understanding of learning, nor have not a singular desire to make their
speech and style like unto that which is most praise worthy, and of the best
sort. For as I think, this caused Aristotell to banish boys and young men
from his doctrine: for that he saw in them neither constant promptness of
will, nor moral judgment. So we also unto this practice and trade of
imitating do admit him whose mind is inflamed with ye love of eloquence and
whose breast is not barren and void of some knowledge of learning. But as for
the ignorant or sluggishe sort, we commit them to the teachers of other Arts,
which can better away with them, until such time as they be further instructed
and more incoraged. Therefore, when the mind is so prepared, and in such a
readiness, as I have said, than is the fittest time to begin this practice:
Howbeit, I require not exquisite learning for this matter, I am content with
this your indifferent skill. Nevertheless, there be three times appointed for
this practice: one while we are learning of it, which is the first, another,
when we have learned it, and that is the middle time, and the third and last
time is, when we perfitlye know and understand it. For so long we ought to
learn this Art, until we have gotten it, and that we be able to devise and
make somewhat, that may be published worthy the hearing of all men, and
acceptable to the learned. But when we have gotten and obtained both the
knowledge of this, and of many things besides, even as a player that has been
well practiced in playing ye second part, may afterward well enough be
admitted to play the first part, and to show himself upon the stage: So also
your style, after it shall be filed in this sort, shall not need to fear the
opinion of the multitude, nor to dread the judgment of learned men. As for the
third time, when we are grown to perfection: although it be to be wished, and
though we ought to labor al we can, that we should the^ seem to need no more
examples: yet I doubt whether ever any man shall attain thereunto. For in so
great variety and excellency of Philosophers, Orators, Historians, and Poets,
there will be always somewhat, which either we have not read or not marked
before: so that still we have some thing to increase our knowledge. For it is a
hard matter to read and understand all things: and to remember all things, I
think it can never happen to a mortal man.

Nevertheless, we must labor and proceed as far as we can. For it is
shameful to stay in a virtuous, commendable and a glorious race, when you
may run further: specially seeing the last traueiles for the most part are
more easy and pleasant than the first. Howbeit, this is also true that
although you cannot be comparable or superior to the most perfect: yet is it
good and commendable to contend with them in many things: and to go beyond
them in some things, if we be able: and either to add or take away, or change
somewhat in the inventions and ensamples of them, whom we do imitate, and to
attempt and labor to do somewhat, which may be better: and has evermore
been granted to all men in all times. For imitation ought to be free, and not
servile or slavish. Neither will we that an imitator do always follow the
steps of another: but diverse times and as often as he can, if he may do it
decently, let him out run him that went before. Therefore, before a young man
has some taste in learning, and before he have some understanding in
Rhetoric and Logic: I will not admit him into this school, but will leave
him to the Grammarians, whose vulgares and prescriptes he must yet follow, as
lines that be drawn by another man. But when he has once obtained these
things: if he have wit, and if there be in him a love and an earnest desire to
eloquence, as appears in you: than shall this school be open for him, and we
will try what this order and practice can work in him. And in the beginning
of this exercise, whomsoever we shall account the best writer in any tongue:
him shall we read with great diligence: and first, we shall consider what he
says: next, in what order, and with what kind of utterance, and by what
Method or manner of handling. Whereof the first pertains to invention, but
order is referred to collocation: and the kind of vtteraunce belongs to the
form of speech. And as for the manner of handeling, which does chieflye cause
and make this form: it conteyneth as well the ornaments and figures of speech,
as the polishing of sentences and reasons, as also the framing, knitting and
numerousnesse both of members and whole Periodes, with the variety of all
those things compared together, which being taught in Art, are here observed,
and as a man would say, are drawn out, and set forth in their colors: All
these things must be laid up in store, and noted in that volume whereof we
have spoken: that we may have them in readiness as often as we shall need: to
the intent we may see in every matter that we take in hand, what steps we
should follow, and where we should tread.

Therefore this is the first time that we have to bestow this way: diligently
in our example to observe and mark those things that Art has taught us
before. Neither ought we to stay, until we know all things, and until our
volume be filled. But immediately after the beginning, so soon as we have
marked any thing, we must take Pen in hand, and frame somewhat that may be
like the same. And in this place touching the Argument and matter, we must
keep this rule that we begin always with the easiest things, that we cloye
not our selves, and make our labor more painful with obscurity. Wherefore if
we will imitate Epistles: we must at the beginning choose the shortest, and in
Orations, long Epistles, and Philosophical disputations, we must imitate a
short piece, as ye conclusion of a reason or a similitude, or a comparison, or
a brief narration, or a common place, and a general sentence, or a contrary.
But notwithstanding, that these things pertain not so much to the matter and
argument, as to the manner of handling the same: whereof we will speak even
anon. Howbeit, this rule well serves for this place, that every thing be
done in his kind. For even as he that would write an History, must follow
an Hystorian: and he that penneth a Satire, would take example of Horace or
Persius, and a maker of Tragidies take Euripides, or Sophocles to be his
pattern: so here also, forasmuch as there is great difference between the
courtly speech of Orators, and the talk of Philosophers, and the familiar,
and daily communication of men: as every one of these, is in their own proper
kind, such must also ye example be. But it is hard to judge of what sort and
nature a thing is. and ought to be. Wherefore, I will from henceforth speak as
I have begoone, of the manner of imitating: Wherein is first to be considered,
what things be imitable: and again, what things they are that we can not
imitate. I call that imitable, that we may by following obtain and express:
of the Greeks called (...). Whereby is understood what is not imitable, which
they call (...). Now to begin such matters or to take such things in hand, as
are not imitable, were mere folly. But of such things there are two kinds:
one is not imitable by nature: the other at certain times. Quintilian says
that wit in invention, vehemence and facility are not imitable: and he says
true, for these things are borne with a man, and are proper to another man's
nature and not to ours. Neither can they be gotten or taught by Art: although
they appear in our ensample: these things therefore by nature pertain not to
imitation: although in imitation they appear and show: and through this
erercise our natural powers also are stirred up and instructed, and made more
strong: yet this kind, because of nature it is not imitable, pertains
nothing to this our purpose. For it depends of another man's wit and not of
ours. But there are also certain works of other men so framed, that they seem
to be set above our capacities: even as Pindar seemed in the judgment of
Horace.

Who Pindars verse does study to excel.
Friend Iule, does with Dedals waxed wings
Assaye to fly to Pontus ysie Pole
A name to give.
He also renders the reason thereof.

From tipe of hill as rivers run amain,
Which daily sures on banks above increase,
So Pindars verse as fast does flow
In mouth profounde.
Horace supposes that this gravity and fullness of Pindarus, if I may so
term it, cannot be imitated. But though therebe certain works of great
Artificers which at the first must not be dealt withal, because we cannot
reach them: yet in time notwithstanding they are made more easy. For it is
not given unto a beginner to make a whole Dration or work: neither would I
council him to do it, though it were given him. For time will breed in him a
greater ability, and bring unto him a greater facility: wherefore, let the
first labor be bestowed in the easiest parts of works, and in the least
portion of the same: and then by little and little we may proceed to greater
and harder, and at the length to the whole work, and finally: we may not
despair, no not in the most perfect of all. For either we shall obtain our
desire, or we shall get from thence some excellent furniture to finishe that
which nature has made us able to atchieue, as Horace writes that he also did.

I as a morning Be,
a little wretch
That seeks the woods and Tiber banks about,
With labor great the pleasant Time to suck,
In manner do my painful crabbed verse with labor sing.
But this modesty in Horace is laudable, because he attributes the chief
price to Pindar: and exhorts Anthony Julius to a higher vein, as though he
should leave the little Rebeck, and play on the great Violl. For neither is
there any thing more to be shunned of an Imitator than arrogancy: which is
ever a companion of lightness and folly. And yet did not Horace despair: For
in many things he is equal with Pindar: and diverse times he contendeth with
him both wisely and commendably. But because unfortunate imitation is
ridiculous, he speaks of himself modestlye: and warns others wisely, that
they take nothing upon them passing their habylities: specially if they mean
it shall come to light, and abide the judgment of the learned. But at home we
may assay and attempt what we list, and we may still stay in them so long as
we profit. But the beginning of this trade must be employed upon the easiest
and necessariest things. I call that necessary, whereof we have use, not only
at sometimes, but at all times. Such are those things that I named before,
among the which we ought to see what is worthy of imitation. For whatsoever is
worthy of praise, that either plaintly appears, or is closely hidden. The
one kind we call (...), that is to say, apparent or evident, using therein a
mathematical term: the other we name (...): that is as much as hidden, close,
or secret. I account apparent things: as words are, and the polishing of them,
and the joining of them together, as the order, placing and framing of those
things that be invented. Hidden and secret points are these. A signification
of an amiable honesty in the Orator: sometime a further meaning than is
expressed in words: the leaving out of some words, reasons, and sentences
that might have been put in: also beautifications and polishings omitted, which
might have been used. Which are of so great weight that whosoever passes by
them, and see them not, shall never work any excellent feate. For as it
appertains to virtue, not only to choose those things which are good and
laudable, but also to shun those things that are evil: and as virtue it
self sometimes is understood when it is not seen, so also it is the duty
of an Imitator not only to vewe that which is manifestlye showed and plainly
uttered, but also to consider what is secret, and is not expressed. Therefore an
Imitator has need of skillful eyes: first for that these secrret points are
not espied till they be revealed: then, because those things also which are
apparent, are oftentimes by the writers themselves so conjoined and
knittogither, that they cannot be perceived, but by a quick sighted workman,
and a skillful master. Wherefore the beginning of this practice must have the
help of a teacher if he may be gotten: to give us our matter and argument, to
tell us what is to be imitated, to teach us, to correct us, to show us how
we may hide and cover like things by unlike using and handling the same. For
he ought to be a hider of his Art, which would be a good Imitator. To follow
our example in every point is very childish. For although it be artificial to
follow the picture of Venus drawn by Apelles, (which was called (...) for
that she seemed to rise out of the sea) or to paynt a Satyr or fieldishe
Maumet in such sort as Protogenes did: and to use the same colors, lineaments,
and shadows, which they did, and to differ from them in no point at all: yet
is it more excellent to express in Apollo or Achylles, the selfsame Art
which Apelles showed in counterfeytinge the images of Aesculapius or Priamus,
though therein you have only followed the documents and draughtes of Apelles.
Therefore we must first endeavor that our doing may appear unlike the
pattern: Secondly, if it do seem like, yet let us so use the matter, that it
may be thought we made it so of set purpose: which is the use sometime of
learned men. Howbeit, this must never be done but when it is commendable to
contend with our pattern: and when that elegancie is not unlike, though the
matters be not of one sort, but different, and not so like in kind as in the
manner of handling.

There are many Orations of Demosthenes, and many of Ciceros: but yet in these
Orations of Cicero, yea, even in his Philippickes, which show by the title
after what pattern they were shaped: Tullie using the same kinds of speech
and forms of vtteraunce that Demosthenes did: yet does of purpose endeavor to
differ from him, although he followed Demosthenes altogether. What difference
is there between the sayings and doings of Aeneas in Vergill, and the words of
Ulysses in Homer. What is so like, as often times the form of speech in both
these Poets: and yet in this great likeness, what great diversity is there?
what great variety? that almost in common talk we do not so properly say
Ulysses in Homer as Aeneas in Vergill. Notwithstanding, sometimes I like well
that our Imitation should appear and be perceived: neither do I mislyke that
beginning of Bembus: My Eather Bembus, dear fryende Tupoll: which he made to
the exsample of Tullies beginning of his book, called Brutus. For as Tullie
hearing of Hortensius death, conceived greater grief of mind, than any man
would have supposed: so his father Bembus, when tidings came to the Senate of
Venice, of the Duke of Vrbines death, conceived verily great grief, and sorrow,
as Tullie does: and as Tullies grief increased in writing and vtteraunce, so
does Bembus his in like sort. Now whither Bembus for some purpose would have
it perceived, that his writing was like to Tullies, or whether he thought it
could not be spied: truly for my part, in stead of the grief that he and
his father conceived, in reading of this, I reaped great pleasure, and while I
considered it, I remembered this practice, which I now speak of. Nevertheless
an Imitator must hide all similitude and likeness: which is never praised but
when it is comparable with the pattern, and yet cannot be perceived by what
means and in what places, and examples it comes to pass. But this means of
hyding stands in three things: In addition, ablation, alteration, and
changing: wherein is contained, conjunction, figuration, commutation, and
transformation, both of words and sentences, of members, and periodes. Now as
for addition, and ablation, what they be, it may be easily understood by
themselves. The Greeks call the one (...) the other (...): and oftentimes a
word or a littell piece, or a member, and the sentence contained therein being
either added, or taken away, causes a new form or image of speech. As for
example, Tullie says thus: I conceived greater grief of mind than any man
would have supposed. But Bembus thus: He conceived verily great grief and
sorrow. But these two points, I mean addition and ablation, are seldom used
without the other, which if we want our imitation, is but childishe. I call
alteration (...), one part of the which is (...) or (...), which consists in
the diverse placing of words and things, and is wrought by putting of words,
members, sentences, and other things necessary either before, or after, or in
the midst.

Figuration, is of the Greeks termed (...), which is chiefly in genders,
numbers, and cases: for the variety of these brings delight, and takes away
sasiety. But as in making, so also in hiding, and changing we ought to do
that which is desent, and to train every thing as best beseems.
Communication is called (...), and it is when one word, or thing serves in
the stead or place of an other: which in words is named (...), in things it
is called a diverse argumentation, when diverse sentences, and reasons pertain
to one purpose, even as (...), that is to say, concauses or joined causes, be
in things done, or brought to effect, and in conclusions are the collections,
and silogismes of many reasons. I name transformation, that which the Gretians
term (...), which contains all the figures of Rhetoric: for both the
Metaphores and tropes of words, and also the ornaments and beautifications of
sentences are oftentimes of like force, and therefore it is lawful to change
the one with the other, neither is there any thing wherein an Imitator may more
glory, than in turquifing, and translating of things and words, and the
cowpling and knitting of the same: in the which is required not only
diversity, but also variety: therefore transfiguring has adjoined unto it
(...), which we may term variation, because it takes away sasietie, and is
commonly the chief causer of all pleasure and delight. And this difference is
between (...) and (...): that the last makes a diversity of works: the
other variety, in only one work: neither is there any thing more pleasant
and exceptable to the ear, than to hear one thing often expressed in other
words, and to see every where diversity of ornaments, and variety of
Periods, with change of numbers in the clauses of the same by distaunt places.
And these are the things which hide Art and similitude, which although they
seem but trifles: yet are they the only dooers of that, which the ears of
the learned desire to hear, neither is it known what force is in them until
we have tried it by use and practice.

But this must always be remembered, that no hiding is worthy praise, which
does not bestow in the place of that which we imitate, a thing either as good
or better: or if it seem baser, yet it may appear to be done not without some
purpose and reason. That circumscription of Vergil. Arma virumque cano. etc.
That is, of arms, and of a Captaynecke I do indite. etc. Who sees not that
it is framed to the similitude of Homers beginning: Yet is there this
difference between them, that Homer names Achilles by his proper name, and
brieflye requiesteth the muse to recite his wrath, and what mischief it
stirred among the Grecians. Vergill does not name his Aeneas, but shows his
purpose at large in more words: so that though we will not grant Vergill to
be superior: yet of necessity must we confess, yt his is a goodly and
beautiful beginning, and equal to Homers, if the Greeks will not be displeased
with us for so saying. But not withstanding it is honest some times to yield
and give place, when the thing we purpose does so require. And to continue in
the same example which I used before: who gain says but this sensentence is
more full and numerous: I conceived greater grief of mind than any man would
have supposed, yet is the other also modest and fit for the present matter. He
conceived verily great grief and sorrow. But to return to the matter: in
stead of that which we imitate, we must always place either a better thing or
as good, or such as is inferior for some special cause: and we must think
that those three points are then truly observed, when they do not only hide
our steps, but also do garnish, and set forth the matter: for whatsoever is
artificial, that also ought to be fine and trym. And those three things which
I talked of before, be of greater force, and do more beautify the matter, than
unskillful persons would imagine. For figuration is one of the smallest things:
but is it not pleasant in that comparison of Vergill.

O happy art thou Tityrus,
that under Beechen tree,
Thy song in Pipe of slender Ote,
doste sound with voice so free.
But we alas our Country costs,
and pleasant fields forsake:
We fly our native soil,
but thou in shade thy ease doste take,
And makste the woods for to resounde
alowde fair Amarill.
What can be less then: thou Tityrus, and we are expulsed, yet this change
of numbers has a marvelous grace: and for that cause, as the order is of this
kind of verse: Tityrus does also imitate the same elegancie, the which he does
without any arrogancy, or envious emulation, because the shepeherde Melibeus
was his friend.

O Melibey our God to us
this quiet state did will,
For he, for aye shall be my God,
upon his Altar stone:
Often shall the tender Lamb be slain,
from sheepefoldes of our own.
You see how in like sort he has changed the number, for in the one place he
says: our God to us: and in the other: for he for aye shall be my God. As
therefore this kind is elegant, when we write without an example after our own
devise: so also when we write with an example and pattern to follow, it is
both elegant and covers that which we seek after and would not have known.
I need not discourse of all those points which I propounded before: for you
have partlye heard them of me, and partly they are understood by themselves,
and at this time are not to be thoroughly handeled. Howbeit, I will yet put one
example more, and that shall be of transformation. There is an excellent and
proper conversion of sentences in Theocritus, which the Greeks do call (...),
we may name it a counterchaunge.

If he shall choose the horned Scire,
The female Goat shall be thine hire.
But if he do the female take,
Thou with a Kidde shall merry make,
Kiddes flesh is good and sweet perdee,
Until at Paile they milked be.
In stead of this conversion Vergill used a circle, whereof I spoke before:
and for these words which Theocritus repeateth, Vergil reherseth other: and
who can deny but the one does follow the example of the other. But some will
say, he uses not the same polishing of his sentence, nor the same words that
Theocritus does. I grant it, and that did he to the intent that unskillful
persons should not perceive his steps. But why did he not so in that which
follows: Non equidem inuideo: that is, I envy not thy happy state, seeing
Theocritus also writes (...): forsooth because he would have it known whom
he imitateth, although he would not have it spyed, how and after what sort he
does it. But peradventure some man will deny that this was done by imitation,
seeing the things be not all one in both the writers. I answer that
imitation is not in things that be all one, but in things that be like, and
that which is like, must be, not the same, but another thing, and yet nere unto
it, which nearenesse is measured by the end and form of the speech: as in
these verses the end of a shepeherdes song is sweetness, and for that cause
Thyrsis in Theocritus commending the song of the shepeherde Aepolus says
(...): that is, this whuzzing wind does sweetly blow: and by and by (...)
which in English is. And thou thy Pipe doste sweetlye sound: and so for
pleasure and delight as Theocritus repeateth in this word (...), and uses
that conversion we speak off: so likewise Vergill does iterate, Nos patriae
fines, and Nos patriam fugimus, and in stead of the conversion, he concludes
his sentence, as a man would say in a certain circle and compass. Every man
knows the beginning of Homer (...): that is, O Muse recite Achylles wrath.
etc. Which undoubtedly is a beginning sit for Homer, both grave and
beautiful, and meet for the purpose he had in hand. Nevertheless Vergils
beginning Arma virumque cano. etc. Of wars and Arms I do endite, and of
that Captain bold etc. has as many and as great graces in it, as Homers
has: and certainly it is altogether Heroical, and though it much differ from
Homers, yet has it a certain artificial likeness to the same consisting in
the gravity and beautification, which is covered by those means whereof I
spoke before. For as Homer shows the wrath and fury of Achylles, so Vergill
painteth out Aeneas with more words and special tokens: so that in the
persons there is variety, and in the handling there is a likeness, which
ought to be applied to the end, which is gravity. And for this cause has he
briefly comprehended many and great matters. Now touching Homers sweetness
of letters and voices, and the sound of Poetical words, which are proper to
the Greek tongue: Vergil has fullye recompensed that grace with a most
beautiful figuration. Arma virumque: of arms and of that Captain bold:
Italiam Lauinaque littora, to Itaile land and Lauine shores: Terris iactatus
and alto: by seas and eke by land ytoste: both numbers singular and plural
are thrice knit together: and in that verse Vi superam saeue memorem Iunonis ob
iram: through force of Gods, and for the mindful wrath of Juno fell: not only
numbers are joined, but also the consecution, combining and apt knitting of
cases is featly changed: likewise that which follows. Genus vnde Latinum,
Albanique patres, atque altae maenia Romae: from whence the line of Latin
blood and Albane fathers came, and lofty walls of Rome do rise: what
distinction of Genders, numbers, vowels or voices is there: and lastly, Musa
mihi causas memora. etc. O Muse recite to me the causes of this grief: does
both differ from the invocation of Homer by order and placing: and in
greatness is aunswerable to Homers beginning: and beside these excellent
points he does not only ask a question, but also lamenteth: woondereth and
cries out. Wherefore the imitation of this like matter is hidden, by placing,
changing, adding, and by varying: for Vergil has separated the proposition
from that invocation, and has changed the persons and matters, and has
recited more plenty of things which is proper to addition: and by the variety
of words, genders, cases, and numbers, all things are sounding, which is
meet for gravity: and yet is this so done, as neither the elegancie does
mar the gravity, nor the gravity is a hinderaunce unto the elegancie.
Wherefore, when we will handle diverse matters after a like manner, we must do
it couertlye, which is wrought by that means that I have declared. Now after
that we have made choice both of our Author whom we mind to imitate, and of
the matter that we purpose to express: than the first consideration ought to
be of the kind of utterance, to the end and form whereof we must apply both
our matter and words, and the placing and variety of the same.

But here it is necessary and needful to have a master and teacher, and
without Art the secret Image of an Imitator, is not perceived: and this order
requires great use and practice, and few there be that attain unto it. Salust
is a noble Historian, and Quintilians testimony of his brevity is well
known. But how many be there, that understand how it comes to pass, and
wherein it consists. Halicarnasseus writes, that the composition of words
in Thucidides is goodly and beautiful, but nothing sweet or pleasant, and
contrariwise in Xenophon, it is pleasant, but not goodly: But Herodotus
composition, as he says is, (...) both pleasant and goodly: surely it
pertains to a sharp and well practiced judgment, and as a man would say,
to a piersing eye to see wherein comeliness and delectation consists, and
how goodlinesse differs from sweetness and pleasantness: not as though
there were but small difference between virtue and pleasure: but for that,
that in speech, eligancie and swauitie are not easily severed, therefore both
Art is necessary, and a teacher requisite, and there needs practice and
experience beside. It is commonly said that Vergils Georgickes are perfect and
that his Aeneidos are not so thoroughly filed. But I would meet with such a
fellow, an interpretor of Poets, that could show me this, and declare it unto
me where need were. But of this matter at some other time: and now to our
purpose, touching the form of vtteraunce: whereof we must have the Image
before our eyes, whilst we are working, and framing our matterwherevnto we must
apply our style, as it were our hand, with fit and convenient words, and
beautifications, which are in stead of colors, shadoings, and lights, I call
conueniencie, or fitness, that which the Latins name decorum, and in our
english tongue seemelinesse, which in all things, and specially in imitation
is most necessary. Wherein two things must chiefly be observed, that is to
weete, aptness and measure: aptness is a continual agreement of things and
words, measure is, when in such things as do agree, there is neither to much
nor to little: as in the beginning of Homers Iliades there wants nothing, and
in the preamble of Vergils Aeneidos there is nothing to much, notwythstanding
it be larger and of greater compass than Homers is, aptness is considered in
moving, or stirring up, in manners, and in nature: nature I attribute to such
things as pertain not to men: as Earbes, Trees, Precious stones, Orchardes,
Lands, Lordships, and such like: which things are uttered and expressed by a
certain and proper kind of speech fit for the same. And moouings pertain
to Poets and Orators, when they express the manners and inclinations as well of
themselves, as of other men: and when they stir up the minds of the hearers
or readers to wrath, hatred, love, and to mercy: and hereof comes these kinds
of elocution or vtteraunce, whereof Aristotle speaks in his third book of
Rhetoric, (...): that is to say in english, a patheticall or stirring kind
of vtteraunce, and a moral kind: and the third, when the speech is
proportionable to the nature of things. Now what manner of utterance these be,
and ought to be, the selfsame Aristotle, who is a passing master and teacher
of Art, has plainly showed. Here have I also to speak of seemelinesse,
which I called decorum: that we do not only resemble a bare image of this
form as it were the outward skin, but also that the blood, veins, sinowes,
and the very brawnes, or force of the muscules may appear forth and be seen.
Wherefore we must labor and travail, that our speech may be beautiful, wise,
and sound: of the which three, beauty, appertains to elegancie, wisdom, to
the things themselves, and soundness, to nature and comeliness: that the form
it self may be natural, agreeable, and seemly: neither is it to be doubted
but the picture of Venus, which Apelles painted as rising out of the Sea,
appeared to be sprinkled with some form of the Sea, but yet in such sort, as
the same did make the form and beauty of the Goddess more amiable and
lovely. Wherefore as Apelles left some part of that picture rude and
untrimmed: so likewise ought a writer, and Imitator to do, and to consider not
how far a thing may be beautified and set forth: but how much polishing is
meet therefore, which being not considered, the speech must needs be both
swelling and puffed up, and also unapt and foolish. Therefore they give good
advice, which will us to follow Minerua in Homer, who often changes Ulysses
into sundry forms, and sometimes makes him a wrinkled, little, ill favored
fellow. (...): that is to say, like to a simple begging wretch, or like a
withered Carle: sometimes also touching him with her Verge or Mase. (...).
She makes him fat and gross of flesh, and large of lymme to seem. Et
(...). And on his head the curled locks, with grace she makes to fall, much
like a Purple Syacinth which we do Crowtoes call: even thus must also an
Orator do, that he come not always forth in a Silken and precious garment:
but often times also in a worn cote, and common attire, and such as serves for
every day. Now after we have well considered what is seemelye and comely: we
must gather things together and set them in order, and get store of words, and
follow these ways and rules that I have showed: that nothing be done or
placed without a cause: and yet after such manner, that the common sort may not
perceive it. For as it is to be wished that our speech may please all men,
and as we ought specially to endeavor to obtain the same: so also we must take
great heed, that Art, and Imitation, and the similitude and likeness be not
espied.

And thus much hitherto touching the style and imitation: wherein I thought it
not best to prosecute all that might be said: as how we should translate out
of Greek into Latin, and after what manner we should resolve Poets verses
into prose, so that it might appear to be no Poem: also how we should
comment and devise: and how we should begin and finishe a declamation: all
the which things may then very well be taken in hand, when we have already
had good practice of those things whereof I have spoken: wherefore we will
speak hereof at another season, and for this present time, let that which I
have said, suffice for your studies: specially because you have me yet present
with you: Let us begin therefore this course again, and come afresh to that
great reading and writing whereof we spoke. Reading is of two sorts, the one
for ensample to imitate, the other to get knowledge and understanding: of the
which two, the one requires a pawse or stay: that those things which are
hidden in the example, may be fetched forth and seen, the other is to run
over the matter, and to mark and remember many and sundry things. Therefore
it must be used and applied as I said in the beginning, and verily there is no
doubt but we may both read over all Tullie, and understand him within three
years, taking only the hours in the forenoone: Moreover, we may note much
in him for imitation: and whatsoever remains shall serve for the years
following. Now for other Authors, who can deny but we may learn much even of
those that I named before, as Orators, Hystorians, Philosophers, and Poets, so
that these three peers space may both make our speech beautiful, and furnish
us with wisdom and knowledge of diverse things. Both which, if you shall
atchieue, you may be patterns and examples to men of your state and degree.
And surely next to warrelike prowess which consists as well in the
experience of such affairs as in valiant and hautie courage: what does more
become a noble man, or more agree with ancient lineage, than honest manners, a
learned understanding, a wise tongue, and the remembrance of all antiquity,
and the knowledge of all kinds of gouernements and common welthes. Were not
Contarenus Bembus and Sadolecus in the number of Cardinals as Lamps and
lights. In the Emperors Court, how great an ornament was the Bishop of
Atrebat. Is not France honored by reason of Cardinal Bellaius: and at this
present because of Cardinal Guise and the Bishop of Mascon. Julius Pflug mine
host and patron, is he not the beauty of Saxony? What a name and
commendation got James Sturmius and Christopher Corlouice for learninges sake.
And though all these were Gentlemen, and of great calling, yet was their
Gentry, being honorable of it self, the more renowned because of learning. If
our country of Germany, and the families of great men were governed by such
personages we should not need to fear any dangerous change of things, or
any barbarous customs, or any deformity of the Church and religion. I
therefore writing these things unto you, do encourage all Gentlemen to these
studies, which if they greatly beseem all states of men, surely they do
chiefly become Gentlemen, who for that they are above other in honor and
glory, ought the rather to excel other in singular virtue and piety.

FINIS.

