THE DISCOVERY OF A GAPING GVLF WHEREINTO ENGLAND IS LIKE TO BE SWALLOvved by
an other French marriage, if the Lord forbid not the banes, by letting her
Majesty see the sin and punishment thereof.

Save Lord, let the King here us in the day that we call Psalm. 20. verse. 9.
Mense Augusti.

Anno. 1579.

IN all delibrations of most private actions, the very heathen are wont, first
to consider honesty, and then profit. Some of the^ also many times, not without
some blind regard to a certain divine nature which they worshipped before the
altar of the unknown God. Oh the strange Christianity of some men in our age,
who in their state consultations have not so much respect to Piety as those
first men had to honesty, nor so much regard to honesty, as they had to
profit: and are therefore justly given up of the Lord our God to seek profit
where in deed it is not, and deceived by their lusts to embrace a showing and
false Good in stead of that which is the good End of a wise man. Yea, who
neglecting the holy and sure wisdom of God in his word, wherein are the
only honorable enstructions for polytyques, and honestest rules of gouering
our houses and own person, do beat their brains in other books of wicked
vile Atheistes and set before them the example of Turkish and Italian
practices, whereby the Lord many times thrustes their hands into the neste of
vvaspes and hornets while they seek the honey of the svvete be.

This sickness of mind have the french drawn from those Easteern parts of the
world, as they did that other horrible disease of the body: and having
already too far VVestvvard, communicated the one contagion, do now seek
notably to infecte our minds with the other. And because this infection
spreeds it self after an other manner from the first, they have sent us hither
not Satan in body of a serpent, but the old serpent in shape of a man, vvhos
sting is in his mouth, and who does his endeavor to seduce our Eve, that she
and we may lose this English Paradise. Who because she is also our Adam and
sovereign Lord or lordly Lady of this Land, it is so much the more dangerous
and therefore he so much the more busily bestirres him.

Now although the truth be that upon further ripping up of this serpentine
attempt, we shall find the Church notably under mined by the Pope: the very
foundations of our common vveall dangerously dug at by the french: and our
dear Queen Elizabeth (I shake to speak) ledd blyndfold as a poor Lamb to
the slaughter: yet should not my fear be so great, knovving her Majesty's
wisdom sufficient to teach her, in such a matter as this, neither to trow a
French man nor once here speak a daily hearer of mass (for she may know him
by his hissing and lisping) but that some English mouths professing Christ are
also persvvaders of the same. And though this ship fraughte with Englands
bane, were already vndercrossed sail with the freshest gale of wind in her
stern that can blovv in the sky for our best port: yet had we counter puffes
and counterbuffes enough to keep him aloof and to send him back again into
the deepes, if he had none but only french maryners and only french tackle.
But alas this ship of unhappy load has among us and of our selves (I would,
not in Princes Court) those who with all their might and maine help to hale
it in: and, as though the blustering vvindes of our enemies malice and the
broad sails of our sins were not sufficient to give it a speedy passage
hither, our own men walk on this shore and lay to their shoulders with
fastened lines and cables to draw it in. This is our mischief, this is the
swallowing Gulf of our bottomless destruction: else might we think our selves
impregnable. It is not the feeble assault of this carpet squire that would make
us come to the wales or once shut the gates against him.

Therefore albeit I wot well you understand already in general, what is that
great calamity thus imminent over our heads whereof I speak: and albeit the
bare consideration of some fevv apparent circumstances of this strange sought
marriage by France with England, do suffyciently move and affecte every
Christian heart, in respect of the hurt to the Church of Christ: every English
heart, in respect of the detriment to England: and every honest affectionate
heart of any her majesty's loving true servant in regard of the great danger
thereby coming to her royal Person: yet to the end our minds may be the more
earnestlye stirred up, by more particularly vveighing the evils of this
matter, we will enter into the parts of this practice and gage the very
bellye of this great horse of hidden mischiefs and falshoode meant to us. And
according as those not half taught Christians and half hearted Englishmen
which persuade and solicit this french marriage, have in their mouths
nothing but the church and common weal, pretending hereby either against
their own conscience or of some other humor that blinds them, to bring great
advancement to religion and advantage to the state, with many smooth words
of I wot what, assurance to her majesty's person: I will likewise dravv al my
reasons to those chief heads of Religion, and the Policy, shevving and
proving, I hope, that this is a counsel against the Church of Christ, an
endeavor of no well advised Englishman, as well in regard of the common state,
as of her majesty's good estate. to every of which it is pernicious and
capital. In the end I will aunsvvere such of their adverse or perverse
reasons as shall be left vndisproued in this my proof.

And first if a man would here bring in the Church to speak The church.
for her self, standing upon the doctrine of her Prophets and Christ the
Lord, leaning upon the pillar of truth, whose crown and garlond is to suffer
rather then to use any vain help of man against Gods law: mild though she
be without all gale in her heart, and have no words in her honey sweet mouth but
of a most loving mother: yet would she with sharp reproof take up these
goodly procurers of her wealth as very practisers of her vvoe, she vvoulde call
them to account why they take her holy name in their mouths, and she would
scarce repute them for her children who will needs forsooth be her fathers.
for (to reason with these Politiques in their own professyon) can they
think any counsel wholesome to the state or becoming good counsailours,
which can not be once deliberated of, much les put in execution, without both
despising of the Prince and contemptuous breach of the country laws? they
must needs say noe, if they have any sincerity or plain dealing left. at
least they will say nay for fear. And think they that any their vayneglorious
devise can prove to the life or health of the church, which is offered her with
shameful dishonor to her spouse, with the separating her from her Lord God,
and with the treading under foot of that precious law, which is her holy
rule for order, and sovereign preseruatife against all headlong confusion? if
they say yea, we say nay, and prove it nay. Namely that this procuration of
marriage, is a breach of Gods law, and not only for the sin thereof is
against the church because it hasteneth vengeance, but we shevve by
demonstratiue reasons that it goes to the very gorge of the Church.

I trust, I shall not need to prove to these men's consciences this Mayor
proposition or Maxim, that is to say, Syn provoke the wrath of God, and that
great sins call down great plages, and mighty sinners are mightily punished.
This argument, The world sins, such a city sins, such a land sins,
such a try be, such a kindred, such a family, such a soul sins, Ergo, the
Sin draws vengeance.
world, such a city, land, trybe, kindred, family, soul, shall feel the
vengeance of that high lavvgeuer against whom they sin: is a most necessary
consequence.

This next though it be but the Minor in order and will not perhaps without
farther proof be yelden unto by this kind This marriage is sin.
of protesta^tes: yet is it as true as the former, that is, that it is a sin, a
great and a mighty sin for England to give one of Isreal's daughters to any
of Hemors sons: to match a daughter of God with one of the sons of men: to
couple a Christian Lady, a member of Christ, to a Prince and good son of
Rome that Antichristian mother city. For the invincible manifestastion
therefore of this truth, let us first consider England as a region purged from
Idolatry a kingdom of light, confessing Christ and serving the living God:
Contrariwise, France a den of Idolatrye a kingdom of darkness, confessing
Belial and serving Baal. Then let us remember what was the first institution
of marriage, which Iustitution of marriage.
is set before us, as a directory rule for us in our marriages for ever, and
whereunto Christ teaches us plainly in all cases and other incidentes of
marriage, to look back, when, upon a case put of marriage, he aunsweres. IN THE
BEGINNING IT WAS NOT SO. The first marriages were between payres in Religion,
and in the fear of God. And the first written commandments that are given
by Moses touching marriage, have their regard to that first The first Laws.
institution, as it were to the oldest law. The which Moses rightly
understanding and according to the interpretation of al laws when they bid or
forbid any thing, do therevvith forbid or bid the contrary: He also in
Denteronomie forbad those matches Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
wherein the sons of God were given to the daughters of me^, adding this
reason. for, says he, such marriages will make thy children to fall from me. And
this place at once, may expound those other many places where it is said,
least they make thy children to commit Idolatry, to be added as a certain
punishment by the judgment of God, and not for a doubtful reason as some
would fayn have it, that seek to dravv the laws of God to their lusts, who
should rather rule their lusts by the laws. Which pure institution of
marriage S. Paul also continues: when enlarging the holy use thereof to all
sorts of men, he yet has this restraint, that it be in the Lord; that is to
say, in his fear, as it was from the beginning, and according to his former
commandments in his word.

It is more then enough to break the holy ordinance instituted of God, which
ought to govern us without further enqui rye of reason or commodity. But as
the holiness of his laws is The end of holy maria.
wholesome to us, even in this life by obedience: so does their tra^sgression
breed us infinite incommodities. For the end of this holy kind of marriage is
our mutual help and vpholdiug one an other in the fear of God. which
appears by the reason of forbidding those unholy marriages, which is, least,
says the spirit of God, their sons draw your daughters or their daughters
your sons from the Lord. Now as the one comes to pass where The hurt of
unholy ma.
thorder of God is kept: so the contrary effect must justly follow upon
neglect. especially if such a marriage be made in a gospellike land where the
law of God is preached, and contrary to warning given out of Gods book. Then
without peradventure all blessing is taken away, and the plague follovveth.
And to teach our politiques by reasonable arguments, what other reasons have
the laws of all lands to join like to like in marriage, but for the norishing
of peace and love between man and wife, and for the well bringing up of the
children in every familye, vvherby to make them profitable members in some
serviceable vocation: considering that families are the seeds of Realms and
petie parts of common weals, where if there be good order, the whole land
is well ordered: and contrary, as in any instrument if every string or many
strings be out of tune, the whole music is marred, and who so will preserve
any entier, must conserve every part: so if the families be distempered and out
of tune, the whole land is disturbed.

Think you that the common weal can have this care for her less parts, and
thus provide for the well trayning up of her chil dren, and that the church of
England vvherin this holy law of religious matching and marying the faithful
with the faithful is give by Christ, to this end, that their children might be
sanctified, and holily brought up in christian religion: think you I say that
the church will easily depart with her dear daughter her daughter of hiest
honor, Elizabeth the Queen of England, who is the temple of the holy ghost:
and will not hold her fast in her loving arms as being loath to give her to a
stranger, one that has shevved no signs of regeneration, and her self want
thassistaunce of a faithful husband, and her children of her body, if any she
have, which receive outvvard sanctification and entry into the bosom of the
church thorough the promise of their faithful parents, be in danger to be
profaned before they be borne, and to be corrupted after they are borne and
thorovvout al their education?

S. Paul speaking of contrary couplings together, compares them to the uneven
yoking of the clean Ox to the unclean The disparagement of such marriages.
Ass, a thing forbidden in the law. And here again the laws of men vvhieh
meddle but with the distribution of the things of this life, have learned this
equity of the laws of God, that it is a great disparagement for health to
be joined in marriage with any foul disease, for beuty with deformity, youth
with decrepite age, or to tender a towns man daughter to a gentilman of
birth. A citizen of Rome vvoulde hold foul scorn to mary a Barbariane. And
the common wealths of England and France I dare say, would meruail if
either our Queen or Monsieur being both great princes borne, and of high
lineage, should seek or consent in marriage with any lovv borne or contemptible
person. Have the laws of common weals provided thus well for men? the
world, stands it thus upon her slippers of reputation, in observing what is
comely in marriage and honorable for each personage: and shall the laws of
God, trow you, be of none effect? or shall it not be much more ougly before
God and his angels, when an Hebrew shall mary a Cananite' there is no such
inequality as that of religion: no such disparagement, as not to be faithful
no such dignity of Principality, as to be a good christian: and no such
slavery, as to be a Barbarian from Christ Jesus.

Perhaps some man will defend these uneven Irreligious marriages, by abusing
that place of 1. Cor. 7. But without any other help, that text it self is
self sufficient to deliver it self from that violence: and the law of God
from the beginning and to the end all one, with the obedient practice of Gods
children, and the plages upon the transgressors: do evidently show, that Paul
there speaks only for the continuance of such marriages as were first not
uneven, being made in time of infidelity on both parts, and by the
aftercalling of one party are become uneven: for the continuance I say, of such
marriages, and not unevenly to yoke any Christian which is free to one not
faithful.

Now as by reasons it appears unlawful, so by examples it Examples.
may appear hurtful. Those good men of whom we love to be esteemed the
children and followers, Abraham and Isaac had Gene. 24 3. Gene. 28. 1.
even a religious care not to have their sons match with the Cananeans
dwelling at their next doors, but sent further of for the daughters of God.
What a diameter of religion were it for us dwelling among Christians, to
admit from over sea, the sons of men in marriage? The children of Jacob were so
well taught Genesis 34. 14.
bytheir father in the religion of their grandfather and great granfather, that
they could answer, we may not give our sister to the uncircumcised, that is
to say, we can not or we may not lawfully: for that we only may, which by
the law of God we may. Those ill men to whom we vvoulde be ashamed to be
resembled, made this manner of marriage. The old world which thus defiling it
self was therefore vvashed in the universal flood. And Esau, whose fault yet
was in this point less then ours, for they without care of Religion took the
fairest and such as perhaps were next hand: we should, in this match, send
further of for our marriage and have not so much respect as to the fairest.
being so far given over of God, as to forget even that part which we would
gladliest please. And among those good men whom we set for holy examples, this
manner of marriage was ever noted by the scripture among their faults. As the
Israelites which thus fell away from the service of God, and withal out of his
protection. As Samson and Solomon whose virtues we must imitate Judge. Psalm.
Solomon.
and not these their sins.

Where Solomon might serve for all examples, and him will I chiefly name and
namely urge (speaking now of kingly marriages and courtly marriage makers)
because he was a king, and also because, that godly Courtier Nehemiah does
notably apply it in a stronger case: using Salomons sin in this manner of unholy
Nehe. 13. 23
marriages, as a reason to separate the Israelits from their wives which they
had already married, yea and by whom they had had children born to the^:
thinking it an ill-favored noise to hear their children gibber in the streets
half Hebrewe half Ashdod. I pray you mark then how much more force Salomons
example has to dissuade a marriage that is yet but in parle and not concluded,
to make no such fair reckoning of a babe yet unborn whose shape we see not,
and how much more ill-favored it were for us that in our churches speak the
language of Canaan to join with the^ that in their mass mumble the strange
tongue of Rome. And if woman, that weaker vessel, be strong enough to dravve
man through thaduantage which the devil has within our bosom, (I mean
our natural corruption and proonesse to Idolatry) how much more forcibly
shall the stronger vessel pull vveake woman considering that with the
inequality of strength there is joined, as great or more readiness to
Idolatrye and superstition. And if the husband which is the head be drawn
aside by his wife over whom nevertheless he has authority and rule: how
much more easily shall the wife be perverted by her husband to whom she is
subi^ecte by the law of God, and owes both awe and obedience, how soever
the laws by prerogatif or her place by preemine^ce may privilege her.

And here note this, that every where it is set down how the wicked
perverted the good, but no where that the better part converted the wicked.
for even the ill ralke or other conversation of ill men, corruptes good manners.
And since Solomon a peereles king, beloved of God, as Nehemiah says, so
furnished in wisdom and of whom there were such certain demonstrations
that he was the child of God, did yet this foulye fall by joining himself in
marriage with Idolatrons vveme^, in so much as diverse now think they find
almost as many reasons to call in some doubt his salvation: I pray God it may
seem fearful in the eyes of all other Princes and princesses, worms to him
in wisdom, to do the like fault, for dread of the like sequel. VVherby it
appears how vain that promise is of theirs, who say that Monsieure shall be
instructed in our religion, and drawn from his, by going with our Queen to
hers: besides that we would be loath, with so certain great peril to our
Queen, who is among men and women the chiese to us: to attempt the uncertain
winning of him who is among all men the least to us. And if there were in him
any hope of tolerable inclination to religion it would rather shevve now in the
time of his suit to our Queen, by that means perhaps thinking to be less
loathsome to her and les abominable to her people. but we have no cause to hope
it. for he uses no protestant in the matter of marriage, although for some
other color he has seemed to make some reckoning of some in some respect. And
if there were hope, yet in so unadvised rashness to venture against the word of
God, we may well look for Gods judgment to come between, and punish our
folehardines that he which loves peril may abide and perish therein.

But these discoursers that use the word of God with as little conscience as
they do Machiauel, pycking out of both indifferently what may serve their
turns, perhaps they will think to escape all hitherto said, by calling in
question (for their mouths are their own to dispute of any thing without care
of resolution) Papist.
whether to mary with the Papist that worshippeth the Lord of Heaven and earth?
be against those interdictions in the law which seem to compass in no more but
the Canaanites Iebusites etc. And mere pagan nations: and whether to mary with
the papist Cananite. Pagan.
who in general terms protests Christ, be to mary in the lord.

To answer these men whose doubts proceed ever of their lust, to give
themselves liberty, and not of a conscience affrayd to offend God, I might say,
that if to confess the Lord of heaven and earth, be enough to avoid those
interdictions then might we entermary with Turks, Jews, Moscouites, and diverse
other painnimes: and, as far as I remember, with some of the Cannibals. Look
the stories of the new Indians. And albeit the Papist protest Christ in word,
yet since the unity of the Church is noted to be herein that Christians be the
household of faith, in the fundamental doctrine whereof, what it is, what is the
use, worthiness, and working thereof, the papists dissenting from us as far
as they that scatter where we gather, it will be hard to make them of one
faithful household with us.

But to yield them a degree somevvhat nearer us then Canaanites, compare them
with the Moabites and the Ammonites, who were cosens to Israel by the flesh
and had Lot for their father: Moabite. Ammonite. Ishmalite. Edomite.
or let them stand with Ishmael Abraham's bastards son, yea at once let them be
in regard to us with Edome, Isreal's twinne brother, both which had the
circumcision of flesh: yet was it not lavvful for the Isralites to mary with
them: and in Solomon, namely, it is counted among other his sinful marriages,
that he married King. 1. 11.
with those nations. But that we may yet give somewhat more to these strayners
for lusts sake at a gnat and swallowers of a Camel through conscience (for
they are more precise to do popery wrong, then to do the gospel right) let
us I say, suffer the popish church to be made more of then she is worth, let
us take her at the best and in as good account as any learned gospeller
hitherto has set her and let her have the allowaunce of two or three grains
to be massier then the Edomite and finer then the pagane, to hang in an even
balance and to be of one assaie or touch with the Idolatrous and traiterous
Israelits that fell from Idolatrous Israelites.
God and were false to the house of David their king: yet shall papists be to
light and to drossie to mary with us. For neither was it lawful nor luckie for
the Jews to mary with those Ieroboamical Israelites, for all their ontward
circumcision, and though they worshipped on the hill of the patriark fathers.

For this purpose read well the storye of Iehoram king of Iehuda the son of
good Iohosaphat that made a notable reformation in Gods house. and for all his
fathers sake you shall see it objected against him and rendered as a reason of
his other great outrageous sins, that he had married in the house of Achab king
of the Samaritane Israelites. The wickedness and sin of which kind of
marriage, as it is euinced by the very word of God and punishment upon the
person of Iehoram: so is it proved by the horrible punishments following upon
his generation. For Ahaziah or Ochoziah son of Iehoram, by reason of the Queen
mother Athalia, fell in such a leag with the king of Israel that taking
Athalia.
his quarrel, he fell with him upon the svvord of Iehu. After whose death the
Queen mother and dovvagier Athalia, played Rex and slew all the princes of the
blood and peers of Judah. All which murdures began, and are set down to have
com for that marriage with the daughter of Achab, whose seed the Lord had said
to purseu to the rote. VVherby it appears that whosoever matcheth with any wicked
race, do make themselves and their sede partakers of the sins and plagues of
that race and their auncesters. And because the match of france with thitalian
Athalia and her furies in that land, especially those at the marriage of her
daughter Margeret, will of themselves apply them selves in every respect to
agree with her of Judea, and prove the sin and punishment of such wicked
vvilling matches between Christian true Jews and popish bastard Israelites:
I only name it and leave it to the trembling consideration of all, especially
of such as it nearest touches, whom I beseech, in Gods name, to stand
vveightily upon it.

These things do necessarily infer the third proposion, which is the
conclusion or final sentence of Gods punishment against Conclusion against
England.
this poor church, for this sin if it be committed. Fair therefore is their
pretext of peace to the Church, who seek that thing that must be the cause of
such a vvoefull effect.

So that if our marriage makers be not so spiritual, as that the sin which
this marriage has simply in it self and of it self, only for being against
Gods law, can not make them yield to confess the danger it brings to the
church: let us compel them to come in by looking at the tail of sins and
punishments that this venomous serpent of sin draggeth after it.

It is not in Gods church as in the Grecian host. there, delirant reges,
plectuntur Achiui. but with us, Regis ad exemplum totus The Kings sin strikes
the Land.
componitur orbis. The sin of the Prince makes the people to sin, whereby
every one bears his sin, and the Lord finds matter enough in Prince and
people to vvrap the one and the other in the same calamitye. In reasoning it is
truly said, one absurdity begets an other. even so has sin a fruitful
generation. and as the virtues are said to be chained together, so is never one
vice or sin alone.

But specially the breach of this law of God, in whom soever private person
it lights, draws not only a certain falling away to the goodman or
goodvvife of the house so ungodly married, but a danger also to children,
servants, and every reteiner of that household. much more manifold is the
danger, when the honorable dame and (as in humblenes I may say) the goodvvife
of England should be so (which God forbid) vneue^ly matched It were more
perilous to the overthrow of Religion in this faithful household of England,
then if in one day were consummate the like marriages of a hundred thousand of
other her subjects. for the straightest and roundest going Prince shall with
much a do keep his people upright, especially in Religion. But let the Prince
laake never so little, and the people vvil halt right down. The Princes fall
is like that of a mighty Oak, which bears down with it many arms and
branches, therefore is it often recited in the scripture, that Jeroboam sell
away from God and all Israel with him. again, for the sins of Jeroboam
whereby he caused all Israel to sin against the Lord.

Now if the French fautors of this marriage, which can enlarg their policy
and mince the word of God as they list, will yet cast about an other crooked
by way to meet with this great inconveniences, that, forsooth, it shall be
capitulated, only lavvful Monsieurs mass no private mas.
for Monsieur and a fevve of his nation to have their miserable mas without
the admission of any Englishman: surely these me^ neyrher measure this article
at the standarde meatvvande of the Lord, nor weigh the easines of performing
it in a wise man's balance. For, I pray you, do but go upon the Tamis and
see what companies go to the french mas: enquire what numbers flocked in at
backfield gates to the portugale mas: how the Spanish massers had their
customers more then enough: and you shall easily see the loose reckoning of
these men in matters of so great valeue. they will keep better books of their
crowns. do they see deputed Ambassadors, hable to break our highest laws of
Gods honor, in themselves and in so many of our nation: and can they think as
they speak, that so great a prince, the husband (which God forhid) of our
Queen, and perhaps (which God defend) honored with the name of our king for
our Quueenes sake, shall not and will not give him self his own conditions
for his own religion, to him and his, and so many of ours as will seek it
at his hands?

But weather this be their gross oversight, or whether they vvink vviles
against religion I vvil not now dispute: this is more then wonderful, that
such as pretend outvvard profession of religion should make so irreligious
account of Religion: Oh the wickedness of our professors and the hypocrisy of
our protestants. Is not Idolatry the highest treason that can be against the
Lords own person? does it not go directly to the point he stands most on for
his honor? do our lips say that we are zealous of gods honor, and tender over
his church, and can our hearts rest in quiet and not tell her majesty how great
a dishonor it is to have one mas, and what a plague it menaceth to the church?
we do not love her, whatsoever we say when flatteryng her, perhaps, in other
vanytyes, we do not fall down before her with tears, bevvaylyng the wrath
of God kyndled against her, if by her advised permyssion, and by means of her
marya^ge, God should be so hyghly dyshonored in this kingdom, vvhervvyth he
has honored her. Take not the word of God in your mouths, you that breath
such lukevvarme counsayl. halt no more on both sides. If God be God let him be
so honored. If Baal be your god take you to him altogether. honest men serve
one master and him wholy, and our master will be so served or not at all.

Of all sins ingratytud is odyous with God and man: no unthankfulness like to
ours, who having been thus long maynteyned in peace: and in the beginning
having all natyons our enemies, have now many faithful borderyng friends,
and are rych at home through our peace and by the blessing of God: will now
svvarue from the Lord, and trust to our own devises, and make leage with
them, and suffer their Idolatry in our land, that never less loved us then
now, when they look fairest. Good Lord (if it be possible) make us wise
vvythout experience of our soly. This were to set up altar against altar, and
with Antiochus to offer the foul swine in the holy sanctuary, for this sin
of Idolatry committed, great judgments have been executed upon the
transgressors. whereby all they that believe the story of the scripture, and
are not stark Atheistes, must confess that this fear which we fear is no
vain fear.

The old world was drowned, the people of God often given Judgments for
Idolatry.
up into their enemies hands, and in the end, the twelve tribes of Salomons
kingdom rent a sunder, and a perpetual translation often tvveluethes out of
Salomons posterity for ever. Jeroboam when he set up alters in the land of
Israel contrary to Gods law, he would have been loath that any man should have
said he committed Idolatry or made the people Idolatrous: yet that sin
follovved, and he thrown. out of Gods favor, noted with a foul blot for a
ringleader in sin often reputed in the scripture, his kingdom came to naught,
and the whole people suffered a transmigration irretornable in Affiria. The
only fear of this sin has made the hears of many good men's heads stand
right up. David durst not take the Idols name in his mouth, he would then have
shaken to have set up an Idol to be worshipped.

The memory of Asa is with a holy praise, for that his mother 1. Kin. 15. 13 2.
Chr. 15. 16
Maacha having set up a woden Image in a grove, he would not suffer her to have
her wicked religion to the dishonor of God, but without reverence of her
superstitious request deposed her from her dignity utterly, and brake down her
Idol, stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron. In which story I pray you
observe these two circumstances, king Asa the son, to his own mother, and the
manner how he did it, even with despite to Idolatry and zeal to God. The Lord
send Queen Elizabeth the everlasting commendation of Asa for many such notable
acts. Elizeus protests by oath that he would not once talk with Ioram King
of Israel had it not been in the presence of Iosaphat. Private men are bidden
to fly from Idolatry, and Princes bear the Lords sword to make it flee and to
chase it far away. If therefore they will have his hand to hold up their
svvord, they must let there svvord serve him chiefly. But most notably the
fear of this sin even before it was committed, and how ielous therefore they
should be that are in authority, appears in the end of Iosue, where the
children of Israel feared least the Lord would impute to them as all one
fault to commit Idolatrye in them selves and not to remove it in their
brethren. Which made them when the the tribes of Ruben, Gad and the half of
Manasseh, after the conquest of Canaan, at their departure home, over Jordan,
had set up but one Alter, of a good meaning in deed and for a monument of
their unity in Religion with their brethren, but supposed of the rest of the
trybes to be set up to the dishonor of the Lord and contrary to his law,
which commanded but one alter throughout the land: they the other ix trybes
and a half whose lotts were fallen within Iordane, assembled themselves,
and, had not their rulers and princes that went Ambassadors over to Gilead,
brought a reasonable and a religious satisfaction by the Reubenites answer,
were ready to fall out with their brethren whom otherwise they loved,
rather then to vvincke at the dishonor of their heavenly father.

The reason of which their doing I beseech all governors to mark, which
was, they feared least thorough that one Altar the anger of God should also
have consumed them. Now if one Altar, set up in the uttermost corner of that
land, threatened destruction to the whole: and the offense of two trybes and a
half, made all the rest to fear: if these Israelites feared so much at the
building of an Altar which was meant to the honor of God, and only contrary
to the outward show of the words of the law: shall not we tremble at this
Alter which all the charity in the world can not conceive well of, as that
which has none use but to serve the devil? good Nehemiah for one piece of
this our sin found in the people, feared the wrath of God and proclaimed
public fasting and prayer Let us follow his example that the Lord may be still
our God and remember us to do us good. Much more have we to shake, for that
this our turning from God in strange marriage and permitting strange Gods
(which the living God turn from us) should be more foul and more gross
thenany of those former, which nevertheless deserved and had such plagues.
For it cannot (I dare say) be shevved in all the holystory that those people of
God, in the vvorst marriage among them, did yet ever make any precedent pact or
articulat condition aforehand with the Idolaters that they should quietly
against the laws of their holy land commit Idolatry, but rather at first
the Idolaters dissembling their own or making semblant of the true religion,
fair and foftly won by little and little through familiarity and mutual
conversation of life after marriage by a stealing insinuation or flattery and
creping persvvasion (dangerous therefore to have any sort of fellowship with
the wicked) an open exercise of their paganism. But if any man persuade our
Prince in whose hands the Lord has put and holden a sovereign scepter of
peace now twenty years and more, and by whose hands the Lord has quite
expelled Idolatrye (he make her and us thankful for it) upon cammunication of
this marriage to indent with man, how far God should be honored: what is
this but to sin more then the supposed sin of the Reubenites, and to excede
the transgressions of Solomon or Iehoram even to erecte an Idolatrous altar,
not in a corner of the Realm but on the highest hill of the land, in London
which is our Jerusalem, and to make an open fault: not of infirmitye, but by
addised composition against the Lord and his truth: not in two shires and a
half, but in the greatest part of the realm and head of the land, our prince.
in so much as it should be safer to set up a thousand hill alters for
hedgecreping Priests other where rather then this high Altar so near the
Court.

The sin of Achan, though not in this kind, proves that the sin of one man,
and him pryuate, done in secret and buried close under the ground, gave forth
such a stench in the Lords nostrels as was contagious to the whole host. and
his garmente brought the plague among them. Much more shall the high sin of a
highest magistrate done and auoued in open son, kindle the wrath of God and
set fire on church and common weal.

And this fire if it fasten on our church, it is like wild fire or fire from
heaven that all the seas can not stop nor quench but the flakes thereof will
fly over sea and keep hauoke in the churches The hurt of this church hurts
others
both on this side and beyoind seas. Our neighbor well builded church of
Scotland must needs think her self to have some what in hand when our wall
is aburning. The infant churches in the lovv countries shall loose a nource of
us. The elder churches in Especially the french churches.
Garmani a sister of strength.

And when I remember the poor orphane churches in france I must needs give
the price of godless impudency to those, which will needs forsooth
mayntaine this marriage as a mean to assure religion in france, and to preferue
the professors there from more massacres. These men have like unkind mothers,
put (as it were) their own child. the church of England to be nour sed of a
french enemy and friend to Rome, and now very kindly they take in both arms
the church of france, and give it a privy deadly nipp, under color of
offering it their teates, wherein is naught but vvind if not poison. As
therefore the ennemies to Gods truth seek those churches ruin, throug hatred
to religion: so should we, who are members of one body with them, have a care
of them as of our selves. The enemies think there kingdom of Antichrist can not
stand, unless Christ be put out of these churches: let us know, as those
reformed Churches next under God and their own forces, have stood by good
neighborhood, even so that there standing is our necessary strength.

Certainly the Pope sees well that one great stay why neither the French
King in France, nor the Spanish king in the low countries, can destroy
religion, is the help and awe of other Princes confessing the gospel, among
which our Queen is in regard with the chief. A game he sees as well, that
next under God, one great cause why his interdictions against us, take no
place in England nor Ireland: and that those kings to whom he has given our
land as it were to whom soever occupanti, can not come to take possession of
us: is, because that they of the reformed religion in both those countries are
as a brazen door, and an iron wall, against our popish enemies. and therefore
by this match, he seeks to sunder them from us and us from them, and so by
vnbarring our brazen door and treading down our wal, to lay open his
passage to us. I will not therefore vouchsafe this strange suppositon of
these persvvaders, the place of an objection to be answered in the end, but
will use it for an other mayn reason of proof in this part, that this marriage
is against the church, because it is against the churches of France. the
which it must needs kill in the place, as they say, and vvithall give our
church a deaths wound.

Here is therefore an imp of the crown of France, to marye with the
crowned Nymphe of England. It is proved already that his coming shakes the
church in England, and how shall he stablish the religion in France. What is
France to the church France.
of God, and to England for religions sake. France is a house of cruelty
especially against Christians a principll prop of the tottering house of
Antichriste, and without which our Western Antichriste had been ere this
sent to his brother Mahomet into Greece whether he long sense sent his
masters the Emperoures of Rome. The long and cruel persecutions in France,
the exquisite torments, and infinite numbers there put to death, do witness
how worthy that throne is, to be reckoned for one horn of that persecuting
beast the primitive Empire.

This man is a son of Henrye the second, whose family ever since he married
with Catherine of Italy, is fatal, as it were, to Valois. Medices.
to resist the Gospel, and have been ever oney after other, as a domitian
after Nero, as a Traian after domitian, and as Iulianus after Traian, Whose
manifest cruelties and detected trecheries against Gods church, have been
severally sealed with his visible marks of vengeance, written, not upon the
wall, but successively on their carcasses, with a heavenly fingar: not by
torch light but at noone day in the eyes and ears of the world. in so much as
Baltazar the father had his Maneh graven in the apple of his eye: and that in
the eysight of Anne du Bourg whose death for Henry the. 2
professing Christ he had voued to see. His first son had his Tekel told in his
ear which rotted him while he was yet alive. And Francise. 2 Charles. 9.
his next son had his Phares marked in every vent of his body: that as he had
shed Christian blood with Iulianus, so he might take of his own blood in his
hand and say with Iulianus Vicisti Galiaee. Who would not tremble to come
nere this kindred so vvrathfully marked of God? who would become one with
this generation so hateful to men? let us bost in this Galilean and defy
Julian. let us with confidence glory in the cross of Christ and Henry. 3.
not vouchsafe to join with these apostate princes. This present king,
besides the sins of his auncesters have given the Lord cause enowgh of
personal actious by his own excesses. Which though the Lord do not yet
bring in upon him thorough his long suffering, yet assuredly there is a
measure of his wickedness measured out, and a time for his judgments,
whensoever the Saints of God have filled his bottle with tears. The plague
common to the house he has. That is, he wants one of his loins to sit upon
his seat. So that we see by proof in three brothers that the Lord will not
leave one of Ahabs house. An ill disposed body he has, a suspicious and
fearful mind even of his friends.

Touching this prince now offered to this church in marriage, if he be behynd
in mischiefs, remember he is younger in years, Monsieur.
and never came to that hability by might of a kingdom to perform his inborne
malice to the church. and the discredit of his brethern have notably hindered
him that way. Nevertheless, so far as his place would suffer, he has been
used to do that service to Rome, and damage to the church, that he was fit
for. At the mas sacring marriage he was not old enough to execute any thing,
but was set by his mother to cry and weep at the cruelties: that so shevving
some misliking of them, his credit might be saved for such another desperate
match. all the rest of the credites of the king then, and his mother, brother,
and sister being little enough to color that mischief. since that time he
has been set a work in France and Flaunders. diverse counterfeit fallings
out betvveene him and his brother, and suddein appeasings. When he fled from
the Court to Dreux, declaring himself protector of common liberty, he quickly
made first a truce, and then a peace, whereby to frustrate the gathering and
keeping together of that great army of protestants. If his meaning had been
but indifferent to religion, he would not have been at that stately assembly
and signed with them, the abolishing of religion in France. He was content to
be used to pull towns out of the protestants hands, and in wars against
them, namely La charity and Issoire. where, after his revolt, he committed such
abominable cruelties and beastly disorders as if he now meant never so good
faith and had never so honest a mind in these matters: yet is it not like that
this man's foul hands should lay one stone of Gods church Yea so far is the
Lord from blessing such a disloyal hand in his public service, to the
salvation of others: that he curses him in public and private, in town and
field, even in his own soul and body to everlasting death, unless he make
open acknowledgement of so open and shameful outrages, and persevere in well
doing. After this he leapes over Paris wales as fleeing from the Court: and
took on him the voyage into Flaunders with show of some tolerable mind to
religion or at least to help the oppressed professors: vouing with diverse
solemn oaths and making others to swear, that they would never come at the
court again and yet presently upon his return, he left his poor court all
amassed at Alencon, and with two or three gentilmen only posted to yield
himself into the kings hands with these words. Sir I yield my self to you to
dye at your feet, in your service, assuring you that never will I be
estranged from you: with more like words, such as detect greatly the French
lightness and french falsehood in him, general to all papists of that nation.
The king with many embrasings and caresses gave him the best vvelcome in the
world. On which day also came to the Court the Duke Guise the great ennemy
to the church of God with five or six hundred horses with whom whatsoever
unkindness he had seemed before to have, he now entered into a present
familiariaritie and open kindness.

When we speak therefore of France and of the practices there against the
church: of their some time mitigated nature toward Queen.
Religion or of dissentions in appearance: and bruites of jealousy, which the
Queen mother puts as visarde upon her practices: we must cast our eye wholly
to her, as the very soul whereby the bodies of the king, of Mousieur, of their
sister Marguerit, and of all the great ones in France do move, as a hundred
hands to effect her purposes. And when we speak of Queen mother, we must
straightvvayes present before us but a body or tronk Pope.
wherein the Pope moves, as her soul, to devise and have executed
whatsoever for the appetit of that sea. even as Necromancers are said to carry
about a dead body by the motion of some unclean spirit. And this soul of
France, as it has been most eager and obstinately bent against Christ's
church in all things wherein she entermedled: so above the rest has she been
a dangerous practiser in marriages. For to begin with the marriage of her other
daughter into Spain, in the life of her husband, what France marieth with
Spain and Piemont.
time a sister of his was married into Piemont, and so three great princes
linked in a threefold cord (as it were) by that alliance: all the world
knows, that the capital capitulation and article of inprimis (as I may say)
in that threefold marriage, was, against God and his anointed. which strong
cord, though the Lord which is in heaven laughed to scorn and turned to the
strangling of the tvvisters thereof, insomuch as the father dyed presently, and
the daughter lived but a short time after and with small joy: yet has not
this spyder left to twist once more.

And albeit in the marriage of the first daughter she spedde not Parisien
marriage.
so well, by reason there was no sin of the church in it (for they yoked
themselves asses to asses) yet in joining this latter sister with the king of
Navarre, she had better luck, because our sins joined with hers, in that we
joined one of our Oxen to one of her she asses. In this tragedy she played her
part naturally, and showed how she gouernes all France. Her daughter Margerit
was the stale to lure and allure them that otherwise flewe high houering a
far of and could not be gotten. her son, then king, was in all the haste become
a father to the Admiral and those of the religion. Monsieur that then was and
now king, he played false semblant, as though he had been merueylons angry at
the marriage and at the grace which the Admiral and the rest of the religion
found with the king. Monsieur that now is, he played the childs part or
weeping part, reserving his credit as is a foresaid, til a riper age, all this
while the mother as setter forth of this earnest game, stood holding the book
(as it were) upon the stage and told her children and every other player what
he should say. the last act was very lamentable. A king falsified his sworn
word: The marriage of a kings sister embrued with blood: A king murdered his
subjects: many noble and honorable gentilme^ shamefully used: valiant men
surprysed by cowards in their beds: Innocents put to death: women and
children without pitye tossed upon halberds and thrown down wyndowes and
into Rivers: learned men killed by barbarous soldiers: the seyntes of God
led to the shambles all the day long and all that week long, by vile
crochetors or porters: the church of Christ rased, the very nest egg broken,
as far as men's mischeeuous reasonable wit cold reach: and, that which was
worst, those that lived, were compelled to forswear their God: and little ones
Christened before to Christ, were now dipped again to Antichrist.

He therefore that loves the church, can not think this marriage to promise any
happynes to Gods church in France. Noe certainly as touching the church, it
has that mischeuous end set unto it by them, which the former marriages had.
God grant we harken not in this match to the present French king and his
brother: least by abusing us also inmariage thorough our sins, we thorough
unadvised policy fall in the same snare with our good brethren: and the king
with his brother for so abusing us, be gathered to their fathers and buried
with them in the same grave or hell of infamy, by Gods manifest judgments
upon them. And which is all the good can come to the churches of France by
this marriage, the Queen mother, seeing now all her four sons after a sort to
be kings, find that delphick answer of her familiar spirits subtly
fulfilled: so as she may challenge no longer life of the devil, but that he to
whom she has given her self, must rid that Realm and those poor churches
of her.

A man would think that this matter needed not to be any whit set forth,
but that the very name of the Parifien marriage should a fray any protestant of
Eugland or France from ever loking for any good to come, by committing this
il. yea the scourging rod which followed so hard at the heels of that sin,
and where judgment began at Gods house, should as a thonderclap of Gods
wrath astonish all politiques. And if Thadmerall and the hundred thousand men
women and children, whose innocente blood solemnized that marriage, might be
sent to us again from the dead: they would, out of their heavenly love to Gods
church hear on earth, lively and hottly diswade this kind of marriage: they
would lay forth the harms of that marriage: with such revived afections as
their wounds would bleed afresh and their headless bodies speak (as it
were) before you. But we have Moses and the Prophets, we have Christ and his
Apostels: if we believe not them, we shall be taught by late experience, and go
the way of our Parisien brethern. Yea though this marriage being made, should
not have, toward us, that malicious bloody effect which is meant, and that it
should but weaken us, as that of Spayn did, alas nevertheless for the poor
protestants in france: there ruin were present. for we saw when, before the
great murder, there was a new colored freendship made with our Queen such as
with other Princes (in respect whereof both she and they were notably abused
and vvronged by the massacer following:) that friendship served first to bleare
the eyes of the French protestants, and after to put them quite out. which
single friendship with the Queen, if it made the french king the bolder to
enterprise the murder, how far will he presume having a brother in the heart of
our Court to refresh the remembrance of his alliance and to stay any contrary
aids from hence, while he seize upon his protestants and vvorry them like
sheep.

And if Monsieur had any sinceare meaning to relieve the protestants, he would
employ all that credit and familiarity which he now has, while he is present
with the king, to the protestants Feeble hope of Monsieurs change.
good: even now when as they seem to have some need of him. He means nothing
les: and that he means the contrary, may easily be gathered by the many
blasphemous speeches and cruel threatenings against reformed religion,
proceeding from such as been in the trayn of his present legate a latere in
England. his ill will also to help the protestants, may appear, that where as
there have been since the last peace many violences, murders, and outrages, and
justice for those facts denied, and establishment of churches, withstood, all
against the edict: yet Monsieur, shevved never to have any common compassion,
such as some man would have upon beasts, when he saw them ouerburdened. In
france, he hantes the mas, and is hanted only of papists. In Flaunders, he
joined himself only with the Papists, and strengthened that tumultuous part
of the VVallons from whence all the present disorder there, comes, and
thaduantage to the Spaniard by mutual discention. his messenger here, though
he be in continual conversation with the kings Ambassador, and at one table:
yet can not one mas serve them, but they must have three or four Priests, that
do nothing but go from the tauarn to mas and from mas to the tauarn. A
miserable hope therefore of the masters change to good.

And to conclude this part, vulesse he had some extraordinary purpose and some
Italian Quintessence of mischief meante to be compassed against the church of
Christ, in which service the Pope will employ his catholic and his christien
son and all his sons, and they like obedient fools do his will. it could
not be possible that he would speak of coming hither with any meaning. For
pope, mother, and brother, and all papists would resist it. and he himself
for his own part, would cast with himself, that, being next king of France,
if he should be here at the death of his brother, he might beholden for a noble
hostage till they had restored us our manyfold wrongs. and again on the
otherside, it might put him in danger of his French kingdom, being there but
slendrly beloved for his famelie and for his person, and where other great
houses for valor in their persons, and perhapes title of their auncesters
would be judged by the wise and by the multitud more worthy to reign over
them. and so perhaps we might keep a gage that they would not care to redeem.
The hazardes to himself and his state, must needs tell us, that it is a
commodity by our extreme incommoditye, which he seeks. especially to Gods
Church against which all the kind of them have sworn enimitie.

For the Lords name sake therefore, Oh christian Queen ELIZABETH, take heed
to your self and to the church of Jesus Christ for which he shed his
blood, and which he has shielded under your royal defense. show your self
a zealous Prince for Gods gospel to the end. forefee, in a tender love to this
people committed to your government, the continuance of the truth among them
and their posterity. And for so much as in any great plague that can come to
this chutch your majesty must have your part being a chief member therein, as
by being in the bosom thereof you receive of the graces bestowed among us:
have a care even of your self and for your self also, we instantly beseech
you, to keep this sin far from you by admitting no counsel that may bring it
near you: and in that common confession of sins with the shaking of this rod
drives us all to deny some of your delites also, and enter with the whole
church into judgment of our selves that we be not judged of the Lord. And since
the Lord has used you as a mean to spread and enlarge Christ's kingdom in
other churches, and to harbarough the persecuted Christians in your own
kingdom: stop your majesty's ears against these forcerers and their
enchanting counsails, which seek to stay this happy course of yours, and to
provoke Gods anger against you, pray against these dangerous tempters and
temptations, and know assuredly, to your comfort, that all the faithful of God
pray for you, and when you are in your secret most separate closet of prayer,
they join with you in spirit.

The Lord endue you with wisdom according to that you have need of, at
this special time. and considering the state of princes is, in this one point,
more unhappy then the poor man's degree: that they have none ennemies that dare
tell truth, and commonly such as been their chief favorites yea, too many
churchmen, which have particular privileges to speak truth (a cruel and
impious betraying of a sacred prince) study rather for smooth delicate words
then for plain rough truth: so much the more I beseech the Lord of his mercy to
supplye their want of duty with such extraordinarye store of counsel in
your own breast, and grant you such a principal spirit to discern
spirits and to sift counsayles, that you may smell a flatterer from a loyal
counselor, prove all and approve the best. And seeing the very place of a
prince does bring him some disadvantage through our old Adam, who when he is
lift up, will hardly yield to the good poor advice of them that speak truth
in a bare simplicity: the same Lord fill your royal heart with such a
tractable and easy swetenes of a yelding nature, that you readely and humblye
may hearken to all good counsayles sent you from God and such as fear God and
love your Majesty. Yea, that you may know, that it makes most for your safety,
to encourage and make much of plain honest speakers, and to put out of heart
all flatterers. For true plain men are the best spies of a prince, they watch
when you sleep, and will ryng a timely a larum in your ear, before the danger
approach. flatterers never watch but when you wake and that they may be seen,
they will lull you in securitye til the sin and punishment thereof be heard at
the doors. The Lord de liver you from them even as from Ravens and Dogs. And
whosoever Two trials of these persvvaders. The first.
does most hottlye follow this suit ot french marriage with your Majesty,
seek to satisfy your self most gracious Queen, with what faith and love
he can do it. let this be one fire to try him in, that whereas marriage is
the most important matter even to the priuatest person that he can do all
his life long, as that which makes most to an happy or unhappy life here. and
therefore even the meanest body will not enter this weighty consultation of
marriage, without special prayers to God for his direction: if these men,
while they deal in this high marriage so nearly concerning your own person
and so much importing the whole church in these parts of the world and the
state of England, have persuaded not only your private prayers, but, according
to your public place, have also proclaimed or wished to be proclaimed publik
solemn prayer to God through the land, that he might send the best issue to
this counsayl: then have they not neglected a great help in this thing and
have considered of this matter as the consequence thereof requires.

Again, let this be a second trial (for it were well done to try The second
trial.
them seven times) if heretofore through out all your younger years they have
continually been thus earnest and taken every good occasion to persuade you
to marriage, hanging upon your skyrtes (as it were) and lying at your feet,
for to vvin you to marriage, alleging reasons for churh and common weal as
they now prrtend: then may you think they now have also a good meaning at
least, and are but deceined but if hertofore they have been either domme or
slow speakers in this cause, when all good men wished it, and whole
parliaments humbly besought it, wha^ they that be most religious prayed for it
of God and prayed it at your hands above others, no appointing you to one as
though there had been but one husband in the world, but leaving it to your
godly considerate choice any where: if in that mean while, these present
perswaders rather tended their own enriching and advancement making no
great reckoning of this matter, or if they have not very vehemently and
continually through out your reign enforced it with the same heat they now
do: I can not see what good thing can thus suddenly bring them about to this
earnest thought of marriage, and that with this man pressing you with him as
the only fit man, after so many years of your raygne and at these years of
your life: but that they be very Balaams, perhaps not of malice but blind, not
seeing what harm they seek even to themselves, and are abused by some Balac,
and that Romish archbaalam, who, by Gods mercy, having in vain assayed all
other engines to overthrow this church of God, by excommunication,
interdiction, absoluing our neighbor kings of any ancient leage or late oath
of society, and dissoluing the fealty and loyalty of subjects, and having don
his vvorst by all forcible means of that holy leage of hostility decreed in
the last Tridentine session: does now remember an older Canon of constance
which is that faith may not be holden with such as he takes for heritikes.
And therefore as one at his wits end, resolves upon this conclusion, slily to
styr up one of his honorable sons to join, in marriage with our eldest
daughter which before hand he means, though it be against his own savv, to
dispense with. knovving assuredly by the experience of that old false prophet,
that when the Lords long suffering had passed by, many of the Israelites sins:
yet so soon as they were won in, to mary with the Moabites, the wrath of
God would forthwith break out upon them. the Lord grant us to bevvayle
this sin, and to prevent this judgment.

How are we blinded that since the Lord spared not the whole world but
covered it with waters from heaven, yet England thinks to be somevvhat in
Gods sight, a poor Island surrounded already with the Occean seas, which can
(if the Lord do but vvhistle) come tombling in and devour us up. he brake in
upon his own people, whom he had hedged in with privileges: and yet we that
were, as other nations, presume to sin and hope to escape his hand. he found
away, out of his gracious promises, in justice to plague Solomon the king of
his own holy mountain, to whose person also he had so bound himself: and
yet we that are but masters of a molehyll in the world excedinglye defiled
thorough our many transgressio^s, think not to bear our own sins. Solomon for
these very sins lost ten parts of his own kingdom which he had in quiet
possession and had lost the whole but in regard of the holy promises to Judah:
and we leap at a kingdom yet in the hands of our enemies and think to gain
another kingdom to us or our heirs, by displeasing, with the self same
sins, the same revenging Lord. Noe noe, this counsel is not of the Lord,
because it is a wisdoms against his church, and if he be against us who shall
be for us?

Now as this counsel, for so much of it as touches the church, can not
proceed but out of the mouth of some hired or at the least and at the best,
some blinded Balaam: even so, for those particulars thereof which concern the
common weal and our Queen, it might well enough come from rash Rehoboams
^oung counsailors, whom there lusts will ever keep young Common weal.
^hatsoeuer years and experience they bear on their backs: (...) not from
that remnant of Salomons sages, whom the fear of God makes vvisely old
betimes. Having therefore thus far said of the church:

Let us see whether their country love by not as little as their religious
conscience, so as a man may not say, such says, such A foreign match.
fruits. The danger therefore of a foraigne match, is not so apparent or so
light, as it can be easily espied or provided for by any assurances. And if
wisdom might foresee the many lurking perils, yet this may we well look
for, that such a kind of marriage being already proved to be a high breach of
Gods law: the same Lord will! justly take away all wisdom from our wise
men and courage from our valiant men. I humbly therefore beseech the Queen and
alher wise, valiant and good men, rather to keep away the cause of this
danger then to trouble themselves with provision that in coming he should not
hurt.

It is natural to all men to abhor foreign rule as a burden of Egypt, and to
us of England if to any other nation under the son First, it agrees not with
this state or frame of government, to Foreign against kind. This state.
Laws of England.
deliver any trust of under government to an alien, but is a poison to it. when
we receive any such for a governor. And that is evident by our laws and
ancient customs of the land disabling any alien to inherit the highest
government of us. upon this reason, no doubt because a senceles and careless
forreiner, cannot have the natural and brotherlike bowels of tender love
toward this people which is required in a governor, and which is by birth
bredd and drawn out from the teates of a man's own mother country. according
to the wisdoms of that high politic call law of God: Choose a king from among
thine own brethren. and if thee want of an English heart does disable any
from ruling the ship of our Realm: shall a French heart be kindlike enough to
rule our Queen which is the stern of our ship? no, the place of an alien is
far from such trust by the judgment of our natural laws. which appears
in considering the^ by the(...) several degrees. First, for an alien which is
an alian enemy, (...) law does not so much as protect his life (a thing
other(...) Alie^ enemy.
highly and deerly regarded in our laws, if in any other (...) but makes him
all in one predicament with the case of premuniri. and though the law of
arms bid him be raunsomed, yet our peacible laws ask no subjects blood for
arresting such a prisoner and killing him in cheapeside. And let this alien be
an alien friend, yet if he be not denized, the laws can not abide him to be
master of one foot of ground within the Realm. the reason Alien friend
vvherof is, they are not inheritable to the laws of our land or answerable
or able to demand by the laws, any thing from the meanest subject. Yea when
they have their best footing here and are accounted members with us of this
body by endenization or enfraunchisment, yet have those our wise forefathers
that have left us England to rule and dvvell in, had ever such a Alie^ denize^.
vvatchfull eye to strangers as they would not in their days of peaceable
gouernements, and we, according to their custom, do not in these days
suffer any stranger though denized to bear any office touching the peace and
ordering of the land. he is not trusted with a iustiship of peace or petie
constableship. much less would they make him Admiral of the navy, Constable
of the tower, or Guardian of any castle or piece of strength. In time of poperye
when the Roman prelate usurped upon our prince for conferring benefices,
Abbeis, and such livings here, to Priors aliens
Italians, French, and other alians at his pleasure, yet would the kings of
those blindest days suspect treachery in these holy Abbots and Priors whom
otherwise they made their Gods, and would without fear of sacrilege,
sequester their profits unto the kings cofers and seize the land of those
holy alians, least they might perhaps wage foreigne soldiar with English
pay, against the king of England. whereof they gave manifest experience to
king Henrye the fifth who having founded an Abbay wherein he put French
friars, and in a visitation, as their founder fynding them negligent in their
devotions: he asked the good father of the house what was the cause. who
ansvvered flatlye that they could not naturally pray for him, that had been
enemy in himself and his auncesters to them and their forefathers and to their
land which by kind they loved. so much nature remained in those of that
ungracious spirit. Now if a founder of a beggarly rabble of friars, could not
have their prayers, which at that time went a begging and were never so
dear but a man might have a long paternoster for a penny: how deinty vvoulde
they be of their monye to Englishmen and how liberal in alms to aid their
own countries and countrymen? Likewise in the days of king Edward the
first, certain aliens richly beninificed, refused to aid the king in his
wars: for which obstinacy, albeit the Pope would not let him deprive them,
yet was he so bold as to put them out of his protection, leaving their lives
out of defense or revenge by law. For these reasons, to this day it is
expressed in the most large and most benificiall Legitimatio^ made to any
alien, that he shall not dvvell in Barvvick, Hampton or such maritime or other
town of trust. and all for fear least that their love toward their own
countries, or hatred to ours bredde in their bones, should never out of the
flesh. So that we see no alien is made so legalis or ligeus to the crown of
England but with some restraint to him in respect of the state, which can never
so kindly matriculate him as the child which she has born in her own womb

And we are the more loath to put our shoulders under this burden any more,
because already we have felt the weight of the little finger and smarting
whips of this incommoditye. which would seem yet so much the more irksome to
us, if now after more then twenty years svveete fredome therefro, we should
be pressed down with the heavy loins of a worse people and beaten as with
scorpions by a more vile nation. In which respect it has been always yelden
unto her majesty, for the chief and first benifite done to this kingdom,
that she redeemed it and yet, not she but the Lord by her, from a foreign
king: according to the worthynes whereof, it has been from time to time
notably set forth in monumentes of ecclesiastical story, and civil cronicles,
as a singular commendation to the happy beginning of her reign: yea it made
her subjects in love with her the very first day, and has increased it
mightily to this hour. whereof it seems they have little regard who seek to
stain the entry of her second twenty years and to blemish the praise thereof
by the contrary of that which caused the first to be so highly extolled and by
bringing upon her people a more dangerous forreiner and more to their
discontentation, to leave them in worse case then they were found.

For whereas all these kinds of aliances with realms are contracted for
mutual support, this aliance presently in talk, has no such hope. These
Frenchmen gave such trial of their loyal aliance and of their profitable
neighborhood to the Grecians, either while they were yet in Galatia from
whence their french Frenchmen.
brag is to come, either else in their vagabond time while they sought a place
to set their foot on, that an Emperor of Greece burnt them with this
caremarke which they carry till this day: Who will needs hold friendship
with France, must take heed of their alliance.



According to the which counsel of Greece, the true and natural old English
nation never esteemed nor loved the French: they have it sonck so deep and
deeply laid up in their heart, as the savor wherewith their young shells were
seasoned to the son from graundfather to father, who in teaching the^ to shoot
would have them image^ a frenchman for their butt, that so in shooting they
might learn to hate kindly, and in hating learn to shoot neearely. Out of
this inbred hatred it came, that Frenchmen above other aliens bear this
addition in some of our ancient chronicles, Charters, and, statuts to be the
ancient ennemies of England. And can it be saufe that a stranger and
Frenchman, should as owner possess our Queen, the chief officer in England,
our most precious rych treasure, our Elizabeth JONAH and ship of good speed,
the royal ship of our aid, the highest tovver, the strongest hold, and castle
in the land?

It will not be received for answer to affirm barely, that this fear is
without ground of truth, because, forsooth, the Realm Alteration of government.
must still be governed as before. we know that de iure it should be so. But
in matters of kingdoms, who can say that de facto it shall be so? will any
perswader of this marriage offer himself a gage of life and death, that it shall
be so? If he and many more vvoulde yet are they no counterpoise to the Queen
and Realm, whose life and good estate comes here to be warranted. For if he
marye her with that good love on both parts, which I wish with all my poor
heart between her majesty and her godly husband whenever and who^soeuer she
shall marye: yet shall he bear a great swaye with her, who bears all the
swaye with us. and if he do not love her (the Lord keep her from proving)
then must she fear him. so as for fear or love, he will rule her and the
whole land for her sake. And this is done many times without taking on him
supreme authority. for if he do but either give or sell, after the French
manner our chief offices: he may rule though not as head, yet by those his
promoted creatures, as by so many hands and feet. and though he be not
president in the counsayl, nor once admitted to sit personally in the chamber:
yet vvoulde it be no hard thing for him to thrust in at the door such
counsailors in whose mouth he may speak, and by them, as by hired spialles, to
know what is done at that bourd: and as by knights at his post to pass or
repulse what him pleases.

The example of the king of Spain serves for me in this case, and not for
those which would make us believe he stood for a K. of Spayn.
cipher in Algorisme. For how many great matters obtained he? and it is known
too well, what pensionars he had of that honorable company of counsailors,
again, at that time, the marriage with Spain was not so dangerous nor offering
such cause of suspicion as now. for there was not yet come into the world out
of the smokye pyt of hell any such holy leage as absolueth aforehand all
conspiratif oaths given us. France and Spayn were then in wars: they are
since allied by marriage of a French daughter, by whom Spain has a daughter:
and the lest alliance in the world binds them together against religion. And
though I esteem the king of Spain for a loyal king of inuiolate faith and
whole honor in respect of the French king: yet am I so far off from sound
trust in either of them both, that considering how Spayn doates upon that
dronken harlot of Rome, I would be loath that either Frannce or Spain should
have such a Porter here to let them in at a posterne gate, as Monsieur is. Yea
I do not only set this popish French faith behind the Spanishe honor of
promise holding: but I affirm without doubting, that it is not so safe to
contract this near alliance with these French, as to make some other commun
amity with those Moors beyond Spayn. whose barbarian religion and region,
though it be farther from us then France: yet do those mores hold more Faith
with strangers then these French do with themselves.

A most illcome guest therefore to all sorts of men here. for to take this
whole land in a lump, and to make no difference of papist or protestant: I am
sure the deuoutest papist that has an Englysh heart left to knok upon in his
breast, wyllbe afraid to call Monsieur his master. But a most dangerous
guest to this quiet of the state must he needs be, that to the grief of the
greatest Contrary religion.
part and chief strength of the land, requires open exercise of a contrary
religion, for him self and his, giving great hope thereby to others of
obteyning some indifferent Interim. Now to prove that any alteration in
religion or expectation to have religion altered, is a politic bile enflaming
the peace of a settled and even state: I might have sufficient authority, to
some men, out of macciauel. But I loath once to take up his best textes though
they were written in golden letters of the fairest text hand. Hereon will I
only rest for this point, that to alter our good religion, or to give any
premission to so wicked Idolatry as is his, takes away Gods blessing from the
state, whose providence it is whereby Rulers reign and states do stand. And
let him, pardie, that holds himself the best politic, hold this with me for
a corner stone and most luckie principle in policy: that, as to bring in and
hold true religion, procures Gods protection, and works subjects obedience
of heart far above all other laws or fear of laws: so, to put out Gods
gospel and to bring in Idolatrye, or to enlarge Antichrist and streighten the
passage of Christ, does shut all bessing from heaven: so as the Lord shall
curse our counsel and cast us in our wisdom of ouerweening. In which
behalf, we have somewhat already felt of that judgment for our fault of once
deliberating so ungodly a thing. for wisemen in marieng of their children will
most willingly seek houses of ancient amity, and carefully do avoid the
seed of old enemity, which is heriditarie, as other diseases are. and we are
not so wise in marriage of our common weal. for what house is more aunciently
enemy to her majesty's royal ancestors and this land, the^ that of Valois?
what king more out of leage or long truce with this Valois.
state then he of France? as he who can not be content only to usurp a
kingdom from us, but is impatient that our prince should so much as bear the
true title thereof. And if we were such ennemies when we had but civil
quarrelles and only, vter regnaret, how should not our hate be multiplied,
when it is de aris et focis, and consequently, vter sit et viuat? And if
entermariages emongst themselves in their own family, can not stay this furye
of theyrs, but that for religion only and none other quarrel, their very pity
is cruelty even upon their own bowels, murdering and massacring one another
by thousands and ten thousands: how shall any marriage make them friends to
us, whom they repute as old enemies and have yet bleeding in their chronicles
the dishonors and vvounds heretofore given from hence to their kings and
aunceters? No no, well said that wise Troyan Timeo Danaos vel dona ferentes:
and well may a simple Englishman say, timeo gallos, namely Valesios, nuptias
ambientes especially such mixed marriages, which we know to be otherwise
against their own conscience.

It were well we learned that conscience of them, if not of conscience, at
least by horror of those streams of french blood Examples modern.
that was shed through such a marriage in Paris: assuring our selves, that
if they went up to the knocles in french blood, they will up to the elboes in
English blood. And that cruelty raged not only on the poor and selye ones,
but it took the noble men and great princes by the throat. Yea the king of
Navarre himself who was the spouse in that infamous marriage to the end of the
world, had the deadly sword hanging over his head by a tvvine thread, and had
felt the point thereof if he had not to his dishonor (the Lord be honored in
his repentance) renied his God. From these me^, that have eaten the people of
God as bread, have been fleshed in murdering of multitudes, and drunk the blod
of noble men, why should any good manner stay a good loving subject from
fearing the same dangers and cruelties from the same men to our Queen? and
so, a vvretched confusion in this land, if for the sins thereof, she should
come in their fingers to be a doleful bryde in their bloody brydchambers:
which God for his Christ's sake prevent Amen.

Beside this late experience in our eyes of their dangerous dealings in
marriages among them selves, we may learn, if we Examples ancient.
be so happy, by the ancient hurts that England have received through royal
intermariages with that nation: and by the rules which the wise English
counselors of those times have set down as a state wisdom for their
succeding counselors. yea we may see, that these marriages with France or
with any other parts of that present dominion, before or sense it was united
to that crown, have alvvayes endamaged England, and sometime France to. so
as, for most part, they might be reckoned among those ill bargaynes that no
body gaynes by, and therefore be Henry first
like cursed from above. Such were the marriages, where Henrye the first gave
his daughter Malt the Empris, in second marriage, to the Earl of Angeovv, and
his sister Aelix (as some chronicles call her) to Steeuen Earl of Bloys. for
thereof sprang the loss of a kingdom to Malt during her lvfe, by being so
far out of the land in another country, when she should have accepted it
here: thereof sprang the periuries of Steven king of England entised to a
kingdom through the commodity of his near place which seemed to provoke him
and therefro came the civil miseries to the people, who through the
incertaintye of a governor, were in field and arms one against another. with
like blessing did Henry. 2.
Henry her son take to wife Eleonor daughter to the Earl of Aquitaine and
Poictou, who through her own wickedness and the friends she made on the
otherside, entertained many years an unnatural war between her own
husband and his and her children, Henry, Rychard, and John, And yet this
unhappy Henry the father, must go and take Marguerit the daughter of Lewis the
eight for a wife to his son Henry, and for his son Richard Prince H. Rychard.
1.
took Aelix an other daughter of France, which alliances proved such
assurances to Henry the second as his last five or six years were nothing
but an unkind strife with his own sons and especially his son Rychard made
open war against him and won from him a part of Normandy, by the help of
his trusty friend Jews the French king. After this, when Rychard him self
was king, not vvithstanding all the French friendships and alliances: at what
time he was taken prisoner in his return from Jerusalem, the French king was
not ashamed to excite John the brother of England to seize himself of the
crown. The said John when he was king marieng the daughter of the Earl of
Engolesme in France, and his son Henry the third having married R. John. 1.
Henry. 3.
first a daughter of the Earl of prouence, and secondly french Marguerit
sister to Phillip the fayer: found in the several days of their reigns, the
French king to be no better then a prick in their sides, taking part against
them and provoking their people to be, as it were thorns in their feet.
Edward the second succeding Edward. 2
his auncesters as well in their unhappy folly, as in their kingdom: will
needs marry with Isabel daughter to the same Phillip. which proved such an
assurance to himself, as that his French wife was able to bereave him first
of his son carrying him into France, and having there made a strong part, could
return and bereave her husband of his liberty and kingdom, and in the end of
his life to, after a vvretched captivity under his own son.

So that of old, the alliances of France did set husband and wife together
by the ears as in Henry the second and Edward the second: the father and son
together, as they did Henry the second and his three sons, Henry, Richard, and
John: brother against brother, as Rychard and John: the king and his people
together, as they did king John and Henry the third against the people: and as
they did afterward in Rychard the second, and Henry the sixth. which the duke
Thomas of Gloucester in his time Richard. 2.
well foresavv: and therefore upon treaty of the like marriage for Rychard the
second, who having now reigned. xix. years, and being thyrtye years old,
fell amourous most vnkindlye and unkingly with a french girl but eight years
of age, daughter to Charles the sixth, French king: he the same Thomas of
Gloucester uncle to the king stepped up and vvithstode that match: having belike
in these former experiences observed the truth of that general rule set down
upon the French, by that Greek Emperor. And because I find the words of this
Duke set down more expressly in a French chronicle then any where else, I
will use their A witness vvithour ecception.
own words as the fittest testimony in this case. The alliance of France
(says that Duke in that french story) has been the ruin of England, and this
nevve friendship betvveene these kings (says the Duke) shall never make me look
for any assured peace attvvene the^, for (says he) there was never yet any
trust or religion or truth in the word or promises of the French. What an
ancient and hereditary disease of disloyalty is this in the royal seat of
France, especially since the Majors of the household became kings? And though
this Dukes voice in this counsel were ouerruled by the multitude, or rather
by the lust of the king: yet did the king and his people and their children
feel how true it was in sequel. For first this externe amity with France,
bred home enemitye in England. It cost us for an earnest penny the town of
Breast in Britanie, by means of the kings outlandish Queen. And poor king
Richard using in private connsaise altogether the French companions, such as
his wife brought: began to disdeyne his own natural kinsmen and subjects,
and finallye follovving overmuch the cruel and riotous counsel of such
minions, namely the Constable of France and Earl of S. Pol vvho^ the French
king sent of purpose to king Richard his son in law polling the people and
putting to death such nobles as his french counsel put in his head, in the end
he was quite vnkinged by Henry of Lancaster, afterward Henry the fourth.
who during the time that he platted this enterprise, found hospitalitye in
France for all king Rychards alliance under his father in laws nose. The
French match it was which within one year brought the king to dishonorable
captivity, death, and deposing. which appears, for that in story it is
rekoned, among other things that alienated from him the love of his subjects,
so far as when he was taken, his enemy was feign to save his life by guard
from his own people, and also it is objected against him that he had made this
alliance with France, not calling to counsel the three estates of England.
Even the last marriages we made with France Henry. 5.
were like unhappy to the end. Henry the fifth that noble king had the alliance
of Katherin daughter to Charles the seventh of France, and after had the
possession of France, first by right of descent and marriage, then by conquest
of sword, and lastly by covenant agreed with king Charles and his peers. yet
could he none otherwise hold their love, but having their necks under his
yoke. Which union of possession and right, to that realm, Henry. 6.
was afterward fortified by crouning his son Henry the sixth in Paris and by
a new match between him and Marguerit daughter of a French Charles, as most
men saien, which cost him first for a princely brybe, the dukedom of Angeow
and Ereldome of Main, and after many miserable destructions of our English
cheualry and people lost both the new co^quired title and ancient heriditarye
dominions on that side, and finally wrought an ignominious deprivation of
Henry the sixth from this realm. I think, I might set dovvue all such matches,
as unhappy ones: and contrariwise those matches nothing so unhappy, but for
the most part prosperous, which were made either at home or in other places,
as vveren al those marriages made since Henry the sixth as by Edward Home
mariges happy.
the fourth her Majesty's greatgraundfather, and by her majesty's graundfather
and by her father.

And if a sister or daughter, who had no or dinarye counsel allowed her out
of France, could yet continually prevail so much to the trobling of the state
and deposing of the king here: what peril is it to dravv hither a brother,
who is to have his ordinarye counsel, and some guard of force and
continuall-intelligence with the French king, and is also to be a leader and
executer of any devise himself, which a French woman could not do so well.
the danger therefore in this match is increased beyond that in the former
matches. for there the party, for or by whom, the danger came, was a woman,
and therefore weaker: the party to whom the match fell out so hurtful, was a
man, and therefore stronger: here the peril strenghtned for the party bringing
the peril out of France is a man: and the party endaungered is a woman
These things deserve well the vveighing, and may not be passed over upon
every lisping word and crouching courtesy of a French Ambassador or other
flattering petie messenger. And if our wise and renoumed forefathers of England
passed without stombling over the threshold of suspecting the french aliance,
even then wha^ the french men professed and held the laws of atmes with
their enemies as soldiers: let us not be nicely fearful to pass the bounds
of honorable modesty, in iudgeing of the present princes which profess to
deceive and break faith with such as we are, yea let us boldly and vvisely
cast this doubt that they whose frendships when they had not so il purposes,
but thought it their honor to match with us, wrought us yet this woemust needs
now hurt us according to their hateful falshod in dealing with us, who^ they
esteem, according to their doctrine of Rome, no better then dogs.

Now as there is danger on the part of the French for great troubles to
follow by this marriage, as well for that they have new fangled and stirring
common wealth heads, lusting after Innouations, as also for the jealousy of
two so near bordering kingdoms: even so will it be harder then iron for
Englishmen Englismen. K. of Spayn.
to digest with quiet stomach, the french insolences and disdaynefull
brauades. For if the Spaniard coming in upon his honor, and being an ancient
friend, at that time of one religion, did nevertheless bear away hard
intreadie for his unwonted pride toward us: more danger will their be, least
these needy spent Frenchmen of Monsieurs train, being of contrary religion
and who are the scome of the kings Court, which is the scomme of all France,
which is the scomme of Europe, when they seek, like horseleaches, by sucking
upon us to fill their beggarly purses to the satis fieng of their bottomless
expense: the poor plain and rude Englishman first give him the elbovve in
the street, then the fist and so proceeding to farther bicquerings in pryuate
quarrels, great troubles rise of small beginnings. for as touching the humble,
mild, persecuted, and religious Frenchmen, that we receive him as a well-beloved
brother, and that our old grudging nature against the french in this respect,
is expelled, as it were with a fork. that comes by the force of religion, the
Lord having wrought it in our hearts. But against these irreligious, haughtye
and faithless frenchmen, that bring in a religion contrary to ours, and have
no conscience nor love to use us kindly, our English nature vvil return a main
to his own course. which things also may euidte^ly appear to any man, that
would but mark how sadly and heavily and with how sorovvful cou^tenances all
the multitude of English both nobility and comminaltye look, casting up their
hands and eyes to heaven when they do but talk of the matter.

This stinging stranger of France must we keep vvarme in our bosom at our
own intolerable charge, which is another reason not to be neglected, since
treasure is a principal sinevv of any A charge to the Realm.
state: and therefore would not be wasted, much less therevvyth to buy our
own harm. For they are over credulous to be believed, who with the empty
name of Monsieur, and of the French kings brother, would promise such other
fools as list credit them, mountains of gold and great gain to this royal
state, by his worshipful revenues forsooth bringing in king Phillip (who
serves them in this devise for all in all) for their example. First who knows
not this in general that every prince, though never so rich, will hoard up his
own treasure, and spend of the strange purse. and it is a notable policy for
our french enemy, by this means to weaken the very knees and hammes of our
Realm. Now, that which other princes do of worldly wisdoms: Monsieur must
do of mere necessity. for let his receiptes be great for a subject, yet
shall they not be sufficient to maintain his mind in state of so great a priuce
and companion to our Queen. for eue^ already his debtes and expenses are said
to be farther at odds with his revenues, the^ many years receipts can yield the
arerages.

But these perswaders, as men having their eyes daseled with the golden sun,
are over affectioned to this match and can not see that Monsieur has not more
countyes then king Phillip had archdukedomes: nor so many dukedoms as king
Phillip had kingdoms: and that he is not able to dropp half testons for king
Phillips pistelas: nor with silver to weighdowne his gold: as also that king
Phillip for all those dominions and mines of treasures, was content to be
pingling with our purses: made Queen Mary to ask more extraordinary and
frequent subsides and taskes, then had been seen in so short a reign: further
causing her to borow more loanes of hundred powndes, forty pounds twenty
pounds, and ten pounds of her subjects, then were ever paid again by a great
sort. thus gleaning the money from the subjects, and by armefuls lading out of
the eschequer, that both the land and the Eschequer was left as empty to the
Queens majesty that now is, as it was many a day. The very bodies of our
men, were feign to be employed in his service and foreign wars there to
abide the foremost force and to be as a wall between the honorable Spainard
and the Canon. which wars nothing in our own quarrel, besides the present
loss of noble men and good soldiars there at the place, cost us in a back
reckoning, the richest and strongest town of war that the Queen then had.
And yet must we have king Phillip brought in for example of a gainefull
marriage to England. In deed we had great cause to thank the Lords mercy, who
delivered us from that king his power, as we had to thank our sins that we
were given into his hand. but we may say we escaped a scouring. for, but that
he was newly settled in his own kingdom, and could not tarry to be warm in
his bed here, the end would have been worse then the beginning, he would have
holde^ hard, if not for the soil of the kingdom, yet for the navy, for the
ordinance, and other chief moveable treasures and real Jewels of the land.
All which things come in a more danger with this Prince, because if he be
king of france, he shall be nearer and readier by colorable polices to
vvythdravv by little and little all things from hence in her Majesty's lysr,
and by force to challenge them, if (Which God say nay to) she should be his
wife and dye before him.

There is another dangerous danger in this foreign french match that aryseth
yet far higher, in that he is the brother of Monsieur heir aspara^t of France
and the dangers thereby.
childles France. So as, if Henry the third now king, should dye the morrow
after our marriage, and Monsieur repare home, as we may be svre he would, into
his native country a larger and better kingdom: then, by all likelihode, either
must our Elizabeth go with him out of her own native country and svvete
soil of England, where she is Queen as possessor and inheritor of this
imperial crown vvithall regal rights, dignities, perogatiues, pre
heminences, privileges, autorities, and iuredictions of this kingly office and
having the kingrike in her own person, into a foreign kingdom where her
writ does not runn and shall be but in a borovved Majesty as the moon to the
son, shining by night as other kings wives, and so she that has ruled all
this while here shall be there over ruled in a straung land by some belledame
not without awe perhapps of a sister in law, and we her poor subjects that
have been governed hitherto by a natural mother, shall be ouerlooked at home by
some cruel and proud governor, or else must she tarry here without comfort of
her husband, seeing her self despised or not vvifelike esteemed and as an
eclipsed son diminished in souereinty, having such perhaps appointed to serve
her and be at her commandment after the french phrase, which in plain
English will govern her and her state.

In this great matter what an illuding answer is it again by the particular
example of the king of Spain to put away this Spanish K.
reason grounded upon these two general rules. The first is, that a stranger
mighty king brought into a realm to aid them as strange aid.
was the Turk and his sarasins, or upon any lighter occasion, will hardly be
gotten out again. The second, a stranger king drawn in by our sins and sent
by Gods justice for our punishment, is not ridd without Gods extraordinary
help. Now sir, because we were once happily dispatched of Spain, therefore
we shall once again commit this gross follye and contemn that general rule
of policy. And because the Lord in mercy did once deliver us from Spayn,
therefore we will tempt him again by delivering our selves into the hands of
France. Alas for these men, if king Phillip had never married Queen Mary and
if this matter had been to dispute xxvij. years ago, then had they had no one
reason for their side, nor no answer to escape any of our arguments. and this
absurd manner of reasoning is very Macciauelian logic, by particular examples
thus to govern kingdoms and to set down general rules for his prince whereas
particulars should be warranted by generals. But there master wrested his
ungracious wit ever to the mayntenance of a present state, and these foolish
schoolers put forth their gross conceits to the overthrow of this present, in
hope of, I vvot not what, futur common wealth of their own head. Some
subtilty there is also in this French marriage more dangerous the^ spanish.
answer, that when we are to deliberate of France which is the more nere
and more ancient, therefore more dangerous enemy, to anoy us with his forces
and to hold us if he once have us: they bring us in example Spayn, a more
remote potentate and an ancient friend, one that was at that time of one
religion with this kingdom, and therefore not so pricked to hasten some chaung
in our state, as this man, who being ledd by Antichrist must not endure with
any patience that state vvher Christ is. Moreover our dispofitio^ more ready to
war with France then with Spayn, is helped by more continual occasions
given of both sides, by more co^ueniencie of means to perform suddenly, which
will make them let no opportunity slyp, that may bring so com bersome a
neighbor under the^ as we are. And better may they do it now, then might the
king of Spayn then. for the^ was Spain at wars with France, neither was it
like that France would have been holden by any friendship while he should have
suffered a more pnissant neighbor set his foot here, whom he might so
easily let by helping us. But now is there no enemity between France and
Spain to let this practice: they are of kin by the flesh, and by their
religion. and the holy leage ties them together in that respect as it were
faggotstiks. And in truth Spayn being so far and France so nere, France has
great advantage in this comparison and cannot be so let of Spain, as Spayn
may be by him.

These dangers wherein this dangerous pactise of marriage vvrappeth Queen
Elisabeth in hyrlyfe time and her England together alike, will, I doubt not,
move those in authority to avoid them and others that are private to pray
against them most seruently. But these calamities, alas, end not with this
age. For where as these persvvaders lay for a chief ground their certain
expecting issue of her Majesty's body upon this match and the commodities
thereof ensuing, thereby persuading this strange conceit: I will at once
dispatch that reason that might be objected against me, and make it a chief
argument (for I esteem it my second politic reason) to diswade the French
marriage especially. If it may please her Majesty to call her faythfullest wise
physicians and to adjure them by their conscience toward God, their loyalty
to her, and faith to the whole land, to say their knowledge simply without
respect of pleasing or displeasing any, and that they consider it also as the
cause of a realm and of a Prince, how excedingly dangerous they find it, by
their learning for her majesty at these years to have her first child, yea
how fearful the expectation of death is to mother and child: I fear to say
what will be their answer, and I humbly beseech her Majesty to inform
hyrselfe thoroughly even in her love to the Issue dangerous to the Queen.
whole land, which holds dear her life and peace, and which as it has
hitherto deutifully sought her marriage while hope of issue was, desiring it as
the chiefest common wealth good, and vvithall that fear God English or
stranger would have rejoiced to see that the reign of Queen Elizabeth might
have been drawn forth, as I may say, in her faithful ligne: yet dare we not
now otherwise crave it, but so as it might be by such afather as had a sound
body and holy soul, and yet not the^ neither, onles she may first find it to
stand with her life and safety:

And when I think more earnestly of this matter, me thinks it must needs
come first of a very French love to our Queen and land, to seek this
marriage, even now so eagerly at the uttermost time of hope to have issue, and
at the very point of most Note.
danger to her Majesty for childbearing: whereby they think, if her Majesty
have issue, to see either the mother die in childbedd (which the Lord forbid)
and the land left again as theyrs has been, to an infant: or else to see both
mother and child put in a grave, and so the land left a spoil to foreign
invasion, and as a stack of vvood to civil wars. All is one to them saving
that they desire the vvorst to befall us. And if there be any perswader of this
strange marriage, in whom remaynes yet a simple mind but missed or miscarried, I
desire him or her, and I charge the^ as they will answer to God of their truth
to their Mistres of England and English brethren, that they close their hand
and put their fingar to their mouth, and vvaigh better hereof as well by the
law of God, as of humane policy which must, no doubt, agree with Gods law.
I counsel them to consider these dangers common to them selves with all
other. and if they look well about them, they shall find this marriage a right
unhappy one, and on no side happy, wheresoever they turn them.

For let it be that he have issue by her and that none but feamal only: we
have hazarded our kingdom for putting it in the hands of the father, who under
color of some tutorship to his daughter, Issue female only.
will have her into France and so either adioyne this land to France, or
mary her to some French or other stranger at his lyking: and all this while
we never the near possession of our old right in France which we so much
desired. for the Salique law bars her quite. And though she should come and
dwell in England, yet her bringing up being in France, her father will nousell
her in his own religion, and so she coming home shall strive to staplish
popery, as the late Queen of Scotts did when she came out of France:
whereupon ensued those bloodshedds and read vvarres: besides the ill-favored
examples of the French Court and kings, which we would be loath our English
princes shall learn and bring home hither.

If this issue by Monsieur should be a son and but one son: then will he
translate his Court into France, and leave this Issue male one and only
Viceroy.
poor prouence to the mannaging of a viceroy, the greuances whereof are enough
set forth by referring you to the proconsulates of Rome under that Empire: to
the vndergouernours in the former monarchies. to the viceroyes and Luogotenenti
of Spayn in Naples-Cicil and here nerer in the lovv countries. Who like boares
in a fat new broken up ground, by sovving first some seeds of dissentions to
breed partialities in the country, do root out the ancient homegrovving
nobility, and turn under perpetual slavery, as cloddes, the country people,
yea and perhaps in the end, caught with the liquerishnes of government, seize
themself of the absolute kingdom, and deceive their master, so did the
ancient Monarchies melt: so did this pre sent Empire lose her provinces and is
now become less then a kingdom: and so may this ancient kingdom be
transferred to a rebellious seed. Such rough plovvers do our sins deserve, to
plovv deep furrovves on our backs, if the Lord in mercy look not on us. I am
not ignorant that some pass easily this incommoditie Mark well these
Englishmen.
of viceroy affirming it to bring honor not peril. for (say they) this son
being born here, shall be king of both kingdoms with great honor, as has been
heretofore. But they be svveete Englishmen if you mark their English. we
reason of the dishonor and servitude which comes to the nation, and they
answer of the honor that comes to the prince. more like Basciaes to the great
Turk, then Christian commonvvealthmen. as though our Christian and natural
Queen could think any thing profitable to her, which might any way though a
far off, tend to the perpetual bondage of her people: here though they
subtly let slip the assured hurt which hereby falls to the common weal:
I will not forget to show how uncertain, yea and how certainly perilous to
the prince, this honor is wherewith they flatter her.

Holy king Henry, as they call him, whom I suppose they will bring in for
example, was crowned in Paris: and yet lost all on that side before he was a
man, as I remember, or soon after, and before his unhappy death, he lost this
land also. which loss of both came by striving for both. So that he may with
more reason Henry the sixth no good example to persuade by.
be recorded among those fallen princes at the lowest of Boccaces vvhele, or in
our English book of fallen Maiestrates, then to be reconed up by any faithful
English man for a pattern of imitation to our present Queen Elizabeth. Who so
will avoid those fearful effects, must avoid the cause from whence they
proceed and not bring such examples to be followed. This example of Henry the
sixth, would prove like to our present case if it were pursued. For, the
complexion and constitution of Monsieur, is not to live long, but to leave his
child in the cradle, for the reasons hereafter remebred. And if the birth of
this child should any way endanger our Queen: the poor infant if he ouerliued
should have two over great scepters to play withal: even as Henry the sixth
had. and so much the worse as there are even now one or two houses in
France which would easily be saluted as kings, and of whom both Monsieur and
the king that now is, may well stand in fear. perhaps these men would
provide that this child should be borne in Monmouth and not at vvinsor and then
they would think all sure. Me thinks they should runn headlong on this remedy
that are blinded in this evil. Thus it comes oftentimes to pass, that
flattery vvoundeth princes even with the very self things it so fairly
bears in hand.

And if he should have a son and a daughter, so as both of them Issue male and
female.
over living their parents, the son should be actually king as well of his
fathers as of his mothers kingdom and then dye without issue: his sister yet
living: is it not more then probable in this case that the next prince of the
blood in France under pretense that England was once vested in the blood of
the French king and under their government will draw it also by this unity of
possession with the crown of France, under the law Salique and so quite
vnqueen the desolate sister? for the least color in the world joined with the
sword in a strong highminded kings hand, makes a good title to a kingdom,
even against father, mother, wife, brother, and sister: as stories witness, and
according to that which is said, No faith in matter of a kingdom. Much more
against that poor daughter which then should be a stranger in the house of
France. The actual possession of her brother, will make no title: neither
will it be any plea, to say that by our laws, lands descended from the mother
are guyded to the heyrs of the part of the mother. but our issue must be
battle, which is a trial most uncertain, most perilous to the daughter who
being out of possession, shall have much ado to find equiualiant champions.

And if this Monsieur should have by our Queen, two sons or more: it must needs
breed foreign wars and civil partaking thorough Two sons or more.
disagreement of the brethren, while the younger looking back to the times of
william the first, would challenge to have kingdoms and such regal dominions
divided among children, as the Conqueror did with England and Normandye: and
the elder knovving himself according to the present laws heir to both
would claim both: utterly denying this carpet conqueste of Monsienr to be any
conquest like that of William. And so that miserable civil dissension in
England renewed after her, which in the peacemaking marriage of her noble
grandfather, and in the person of her royal father, and in continaunce of that
ligne in her hitherto is happyly quenched. He that confesses all these
inco^ueniences and weenes to provide for them with his penn in his study, or
by acts of parliament, or by any other conditioning of oaths and sworn
promises contested at their high altar of their mass, forgets the many
experiences of sayths most solemnly given, falsified. on the other side he that
scorns this our particularizing of this matter and putting of the case, what
if he have issue male only, or female only, must be put in mind again, how
unlike it is for her to have any: how dangerous for her to have but one: and
how her years do necessarily deny her many. he must also remember on the
side of Monsieur how fruteles a race that is. his eldest brother had none: his
second brother but one and that a daughter: his third has none: all of them
being a forced generation by physic after many years, when their mother
feared to be put away as barraine. No where therefore are we to match with
less hope of issue. And if it seem curiosity that we proceed further in
this case, as to say what if Monsieur should have both male and femall, or
diverse males: I require of him but so much foresight and casting of doubt for
the happy staying of this crown in the English ligne of our auneient kings,
as noble men and other great landed ones at this day have. who in their usual
conueighances do marshall the fall of their inheritances by limitation upon
limitation even to the tenth son of their body begotten and to the tenth
nephew of their foresaid tenth son of his body begotten. May it be lavvfull,
so to prouied for the continuance of pelting manners in one family of a
subject: and will he not carefully cast a fevv doubts for holding of the crown
with many principalities and dukedoms, for the preservation of the capital
corporation of England: in respect where of al other the greatest castelles,
honors, and manors, are but mesnalties or rather very messuages and tenancyes
paraual. Issue therefore, or no issue by this Frenchmans body: the issue of
this Frenchmans marrage is most dangerous to this Realm, and the very
consideration of it fearful in behalf of our lief sovereign.

But these gloosing Frenchmen have whet on some of our persvvaders, These
fair words make no wise man feign. Dominion.
who likewise whet on others, with remembrance of the dominions and rule
which their anncesters sometime bare in France, and which this land now
wants with some disgrace. Other of our men's teeth are made to water with
fair promises of reposseding those seigneuries and countries which their
noble forefathers enjoyed: as though, by means of this marriage, they would
set foot there (I know not how) before the french Revenue.
were a vvare, and sending over some colonies from hence of such superfluous
gentilmen as themselves, they would hold it maugre the king there. with such
brave words the false flattering frenchmen, bring fond credulous Englishmen
into a supposed paradise. These brauing English gentlemen are as far from the
wisdom of their noble auncestets of whom they speak, as from their courage.
It were verily a conquest fit for gentlemen, to assay the recovering of our
former losses, and to begin even with our last loss first. but if these men's
either wisdom were such as were like to get it, or their courage such as
were like to keep it, they would remember that in times passed, the noble*
Englishmen delighted rather to be seen in France in bright armor then in gay
clothes and masking attire. they did choose rather to vvinn and hold by manly
force, then by such esseminate means. Yea when they did obteyn any thing by
marriage, it was not that England was married to France, but by marying france
As the wise is subject to her husband: so is her country to his land.
to England. wherein is great difference if a man have the wit to mark it.
For if either we were Frenchmen or our nation more large and pleasant then
France: we might perhaps have reason simply to desire it. Then should our
land* be the royal seat, our king should be resident among us, and our empire
increased by so many vassalles. which though, by the marriages of our former
kings the flowers of kinghthood, would have fallen out otherwise in process
of time, to the same bondage of this land, if they had still kept France,
because their succeeding children kings of England vvoulde have removed
thither as into a more rich and pleasant kingdom out of England divided from
the world: yet had even our forefathers in the days of those victorious kings,
that reason to desire it which we want. that is, they went thither with
their kings to be masters of country and people, and to hold it by aims as
strongest: and wheresoever their king went he was still an Englishman, and
trusted most and most advanced Englishmen. yea those kings had ever Animam
reuer tendi, as I may say, into England* in so much as king Henrye the fifth
who had set surest foot in France, yet he had a mind to be brought after his
death out of fickle France into well stayed England. and here we have his
boanes. But in this marriage our Queen is to be married, and both she and we
poor souls, are to be mastered and, which is worse, mistrised to. And as
for the issue he shall be mere French, no more acknovvledging us, then that
other Pharaoh which never knew Joseph.

This therefore were a desire more like the noble blood of those times, rather
to fight for that we have not, then to dance for that we have: yea, I will
say to these dauncers for a garlonde and not for a kingly crown, as that duke
of Gloucester said. It were more commendable for these ioyly mates to demand
by word and sword those dominions which we have lost, rather the^ by marriage
to shut the gates of recovering any thing lost, and to open agate of loosing
all that is left. And if these men were either regenerate with their living
brethren by the Gospel, or if they were not degenerate from their deceased
noble fathers, and remained but in their pure naturalles, they would never so
speak for a faultor prince of Rome, and one that may be warranted to us and our
heirs for an enemy auncestrell, as I may say, and of an hateful blood from
many graundfathers. And if they had but that natural sense which all living
creatures have, to eschew in their kinds all contrary and hurtful things,
they would not so labor this matter. For what if some of these perswaders
can English French little vvorth.
talk a little French, and peradventure have none other English commendation
wherein they excel their poor countrymen, nor whereby to clymbe one step to
that height they look at: yea what if they cold speak french naturally: think
they for a little french in their tongues end, to be so much set by? alas
poor men, how vainly they gape at french promises, with loss of their
English possessions: If they should have their desire, it would not be long
before their tongues would make their hearts ache. It might be honiemoone awhile
with them but afterward french would be no deinty dish, and these seely
interpreters were happy if they might quietly stand without the door.
whatsoever therefore their estate is now, it can not be so ill, as that must
needs be under them. they shall know how sweet the only freedom in a man's
natural common wealth is, by experience of that irksome contrary, to serve so
waivvard a master as is he that by slight or force conquers. who though he
will love well the dominion so gotten: yet will he never trust but esteem with
a vile estimation, al those that helped him to it, and scarce deem them
worthy to live in that land which they have delivered him.

But the graund reason and mother argument of these perswaders is the gaynefull
honorable and strong alliance which must Alliance with france what it is
of necessity come by matching with the house of France: whereon hangs an other
dwainling daughter reason, that great party, forsooth, that Monsieur can make
us in that kingdom. Touching either of which reasons though I suppose they can
say nothing for maintenance of their conceit, but that is already in their
several places either expressly removed, or more then by the way ansvvered: yet
for their pleasures who think themselves never answered onles their reason have
an express reproof, I will be bold with the reader and a little pass order
to object it against me self again and handle it a part. First I demand of
these aduenturous commonwealminglers whether they vveene this strength and
honor to be had in the life of this king? and if so, then vvhither by his aid
and friendly alliance? if they say yea, yt is contrary to that they say in an
other odd reason of brideling the king, who surely will never strengthen that
which must curb him, and it is proved also that if he and his brother join
in any thing, they will do it smally for englands good.

If they think this great match of honorable strength in the present kings
life, to be by reason of the great party only that Monsieur can make in
France without the king: they are vvyde The sely great party of Monsieur
and little think of two other houses, which according to the two chief
factions in France, have most devout favorers and addicted followers, as
men been respectively minded toward them and their professions. vvherof, the
one house can have more exequutioners of any his cruel determination to offer
violence, and the other more faithful ayders and companions of life and death
in defense of their consciences lives and goods, then ever Monsieur could bring
into the field when he joined himself with the Malcontents either in France
or the low conntryes: or then ever he could have either to rescue him out of
his feyned restraint, or to fall to him for his guard, when he seemed to ruun in
some fear from the Court. Yea, of these two partialities in France, as we
have no need of his help for vvinning us the one part, who be already, in the
fear of God and christian love, so united to us, and in all leeful things so
affectionate to the Queens majesty, as, there homeloyalty saved, they vvysh
her al prosperytie and long life to the glory of God and advancement of the
truth: So is not Monsieur in such credit with the other faction as he can gain
us there hearts. For albeit, that be his best side indeed, yet is he of so small
reckoning among the papists, that Monsieurs companio^s
unless the king will, he shall not have one great on so much as his companion
or counsaylor. For look into the government of his pryuate affairs: and
though he be a great prince the kings Counsailors Servants.
brother, yet has he not one man of mark or of great credit that follows him:
but a crew of unruly youths. Yea when he takes any public enterprise in hand,
as that of Flaunders, which stood him so much upon in honor, and which was
with secret intel Enterprises
ligence betvveen the king and him, and by collusion: yet because the king
could not, for bewraying that counsel, declare his will ouertly and lyking to
that voyage, not one Lord of name acco^panyed him. And let us believe our eyes
in this his woeng of England. VVoeng messenger.
No doubt very good manners which he can not but know required as well in
regard of her Majesty as of his own highness, some proportion to have been kept
in the quality of his messenger sent to her Majesty. It is therefore want of
having at his devotion such as had been meet for such an Embassage. Else had we
had an other manner of man, and not this, I wot not what, who has no credit
in France but as a minion of Monsieurs and whatsoever place he presently has,
it is much increased even since he came hither to us and by the credit hereof.
In so much as I think scorn in her Majesty's behalf, and the whole land takes
it as an old french frump, that no worthyer or nobler person is employed in so
worthy and noble a message to our Queen.

But letting go the poor party of Monsieur to be hoped for in France, we
will in sinuate the small value thereof, by showing in a word or two, how
little worth the accepting in alliance, the house of France is: either in this
present king as our brother, or in Monsieur, though he were reigning french
king and (which the Lord forbid) out husband. It is alteady proved that France
is our ancient foe and that their very frendships have proved enemityes to us.
Here then we seek to make a new friend of an France, an old foe. A new friend.
old enemy. such an one as we may not trust, as well for the non trial of his
love, as for the often trial of his hatred. I remember that Hector and Achilles
are supposed to have found the very gifts of enemies to be deadly dangerous,
yea such gyfts as when they had them, made for their defense: vvhereupon the
Grecians had in proverb that, enemies gyfts were no gyfts. And if there be
such a malicious influence of an enemy into his gifts, that they seem as it
were, poisoned, and can not be saufely taken out of his hand, especially by a
prince: How can we without desperate danger receive into our bosom the old
enemy himself? certainly, we may take up this proverb, and the truth thereof is
as authentike as that other of the Grecians, by a much more strong reason:
that is, that an old enemy friend, is no friend. which proverb, though in
christian reformed men it may now and then be falsified. yet do I not see, but
in men unregenerate by the gospel, it remaynes true: and to believe it false,
is perilous to prince or private person in choice of friend or allie.

But if these perswaders will needs have this painted man to be a man, and
this no friend to be a friend: yet is he of necessity a A dangerous friend.
most dangerous friend, by reason of his largely spread dominion which makes
him esteem himself as the iron pot, and us as the earthen crock, with whom
when he floteth on the sea, he weens he can dash us into shards at his
pleasure, according to that emblem of Alciat. And though by the might of the
high potter of mankind, and framer of kingdoms, he has found our sides as hard
as iron, and we have found him as brickel in our hands as clay: yet the pride
he conceiueth in his own might, vvil make this dreadles enemy, an intolerable
and an insolent friend to us, unless he may find us as serviceable as he found
his old friend Scot land. wherein his old rancour still lurkes and will
provoke him to take any occasion. Thus under trust on our side, shall be shrovv
ded treason on their part: which could never have his effect, if we were
still enemies standing on our own guard and in nothing trusting them.

Again, a most unsure and slippery friend he is. for they that seek vtilem
amicitiam, as he now does, vvil also suddenly break friendship, inhonestae
vtilitatis causa. wherein he has the start of us be An unsure friend.
fore we join, while we standing on our honor and Christian conscience, as
it were, at the listes, shall give none offense but with much ado take any
given, pretermitting the best occasion of resisting in time the beginnings: he,
that has made ship vvrack of honor and conscience, shall make his profit of our
conscience, and lie in vvait to fall out for advantage, and to break thorough
even whatsoever surest band of alliance.

Furthermore, a needless friendship is it which we seek. For hitherto
without their help and in despite of their beard we continually have holden
our own, and many times prevailed up A needless friend.
on theyrr having thereforh tried their malice of 500. years to be
contemptible, let us not without any need in the world accept their
friendship now when it is most doubtful: least the title of love compass
that which hatred could never come near. Lastly, as in common alliances, it is
no credit to entertain a reiec A dishonorable allia^ce.
ted friendship: so is this french alliance dishonorable to us, in respect it
is the refuse of Scotland, who being weary of their pride and untruth, have
cast them off now a good while since and all there old near fellowship, with
resolute purpose so to continue because they find much more profit and safety
in these more estranged terms of neighbourhode wherein they stand presently
then in their false and insolent former friendship. And to speak truth, the
honest late dealings of French are such, and they so renoumed for an hateful
seed of an hateful house, as, I suppose, they are not like to find friendship
else where with any Christian prince of Majesty, especially to join with
them in this friendship of marriage. which made their present king Henry the
third as haughty as he is, to stoop to a mean man's daughter a vassal of his
own And what if it were possible to make some thing of this no friend? to hold
this vvett Eele by the tail, as they say, and to have his friendship fast, and
that the same would be in any thing needful, profitable without peril and
not dishonorable, which A damage able friendship. Burgundy.
in no wise I admit: yet will our loss be otherwise far greater the^ his
friendship can yield. For first this new found french friend of france,
vvilpresently cost us our old friend of Burgondy: which faithful society, if
our vallant politic auncesters preferred before that untrusty alliance with
France, enen then when it was not yet married to Austrich, nor crowned with
Spayn: when it was not yet enlarged with her Italian dominions and midsea
Isles, nor enriched with her golden Indians: and if also then it were more
profitable to us then Frannce: how shall France be now to be preferred
before it, or prove more profitable to us now then that? And it is not only
for peace and war, that Burgondy has been entertained before France but even
to this day, the merchaunts will tell you that the only lovv countries here
at hand of that dominion, are more worth to us for venting the surplusage and
abundance of our country commodities, and for the transporting hither of the
most necessary merchandise of foreign parts, then is all France. Secondly,
we shall for this ouerthvvart friend of France, a professed enemy of
religion, which only knitts the trueloue knott: cast of Scotland a brother
in Christ. whose profession as it has made them new men in love Scotland.
and loyallty to us: so do our deserts tovvard them hither unto, and their need
of our help henceforth, make them wholy ours and undoubtedly. And if we
were in a brotherly perpetual league with that state, such as both our
professions requires of us both, and such as our peculiar neighbourhode begs of
us, who have one bounds of the sea, and but a small brook that parts us:
doubtless our mutual friendship would prove more mutually strong and
profitable, then with any potentate severed from us by seas, whose faith if
we could assure our selves of: yet can we not have it at all needs but must
tarry for the vvind and tide. All the religious states of Germany, and other
whosoever that have Allemain.
gone from Rome, will at once throvv away their Christen estimation of us.
Those protestant princes who having tried the faithlesnes of this generation,
do set their bodies, possessions, and honors in the gappe for defense of Gods
people in several countries, from sclauery of conscience, bodies, goods wives
and children, will in their lour lament our unhappiness that will not not be
warned by their harms: wherein I merueil not a little at some who regarding
neither modesty nor conscience for the aduauncing of this marriage do sclaunder
those religious princes as recommenders to us of this marriage against which
their deeds do speak and their words cry out.

And for all these losses I know not what nevve friend comes in by this house
of Valoys in France, oneles it be the house of Ottoman the great Turk. with
whom though France have Ottoman the great Turk.
holden, not a truce for a time, but a continual amity, which might well
ynongh be the cause why the Pope decked him with his title of most christian
king: yet have we of England ever defied him with the rest of those kingdoms
that bear the name of Christ. and it will be for our Christian honor, that no
match work the contrary, but that in this point we may still hold with
them, as well in respect of our common detestation to his blasphemous Mahomet,
as for that of all other christians we least need to fear his might, being so
far separate as Europe is large.

If any man think that we may hold al these old and latter friendships: and
that thembracing with France is not streightwayes an unfolding with all the
rest: he neither considers the difference in religion between Scotland and
France, nor the diffidence between France and Spayn, for the lovv countries,
the which as Spayn has in possession so does France many times mut-ter a
title thereto. This universal perswader, I say, of all friendships and
especially with France, forgets how in times passed, our king Henry the eight
could not be at once friend with the Emperor and the french king: but the
league with one was present diffiance to the other: and that Scotland so long
as they held France, was ever at deadly food with England, and since they
clapped hand with England, they have not missed al most enemy like attempts of
France,

And to put him out of doubt, how odious all Germanny will hold us for our
fellowship sake with Monsieur: let him remember how far from the dignity of
a prince, they enterteyned Henry, then not single Monsieur and only a brothrr
of France, as is our Monsieur Fraunces, but elect king of Poland a piece of
Germany: when, to take real possession thereof, he passed thorough their
territories. some of them, with much ado and after many reproaches for his
cruel falshods, sending him only a bare pasport which the devil might have
had to be quickly packing, as did the duke of Saxony, to his worthy and
princely praise. Some Duke of Saxe. Palsgreue.
of them, granting him a more free saufconduit, yet would not vouchsafe to
see this great French prince, as the prince Palatine, that good man. whose
blame was more in that action for his overmuch mildnes, then was his praise
for courtesy. Other of those states, as Spire, bending and turning the mouths
of al their great ordinauce upon him on which side of the city or streets
Spires.
soever he went, as it had been at a common enemy of mankind. Other, as in
Franckford, saluting him by the unkingly name of the king of butchers in
france. which though it were by the Frankford.
mouth of one principal man among them: yet was it ratified by the whole
state, when he complaining to the Burgmaisters of this reproach as of a high
vvrong, they thought it not cryminall nor to be pursued Exofficio against the
accused, but only at the co^playnants pryuate action. vvherin he fearing
evidence enough so prove the saying true durst not put in cautio^ but departed
with shame enough and bare the reproach away on his back. In all those states
and cities his welcome was such, as when he came again stealing out of
Poland, he would not come back that way to thank them or to have the like, but
chused rather to go about by sea and land the farther and more dangerous
way. The small reckoning which that man like nation makes of France, appears
by the many happy aids from thence which have bidden base to Valols at his
own gole in his own field and at the gates of his strongest wales, hunting
the French wolf in defense and relief of the french oppressed lambs.

A wise man without descending into these sensible particulars would in his
understanding see the very general nature of suspicious friendship between
neighbor kings: how like it is to the love between a jealous man and his wife
in this one point: they be both of them fearful and jealous of their own
states, and can not patiently endure that their ally should be any thing great
with an other confine government, but streightvvay every countenance breeds a
suspicion, and every suspicion a restraint of intercourse and trafique or open
war.

I might fetch examples farther of and ovvt of tholder stories of Grecians and
others. where ever the societye withone neigh No plurality or totquot in
stately friendship
bor was enemity with another state, according to that one great social law
among others, which is, that friends and enemies must be common. But it is more
then manifest hereby how ungodly and dangerous, how uncertain and needles,
how dishonorable and unprofitable, this near French conjunction is in it
self. again, it is detected as evidently, how many friends in Christ, how
many confederacies in old friend ship, how many alliances in blood, and how
many sworn brotherhoods in wars, this one forsworn brotherhode of France vvil
loose us.

It follows then necessarily upon that which has been said, that we who
already bear the flower delice quartarly, receive no honor by joining with it
Par pale. And since our Queen rightfully bears it, as king of France, and he
occupies it as actual french king: I believe it will pose the king of
Heraltes of either realm to make alouing agreement and in one Eschocheon well
to marshal, according to their rules, the self same cote of the usurper with
the self same kingly cote of the right heir, having Laws of arms.
no difference. For, though it may be in other noble gentlemen's cotes: it will
hardly be don in kings cotes. For Heraltes which are upright judges in these
causes must imagine but one king in a land, as but one son in the heavens.
perhaps, to salve this sore they will take up the old french coat of
crawling Toades. But the noble Lion will choose him no such feere. his nature
is to abide Tode.
no venomous thing in his denn: how should he then embrace a Toade for his
make? This difficultye of Heraltes is the Lion.
least of a thousand and might soon be dispatched, were not those other great
ones, which even by this small difficulty also in that kind, are bevvrayed.
that is, that this marriage seems to strive vvithall laws: that of arms and
al.

Those therefore that persuade this band of strange alliance, must needs be
such Englishmen as find themselves not advanced in this state according to that
desert which they conceive in the^ selves and therefore disdeyn at others good
estate: or else such, as are past hope hear and having nothing, know they can
loose nothing what change or tombling soever come. but these be degenerate
dangerous Englishmen, who for the satisfieng of their disdainful or hongry
humor care not to let the common weal blood even in her Basilica vain, who
having now lived, by Gods grace, and through the great love of her subjects
toward her, many years in a miraculous peace: and ben a beholder and judge
of other lands troubles: should now by this marriage throw, as it were, into
the sea, not her ring with Policrates, but her precious self: and putting her
prosperitye to the plunge: send it to flote or sinck, by dravving into England
a great spark of that family which has been a fire brand in Europe. We can not
hold this fire in our bosom, and not be burned therevvith. Now that which is
hurtful to the whole common weal must be noisome to every part.

To begin wtih the chief thereof, her Majesty, in whom as two persons or
bodies (as they say) do presently fall in consideration, the one her natural
body, such as other private ons have, the other, her body politic or common
weal body which is her body of Majesty, incorporate in understanding of the
laws: eue^ so several discommodities and hurts are here to fall in
consideration also, in respect of these her two bodies. which all beit they be
of that nature as nothing can be harmefull to one, but the same is full of harm
to both: yet have I in speaking of the common wealth handled also her majesty's
civil body: as that which can no more be removed from the common weal then
the head from the body: and as that which has mutual suffering with the
common weal in weal and vvoe, as has the head with the body.

And for her very self or self self, as I may say, which is her natural
body, though it godly pleases her, according to the laws The Queen in her
natural and private consideration
of all well ordered realms, and manner of all good princes, to abide thaduise
and consent of all her estates, not to conclude her marriage before she parle in
parliament with her subjects, before she consult with the laws and call the
common weal as it were to common counsel, so as she on the one side may
chaleng of it an assured maintenance of her doing with body and goods, as a
thing which had their general consent, and the whole land, on the other
side, may say, I have chosen such a Lord as I dare put in trust with my Queen,
for so much as it also is to be married with her, and in sort to be governed by
him that shall be her governor: yet is she for her part to have her particular
lyking and hearts contentation in this match, in respect of that life she must
lead with a husband, so as she may say within her self, I am gladly
satisfied in this choice. else should she be in worse point the^ the worst of
her wards, of whom she does not so absolutely claym the marriage by any tenur,
but that yet her tender may be their choice. Let us then see vvhither this
prince be a conuenable marriage in regard of her private person, who is already
proved most unworthy and extremely dangerous for her princely personage.

Here comes first to our remembrance, her constant dislike and indisposed
mind tovvarde marriage from the flovver of her youth Dislike to marriage in
general.
which in all that love her, bredes fear of a disconte^ted life, if at these
years she take not her best heed and faythfullest advice in her marriage. This
first difficulty on the part of her Majesty, offers a second as great a
difficulty on the part of his excellency, Monsieur no Paragon.
that is that he should hardly be the man that choice man of choice in all
respects to content both eye and mind.

And if any that persvvades this marriage think to have quite himself
substantially out of these two difficulties only by a bare obiecting of them
with referring over to be answered by her majesty, as in whose heart rests
the best knowledge of her disposition to marriage, and contentation to this
man: such one must be told, that he does not his bounden endeavor, especially
if his place give any leave to debate at large with her. In this point,
belike, he is to learn of every parent or other whatsoever that has a loving
care of their daughter or dear friend. who upon a marriage moved will not set
them down and rest in saying, you know vvhither it be fit for you to mary,
and you know vvhither his man be fit for you and to your lyking: but cannot
con tent themselves, unless they press to help her with their best advise
laying about to search and enquire, whether he be such as they vvish. and if
they find him otherwise, they lay the matter forth in time and franckly tell
it her, least thorough their silence or negligence, she fall in danger of an
ill husband, the greatest cross that may be laid on a poor vvomans shoulders.
The same should be much more diligently don in marriage of a Queen and her
realm and it is a faythles careless part, to leave her helples in her choice of
the person and personal conditions of her husband to her own only
consideration. which how so ever sufficient it be, so much the more has she
need of help, as the matter is more weighty in her then in common matches. I
merueile therefore they could not see, that as that meat brooks not well
which is crammed in against the stomak: and as nothing is said to be don
egregie which is undertaken inuita Minerua: so surely in this marriage the
success of joy and contentation can not be promised, if there be either a
general untowardness to desire that state of life, or none hearty affection
toward that person which seeks.

And for the presence or show of this man's person, although I vvot well, that
as for most part the svveet and amiable or crooked His person.
conditions of mind ben (as I may say) written in the lines of a lovely or ill
shape of body or face: so contrariwise that sometime a virtuous mind is
meanly lodged and dwells in a homely cottage: yet do I not gladly meddle with
this particular, but vvil also referr it to her Majesty's enteruieue, if it
must needs come to that point, Only this I humbly beseech her, that she will
view it and suruieu it, and in vieuing she vvil fetch her heart. up to her eyes
and carry her eyes down to her heart. And I beseech God grant her at that time to
have her eyes in her head even in that sense in which Solomon places a wise
man's eyes in his head: and then I doubt not but upon conference of her wise
heart and her eyes together, he shall have his dispaching answer. But of many
circumstances of his body I cannot hold my peace because I hope being well
conceived and digested with other things that are and may be said herein they
will let this enteruieu.

I may not nor mean not to deny his great place that right which is due to
all men: that is to reckon reports and bruits as re His ill spent youth hither
to.
ports and bruites. And though they speak in all laguages, of a merueilous
licentious and dissolute youth, passed by this brotherhoode: and of as strange
incredible parts of intemperancie play ed by them, as those worst of
Heliogabalus: yet will I not rest upon coniecturalls. Only this I touch
lightly and cannot pass utterly in so high a matter as is the marriage of my
Queen, that it is vvorth thinquiry after. For if but the fourth part of that
misrule bruted should be true, it must needs dravv such punishment from God,
who for most part punishes these vile sins of the body, even in the very body
and bones of the offenders, besides other plagues to third and fourth
generation: as I would my poor life might redeem the joining of Queen
ELIZABETH to such one in that near knot which must needs make her half in
the punishments of those his sins. Her Majesty's father had a law passed by
parliament in his time, that whosoever had unlawfully known that woman with
whom the king was to mary, and did not before marriage come in and bewray it,
should upon the matter afterward detected, be holden little better then a
traitor. His care to have a good woman was Christian and royal: he vvyst
well, as the preambles of those statutes purport, beside the pryuate
contentation to him self that as well the sins of father and mother as the
plague of their sins descends to the children: and considering his children
were to be left governors of the land, which mightso also have part in these
punishments, his care was so much more to be approved because it was also for
the common weal. The same reason is to move in us all a hearty desire thas her
Majesty should mary with such a house and such a person, as had not provoked
the great vengeance of the Lord. And surely considering the haynousnes of the
sin in every person, with the concurrant circumstances in this case of a
prince, the law was a just law. we can have no such law against strangers:
therefore, in her Majesty's name I require at the hands of al English
Ambassadors and other trauayling Englismen abrod, and of all wise men at
home, that they will be her diligent espialls herein: giving faithful
advertisement, not of such seldom or small fautes as men corruptly call
tryckes and pranks of a young gentilman, but vvhither his life has been so
monstrously wicked as is reported. for it is no small matter for a Queen the
head of the land to join in any manner with that person over whom the
inevitable plages of the most true Lord do hang. This is to approach to the
plague when it comes, and not, as Salomons wise man does, to withdraw
himself when he sees it.

His youth of years is an apparent inequality of this match, and a secret
discovery of his mind not singlie affected with true and His youth presently.
simple love to that he should chiefly seek. for among us of the meaner sort,
not one in a thousand of those younger men that seek there elder matches, but
does it in side respects. and how can we think other wise in a young prince,
heir apparent of france. It is quite contrary to his young appeties which
will otherwise have their desire. It is therefore either for want of living
and mayntenance to his mind, and then is he not fit for this realm: or else is
it certainly for some other notable practice which must needs be dangerous,
because so great a man must be the instrument and because it is not disclosed.

He is differing from her Majesty in religion: thagreement where His religion.
in as it works by Gods blessing, a most near knot of good will and perfect
liking in all things even among strangers: so, by the words of Christ, a
disagrement in this kind brings the svvord between father and children,
brethern and sisters, between a man and his wife. Yea we have seen in our
days, parents and husbands being papists, thorough the unnatural cruelty of
that Italian heresy, upon the least occasion and vvithall gredinesse to have
delivered up to death their children and wife. And if al bands be little
enough to hold love and to work a comfortable life here in earth against the
many miseryes of this noisome pilgrimage: let us not despise that which is the
chiefest and strongest.

And which I may not forget who so marieth with any popevvorshipper can not
tell when to be sure of him. for they have Pope plays fast and loose. in
marriages.
one knife to unloose all alliances with kingdoms and faith given to princes,
that is the popes dispensation, which is so just in it self as vvhither it
bynd or loose it may not be examined. if therefore after our marriage (which
God first let) the changeable decree of a pope will pronounce the marriage no
marriage, either upon some new advantage to the church of Rome, either else
because Monsieur could have no children by our Queen, and for that there must
of necessity sit upon that throne some of the blessed seed of Medices, which
was sent into France from a pope: no doubt this son of the pope in France is
as much bound by popish obedience to leave against Gods law his wife, as his
son of Spain was to take against Gods forbodd his own sisters dau^^ter. And
as much conscience will the holy father make to break a lavvfull marriage for
his advantage, as to license a lavvles. what a fear of dishonor worse then
the dishonor, were this, to depend upon the uncertain pope vvhither we shall
at any time hereafter be decreed to have lived in unlawful marriage yea or no.
If any man anusvver hereto that this doubt is too far fetched and has no
reason to be conceived: let him at once take this replye for maintenance of
this and diverse other like reasons that are and may be made. That whosoever is
careful of the life and honor of a prince, casts more doubts then for a
common person. In their palaces they must have more gards for night and day,
more porters more hus shirs and more doers to come to them even in time of
peace, then common persons have. But when the enemy of a prince comes to be
considered of, then princes will use their longest hands of strength, their
tendered nosed cou^sailors and most percing sight of their wise and faithful
servants. and who would not suspecte any treachery from that Roman ennemy of
enemies which like a iugling Aegiptian plays fast and loose with all the
world and is singularly a deuowed enemy to our Queen as he was lately to her
Majesty's father, because he refused and rejected one of his like godless
dispensations for a like lawles marriage.

An other reason might be made a against this marriage, that, if His absence by
being chosen K. dls where.
thorough his ambitious mind, not so blamevvorthy in such a prince as hurtful
to such as should choose him, during the life of his brother he should be chosen
king elsvvhere: it might cause his absence little to her majesty's comfort. But
this reason I bring not for the force of it or for want of other. for I
suppose the late honorable leaving of Poleland will be a lesson to any kingdom
or state of free election how they shall choose this brother. If therefore as
Qu. Mary's counsailors had that respect to her high honor that they did not
mary her to K. Phillip till he* was a king in the life of his father: so
likewise these men would not talk of Monsieur, til he were her majesty's
peer by being chosen king by the frank election of any* state: I would not
fear this matter. The only cause therefore why I thought this reason worth
any mention is by that occasion to show the strange answer that is made
thereunto by these persvvaders, who in their common discourse and talk for
this marriage, obiecting a against themselves this danger of his absence, do yet
again bring in K. Phillip, as their example, that Monsieur need not be long
absent from his wife, no more then was K. Phillip. First, all that they can
say herein, is, that he need not belong absent. Then can we say that this K.
Phillip was so long away that his absence pinched Qu. Mary's heart, and killed
her with unkindness. But in deed I fear not this inconvenient for his being
chosen king any where.

One head reason yet remains which perhaps you think long for and me thinks I
have said nothing in this last part till I have used it. That is the danger to
her majesty's person many ways, namely and above the rest, lest this should be
but a frandulent se A capital peril justly suspected.
king of her by him, the more easily to possess an other afterward Of which
meaning, there is such apparent presumption, and the great peril ensuing has
such evidence of being inevitable: as we may not rest in the credulous security
of these smoth dangerous words: that, in good sooth, it is not so to be thought
of by a christian prince, but to be rejected as a senceles conceit, once to
suspect, that he would seek to any other so far inferior to our Queen in
Godliness, virtue, wisdoms, beauty, and whose peer in many respects is not to
he found. This is but Reinards flattering of our kingly byrd and well natured
Chanticlere in his goodly svveete voice and fair feathers.

When noble men and princes in France, stood on their honor for all their
actions, and would say nothing but true: they were vvorthely believed in the
honorable word of a noble man. Now that they have degenerate from the honor of
ancient noble me^ and their oaths ben traps to deceive: it were foolishnes
joined with peril, to clad such Idolnoblemen with that purple garment of
credit in their honorable word, which is due only to true Nobility. Yea we
are derely taught, not to heleeue them in their oath. And this rule that they
press us with, of not suspecting lightly, holds more straightly among private
men in their private matters, then for maiestrates and counsailors who in
their charges for church and common weal, cannot lightly be to chary or
suspicious. And that we may not here seem to forge our selves a doubt, but
that we suspect such a thing as is very like to be meant by them: and the very
like whereof has been committed by them heretofore: let us speak of this
foreign prince saving his grace that which otherwise we could forbear even
of reverence to a prince were it not that it makes necessarily to the health
and weal of our natural princ.

What then is this Christian prince thus set before us whose credit must be so
sacred as no charity must suspect it? he is the brother of the most Christian
king, so called. many foul men have The credit that the french king lends his
brother.
fair names All the popes canonized dead saints are not saints: no more are
all his living treschrestiens, of the best sort of christians. This most
christie^ family of kings, is that which ever made more deinty to fall out
with the great Turk, then with other even popish Christians: and has held
peace with the Turk when others have been in wars: with out regard of that
secret society, which is, without speaking, contracted between men of one
religion against a common enemy: and which, as a former faith, is
implicatiuely excepted in any truce with an infidel. Yea which former faith
ought to be kept, though with breach of express words of any subsequent
league: and therefore more then treschres tienne heed to be taken in such
leagues. This is that most Christien Prince, whose brother not long since,
accepted a kingdom with promise and oath to maintain therein thopen exercise
of Turcisme, arrianisme, iewisme, papisme, anabaptisme, and such monstrous
professions besides the truth of Christ's gospel. this is that most Christien
prince, whose most christien brother, has sworn to the tolleration of our
religion in his own kingdom: which yet he seeks to destroy by slieghte or
force with out choice. This is that most christien court, where Macciauel is
their new Testament, and Atheism is their religion. yea whose whole policy
and government, seems te set the Turkish tyranny as a patarne, and they dravve
as near to it as their ancient laws will any vvayes suffer in so small
time. To conclude, this is that treschrestien thron, which to the shame of all
kings (so much as in them lay) by the disceite of an oath, in person of a king
with some hypocrisy in religyon, by the bayt of a marriage, by hope of
assurance in foreign leagues, by the base abusing of his own mouth to speak
fair, and personal visiting him in his sickness whose life he sought, stained
themselves with the blood of a number of their subjects which resting upon
their kings faith, came upon confidence under the lee, as it were, of rheyr
protection. Insomuch as they are now bankrupt of all credit with their own
subjects, and with their own brother in law, husband to their sisters. so as
upon no royal oath they vvil come in* but stand on their guard, and keep towns
for their defense, Neither would the king of Nauarr trust their sister so far,
as to His sister not trusted by her husb.
receive her for his wife: til her mother rydyng round about France carried
her to him, and together with her daughter put him in quiet possession of more
towns for his fvrther defense. And yet we may not suspect this Christian
prince a brother of the same brother and sister. and if we do suspect him in
behalf of our Queens sauftie, we are streightvvayes senseless and
suspicious, without ground of our conceits: and who so forsooth, deuiseth
these doubts, will devise any thing that may hinder this marriage. This dare
I boldly say that he who casts not these doubts, is not vvisely suspicious.
and he that passes them over being once put in doubt, may pass over any thing
that makes for her maiestes good estate. And a most strange dream it is of
theirs who will have this match a bridle to the french king, a snaffle to
Spayn, and a stopgamble to all practices of competition for popery, or any
other traiterous attempt at home or abroad. vvheras, all the contrary, it lays
the raynes at randon on the neck of this horse of hidden treason, and sets a
rider of choice upon him for the nonce: yea and opens all the ports to
foreign ennemies.

For to come near the person of this our french prince: could all his
countenances of being restrained upon his brothers first Monsieur and his own
credit.
return from Poleland: and fallinges out with him afterward, his ronning from
his mother: his secret vvithdravving from the Court: and the Queen mothers
trotting between her sons as a broker of reconcilation, win him so much
credit among the protestants in France: as they would trust him for a leader,
and not hold him still for a suspect? could his goodly aids offered to the
states in the low countries, with personal taking upon him their defense,
prevail so far: that he could come any farther within them, then that they
could by their own forces well avoid him? No no, the hurtful help of this
shiuering reed has appeared by the event in both countries, and that it is no
staff of trust. This match no stopp to practices of competition or popery.
Most unhappy therefore are they that may take heed by others, whose hands it
has hurt and will not. But let us against our con science admit Monsieur to
be in this matter simply seely or simply bonest: yet is he set a work and ruled
by his brother and mother, and this suit follovved for him with the manifest
goodwyll of his mother the motherpractiser of France. With the winking of the
pope, who though against the marriage of the king of Navarre Qu. mother the
mouer. Pope vvinketh wills. French king denies not.
to their sister, and against Monsieurs voyage in to Flanders, he sent his
legate. yet here he sits quiet, which is a token that he looks through his
fingers. This suit is pursued with the good alovva^ce of the french king. For
Monsieurs messenger has continual conversation at home and abroad and one
table with the kings Ambassador, a thing plainly arguing the kings good
liking and continual intelligence with Monsieur for the proceedings herein.
The strange papists and our rebels are in deep silence, not one opens his
mouth against this marriage. Papists foreign and rebel silent.


This prince can not but, eythe^ for love or fear, be great with the Guysian
duke. and in deed of very late more theu ever, even when it was said he
should come over hither, he was nearly in ward and in deep conferences
with that duke, who is to us Guyse.
an enemy by kind, and for near consanguinity a fast friend to the late
scottish Queen. who is the most hidden and pestilent adversary creature that
lives, to our Prince and state. The fairest daugh Scottish Mary.
ter of the pope, and shotanchor of all papists. for as the holy league has
tied all these great ons together by oath and their duty to the pope whom they
will not displease to hate to the death all religious princes: so have they
voued it in the fourth degree against our prince, as chief support of
religion, and in whose life or death (as they think) dependes the exercise or
not exercise of the Gospel in England and elsvvhere. Again besides their
afectio^ in many other respects to this late Scottish Queen, they have set her
down as the only loadestone, that should draw traitors together and rent our
kingdom: that should set up I dolatrous altars from S. Michils mount to
Barvvick, and make all the Israel of England and Scotland to sin. Her
injurious challenges in France, her great and disloyal attempts in england,
her confederacies with the Spanish Generals or regents in Flaunders: will
easily tell a wise man, what devotion she has to the Queen and what
impatient greedines to snatch the crown from her head by opportunity or
importunity, which so ever come first. There open and violent attemptes of
this purpose have been by Gods grace frustrate. as enemies they can do no
thing against her Majesty. Now must some great mean be used, and that
vndercloke of love, which is ever the last popish practice.

From no place more fitly then out of France can they fetch this instrument
of our vvoe. France is a neighbor, therefore convenient by the place. It is a
land full of a well trained soldiar, and has all ready great numbers mustered
that abide but their vvatch word. it is now at peace vvithall, and therefore
at leisure: onles they will make wars to themselves. for cruelty they are
approved, to execute any thing. For treason they are so embrewed in blood, as
they are like to assent unto what soever plat never so barbarous. And this is
also a device fit enough for such a soliciter, as is that false Scot prelate
Rosse, mortal enemy hither, who is presently in France, and, like ynoug, her
age^t to procure this devise. Yea, unless we our selves close our own eyes,
we may see that it is a very french popish vvoeng, to send hither smooth
tongued Simiers to gloss and glauer and hold talk of marriage: and yet in the
mean while, Jacques Fitzmaurice who has been in France and conversant with
Rosse, and even now came immediately thence into Ireland to invade our Queens
dominion there and assemble the traiterous papists in nomine domini domini
papae. Is it possible for the breath of marriage well meant to England, and
war performed in Ireland, to come out of one mouth? She has already cost us
enough of our English blood, and she cares not though she make hauock of
nobilitye and people: she seeks her own turn by hook or crook. Above all
the dangers to her Majesty I would she had one that might eueryday cry with a
loud voice. TAKE HEED OH ELIZABETH OF ENGLAND, AND BEVVARE OF SCOTTISH MARY.
The Lord her God defend her from all her popish enemies.

Let other men's squaymish judgments keep them in what temper of suspecting,
it lykes them: I can not be so blockish but to think that it is more then
lykely, he comes for this Mary: to the end that whereas, if there be any
rebellious papists at home which can do naught for want of a leader, and those
fugitive rebels abroad, can do nothing unless there be first some hurliburly
in the land: this man may be he, where they shall first make head, and so
grow into a body of rebellion. which afterward they mean to aid with their
foreign forces, to the destruction of those foolish rebels as well as of us.
And though, in truth, with out flattery, she be inferior to our Queen, in all
the best gifts yet may I well enough think, that Monsieur will stoop to
her as well as king Phillip their old example, whom yet again they use even
here, did stoop in Flaunders and other where, most lowly in that respect and
beyond all courtesy even in Queen Maryes life. yea I do not see, why I
should not make these gyfts and excellencies of our Queen, so many arguments
to prove great likelihood of impossibilitye to knit fast to her, the mind of
Monsieur so contrarily qualified. For love is a knitting of like minds
together first, and then of bodies by accident. And though foul bodies be often
in love with the outvvard beauty of others: yet was there never foul vicious
and Irreligious mind in love with a virtuous and religious soul. If any man
yet again thinks it an unworthy suspicion of so high a prince, let him hear
once again that one of that brotherhood did compass as unworthy a purpose:
and all by laying to gage that worthiness which his majesty might challenge,
and by his personal action, which he judged no man would once suspect, in a
marriage of his sister as near to him as this brother is to the now king. New
french falshod new English wisdom.


These times have new falshodes, which we must encounter by new foreseeing
vvysedomes. new diseases have taught physicians to find new medicines: and
since false frenchmen will do that which their forefathers would never do,
let honest English men suspect that which their auncesters could neeuer
misdeeme Especially in those matters, where popery comes between as the motif,
and the french ben the instruments. For to do that Roman sinagogue service, the
french, do account as fair virtues, all foul lies, treasons, poysonings,
massacres, and turning of realms vpside down. And for recompense of their brave
night xploit at Paris, they were brought immediately, as it were, in a carte
of tryumphe in at Rome gates: where the world is witness of the panegyricall
praises and solemn orations pronounced in their perpetual fame, with many
joyful fyres in honor of that barbarous, vnmanlike, and treasonable victory
upon the noble Admiral that slept in the oath of his king. But though the hope
of like commendation may make these men attempt the like fact: yet are these
wicked praysings of the pope but a shadow of praysings and make as much to the
true honor of the french, as their paper excommunication and burning by image
at Rome, do hurt the good Christian in body or soul.

Now the Spanish genet will soon champ this cakebread snaffle a sunder. for
this great feate that should be don in bringing K. This match no snaffle to
Spain.
Phillip to some reasonable conditions of peace with his subjects and her
majesty to have some maritime part to her own behofe how shall it be wrought?
by french forces only? They will not do it: they can not do it* and if they
would or could: why is it not don already? if by french and English forces
joined: why then does he not join and conferr with us all this while, rather
then under hand seek to trump both them of the religion there and the
malcontent? If it should be don by English forces only, as it must be
indeed, (for he has none to command) oneles they say that his brother will
both man him and money him, and then they forgette that which they said of
being a bridle to France. If, I say, English money and Englyshmen must do
this enterprise it may be much better achiued, now while we have the law in
our own hands, and may command: then when we shall be covert baron, and have
put our sword into an other hand. we have not so much need of him for a
captain, as he has of our strength to serve him. Neither do I think more
truth in any of these their reasons, then that we should serve to work their
will in those lovv countries. and if any thing were gotten, that should
wholy go to France: but our butin in England, should be even as good in
these wars to be taken for france against Spayn, as it was under Queen Mary,
in the vvarres for Spayn against France. at what time the whole loss, even
a grievous loss to any Englishman that shall look from Dover castle over to
the other side, fell on our part.

But in deed if it please her majesty to aid those lovv countries: as it
will be most for our honor in the enterprise, and for our gain in atchieuing,
to do it of our selves, while uve are at The lovv countries.
lybertye, and not under strange restraint: so is it now high time for the
need they have, who by these delays shall be soon past help. and so the
king of Spain have his will. And, in truth, the best vvelcome force and of
most profit to those countries, must be the English without french. for the
popish party of Arthois and Henault, never loved the french, and now dare not
trust the^: Artoyes and Henault. Gant.
and those of Gaunt hate them tvvyse: First for religion, and then for the
cause common to them with the VVallon, which is their overmuch intelligence
with the common enemy the Spaynard. whatsoever peril therefore out of those
countries, and from king Phillip by reason of his pease there, is spoken of by
these perswaders, thereby alluring us unto this match with France: is easily
met vvythall by our own forces in time. which will be much more vvyllyngly
received of them then the French, for all the late foolish and lewd pamflettes
there spread by the french in their own fauoer and our disgrace.

And it is more absurd that France vvoulde consent to send hither a bridle for
himself. those that are of this mind, presuppose a This match no bridle to
France.
jealousy between the French king and Monsieur: which we must first grant
them. or else they fail to prove this in the beginning. Now, albeit I think,
that the best faith can not be meant, but between the best men: yet may we be
assured that how soever they stand between themselves for France, they
will still agree to anoy England and hold together like brethren the change of
that air for this and his coming over sea will not change that mind: and
still shall he be his brother and son of his mother: who seeing that both of
them do follow this marriage, no doubt they will provide against their own
brydeling. And it is like enough, though Monsieur knows a piece of their
purpose: yet knows he not the depth of this mischievous practice. For they do
not use to impart more to him then falls to his part to play. The king
remembers, that he himself when he was Monsieur, being made privy to the
the^ purposed horrible massacre, had like to have marred al, by lauishing out a
word here of to one of his deerelyngs: had not Lignerolls mouth ben stopped
with papp and the hatchet as they say. Besides, that Monsieur was never
admitted so far in connsail as the present king nor esteemed so stanche.

And if a man may guess sometime, what a thing is, by reckoning This vvoing
comes not of love to our Queen.
up what it is not: we shall not find in the king, nor his bro there, nor
mother, any loving cause to bring this nevve love in their mind. They never
bare favor to her majesty's person, they never showed themselves lovers to the
quiet of this state: they account not themseldes any way beholden to prince or
state. Every word or deed of ours, showing never so little compassion toward
their murdered, or mislike of the murderers is depely laid Mother.
up of them for so many wrongs. Much less will any man think she sends her
son hither to school for our religion. It is far from King.
probability, to think that the king sends him hither, because he would be
rid of him. as though he stood in fearful doubt of his greatness while he
were in france. It is sufficiently proved othervvhere, that he is not
followed nor esteemed generally in France, by papist or protestant. And if
there were any such jealousy in the kings head, this were no wisdom by
aduauncing his brother to so puissant a kingdom to make him more dread.

And in Monsieur what do we find that may so earnestly send him hither. he is
here apparent to France: dangerous therefore Monsieur.
in respect of reasons otherwhere alleged, for him to be absent: espetially
the present king being so far gone and spent in the disease, as some of these
perswaders will say, when they will further this match. And if he should come
in with that honorable show becoming his greatness, and as any other such man
will come that woeth with good meaning, and fears not any detectio^ of hydden
trecheryes* his voyage hither would be mightily chargable. a thing ill
becoming him, who is already drawn dry to the botom and extremely indetted
with his other colored voyage into Flanders. And onelesse some notable
practice pricked him hither, the very passage over the sea would appall this
fresh water soldiar, having read that between this and Normandye there
perished in one bottom, three kingly children. but utterly would he be
discouraged by thaduenture of honor which he makes in sailing hither, upon so
slender likelihoode of speeding or rather upon great reason of repulse: if his
care of honor were not less then his greedines to accomplish his other
mischief. And if he should speed (which God forspeake) yet must he com to a
people that loves him not nor his train: and where neuerthe England can not
love Monsieur.
less he must have his gardes and train prescribed and limited in regard of
the state. And this people if heretofore it has been so manly as to master
this generation of Capet in his own or rather our home of France: me thinks
this Monsieur can come with small hope to find good service at our hands,
whose fingers will itch at him in our home of England. But above all, who can
think, that he being the last of his fathers ligne, and the only forlorn
hope of raising up seed to his brothers, would match hear with so far gone
hope of having issue: endaungering by that means a vvylling translation of the
crown of France from him and his fathers posterity, to another prince of the
blood. No, no, no, the king, his brother, and his mother have some other
meaning against the church, state, and person of our prince, even to have an
eye in the head of our Court if they can bring it to pass, and an hand in
the heart of this realm, to work our ruin and their great hatreds: and that
as the mother has long time ruled and turned the wrong side outvvard of
France, so she might have this land another while for her stage. she is
dressing her Prologue to send him in; trust him not. The players be tragical
though he wear peacible laurel on his head Yea the words that escape from
some of them that are come on this message, do bewray how lovvdly they will
speak here after. I pray God they to whom it belongs may keep away such
gamsters. And since the Lord for his own name sake and of his love to the gospel
which we have among us has weakened the hands of It is the lord by whom Queen
Elizabeth reigns while other princes dye and are deposed.
our foreign enemies and broken the devises of their heads hither to since he
has engraue^ such a searing love in her subjects hearts as children bear to
there mother, and such a reuercut note of souereignete in her person as he is
wont to set on them whom he calls by his own name and are his ordinances: in
so much as it may be said of her most truly, it is the Lord by vvho^ kings
reign since I say the blessed word of Christ has made her sword as the svvord
of G^deon, keeping her safe from many practices against her person while other
kings and Queens have (through Gods Keep covenant with thy God O Queen and
defy this alliance. Foreign ayds
judgment for their manifest sins) been subject to tombling and suffered
change in person and estats: Let us still rest in those maenes and approve that
which we have proved for good. It is a folly to seek foreign aid, but upon
extreme necessitye. It is like desperate physic; when one is given up by all
physicians, it sends him speedely either one way or other.

They suffer themselves to be abused which believe the french men when they
say, that England is unfurnished of friends, neither England needs no friends
especially out of France.
in perfect league nor good opinion nor, near allied with any prince in
Christendom. Our alliances are better then his and more assured, as in another
place it is showed. we have the Lords right hand on ourside and all the hatts
and hands of those of our religion. Yea we were able by Gods mercy, to throvv
out popery even then when it had more friends within the land, and when
diverse princes and multitudes were enemies to us for our religion, that are
since become religious even to the death. we doubt not therefore but much more
easily we shall be able to hold our prince worthy of her, and I can not choose
but say, that this prince of France, of all other unmarried princes, is most
unworthy of her, for even that Christianity which her Majesty is called
unto, and her princely priesthood in Christ Jesus, is as far above all his
pride in flesh, as heaven is above earth: and her earthly septer being added
to the former excellency, settes him at her foot or rather drives him from her
presence in judgment of God and men being but a subject in the kingdom of
France and as yet no enrolled citesin in thouvvard kingdom of heaven.

The assured and great evils that grow here out to our head the Queen: make
no less against the well doing of the lesser limes of the land. For, to let
pass the doings of ancient and present kings, who, when by such means,
they win a countye into Nobilitye and Gentry of England.
their pavves, first dispatch the ancient Nobilitye, destroy the greatest
kindreds, and scatter the mean sort into servile, unlearned, and unarmed
trades: for thentreaty that our Nobility and Gentry are to look for, I will
note but this one word, even of this very family of Hugh Capet the first of
this third and present kingly race in France when, by such means as their
own chro Hugh Capet
nicles do mention, he had wrested the sceprer from the hands of their
Master and soueraign seed of great Charles, Peppines son, the first deed
they did was to provide that the chief of that Carrola manus
ligne might dye the death: perhaps some of them did choose some pinig death at
Orleance, but die they must. This is a slip of Hugh Capet, and the practice of
their mother and them in their own country at this present, is, to raze all
ancient french houses and to rear up new, bringing al, as near as they can,
A la Turkesque that all being there creatures may fall down and worship them.
And if the present vvoeng messenger, a man of so bace place and petie companion
in the french court is yet so sausie as to be checkmate with our Queen, and to
enter malapart comparison with our Noble men: doubt you not but the friends of
of the brydegroome will be every man a petie king over our English Nobilitye.
Maiestrates Judges,
Our honorable Counsailors, ^udges, and other Maiestrates, may not hold their
honors and authorities. For if the mother being a forraigner to France where
al manner government is denied her by their laws, can depose natural
Maiestrates, and help her cou^trime^ to the richest offices, promote an Italian
to be high Chanler there, and make her half Italians to be marshals of
france: you may be sure, a french husband will easily advance his Italianate
french me^ to our English preferments. Our lawyers shall be fain Lawyers.
to learn some other occupation. For new masters new men, and new Lords new
laws. No doubt the laws of france vvil prevail against the laws of
Normandy: yea the foreign law, called civil, Laws.
w^l eat up our free customs and natural laws. Our soldiars of necessity
soldiar.
must be sent out under some Ioab, for some more desperate service then S.
Quintin, one way or other to be dispatched and cut in pieces. For of all
English people they will be worse loved of these french. Our Lord bishops may
think it there greatest L. bishops.
honor to take such part as other poor men do. sure they are all to loose
their dignities and riches, and so many of them, as ever were votarie priests,
must part from wives and children. Our Merchants Merchants and richmen.
and poor richmen, they may quickly without any counters cast up their books
of reckonings, by that time such factors and malefactors as these men, have
ransaked their coffers. Touching the meanest sort of men even in france it
self, this ve People.
ry day, al be contemptible pesants and Lackeys. And if there own natural poor
laboring men, find no better condition of life under these vncourteyus kings.
it were madness for us to look for so good. we must, doubtless, be one degree,
at least, beneath vile pesants* and Lackeis. And if these new surueiers come
into this land, we may bid farevvel to thold English liberal measure of
syxtene foot and a half to the pole: our Ortyards must be measured by the
foot: our houses by the stories, vvindowes, and chimnies, and strange tallages.
accordingly new rents raised upon them: our children shall not come freely
into the world, without some unnatural excise for every birth as the earnest
penny of a trybu tarry life: our maidens who in some common vveals are wont to
be bestowed with the public purse, must under this vile stranger, yield a share
of their own marriage portions. which Impositions I neither dravv from old
Tyrans: nor Imagine here of mine own head: but they are such as the french king
very lately demanded and such as his subjects even now deny. whereupon the
former trobles are like to revive, notvvithstanding his mothers late ryding
about france with fair promises for the release of such brutishe exactions
Much might be said in these particulars, and by this little, the noble, gentle,
and others what soever may learn to hate strange co^maunders, and to esteem
our natural regiment. to detest the Turkish tyrany of Valoys, and to thank God
for the kind government of Queen Elizabeth: which the Lord grant her happily to
hold on, and finally to end, as she began. But I had rather we should feel our
grief in the ache of our head the Queen, the^ to esteem our gteuances apart.

Far from us then is this great assurance imagined to her Majesty's self, by
thus matching, even as far as certain peril is from safety. where is the
preservation of Religion? vvher is the strength and gayn to the land? where is
this honor to our kingdom? even as far from this marriage, as preseruatife is
from poison, gayn from spoil and beggary, and honor from danger of perperual
slavery. I should have been afraid to have spoken thus much, had not the
straight of this necessity driven me and my words ben the words not of a busy
body, speaking at all adventures: but of a true Englishman, a sworn liegeman
to her Majesty, gathering these necessary consequences by their reasonable
causes. And since the faith of a man is broken sometime as well in not doing or
not saying as in doing or saying: I humbly beseech, that whatsoever offense any
thing here said, may breed, it be with favor construed by the affection of my
heart, which must love my country and Queen though it should cost me my life.
yea rather let them of this land who excel severally in all good professions,
having wisdom, disposition, and words at vvil, that hearing so publicly,
famously and notoriously, a marriage to be practiced by the pope which is
against al laws of God and man, unwritten and written, of nature and
nations, of the land and of policy, of arms and peace, tending to the loss
of our religion, to the subversion of our state and freedom to the captivity
of our Queen and her people, under our hateful foe the french: can not yet be
stirred up to any pietye toward their God, their country, or their prince, to
handle this matter in their several skils as it requires. You Noble men and
high counsailors join to your vvisedoms courage, and adding to them both the
fear of God, remember you be born and chosen for fathers of advise to the
prince, and in a secondary degree assisting Tutors to the common we will. render
to the Queen that faithful counsel which she may well challenge for
aduauncing you to this honor, and pay to us again that duty of careful love
which our reverence of honor most vvyllingly acknowledged to you, does
deserve. You bishops and others, who sometime speak in the ears of our prince,
let not your study be to leern french for the entertayning of this stranger, as
though then you should be ioly gentilmen with the rest: but learn to speak the
word of God, and speak it boldly, for keeping out this stranger. You,
whosoever in Court, honored by her Majesty with any special favor and
grace, alas, that none of you will do her that right, as to tell her how
far more precious her royal person is, and with how far greater danger
thereto it is: then that this odd fellow, by birth a french man, by profession
a papist, an Atheist by conversation, an instrument in France of uncleanness, a
fly worker in England for Rome and France in this present affayre, a sorcerer
by common voice and fame, should have such free and gracious access to her
chair of estate and great presence, who is not fir to look in at her great
chamber door. All England in a tenderiealous love to her person besecheth God
to preserve her, and prays her to take heed of popish french men. You of the
meaner sort throughout the land and all private ones know your place to be in
all subjection and peaceable patience, with your prayers to solicit the
Lord for his church, for this common weal, and for the Queen: that of his
great mercy he will turn away this plague of a stranger in Christian Israel,
and foreign frenchmen in England. The only noise of whose making hither
toward, gave al these causes of fear, and wrong thus much hitherto said to be
written, as it were with the tears of an english heart. And his soden arryuall
here with all the manner and circumstances thereof would yield nevve argumets
of an other much longer discourse. For first his coming hither as it were in a
mask, bewraies a strange melancholik nature in himself: who delights to make
all his iourneis in such sulle^ solitary sort, and therefore belike an ill
companion to live withal in any fellowship. Then yt shows his extreme want
of ability to defray the expense of woeng in a bountiful show sitting such a
prince as comes to obtein out Queen. This his secret coming and departing,
discouers a mistrustfulnes in him toward our people, and therefore no love,
which must needs come from his own ill conscience of fearing french measure in
England. for on our part (the Lord be thanked) we have not committed such
villenies. all men deem him unworthy to speed who comes in a net as though he
were loath to auow his errand. Some men may think he is ashamed to show his
face, but I think verily that he means not sincerely who loves not light and
will not com abroad. The last noble princely gentleman that went out of England
to vvin a Queen in france gave trial and show of vvisdome, manhod, behavior,
and personage, by open co^uersatio^ and performing al manner of knightly
excercises: which makes us in England to find very strange, this vnmanlike,
vnprincelike, secret, fearful, suspicious, disdainful, needy french kind of
woeng in Monsieur, and we can not choose but by the same still, as by all the
other former demonstratife remonstra^ces, conclude that this french marriage, is
the streightest line that can be drawn from Rome to the utter ruin of our
church: and the very rightest perpendicular downfall that can be imagined from
the point france to our English state: fetching in within one circle of
lamentable fall the royal estate of our noble Queen, of her person, nobility,
and commons. whose Christian honorable, healthful, joyful, peaceful, and long,
sovereign reign without all superior ouerruling commander, especially french,
namely Monsieur, the king of kings hold on, to his glory and her assurance of
true glory in that other kingdom of heaven.

Amen Amen. Amen.

