AN ABRIDGEMENT OR SVRVEY OF Popery, Containing a compendious declaration of
the grounds, doctrines, beginnings, proceedings, impieties, falsities,
contradictions, absurdities, fooleries, and other manifold abuses of that
religion, which the Pope and his accomplices do now maintain, and wherewith
they have corrupted and deformed the true Christian faith, Opposed unto Matthew
Kellisons Survey of the new Religion, as he calls it, and all his malicious
inuectiues and lies, By MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for Cuthbert Burbie. 1606.

TO THE WORTHY and noble Lord, Prince HENRY, son and heir to the most
puissant King, and our dread Sovereign, JAMES, by the grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
THere are two principal offices, most worthy and excellent Prince, of a true
Christian. the first is, To decline from evil: the second is, To do good. And
these two, as they are necessarily required in all, so principally in those,
which are to command and govern others. But the ground of both is the true
Catholic and Apostolic Faith; without the knowledge whereof, not only good
things are often times refused, as evil; but also things evil embraced for
good.

Seeing then our adversaries the Papists of late time have both violently and
fraudulently sought to bring back into his Majesty's Dominions, whereof your
Grace by the grace of God is undoubted heir, not only the heresies and
superstitions of Popish religion, but also the tyrannical government of the
Pope, that is so prejudicial both to Princes and their states, and also to all
Christians and their liberties; I have thought, I could not do either to God or
my Country better service, then to declare to the world both their weak and
absurd grounds, and their impious and wicked doctrines, and how they have
proceeded in the maintenance and defense of the same. And this I doubt not
would appear far more clearly, if without prejudice of men's persons, or
respect of private men's interests, matters might be debated before indifferent
Judges, and soundly tried by the touchstone of holy Scriptures, and none of
those excluded from hearing, that profess true Catholic religion.

My purpose is not, God I take to witness, to touch any man particularly, but
only to set forth the truth of all matters, that the obstacles of Christian
unity, and the causes of the good success of the Turk being removed, we may
all for the most part consent in the unity of the Catholic faith, and
conioyne our minds and forces the better to resist public enemies.

This I present to your Grace, as the first fruits of my affection and service,
that thereby learning to eschew evil, and to embrace that which is good and
pious, you may, as it follows in the 34. Psalm, seek peace and follow after
it. Nay you may the better be instructed not only in following the true means
of peace, but also obtain your desires, and for ever truly possess it. This
your affection in pious promoting the true service of God, and preue^ting of
the treacherous plots of the factious accomplices of Antichrist, shall be the
foundation of your prosperous estate. It shall increase the joy of your noble
Father our Sovereign Lord and King, and glad your Mother, whose hearts joy you
are. S. John rejoiced to see the children of that noble lady, to whom he
directed his second Epistle, walking in truth. And this is the affection of
all your friends and wel-willers, who rejoice to see the heroical virtues of
your Father budding forth in your Grace. The Prophet Psalm. 112, does assure us,
That his children that fears the Lord shall be mighty upon earth, and that the
generation of the righteous shall be blessed. On the other side the adversaries
of religion shall weep and lament, when they shall see the Prophesies of S.
John, Apocalyp. 17. and 18, concerning the destruction of the great whore, and
the ruins of the city of Babylon accomplished, and the rather, as we hope, by
your Fathers and your godly endeavors and means. Vouchsafe therefore, most
gracious Prince, to give reading to this Discourse made in opposition of that
infamous libell, which not long since one Matthew Kellison a Priest of Baal,
and a marked slave of Antichrist, presumed to direct to the King your Father:
and consider what reason he had to talk of the surueying of religion, seeing
his own religion can so evil abide any examination or survey.

The Lord of heaven bless you with all spiritual graces, and the rest shall be
added unto you. This is also the continual prayer of all the servants of God
and your Fathers true subjects, That your Grace may be made a worthy instrument
to advance Gods glory, and that the vows of your Parents, and all well
affected to his Majesty and to your Grace, may plentifully be performed in you.

Your Graces most affectionat servant MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
MVch it were to be wished (Christian Reader) that the same affection and
fervent desire were in all true Christians, and especially in those that are
Pastors and Teachers, to maintain the truth, which we find to be in false
teachers and heretics to uphold and maintain their errors. The Scribes and
Pharisees in time past (as our Savior Matthew. 23, teaches us) compassed sea
and land to make one of their profession. And so in time past did the
Nouatians, Donatists and Arians. But what need I to speak of times past, when
we see before our eyes the present example of the Mass Priests and Iebusites,
and their accomplices? They spare neither cost nor labor. some write, some
discourse, some practice. one takes on him one part of the labor, and another
performs the rest. So nothing is left unattempted, that either fraud could
devise, or malice execute, or industry and labor perform.

Among others, one Kellison (not long since, as is said, my L. Vauxes Butler,
but now a drawer of Popish doctrine) has showed himself very busy: and for
his part has gathered together out of the libels of Staphylus, Cochleus,
Bolsec, Sanders, William Reynolds, and other the Popes Parasits and agents, a
whole pack of slanders, lies, and wicked imputations against Luther,
Zuinglius, Melancthon, Calvin, Beza, and other Teachers of truth. To this he
has also added diverse fragments of certain idle declamations of his own, and
the most malicious railing terms that either himself could devise, or else
find out in his fellows inuectiues. And all this put together, he calls A
Survey of the new religion: by the terms of Novelty, Heresy, Impiety, and
such like; seeking to disgrace that Truth which we profess.

I did therefore expect, that some learned man or other would take this fellow
to task, and indeed I do now understand, that a man both learned, grave and
eminent in this Church of England has both undertaken and finished the Answer
to his scurrilous discourse. but seeing the same is not yet published, I
thought it not amiss in the mean while to requite his Survey of religion,
with this Survey of Popery, and to draw home this idle wandering Surueyer and
Searcher of other men's matters, to a careful consideration of his own
desperate cause.

His Treatise is most foolishly titled A Survey of the new religion. for
neither shall he ever prove, that one article of our religion is new, nor does
he dispute against any grounds held by us, but only tells of certain
extrauagant speeches, partly falsely imputed to Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and
other private men, and partly falsely gathered out of their words by false
constructions, but had they held any private opinions, that justly might be
censured, what is that to us? our religion, certes, is not grounded upon
Luther, Calvin, or any late Teacher, but upon the Prophets and Apostles.
neither is our faith that, which is found in private men's writings, but that
which is founded upon holy Scriptures, and contained in our public
confessions. he might therefore with more reason have called it a surfeit of his
own fooleries and fantastical devices and calumniations, then a survey of our
religion.

Against this idle invention of Kellison, I have, I hope, opposed a more
diligent and certain survey of Popery. for I have not devised any thing of
mine own, but truly reported the doctrine which they teach. and herein I do
not object whatsoever is taught by Scotus, Aquinas, Durandus, Biel, Stapleton,
Harding, Bellarmine, or which other Doctors do hold singulerly, nor that
which Sanders, Parsons, or such idle fellows babble in their trifling books,
but only that which is either defined in some Council, or determined by some
Pope, or generally taught or practiced by all, or most, or best of our
adversaries, and which I think Kellison will not deny. And by these grounds,
doctrines and practices I hope to overthrow the whole frame and building of
Popery, being laid upon weak grounds, and consisting of many wicked and false
doctrines, and being maintained by most lewd and wicked means and practices.

This Discourse I first devised for a private friend, whose wavering (for I will
not say defection, until I see surther) I do much lament, and whose settlement
I do much desire. but because I do think the same may do good to many, who
not knowing the truth we hold, nor the errors, heresies, superstitions,
idolatry and impiety of Popery, do run headlong upon occasion either of
malcontentment, or desire of innovation in matters of State, which they
consider may soonest be stirred by quarrels about religion, into strange
courses; I have been persuaded to make it common. the same also may serve to
reclaim the most haggard Papists, if they do not wilfully shut their eyes,
and stop their ears against the truth. thirdly, this may serve to stop
the mouth of the slandrous Iebusites and Mass Priests, that imputing to us
wicked opinions and practices no way defended, are unable to defend their own
doctrines and practices, which they publicly profess, and commend. sinally, I
hope wise Christians may learn by these collections of ours, neither to trust
the adversary, who makes no conscience of lying or slandring, nor to condemn
innocent men, before they be heard and convicted.

Vouchsafe therefore (gentle Reader) to read our Discourse with attention, and
to judge without partiality. and then I doubt not but thou will beware both of
the impious doctrines, and of the injurious and lewd practices of Popery.

If any be offended with this surueying course, let him impute the fault to
Kellison, who of a drunken butler, is now become a mad surueyer. and if he
find not texts or proofs sufficient to satisfy his humor in proof of every
allegation in this Treatise; let him think, that the matters are of that
nature, that either they will be confessed of the adversary, or else are
notoriously known to the world, though impudently denied by the polshorne
pack of Antichrist.

Finally, as there is but one Faith, one Baptism, one God; so there is but one
true religion, which every one is to know and to embrace, if he will be saved.
And this is grounded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone. but as Athanasius orat. 2, contr.
Arianos, says of the Arians, Pro Christo apud illos Arius est, that is, They
follow Arius as if he were Christ; so we may say of the Papists, The Pope is
their Christ, their head, their lodestarre, their Northpole, and all in all.
This one true religion is also Apostolic and Catholic, and most ancient.
Tertullian lib. 1. contr. Marcionem, teaches us, Whatsoever doctrine has
been brought into the Church after the first publication of the Gospel, that
the same is to be reputed heresy. Haeresis deputabitur, says he, quod postea
inducitur. but Popery never came from the Apostles, but from the Pope. neither
was the same universally or anciently received, but only taught and embraced
by the Popes faction of late times, and within certain limits. finally, this
true and apostolic religion is of God, and not of the invention of Popes, or
their polshorne Priests, Monks or Friars.

Embrace therefore that religion, that is derived from the Apostles and
Prophets, that is truly Catholic, Apostolic, and most ancient, and finally,
which has no author but God. and beware of all profane novelties and Popish
inventions. and then as thou walk by faith in this life, so thou shall
atteine to the vision of the face of God in the life to come, and also reign
with God everlastingly through Christ, which is the Way, the Truth, and Life.

The Abridgement or Survey of Popery.
Containing a brief and plain declaration of the grounds, doctrines,
beginnings, proceedings, impieties, falsities, and other manifold abuses of the
Popish sect.
CHAP. I. What is meant by Popery or Popish religion in this Discourse ensuing.
TO teach aright says Plato in Cratylo, we are diligently to expound the
terms or words we treat of. and Tully in his first book of Offices says,
that every instruction that is undertaken rightly, ought to begin with a
desinition of matters, which we are to discourse of. because therefore I would
not be mistaken, nor have our adversaries to take either an occasion of
quarrel, or a pretense of evasion: it shall be neeedfull, before we pass any
further, to define and declare, what we mean in this discourse by popery, or
popish religion. and so much the rather, for that the Papists do hold and
profess the articles of the Creed, and diverse other points deduced of them, or
consonant unto them, which both the Apostles and ancient fathers, and we also
believe and profess, and under color whereof they abuse simple souls
recesuing their puddle waters of Popery made sweet with some truth, for the
pure streams of Christian doctrine.

By popery therefore we understand not any point of Christian doctrine
generally holden of all Christians, or the doctrine of the Prophets or holy
Apostles professed generally by the ancient fathers, and truly termed Catholic
(for that we hold and profess as well as the Papists, and far more
syncerely than they, albeit we detest and renounce all Popery) but all those
errors and corruptions in doctrine both concerning faith and manners, which the
synagogue of Rome and her lovers by color of the Popes authority, and by his
persuasion and enforcement from time to time baue received, professed and
taught, either contrary to the doctrine and institution of Christ and his
Apostles, or else above the same, and above the faith of the ancient primitive
church. Neither do we otherwise single Popery from Christian religion, than
the ancient Catholics did distinguish Arianisme, Macedonianisme,
Nestorianisme, Eutychianisme, Pelagianisme, and other heresies from the true
faith. for although the Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Pelagians,
and other heretics did hold in terms the articles of the faith; yet for that
the first denied the divinity of the son of God, the second the divinity of
the holy ghost, the third the union of the two natures in the person of
Christ, the fourth the verity of Christ's humane nature, the fifth the
necessity of Gods grace, and added diverse novelties to the ancient faith; they
were reputed heretics, and by their heresies ancient Christians understood
not any point of Christian faith, but their singular opinions, which they
maintained obstinately against the faith.

The Apostles in the Primitive Church, did teach that doctrine, which they had
received from Christ Jesus, and delivered the same to their successors, and
they to others. the first Christians likewise received the same pure, and
without corruption. but as the envious man, while the men of the house slept,
sowed tares among good corn, as we read Matthew. 13. so false Apostles and
heretics from time to time have gone about with their cockle and tares to
corrupt the sincere doctrine of the faith, abusing the negligence of true
teachers to their own advantage; but yet none more cunningly and fraudulently,
than the Popes of Rome and their accomplices. for other heretics were soon
espied by their opposition to the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, and
Christ's true Church, timely bewraying themselves, but these under the titles of
Apostolic men and Catholics have corrupted the Apostolic and Catholic
faith, and under the name and title of the Church have undermined the
foundations and doctrine of the Church, and under their sheep clothing have
covered their ravening and wooluish natures. and so have they lurked many
years mingling their traditions and inventions with the doctrines of faith,
and for truth delivering erroneous and superstitious doctrines, and under the
name of Christ endeavoring to erect the kingdom of Antichrist.

At the first they clogged religion with diverse superfluous and superstitious
ceremonies, and loaded Christians with the burden of their decretales and
censures. but in the end they corrupted both the worship of God, and the
doctrine of faith. Boniface the 3. obtained of Phocas, that the church of Rome
should be reputed head of other churches. and this was the beginning of the
Popes supremacy. In the wicked assembly under Irene that semipagan empress at
Nice the doctrine of the worship of images began first to be established. and
this the Popes of Rome willingly embraced, using this occasion to establish
their own kingdom, and to free themselves from the government of the Emperor.
then also the superstitious worship of Saints relics began to be authorized,
and unwritten traditions under the title of Apostolic authority to be
commended, as appears in the third action of that synod. The French king
Charles the great, and his father Pipin and other their successors endowed the
church of Rome with great temporal possessions, which made them strong and
powerful.

Nicolas the 2. in a certain synod at Rome first decreed, that Christ's body
was present in the eucharist, and handled with the priests hands, and pressed
with the teeth: and this fell out about the year of our Lord 1059.

Gregory the 7. first began to handle the temporal sword, and manifestly to
oppose himself against the Roman emperor. before his time, says Otho
Frisingensis, we do not read of any Emperor excommunicated by the Pope. Nether
did ever any Bishop of Rome presume to depose the emperor before him. some
allege Ambroses example. but that shows, that bishops never took upon them,
to depose princes, but only to refrain from communicating with them. that which
Gregory the seventh began, that in the end his successors obtained. for by
their practices they subdued the emperor, and gave way to the Turk.

The doctrine of transubstantiation was first established by Innocent the third
in a synod at Lateran, about the year of our Lord 1215. then also came in the
necessity of auricular confession.

The communion under one kind was brought in first by the synod at Constance
about the year of our Lord 1414. there also it was decreed, that the accidents
in the eucharist did subsist without a subject.

In the conuenticle of Florence about the year of our Lord 1439. the doctrine
of purgatory, and the Popes supremacy was decreed by the authority of the
synod. there also the doctrine of the 7. sacraments was first propounded to
the Armenians, as proceeding from the synod. neither do we read of the form
of extreme unction, and other Popish sacraments there set down, before this
time.

The rest of the errors and superstitions of Popery were established and
confirmed in the conuenticle of Trent, about the year of our Lord 1564. for
before that time the schoolmen disputed pro and contra. but since that, they
have made it unlawful to hold otherwise, then that synod prescribes, in
matters there newly determined.

Now they have as it were given a perfect form, and full authority to that
doctrine, which before was not either perfectly known of all, or in all
points allowed of all. so that whatsoever the Papists vant of the antiquity
of their doctrine; yet it is most evident, that the full establishment of it,
as it is now delivered, cannot be proved or showed before this conuenticle.
then their missals, Breuiaries and offices received a great alteration, or
rather a new form. then they innouated diverse points of doctrine both
concerning faith, and manners.

To relate all the particular errors and abuses of the Romish Church were a
matter infinite. for there is no point almost, wherein the Papists vary not
from the ancient Church, the article concerning the holy Trinity excepted.
beside that they vary in their doctrine and practice daily. but the principal
points of Popery, wherein we charge them to have digressed from the doctrine of
the Apostles and primitive Church of Christ, are these.

First they have taught novelties, Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 1. says that the
Apostles did first preach the Gospel, and afterward deliver the same in
scriptures, that they might be a foundation and pillar of our faith. they do
make the traditions of the church not written equal to the scriptures, and
upon them, nay upon the decretales of Popes, and practice of Massepriestes do
build their faith. all antiquity esteems holy scriptures to be the canon of
our faith, and therefore calls them canonical. But the Romanists esteem
them to be an imperfect canon without their traditions, and the Popes
decretales and determinations. Bellarmine lib. 4. de verb. dei c. 4. says they
are neither necessary, nor sufficient without traditions. The fathers never
accounted the books of Tobiah, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and the
Machabees equal to the books of the law and Prophets extant originally in
Hebrew, as appears by the testimony of Hierome in prologo Galeato, of
Athanasius in synopsi, of Nazianzen in carm. of Epiphanius and diverse others
old and new writers. the Papists in the synod of Trent decree them to be of
equal authority with the rest. the ancient catholics ever esteemed the
Hebrew text of the old testament, and the Greek of the new to be more
authentical, then any translation. the conuenticle of Trent has made the old
latin vulgar translation of the bible authentical: and does not give that
honor to the original books of the bible. the canonical scriptures, we say,
receive their force from the author of them. and this is to be proved by the
consent of fathers, and by arguments from scriptures, law and reason. they say
that scriptures receive force and authority in respect of us from the Church,
or rather from the Pope. Papists are neither willing, that scriptures be turned
into vulgar tongues, nor will permit them to be read of the vulgar sort
without license, or publicly read in vulgar tongues in the church. finally
they say they are obscure and hard to be understood, and speak what they can
in their disgrace.

Secondly they teach erroneously concerning Christ's natural body, Christ they
believe to be both in heaven, and on earth on every altar at one and the self
same time. they also hold, that his body is really under the accidents of bread
and wine, giving him a body neither visible nor palpable, nor in any sort like
to ours. they teach further, that his body is in diverse places, where it
fills not the places, and that his one body has relation to diverse places.
they believe, that the souls of the faithful before Christ's coming were in
hell, or at least in Limbo, which is a part of hell, and were thence delivered
by Christ's going to hell, as if his cross had wrought nothing for them. they
teach that Christ as man is omniscient, and per consequent omnipotent, and that
he was vir perfectus, that is, a perfect or grown man from the first instant
of his conception. his office of mediation they give to the virgin Mary, to
Angels and to Saints, they make also Saints our redeemers, teaching, that by
their merits Christians obtain their desires, and are delivered out of
purgatory. to Mass Priests they give priesthood according to the order of
Melchisedech, and say that they offer up Christ's body and blood really for
quick and dead. finally they make the Pope head, spouse and monarke of the
Church.

Neither do they teach more catholikely of Christ's mystical body, then of
his natural body. Christ's body. the Church, say they, is always so
conspicuous and visible, that every one may see it and discern it. the true
marks of the church, that is, true doctrine, and the sincere administration of
Sacraments, and holiness of life, they deny, assigning most common and
uncertain marks, as unity, universality, antiquity, succession and such
like.

The Pope they make a most certain and infallible interpreter of Scriptures,
and judge of matters of faith.

Betwixt the Catholic church and Roman church they make no difference
equalling a part to the whole.

The worship of God consists in spirit and truth, know not of whom. to
Saints they pray, they make vows, they confess their sins: to saints they
erect churches and altars: to their images they burn incense and present
diverse oblations, and finally in the honor of Saints have devised particular
masses and offices, transforming the Psalms and words of Scriptures to Angels
and Saints.

Their doctrine concerning the Sacraments is most exorbitant. for they do not
only add unto water in Baptism salt, accipe potestatem offerendi sacrisicium
in ecclesia pro viuis and mortuis, that is, receive power to offer sacrifice in
the church for quick and dead. in Penance they urge a necessity of confession,
strange forms of whipping, and uncertain hopes and new devices of
satisfaction. from Matrimony they exclude Priests, monks and friars, and
make it a Sacrament, albeit they know neither certain signs, nor words of the
institution of it. but the institution of the Lords supper they have quite
abolished. for that which Christ ordained to be received of the Communicants,
that the mass priest does offer for quick and dead, and in the honor of
Saints and Angels, of which there is not one word spoken in the institution.
our Savior in bread and wine instituted his last supper. these neither leave
bread nor wine, but make Christians eaters of man's flesh, and drinkers of man's
blood like the canibals, and Cyclopes. Christ ordained this Sacrament in
remembrance of his death and passion. these make of the same a sacrifice in
honor of Angels and Saints. the cup of the new testament they take from
Christians, abrogating, as much as in them lies, the new testament established
in Christ's blood. and yet they say Christians sin mortally, if they hear not
Mass every Sunday and holiday.

Of grace they speak, as men deuoid of grace, and knowledge.

The doctrine of faith they have also much corrupted.

Concerning the law of God they teach both contrary to reason and law. for
first they cut out the 2. non concupisces. thirdly they say, that it is sin
as well to transgress the Popes decrees, as Gods laws. fourthly they believe,
that the Pope is able either to dissolve the law, as for example, where he
absolueth subjects from their obedience to princes, and children from their
duty to parents, or at the least to dispense with the transgressors of the law,
as for example, with perjured persons, adulterers, Sodomites, murderers,
assassinors, thieves, sacrilegious persons and such like. fifthly they believe
that a man is able perfectly to fulfill the law. of which it follows that man
is able to live without all sin, which as Augustine shows lib. 4. de bono
perseuerat. c. 2. and 5, and Hierome aduers. Pelag. is flat Pelagianisme.

In their doctrine of prayers they offend much. Loreto or Monserat, than at any
other image or form of our Lady?

They believe, Christ's merits and satisfaction, the second is an occasion of
all the mischiefs brewed by these mothes of religion, and blemishes of state.

They teach,

Conscience they know not.

Neither can they well avoid sin, Mary by most of them is acquitted from
original sin. and they define sin to be, not only the transgression of
the law of God, but also every transgression of the law of the Pope; nay every
breach of the law of man, which utterly takes away the difference betwixt the
laws of God and man.

Of the state of souls departed they seem to know little truly, although some
say, they know too much. limbus puerorum. and out of purgatory they say souls
are delivered partly by masses, and partly by indulgences.

All these points of erroneous and false doctrine, and all others, which either
contrary, or beside the word of God, the Pope, and his accomplices have
invented, and brought into the church of Rome, we call Popery. and this is the
subject of this discourse, and the doctrine against which we dispute. let no
man therefore think, because the Papists maintain many points of Christian
religion, that either we reprehend that truth, which they and we defend, or
that they can defend the errors of Popery, because they hold some truth. but
either let them justify their errors; or else they shall be forced to
confess, that the proper doctrine of Popery is wicked and erroneous.

CHAP. II. Of the grounds and foundations of Popish religion.
AS Popery is diverse from Christian religion, so has the same other
foundations than Christian religion. The doctors of Trent in the fourth session
of that synod having pronounced them anathema, that shall not receive all the
books of the Bible, as they are found in the old Latin vulgar translation, and
read in the church of Rome, for holy and canonical, or that shall wittinglie
contemn the traditions of that church, do signify that this is the
foundation of the confession of faith, which they meant to publish. so it
appears they ground their faith beside canonical scriptures upon apocryphal
writings of Tobiah, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and the Machabees, and
diverse fragments of books not found in the Hebrew text of the Bible, and upon
traditions not written, but delivered from hand to hand from the Apostles, as
they say, and so come to their hands. but where they speak of scriptures, it
is to be observed, that they do not simply allow them, but as they are
contained in the old vulgar translation, and as they are expounded by the
Church of Rome. those which under any pretense do reject the old translation,
or use any interpretation contrary to the Romish Churches meaning, they
condemn.

Stapleton in his book entitled Principia doctrinalia does deliver unto us
seven grounds or principles of his religion. the first is the Church, the
second the Pope, the third the means used by the Pope in judgment, the fourth
the Popes infallibility in judgment, the fifth his power in taxing the canon
of Scriptures, the sixth his certain interpretation of Scriptures, the seventh
his power in delivering doctrine not written. these I say are his grounds and
principles absurdly devised, confusedly disposed, and ridiculously propounded,
as God willing, shall be showed otherwhere. now it is sufficient to declare,
that whatsoever he bableth elsewhere of scriptures, councels and fathers, yet
here they are all suppressed in this division, or at the least concealed under
the name of the Church, or Pope, which in his preface to Gregory the 13. he
calls supremum numen in terris, that is, the supreme God of the world, and
who to him is all in all. likewise in his preface to his relection of
doctrinall principles, he seems directly to exclude the scriptures.
Christianae religionis fundamentum habemus says he, ab ipsis literis
apostolicis and euangelicis uliud. that is, we have another foundation of
Christian religion diverse from the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. if he
exclude not scriptures, yet he admits them no otherwise, than according to
the interpretation of the Pope, and his accomplices. nay without the Popes
declaration he does tediously discourse, that Christians are not to receive
the canon of scriptures.

The decretale epistles of the Pope no doubt they admit for the foundation of
their faith. for in the rubricke of their decrees c. in canonicis. did. 19.
they do determine that the Popes decretales are to be numbered among
canonical scriptures. inter canonicas scripturas, say they, decretales
epistolae connumerantur. likewise Gelasius c. sancta Romana. did. 15. defines
that the Popes decretale epistles are to be received with veneration.

In the same decretale Gelasius authoriseth the Roman martyrologe or legends
of martyrs. neither can Kellison, or his kettle companions deny this to be one
of the grounds of his rammish, I would say Romish religion, seeing these
martyrologes and legendes contain diverse traditions, which the conuenticle of
Trent will have all Papists to receive with equal affection to scriptures.

Canus lib. 1. loc. theolog. c. 1. assigns ten places, out of which he
says, divines are to draw arguments. the first is the authority of scriptures.
the second the authority of traditions not written. the third is the authority
of the catholic church. the fourth the authority of councels. the fifth the
authority of the church of Rome. where we are to note that more honestly than
his companions he makes the church of Rome to differ from the Catholic
church. the sixth is the authority of ancient fathers. the seventh the
authority of Romish school doctors. the eighth natural reason. the ninth the
authority of Philosophers. the tenth the authority of writers of stories. so
we see how he builds his faith upon men, as well as upon God, and matcheth
traditions not written with the most divine writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and conioyneth the authority of councels and fathers, nay of
schoolmen and Philosophers with the testimony of holy scriptures framing to us
rather an humane then a divine foundation of Christian faith.

Martin Perez a plain dealing Papist knowing, that all those points of
doctrine, which are in controversy betwixt his fellows and us, are grounded
rather upon tradition then scripture, does entitle his whole discourse of these
matters, de traditionibus, that is, a discourse of traditions.

Finally Bellarmine lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans cap. 31. does call the Pope the
foundation of the building of the church, Fundamentum aedisicij ecclesiae, and
in his preface before his books de pontisice Romans he says, that the seat of
Peter, or the Popes chair, is the approved stone, the corner, and precious
stone placed in the soundation, of which the Prophet I say speaks. c. 8. and
28. and with him concurreth Sanders in his book of the Rock of the church.
Stapleton also declares the matter most plainly in praefat. in relect.
princip. doctr. where he says, that the foundation of the knowledge of
Christian religion is necessarily placed in the authority of the Pope teaching
us, in whom he says, he hears God speaking to us. his words are, in hac
docentis hominis authoritate (he speaks of the Pope) in qua deum loquentem
audimus religionis nostrae cognoscenda fundamentum necessario pom credimus. and
this others must necessarily also hold. for they hold him to be the supreme
interpreter of scriptures, and an infallible Judge of all controversies of
religion, and a lawgiver to our consciences, binding all men's consciences by
his laws; which is the common opinion, as Bellarmine lib. 4. de Pontifice Romans
c. 16. says of all casuistes. a pitiful case therefore it is, wherein the
Papists stand, whose consciences are chained with so many bonds.

This then being found in the survey of the grounds of Popish religion, let us
also consider what conclusions may be hence inferred, that we may as well
survey the conclusions as the premises. First it follows, that these grounds
being blasphemous both in regard of the spirit of God which is the enditer and
author of holy scriptures, and also in regard of Christ Jesus, the foundation
of the church and finisher of our says, the doctrine and religion of Popery
cannot be clear of blasphemy. for to match Popish decretales with holy
scriptures, and the Popes determination with Gods law, is derogatory to Gods
holy spirit, and a plain disparagement to Gods holy law. likewise it is
blasphemous to accuse the holy scriptures of insufficiency and imperfection,
and to attribute more certainty and perspicuitie to the decretales of the
Pope, then to the laws of God. it is also blasphemous either to remove Christ
out of the foundation of the church, or at the least to join the Pope with him
in the foundation, and that as a more necessary foundation for the knowledge of
Christian religion, as Stapleton says. the same also is directly contrary to
the words of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 3. Ephesians. 2. and of S. James. c. 4. in the
first of which places we find, that no other foundation can be laid of the
church, but Christ Jesus. in the 2. we read, that the Church is founded upon
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. in the
3. we understand, that there is only one Lawgiver and Judge, which is able to
save and destroy. it is finally very impious and blasphemous to assirme, that
the Pope is a more certain and superior Judge, then God himself speaking to
us in scriptures, or then the Apostles and Prophets, that were led into all
truth by the spirit of God. of other blasphemies of Popery we shall have
further occasion to speak hereafter.

Secondly seeing the Papists are not certain of their grounds, it must needs
follow, Clement, Leo, or any other sitting in the Popes chair be true Pope.
nor can they assure themselves, whether the decretales, which go under the
names of Popes, were indeed their decretales, whose names they carry. Antonius
Contius a learned Papist in a certain annotation of his added to the chapter
sancta. did. 15. in Plantins edition, says, that all the decretales set out
under names of Popes before Siluester, are false. and this he says he has
showed manifestly. further it cannot be proned, that all the determinations of
the Popes are right and equal. nay contrary, we have by diverse most certain
demonstrations proved, that both concerning scriptures, faith, the law,
sacraments, prayer, the worship of God, and diverse points of faith they have
determined contrary to the rule of says, as shall hereafter more particularly
appear. Thirdly it were plain impudency to say, that the Apostles instituted
the consecration of the Paschal Lambs, the form of hallowing of churches,
salt, water, and all Popish trinkets, the form of praying upon beads, and the
rest of the Romish traditions. neither shall Kellison ever be able to justify
all those reports, which his teachers have received by tradition, and
publicly heretofore set forth, and now read out of their legendes. Fourthly
diverse of those 84. canons, which go under the names of the Apostles are
disclaymed by the Papists themselves, and the rest cannot be proved, that they
were made by the Apostles. of the acts of the Nicene Council the Papists
themselves have no certainty. Most confess 20. as Ruffin, and Pope Stephen,
and others in c. vigint. did. 16. Gratian under the testimony of Athanasius
tells us of 70. c. septuaginta did. 16. now one Alphonsus a pisa a Iebusite
has published 80. canons. the acts of the council supposed to be held under
Siluester Bishop of Rome are all conterfeit, as the barbarous style, and
strange form of government represented in those acts, and diverse barbarous
names and other arguments do signify. sometimes Peter Crabbe the collector of
councels does set down diverse acts of councels not only differing, but also
repugnant one to another. fifthly diverse books are set forth under the name of
fathers, that no man can certainly say were written by the fathers, whose names
they carry. Nay some of them do contain doctrine contrary to the faith
professed by the fathers. sixthly they are not certain either what is the sense
of the Roman church, diverse doctors yielding diverse interpretations of
scriptures, or what is the old Latin translation. for Sixtus Quintus sets
out the old vulgar Latin translation after one sort, and Clement the eight
after another. and he that allows the translation of Sixtus Quintus must
needs condemn that of Clement the eight, and contrariwise. finally seeing
diverse Papists assign diverse grounds of their faith, and scarce two of many
do agree in all points concerning their foundations and the assurance of them;
how can they pretend either unity, or certainty in their religion?

Thirdly the foundations of Popery being laid upon false decretals, and lying
legends, Innocentius. c. quis nesciat. did. 11. where he denies, that any
taught or gathered churches in France, Spain, Afrike, Italy beside S. Peter,
and those which were sent by him and his successors. and likewise by the
decretale of Gregory the 4. c. in praeceptis, did. 12. where it is said, that
all causes are to be referred to the church of Rome, as to the head, and from
thence to receive direction, from whence it received his beginning. and by the
chapter in nouo. did. 21. where it is said, that the rest of the Apostles made
Peter their Prince, and infinite others. that the legendes, which are the ground
and receptacle of many traditions, are full of lies I have showed else where. if
Kellison the Survey or deny this, let him prove unto us, that S. George killed
a dragon ready to devour the kings daughter of Silena, and conquered Palestine;
that Catharine overcame 50. Philosophers, and converted the Empress and the
general of the emperors army, and broke a wheel with her prayers, that with
turning killed 4000. pagans. that S. Nicholas being an infant fasted
Wednesdaies and Fridaies. that Bernacus yoked hearts. that Saint Brendan sailed
into Paradise. that a crucifixe of wood resaluted Bartilmew a monk of Durrham,
that the blessed Virgins body was carried into heaven by Angels, that her house
was carried over the seas first into Dalmatia, and then into Italy, and lastly
to Loreto, and the rest of those tales.

Fourthly, Sipapa. did. 40. that he may, the foundation of the Church should
lie in hell. that the Pope falling into heresy, as Liberius, Honorius 1. John
the 22. and diverse others have done, that the Church should fail; which be
matters absurd, and impious to affirm.

Fifthly,

Sixthly, Sixtus Quintus and Clement the eigth and others set out at Colein,
Louain and Antwerpe, and much more from the original books of the old
Testament in Hebrew, and new in Greek, and the interpretations of the
scriptures being so diverse in the chief doctors of the Romish church, and so
repugnant to the meaning of the holy Ghost, it does necessarily follow, that
Popish religion is composed of contrary pieces, and cannot be the faith of
Christ, which is one, and has only one firm foundation.

Finally,

CHAP. III. Of the wicked doctrine of Papists concerning the law of God, and
the performance thereof.
LOng it were to relate all the wicked and false doctrines of Popery in every
point of Christian faith. beside that the same is performed largely by diverse
learned men in diverse ample volumes. we will therefore here speak only of
some principal points of religion, and show how they have been by our
aduersaties most notoriously abused and corrupted, and so proceed to entreat of
the beginnings, proceedings, impieties, falsities, contradictions, and other
abuses and defects, that are generally found in Popery.

First, then we find, that they have not only taught impiously of Gods law,
but also rejected the same for their own traditions. generally they hold that
the Popes laws bind in conscience, and that it is sin to transgress them.
but if this were so, then were not the knowledge of sin by the law, as the
Apostle teaches us, neither were the law of God perfect, nor a certain rule
of Christian life, nor were God the only lawgiuer, that could save and destroy.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de stat. peccat. c. 3. says that there are certain
sins, or transgressions of the law, so light and little, that they deserve
not eternal death. but this does frustrate the sanction or vigor of the law,
that pronounces them accursed, which continue not in all things, which are
written in the book of the law to do them, as we read Galat. 3.

The Scotists and most Papists now hold, that the Virgin Mary was neither
conceived in sin, nor ever committed sin. but the Apostle Romans 5, says,
that by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin went over all.
and Galat. 3. he shows how the scripture has concluded all under sin.

All of them hold, that in the regenerate concupiscence is no sin. yet can
they not deny, but that concupiscence is forbidden by the law of God. and
thereupon the Iebusites in their censure of Colein deny all to be sin, that
is repugnant to the law of God. Let Christians therefore imagine whether they
will follow the Apostle, that shows sin to be known by the law, and that
concupiscence is sin, or the Iebusites denying the same.

The Iebusites of Collein fol. 194. affirm, that what the law commands
concerning the love of God with our whole heart, mind and soul, pertains not
to us in this life. as if God had given a law to souls in the life to come,
and not to men in this life. this error our Savior confuteth Matthew. 22. where
he assoileth the Scribes question concerning the greatest commandment in the
law.

The same fellows fol. 48. affirm that a regenerate man is able to perform
the law of God perfectly. but if this be so; then they are deep plunged in the
heresy of the Pelagians, who were condemned for holding, that Christians are
able to live without all sin.

The Papists teach, that we are to be justified and saved by the works of the
law. but the Apostle 2. Cor. 3. teaches contrary, that the law is the
minister of death.

The law of God forbids us the having of other gods beside him, in which
commandment we are also forbidden to give the honor of God to creatures. but
Papists beside God in heaven have a God on earth, as appears evidently by the
chap. satis did. 96. and diverse glosses of canonists, and glosing flatteries
of Papists. they worship the sacrament also as God, and Bellarmine lib. de
monachis c. 14. does call Saints Gods by participation. the honor of God they
give to Saints and Angels, yea to the images of Christ, of the Cross, and of
the Trinity. in the honor of Angels and Saints they say masses, and offices,
they erect churches, altars, and images, and burn incense unto them. they call
upon them, swear by them, make vows, and confess their sins unto them.

The second law of the first table prohibiteth the making of graven images. to
the intent to bow unto them, and to worship them. but Papists do both make
them, and pray and crouch before them. they do also offer gifts, and burn
incense unto them, as the heathen did to their idols. nay, which the heathen
did never, they give the same honor to a picture of Christ, or of the Cross,
or of the Trinity, which they give to God himself. praying to the Cross they
say, o Cross of Christ protect me, o Cross of Christ defend me from all
evil.

The third law forbid death perjury, the vain use of swearing, and all abuses
of Gods holy name and word. but little is the same regarded by the Pope and his
accomplices. for they do not only break their oaths, but also lightly dispense
with perjured persons. Gregory the seventh, as in his life appears, forswore
the papacy, and yet regarded not his oath. the like we find related of Pope
Formosus. commonly they loose and assoile subjects from the bond of their oath
to Princes. absoluit Gregorius 7. omnes a iuramento, quos fidei tenuit
obligatio, says he that wrote the life of Henry the fourth. Paschal the second
having solemnly sworn to the Emperor presently brake his oath, as we may see
in Otho Frisingensis, and diverse other historiographers. Gregory the twelsth,
as Theodoric. a Niem testifies tract. union. 6. c. 29. was publickely
accounted a perjured person, periurus publicus. Charles the French King, as
Theodoric. a Niem tract. union. 6. c. 14. testifies, chargerh Gregory the
twelfth and Peter de luna with perjury. violauerunt sidem, fregerunt votum,
promissum non tenuerunt. and again o magnum and scelestum facinus! says he
speaking of their periuries. Innocent the seventh having vowed and sworn to
unite the papacy, would not do it. notwithstanding his oath, as we read
tract. union. 6. c. 39. quam vouit, and iurauit facere noluit vnionem. in the
conuenticle of Constance it was decreed by this wicked synagogue, that oaths
and promises were not to be holden being made to heretics. the perjury of
Ladislaus, which Eugenius the fourth induced him unto, cost the loss of many
men's lives. Gulcciardine histor. lib. 8. does testify, that the Pope decreed,
that it should be lawful, to recall all covenants and promises made by the
Popes predecessors. that impious fellow Pius the 5. in his Bull against Queen
Elizabeth of pious memory did excommunicate such, as would not take arms
against her. and yet her subjects were sworn to obey her. all Papists commonly
are great swearers and forswearers. in the Roman Catechism in 2. mandat. they
complain that their people were given to swearing and cursing. Quis non
videat, say they, omnia iureiurando assirmari, omnia imprecationibus and
execrationibus referta esse? they swear by saints, bread, salt, and other
creatures, infringing Gods commandment Deuteronomy. 6. that requires men to swear
by his name. Finally the Popes and their accomplices most shamefully wrest and
turn scriptures, making them serve to their humors and pleasures.

The fourth commandment concerns the sanctifying of the Sabbath. but the
Papists profane it by worshipping Idols, and frequenting the idolatrous mass.
Julius the second upon the solemn day of Easter fought a bloody battle with
the French at Rauenna, and the Duke of Guise upon the sabbath massacred the
Saints of God at Vassi. and so little do they respect the Lords honor, that
they make more account of our ladies festiuals, and of the days of Francis,
Dominicke, and Thomas Becket, then of the Lords day.

The fifth commandment requires obedience of children to parents, and of
subjects to princes. yet Gregory the seventh, Paschall the second, Alexander
the third and diverse Popes by their decretales have armed the son against the
father, and the subject against his prince. neither was the late league of the
French rebels against Henry the third and Henry the fourth set forward and
confirmed by other more, then by the Pope. the Popes of Rome stirred up
rebellion against Henry the eight in England, and against Queen Elizabeth both
in England and Ireland. Allen and Parsons in their wicked libell against Queen
Elizabeth directed to the nobility and people of England and Ireland endeavor
by all means to persuade her subjects to rebellion, and to lay violent hands
upon her. Cardinal Como in his letters to Parry, that came into England with a
full resolution to murder the Queen, does promise in the Popes name not only
indulgence and pardon for his sins, but also reward on earth and merit in
heaven.

The sixth commandment forbids murder. But Papists think they do God good
service, when they murder true Christians. from this fountain have proceeded
all their cruel executions in England, France, Italy, Germany, Spain and
other countries. Natalis Come; in his history testifies that in the massacre
of France An. D. 1572. they murdered above sixty thousand of all sorts of
persons. their garments are died in the blood of innocents. nay they cruelly
poison and murder those of their own religion, if they be opposite unto them
in faction. Gregory the seventh caused not only bloody wars to be stirred up
against the Emperor, but tormented, and murdered such, as he pleased at Rome.
Alexander the sixth for every word put men to death. Julius the second promised
reward to him, that could kill a Frenchman, as Budaeus de Ass testifies. but
as Lactantius says massacring and piety cannot stand together. long diuersa
sunt carni ficina and pietas, nec potest aut veritas cum vi, aut iustitia cum
crudelitate coniungi.

The seventh commandment as it forbids adultery, fornication, Just, and all
uncleanness; so it requires purity of life, and chaste and undefiled
behauior. but among Papists adultery and fornication is reckened among lesser
sins, as appears by the Chapter, and si clerici. de iudicijs. the Pope
permits whores in Rome and exacteth tribute of them, as is notoriously
known to the world. the same is also testified by the gloss of the
constitution provincial beginning with the word licet. de concubin. cleric.
remouendis. by Agrippa de vanit. scient. c. de lenocinio. by Sansonino lib. dei
gouerni. c. corte de Roma and diverse others. of late in the castle of Wisbich
among the Iebusites and Massepriests one defended, that whores were in Rome cum
approbatione, and with as good authority as any citizen, or as the Pope of
Romc. the Popes and their accomplices disallow honest wedlock of priests, and
yet allow, or at the least wink at such, as keep concubines and whores.
Theodoric a Niem tract. v. nemoris vnionis c. 33. shows that in Gascoigne,
Spain, Portugal and other countries it was lawful for Popish Bishops and
Priests to keep concubines.

The commandment against theft as Canisius in his catechism confesses c. de
decalogo forbids also usury, simony, rapine, sacrilege and all unjust gain.
yet usury and simony yield no small revenues to the Popes coffers. the history
of Matthew Paris does in every kings reign declare infinite pillages what by
usury, what by simony committed in England by the Popes. speaking of Gregory
the ninth his factors he says, they vexed England by usury, per Caursinos and
vsurarios Angliam vexarunt. he says also how they held usury for a little
fault, and simony for none. vsuram pro paruo, simoniam pro nullo inconueniente
reputauit, says he speaking of the Popes agent. Felin shows, that without
the rent of Symony the church of Rome would come to contempt. in Rome of late
times the Popes have erected diverse banks of usury, called monti di pieta, as
appears in Onuphrius in the lives of Julius the third, Paul the fourth, and
Pius the fourth, and there money was to be had for ten or twelve in the
hundred, and sometime for less. Vrbane the sixth, as Theodoric a Niem lib. 1.
de schism. c. 22. testifies, sold chalices, crosses and images. the same man
does make strange reports of the practices of Boniface the ninth to get money.
omnia benesicia vendidit. si non potuit habere pecunias, accepit porcos, sues
etc. lib. 2. de schism. c. 10. he says he sold all benefices, and when he
could not have money he took pigs, cattle, and such wares. the merchants of
Babylon now take money for masses, sacraments, and indulgences, and extort both
from quick and dead. the secular Priests charge the Iebusites to be most
cunning fellows in extorting of money. in Spain they have a rhyme showing,
that they have turned all Gods commandments into practices of gain, es el
primero ganar dinero, that is, the first commandment is to get money. all Gods
commandments they have turned into these two, Todo para mi, nada para vos. all
for me, naught for you.

The ninth commandment does directly forbid false witness, and whatsoever is
under that contained, as lying, detraction, and all lewd speeches tending to
the hurt or disgrace of our neighbor. but the Papists, as if lying,
slandering, and bearing false witness had been commanded, so forge and
falsify scriptures, fathers, councels, histories and all good authors, as
their expurgatory tables, counterfeit decretall epistles, and false allegations
of bastard authors and others do testify, and shall more at large be declared
hereafter. their late books also are full of execrable lies and slanders
against M. Wickliffe, M. Husse, Hierome of Prage, Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius,
Melancthon, and all the professors of truth. the Pope he hireth men to speak
lies and slanders, and his accomplices delight to hear them. Allen and Parsons
in their resolutions of cases of conscience teach their disciples, how to
dissemble, lie, and forswear themselves cunningly. the canonists and other the
Popes parasites call him a god on the earth, the head and spouse of the church,
and bear him in hand, that he cannot err.

Finally where the last law says, thou shall not covet, the conuenticle of
Trent teaches, that concupiscence is no sin. the Papists hold also, that it
is less sin for Friars and Massepriests to lust, and commit fornication in
thought, than to marry. the Popes of Rome, have not only coueted, but also
usurped diverse parts of the Empire. and thus hoping to be saved by the law, the
Papists not only by their practice, but also by their doctrine overthrow the
law. the Pope by his dispensations annulleth and frustrateth the law. his
accomplices more regard the Popes decretales, than the eternal law of the living
God.

This law of God they say may be persectly performed by the assistance of Gods
grace. and as touching the substance of the action, they hold that it may be
performed without grace, ex quo efficitur says Bellarmine lib. 5. de lib.
arbit. c. 9. tot am Dei legem absque auxilio gratiae quoad substant iam
actionis ab hominibus recte seruari posse. in the same book c. 2. he says
that without any special help of God man may know veritatem moralem or the
moral law, with the circumstances thereof. which is not only contrary to
scriptures, declaring man's weakness and blindness, but also overthrows the
necessity of Gods grace. for if man without grace both knows the truth, and
is able according to the substance of the action to perform the law, then is
he not dead in trespasses and sins, as the Apostle says, nor do the Papists
believe in Christ, which says, without me you can do nothing. does it not
then appear that popery is false, erroneous, and repugnant to Gods law, and
the ancient faith, in the doctrine of the law?

CHAP. IIII. Of the damnable doctrine of Papists concerning faith and
justification.
THe Apostle teaches us, that the just shall live by faith. but the Papists
do so handle the doctrine of faith, that the same cannot quicken any, but is
like rather to be the occasion of the fall and death of many. first they teach
that justifying faith is nothing else, but a firm assent to the word of God.
but if a firm assent to every word of God do justify, then are Christians
justified by believing that there is a Devil, as well as believing that there
is a God, and as well are they justified by believing the curses of the law, as
believing that grace and mercy is offered them in Jesus Christ. nay as well may
the Devils have justifying says, as faithful Christians. for they do give
their assent to the word of God, and believe, that he is truth. but these are
most damnable doctrines.

Secondly they say, that Christians are as well to believe the traditions of
the church not written, as the holy scriptures. the doctors of Trent will have
both received, with equal affection. the authors of the censure of Colleinsol.
91. teach Christians to believe, not only such things as are revealed in
scriptures, but also such points as are delivered from hand to hand. but if
this be granted, then will it follow, that Christians are as well to believe the
Pope, or the Church of Rome, as God himself. and that faith is built upon man's
word, and not only upon the word of God. and lastly that faith is built not
only upon uncertainties, but also upon falsehood. for such are the traditions of
the church of Rome. many are uncertain, and some very false and erroneous; as
is particularly showed in diverse treatises, against Romish traditions.

Thirdly they teach, that faith is a gift and light, by which a man being
illustrated does firmly assent and adhere to those things, which are revealed
by God, and proposed to us by the Church. est Dei donum and lumen says
Canisius Cathechismi c. 1. quo illustrat us homo firmiter assentitur atque
adhaeret ijs, quae vt credantur sunt diuinitus reuelata, and ab Ecclesiae nobis
proposita. now by the church they understand the Pope, and church of Rome. but
of this it follows first, that the Church of Rome has no faith. for how can
a Church propose and teach matters to itself? this does utterly destroy the
nature of relations, and therefore I think the learned Romanists will hardly
confess this to be true. it follows next, that Christians are neither to
believe in Christ, nor to profess the articles of the faith, unless the Pope
and Church of Rome propose them unto us. but this is most absurd and impious.
for we believe in God, and not in the Pope, nor in the Church adhering to him.
that these consequents are good it is evident, because they no less require
that the articles of faith be proposed to us by the Church of Rome, than that
they be revealed by God.

Fourthly as well does Canisius require, that Christians believe, that the
whole body of Christ be contained in the eucharist, as Papists do hold it, as
the article of the Trinity, the creation of the world, and Christ's
incarnation. for all these articles he ioineth together Catech. c. 1.. 4. but
he could not say worse, if he meant to overthrow the whole Christian faith.
for the Popish real presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament is
contrary to Christ's meaning, to words of scriptures, exposition of fathers, the
nature of sacraments, and to humane reason and fense, as at large is justified
in my books de missa against Bellarmine.

Fifthly they teach, that the wicked and reprobate, nay that the devils of hell
may have true faith. but our Savior Christ says John 3. that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. so it follows
by the doctrine of Papists, that the reprobate, and the devils of hell may be
saved.

Sixthly they affirm, that charity is the form of faith. but the Apostle
teaches us, that the just do live by faith; of which it follows that faith
has a form of it self, whereby it quickneth us. furthermore it is an absurd
thing to make one virtue or habit the form of another. and if this were
tolerable, that one quality were the form of another, yet would it seem
far more probable, that faith should be the form and life of charity and
works, for that without faith it is not possible to please God, than that
charity should be the form of faith, which does follow of faith.

Seventhly the Iebusites of Collein fol. 122. teach that faith is only of
general propositions, and hope of particulars. so it follows of their
doctrine, that no Christian ought to believe, that he or any other particular
person has his sins forgiven, or is of the body of the church, or shall be
saved. but if this were true, then do not the Iebusites believe, that
themselves shall rise again, or appear in judgment. further, then can they
not believe that Pope Clement, or Leo, or Paul is the head of the church, or
that they are to subject themselves unto him, or that this particular Church of
Rome is the true Church, and such other particular propositions.

Eighthly they teach, that we are not justified by the remission of sins, or
by imputation of Christ's righteousness. but the Apostle 1. Cor. 1. shows,
that Christ is made to us justice, wisdom, sanctification and redemption. and
that Abraham, believing it was imputed to him for righteousness. the Prophet
Isaias cap. 53. shows that by his stripes we are healed.

9 They say that we are justified by the law, and by the works there of. but
the Apostle Gal. 3. says it is manifest that no man is justified by the law
before God. and Romans 4. he shows, that Abraham was not justified by the
works of the law. does it not then manifestly appear, that these false
Apostles of Antichrist teach doctrine contrary to the Apostle, and are not the
children of Abraham, or partakers of his faith?

10 Thomas Aquinas 2.2. q. 4. art. 3. teaches that Christians are not bound to
confess their faith at all times. and this his followers diligently practice,
that by their wicked teachers are taught to aequiuocate and dissemble their
faith and profession. but true Christians are always boldly to profess their
faith, and to yield a reason of the same. for this is the doctrine of the
Apostle S. Peter, whom we are rather to credit, than these false Apostles.

11 For a lay man to dispute of matters of faith they count it mortal sin,
especially knowing that the Pope has forbid the same under pain of
excommunication, as Nauarrus teaches enchirid. c. 11. but this shows, that
Papists do rather seek to suppress the faith then to teach matters of faith.
the same also appears, for that they commend ignorance, and Thomas Aquinas
2.2. q. 2. art. 6. says, that all are not bound to have explicit faith.
Linwood in his gloss upon the constitution beginning ignorantia de summa
Trinit. holds that it is sufficient for lay men and simple people to believe
the articles of the Creed implicitly, or to believe as the Catholic Church
believes. and this is the faith that Hosius commended in the colliar. but it
shows, that our adversaries seek to intertaine the people in ignorance of
matters of faith, while the mass priests sport and intertaine themselves with
all delights, and living idly reap the fruits of poor men's labors.

12 Thomas Aquinas p. 3. q. 7. art. 3. denies that Christ has faith. which is
as much, as if he should make Christ the author of our faith a Pagan and an
Infidel. further the same overthrows the Popish definition of faith. for
either Christ did not firmly believe Gods word, or else he had faith. now to
say that is, plain blasphemy. neither is that defense material, that Christ
knew all things by reason of the hypostaticall union of two natures in one
person. for that did not overthrow his humane nature, nor hinder him for having
faith without all imperfection.

Finally they teach, that the Pope only is to order, and to publish the Creed.
for that is the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas 2. 2. q. 1. art. 10. and the rest,
no question, believe it. but it is sufficient to overthrow not only the Nicene
and Constantinopolitan confession, but also the Apostles Creed and faith of
Christ. for whatsoever face our adversaries do set on matters, they shall never
show, that these ancient Creeds did either depend upon the authority of the
Pope, or were by him ordered, published, or confirmed. nay many Popes we read
of, which, for any thing we can understand, did not believe the Apostles Creed.
upon this weak foundation of infidel Popes the miserable Papists do build
their wind-shaken faith. we do not therefore marvel, if they rely more upon
works, then this faith, and if they trust rather to be justified by good
works, than the Popes erroneous faith. but if they would consider what true
faith is, and how the same applies Christ unto us, and unites us unto him,
then would they abandon the errors of Popery, of which we have given a taste in
this article of justification by faith in Christ.

CHAP. V. What Papists do mean by the Gospel.
THe preaching of the Gospel to Christians is the gladsome declaration of Gods
favor offered to us through Christ Jesus. and therefore the Angel Luc. 2.
speaking of the Savior of the world, declared, that he brought them tidings of
great joy that should be to all people. but the Papists by their new and
strange doctrine do so confound the law and the gospel, as if they sought to
deprive Christians of this joy, and meant to alter the title of Christ's most
ioifull Gospel. for first, as if Christ had not been a Savior, or a
Redeemer, but a lawgiuer, that was to propound a new law, wherewith Christians
were to be newly charged, they call the Gospel the new law. but neither is
the law of Moses contained in the two tables abolished, nor was it Christ's
intention to surcharge his people with new laws and new bonds, but to free
them from the curse of the law, and to redeem them. as for the orders
concerning sacraments we may not repute them to be properly laws, but means
and directions for the right applying of Gods graces unto Christians. further
the new law that God speaks of was written in men's hearts, as we read Hierem.
31. and Heb. 8. but the laws of the new Testament, which the Papists speak
of, are partly written in scriptures, and partly in decretales. the Papists
therefore making Christ a new lawgiuer do overthrow his covenant of grace.

Secondly this new Law or Testament, as they say, is the love of God shed into
our hearts. for so does Bellarmine teach lib. 1. de verb. dei. c. 3. but grant
this, and then the new testament does not include remission of sins. for love
is one thing, and remission of sins another. but that the new testament does
include remission of sins, first our Savior does signify, where he calls
the cup of thanksgiving, the cup of the new testament for remission of sins;
and Chrysostom in 2. Cor. 3. and Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact upon
the same place directly affirm.

Thirdly, Thomas Aquinas 1.2. q. 107. art. 4. says, that the precepts of the
new law (or of the Gospel) as touching the inward works of virtue, are more
grievous then the precepts of the law of Moses. quantum ad opera virtutum,
says he in actibus interioribus etc. praeceptanouae legis sunt grauiora. this
is directly contrary to the words of our Savior Math 11. my yoke says he, is
easy, and my burden light. furthermore the same makes the Gospel not to be a
doctrine of Christian liberty and redemption, but of bondage and greeuance.

Fourthly, the censurers of Collein fol. 204. say, that this is the proper
doctrine of the Gospel, if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.
and with them in effect does Bellarmine lib. 1. de verb. dei. c. 3. consent,
where he says, that the new testament is nothing, but Charity shed into our
hearts by the holy Ghost. but this confounds the law and the Gospel. for no
man can deny, but that Charity is required by the law. further the same is
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles. the law, says the Apostle Romans 4.
works wrath. and ephesians. 2. he says we are saved by faith, and that not of
our selves, for that it is the work of God, not of works, least any should
boast. but our adversaries confess that Charity is a work, and not without
the cooperation of freewill. the fathers also teach otherwise. Hierome dial.
aduers. Pelag. opposing the law to the Gospel, shows that the foundation of
works is laid on the law, but that the building of faith and grace is laid
upon the same in the Gospel. Theophylact. in praefat. Euangel. shows us,
that the Gospel does declare to us good things, as remission of sins etc.
and that we obtain them without our labor. sinally herein the Papists dissent
from their master Peter Lombard sent 3. did. 40. for he says, the decalogue
is a killing letter, but the decalogue requires performance of all things
commanded.

Fifthly, Peter Lombard says, that only earthly things were promised in the
old testament, and only heavenly things in the new, as we read sent. 3. d. 40.
but our Savior Christ teaches us to ask for our daily sustenance in the
Gospel. and to those that performed Gods eternal law, eternal life was
promised in the old testament. or else the reward had not been correspondent
to the work.

Sixthly, they teach generally, that there are three evangelical Counsels, to
wit, of chastity, poverty, and obedience. as if these were the principal
points of the Gospel, or as if the obedience to monkish rules, and forswearing
of marriage, and giving all to monks were required of us in the Gospel.
further it is absurd to think, that chastity, and renouncing all for Gods
sake, and perfect obedience is not commanded in the law of God.

Seventhly the Friars purposing to overthrow Christ's Gospel, about the year
of our Lord 1256. published another new Gospel, which they called Euangelium
aeternum. as if Christ's Gospel should continue but for a time, and their
Gospel were to continue for ever. Of this Gospel thus writes Matthew. Paris in
his collection for that year. Fratres noita quaedam praedicabant, legebant,
and docebant deliramenta ex libris Ioachimi abbatis, incipitque eorum liber,
Euangelium aeternum etc. that is the Friars did preach, read and teach certain
new fooleries out of the books of abbot Ioachim, and their book began thus,
The eternal Gospel. so it appears what respect these fellows Faue of the
Gospel of Christ. Nay albeit the book was most blasphemous; yet did not the
Pope punish the authors, but only commanded the same to be abolished secretly.

Finally all the comfort, that the Papists give their followers out of the
Gospel is this, that Christ is the meritorious cause of our salvation, but the
rest they assign to men's own labors and works, teaching them how to merit
heaven by giving to Monks, and putting on Friars coules, and how they are to
go on pilgrimage, and to buy indulgences, and how to pass through Purgatory.
and this is the Gospel of Papists. of says they talk only as of a
disposition to justification, and little do they trust in Christ's mercy, flying
to Angels, to our Lady, and Saints: and to Christ's justice, remitting our sins,
and accepting us freely through faith in him, they give nothing.

CHAP. VI. Of the impious doctrine of Papists concerning Christ our Savior.
AS Christ is made unto us by God wisdom, justice, sanctification and
redemption, so those which teach false doctrine concerning him do go about to
turn our wisdom into foolishness, and to deprive us of true righteousness,
holiness and redemption. but whether the Papists have done so or no, that
rests now to be discussed. we doubt not to challenge them, as infinitely
guilty herein for first they say, that Christ was vir perfectus, a perfect man
from the first instant of his conception. but this destroieth not only the
distinction of ages, but overthrows Christ's humane nature. for rules of
reason teach us to distinguish children from men, and this is the course of
nature. man is first conceived, then borne, then a child, and so in time he
grows a man of perfect years. the same is also contrary to scriptures, that
show how Christ was conceived and borne, and was first an infant, and then a
man of perfect age. this error proceeded of the false understanding of these
words of the Prophet, mulier eircumdabit virum.

Secondly Peter Lombard lib. 3. sent. 10. did. teaches that Christ as he is
man, is not any thing, but in respect of the unity of the person. quidam
dicunt, says he, Christum secundum hominem non esse personam, nec aliquid,
nisi forte secundum sit expressiuum vnitatis personae. and this opinion he
allows, and would have the distinction to be remembered. but all Christians
that profess the faith of Christ, and rehearse the Creed of Athanasius
confess, that he is not only somewhat as man, but also a perfect man. they
also know, that the opinion of the master of schoolmen followed by diverse
overthrows Christ's humanity.

Thirdly, they take from Christ, both faith and hope, and all upon their vain
conceit, that Christ was not viator, but comprehensor, that is, was not in the
way, but always as man was glorified and enjoyed the vision of the Godhead.
in Christo non fuit sides says Thomas Aquinas. 3. p. q. 7. art. 4. ergo nec
spes; that is, Christ had neither faith nor hope. he speaks of Christ
according to his humane nature. and this opinion is commonly followed of
others. so that which they falselie objected to Calvin, concerning the uttering
of certain words of desperation, that does rightly fall upon the Papists, who
blasphemously make him not only a desperate man without hope, but also an
infidel without faith.

Fourthly the master of sentences lib. 3. did. 1. determines, that the Father
and the holy Ghost might have been made man, and yet may. sicut filius homo
factus est, ita puter vel spiritus sanctus potuit, and potest. as the son was
made man, so likewise the father and holy ghost might and yet may. which is not
far from the heresy of the Patripassians. for they held that the father did
suffer death for us: these hold that he might have taken our nature upon him,
and have suffered death for us.

Fifthly, Thomas Aquinas 3. q. 3. art. 6. teaches that the three persons in the
Trinity might assume one humane nature. tres personae diuinae subsistunt vni
naturae diuinae, says he, ergo possunt etiam vni naturae humanae subsistere.
so he shows that the Patripassians held no incommodious opinion, and
introduces an absurd heresy of the passion of the holy Ghost.

Sixthly they hold, that the body of Christ may be in many, yea almost in
insinit places at one time, and that the same is wont so to be. Multis adeoque
fere insinitis simul locis adesse potest and solet, says Bellarmine lib. 3. de
Christo c. 11. and so it must needs be, if his body be really present in every
Popish altar, and consecrated host. but it implies a contradiction to be
continued, and not to be continued: both which do follow if a body, which is
continua substantia, be discontinued in place.

Seventhly, denying Christ to be (...), and affirming that his divine essence
had a beginning from some other, they fall within the compass of the error of
the Tritheits, affirming that there is one essence not begotten, another
begotten, another proceeding: which heresy does tear the unity of the
Godhead into pieces, and plainly make more Gods then one. so running with
violence upon Calvin without cause, they run themselves out of breath, and fall
headlong into most gross heresies.

Eighthly, the scholemen determine, that the son of God might have assumed
any other nature beside that of man. of which it follows, that as God was
made man, so he might have been made a stone, or other creature. which is an
opinion most blasphemous, and derogateth from the mystery of Christ his
incarnation.

9 They deny resolutely, that Christ as man profited in wisdom. but that is
contrary to the words of the holy ghost, to the doctrine of the fathers and
overthrows his humane nature. Ambrose in his book de incarnat. dom.
sacrament. c. 7. says that Christ did profit in humane understanding. habet
and in Christo scientia aetates suas, says Tertullian lib. de pudicitia. that
is, Christ's wisdom was diverse according to diverse ages. Maxentius in profess.
fid. cath. says, he profited in years and wisdom according to his humane
nature, and not according to his divinity.

10 Generally they hold, that Christ's soul was omniscient, and not ignorant of
any thing. but the scriptures show, that Christ according to his humane nature
was ignorant of the day of judgment, as we read Marc. 13. Nazianzen. lib. 2.
de filio says, he knew it as God, but was ignorant of it as man. neither does
this imply any imperfection, or defect. for then is ignorance a fault, and an
imperfection, when we are ignorant of things, which we ought to know.

11 The master of sentences lib. 3. did. 6. says that Christ as man by grace
has both all knowledge, and all power. sola gratia habuit ille homo, non
meritis vel natura, vt osset Deus sieve Dei silius, vt haberet omnem scientiam
and potentiam, quam habet verbum, cum quo est vna persona. now if Christ as man
have all knowledge, and all power transfused into his humane nature, why should
the Papists condemn the Vbiquitaries, or how can they deny his presence in
all places?

12 By reason of their opinion of Christ's fruition of the vision of the
Godhead, and his glorification, they affirm, that Christ was never troubled in
soul with any perturbation or sadus. Christi anima iaminde ab initio, says
Bellarmine, omnibus alijs spiritus sancti donis ita repleta fuit, vt nulla
vnquam vera perturbatio aut tristitia locum in cahabuerit. lib. 4. de Christo.
c. 2. but this does cross the plain text of scripture. nunc anima mea
perturbata est, that is, now my soul is troubled says Christ. John 12. and
Matthew. 26. my soul is sad unto the death. and it takes from Christ all humane
affection. Ambrose de fide ad Gratianum, sicut susceperat voluntatem meam,
suscepit and tristitiam meam. as he has taken our will, so he has taken on
him our sadness.

13. Bonauenture in 3. sentent. did. 15. says that Christ in the time of his
most bitter passion was in the greatest joy, that might be, in summo gaudio.
but the scriptures do with diverse words of great dolor express his passion.
the Prophet says he was broken for our iniquities, and that he was a man full
of sorrows, and the fathers are full in describing of the bitterness of his
sorrow. Thomas Aquinas also 3. q. 15. art. 6. holds, that there was in Christ
true dolor, and true sadness. and the ordinary gloss in Psalm. 87. ex persona
Christi dicitur, repleta est malis anima mea. 1. doloribus. that is in the
person of Christ it is said my soul is filled full of evils, that is of
greefes. neither will the distinction of the sensitive, and reasonable soul
serve for any cover of this error. for man's soul according to the essence
thereof cannot be divided.

14. That Christ has satisfied the wrath of God for our sins the words both
of the Prophets and Apostles do assure us, vere languores nostros ipse tulit
says the Prophet Isay c. 53. he has truly borne our infirmities and carried
our sorrows. the Apostle also says, that we are reconciled to God by the death
of his son. but the Papists do diminish the merit of Christ his
satisfaction, and deny, that he has satisfied for the temporal pains of our
sins.

15. Bellarmine lib. 4. de Christo c. 11. holds that the fathers before
Christ were not freed from hell before he came from limbus patrum. but both
scriptures and fathers teach us, that all the faithful were redeemed and
delivered out of the hands of our enemies by the death of Christ upon the
cross, and not by his harrowing of hell or limbus patrum. so it appears that
they do eneruat, as much as in them lies, the cross of Christ and the effect
of his death and passion.

16 Bellarmine lib. 4. de Christo c. 16. says that Christ's soul for three
days passed the place of the damned, and the receptacle of heathenish
children. but neither do scriptures, nor fathers speak of any, that came out
of the place of the damned, but rather the contrary. for the Prophet says,
that out of hell there is no redemption: and Origin is therefore placed among
heretics, because he believed, that the devils and the damned should in the
end be saved. are not these fellows then damned teachers, that place the
Savior of the world among the damned?

17. the master of the sentences lib. 3. did. 12.. 3. does ask the question,
whether the man Christ could sin, and so be damned. non immerito quaeritur
says he, vtrum homo ille potuerit peccare, vel non esse deus. and if he could
sin, then he doubts not, but he might also be damned, si potuit peccare,
potuit da^nari. in the end he concludes wisely, that if the soul of Christ
had not been united to the God head, he might have sinned. est sine ambiguitate
verum, says he, candem, si esset and non vnita verbo, posse peccare. nay
Durandus in 3. sent. did. 12. says in a certain case Christ might be damned,
and that it is no more inconvenient to say, that Christ is damned, then to say,
that Christ has suffered and is dead. non est magis inconueniens dicere
Christum esse damnatum, quam passum and mortuum. here therefore Kellison and
Parsons and their consorts may find those blasphemies in their good masters,
which they seek greedily in Calvin, but find not.

18. Certain Papists, as the Master of the sentences shows lib. 3. did. 12..
5. suppose that the son of God might have assumed our nature in the sex of a
woman. quidam arbitrantur, says he, deum potuisse assumere hominem in foemineo
sexu, vt assumsit in virili. and he does not deny it. but this inconvenience
would have followed, that the son of God should have been the daughter, and
not the son of man. such absurdities are they, which have sounded in time
past in Christian men's ears.

19. Thomas Aquinas 3. q. 49. art. 1. assigns three means, by which Christ
has wrought our salvation, whereof the first is, for that by his example he
has provoked us to charity. tribus modis, says he, causauit nostram salutem,
primum per modu^ prouocationis ad charitatem. but the scriptures show, that he
is therefore called a Savior, because he has saved his people from their
sins. and if for this cause he might be called a Savior, then every one,
that provoke us to charity, might be a Savior.

20. Commonly they teach, that Christ is only the meritorious cause of our
justification, salvation, and redemption. and Kellison p. 261. assigns this
for a reason, because he deserved grace for us at Gods hands, by which together
with our cooperation we may be saved and redeemed. but if he be the
meritorious cause only of our iust^^^cation, salvation, and redemption, then is
he not properly our Savior, and redeemer, nor does he justify us. for not he
that meriteth at our friends hands, that we should be ransomed out of the
hands of our enemies, but our friend that paieth our ransom is our redeemer.
so this blasphemous wretch denies Christ to be properly our redeemer, and
Savior, and next he makes every man his own Savior and redeemer.

21. Likewise the same surueior page 262. tells his followers, that Christ
has therefore freed us from the tyranny of the devil, and captivity of hell,
because he has procured us grace, by the which, when the devil by him self,
or the world, or the flesh provoke us, we may resist mauger all the force of
hell. which is as much, as if he should say, that Christ has not overthrown
or triumphed over our enemies, but has procured us grace to overthrow the
devil, and to triumph over him, our selves. that he is not the strong man, that
has bound up the Devil, that had us in possession, but that he has made us
strong, and able to bind the Devil. of the deliverance from sin, and from
the curse of the law by Christ he makes no mention. and if you ask him what
he means by grace, he will tell you of charity, or a habit not distinct from
charity. such is the blasphemous doctrine of these impostors. they ascribe the
work of their redemption immediately to themselves, and a far off to Christ.

22. He tells us further page 336. that Christ's death was sufficient to have
redeemed the Devils and damned also. but this assertion supposes a
contradiction, viz. that the same Persons may be both saved and damned. it
supposes also, that the Devils and the damned may be saved, which is an
assertion direct contrary to the decree of God concerning their damnation.
would not then such impostors with their vain supposals be chased from among
Christians, and placed among the damned crew, of which he himself sometime
talks? I do the rather make mention of his contemptible fellow, albeit he
deserve no place among the learned, because he gave us the first occasion to
make this Surueie.

22. Clement the sixth in the chapter vnigenitus. extr. com. de poenit. and
remiss. does apply these words from the sole of the foot unto the head there
is nothing whole: unto Christ, as if Christ had nothing whole in him: whereas
the Prophet Isay c. 1. does speak of the sinful people of the Jews. for a
little before he said. ah finfull nation. is not then this a proper comparison,
to match the immaculate lamb of God, with an impure and finfull people, and is
not this a plain abuse of scripture?

23. The same man in the same place says, that the shedding of one drop of
Christ's blood would have been sufficient for the redemption of all mankind. his
words are, pro redemtione totius humani generis suffecisset. but Kellison in
his survey page 256. goes much further, and says, that Christ with one tear,
or one word, and not only with one drop of blood, might have redeemed us. thus
these impudent wretches euacuate the cross of Christ, and make his death
superfluous. which we would the rather marvel at, but that they are teachers
of Antichrist, and opposite to Christ, and enemies of his cross.

24. For the most part they ioin the merits of Christ and his mother, and
other Saints together, and of them they make a treasure, out of which the Pope
may bestow indulgences to such as need them or desire them. but it is absurd
to think, that the Pope or any mortal man has power to dispose or dispense
Christ's merits. For he himself has formerly disposed of them. beside that
it is a great disparagement to Christ's merits, either to supply them with the
merits of Saints, or to make Saints and mortal men redeemers, and Sauiors and
deliuerers from sin.

25. Bellarmine lib. 1. de indulgentijs affirms, that Christ had superfluous
merits. as if Christ had not known how much was sufficient, or left others to
discern of his merits, better then he did himself.

26. The scriptures teach us, that by the merits of Christ's death only we have
remission of sins. but Thomas Aquinas p. 3. q. 49. art. 1. says, that by
charity we obtain remission of sins. Caritate consequimur veniam
peccatorum, says Aquinas.

27. Of the virgin Mary most of them say, that she was conceived without
original sin, and of Hieremy and S. John Baptist that they were sanctified
in their mothers womb. of which it follows that Christ is not the redeemer
of all mankind. for what needed they a redeemer that were not borne sinners,
nor subject to the curse of the law?

28. But nothing is more blasphemous, then that they teach that dogs and hoggs,
mise and birds and other brute beasts do eat the true body of Christ, when
they eat the Sacrament: nay that such beasts do eat their God. but this is the
opinion of Alexander Hales, of Thomas Aquinas, and the schoolmen best reputed
of. and the master of sentences holding the contrary lib. 4. sent. did. 13.
is therefore censured. now herein they pass the idolatrous gentiles. for the
Egyptians did not eat those creatures, which they adored as Gods. these
devour their God and Savior, like bread.

29. They say that Christ's true body is in the sacrament. and yet he has
neither flesh nor bone, that can be felt or seen there. this therefore is not
far from the heresy of Valentinus, and destroieth the verity of Christ's
humane nature, as Aquinas 3. q. 5. art. 2. confesses. if he had taken a
heavenly body, as Valentine believed (says Aquinas) then could not the truth
of Christ's humane nature have been saved, which requires, flesh and bones. In
the 24. of Luke our Savior shows, that he had a body, that both had flesh
and bones, and was to be selt and seen.

31. In their abominable mass they make their polshorne Priests mediators for
Christ, making them to pray, that God would look upon the body and blood of
Christ with a propitious and serene countenance. supra quae, says the Priest
looking upon the sacrifice, as they call it, of Christ's body and blood,
propitio ac sereno vultu respacere digneris, and accepta habere etc.

32. They compare also the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ to the
sacrifice of brute beasts offered by Abel, and to the sacrifice of
Melchisedech; praying that God would accept Christ's body and blood, as he
accepted the sacrifices of Melchisedech and Abel: which is a most blasphemous
comparison.

33. In the mass also they confess their sins to God, to Angels and Saints
jointly, and not to Christ. nay they use the mediation of Christ, in their
confession of sins to Angels, and Saints, preferring them as much before
Christ, as a Prince is to be preferred before mediators and hushiers.

34. In a certain prouincial constitution beginning authoritate. de sentent.
excom. they excommunicate by the authority of God Almighty, and of Saints, and
leave out Christ.

35. They say Masses in honor of Angels and Saints. but he in whose honor a
sacrifice is offered is greater then the sacrifice. does it not then appear,
that while they pretend to offer Christ's body and blood in honor of Angels and
Saints, that they make him inferior to Angels and Saints?

36. They call the Pope the head, king, spouse and foundation of the church.
but this cannot be without extreme wrong to Christ. for one king dome cannot
admit two kings, nor a viceking while the king is present, nor can one woman
have two spouses, or one body two heads, or one house two diverse foundations.
the Apostle 1. Cor. 3. shows that no man can lay other foundation then that
which is already laid. Ephesians. 5. he says Christ is the head of the church,
and the Savior of his body. the synagogue of Rome therefore shows her self a
strange beast, that will needs have two heads, and two foundations being
altogether so diverse.

37. S. James shows, that there is but one lawgiuer of the Church, that is
able to save and destroy. the do therefore spoil Christ of his honor, that
give this title of lawgiuer to the Pope.

38. They do also prefer the Pope before Christ. for Christ's body when the
Pope goes on progress is sent before with the baggage, and when the Pope is
near goes out to meet him, while all the gallants of rome attend on the Pope.

39. They give authority to the Pope to draw souls out of purgatory by his
indulgences, and to make portsale of Christ's merits. but he that is sold is
never equal to the seller. neither can the Papists show, that ever Christ
delivered one soul out of Purgatory.

40. Papists believe that the Pope has often times created his creator, or at
the least made Christ's body and blood. but that Christ made the Pope it cannot
be showed. does it not then appear, that by many degrees the Pope excels
Christ in the opinion of Papists?

41. Nay they make S. Francis and Dominicke equal to Christ in diverse things,
and in some things superior, as their books of conformities and legendes do
testify. they call S. Francis Iesum typicum. that is, a figurative Jesus, and
say that Dominicke and Francis did more miracles then Christ. but the Pope gave
both these two all their credit. he must therefore needs surpass Christ in
account of Papists.

42. In the conuenticle of Trent, Cornelius Bishop of Bitonto said, papa lux
venit in mundum, the Pope the light came into the world. and Simon Begnius in
the council of Lateran called Leo the tenth, the lion of the tribe of Judah:
and cried out, Te Leo beatissime saluatorem expectauimus, that is, we, blessed
Leo, have looked for thee our Savior.

43. Beno the Cardinal shows, that Gregory the seventh, cast Christ's body
into the fire, burning the Savior of Papists. Pius the fifth also is said to
have cast an agnus Dei into the fire, as Catena in his life reports. into
this contempt have the Pupists brought their Gods.

44 Theodorie. a Niem lib. primo de schismate shows, that Vrbane the Pope
melted crosses and images of silver to pay soldiers. thus that which they
pretend to honor as God, they sell and give away in service of the Devil.

45 They give equal honor to a cross of wood and metal, and to Christ.
and looking on a wooden crucifixo they say, thou have redeemed us. who then
sees not, what little account they make of Christ?

46 A trentall of Masses the Mass Priests sell for less sometimes than six
pence; and yet they say Christ's body is offered in every Mass. are they not
therefore more wicked traitors than Judas, who would not fell Christ for less
then 30. pence?

47 The Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech is proper to Christ
by the Apostles doctrine. but the Papists make every pild pated companion a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech.

Finally the office of mediator properly belonging to Christ, they communicate
with the virgin Mary, whom they suppose to be more merciful then Christ. they
give it also to Angels, and Saints and Mass Priests. Turrecremata summae lib.
1. c. 40. speaking of Priests says, they are mediators reconciling sinners to
God. ministerium peragunt mediatoris omnipotenti Deo, qui offensus fuerat,
peccatores reconciliando. the schoolmen say also that Saints may be called
redeemers, and that is confessed by Bellarmine lib. 1. de indulgentijs.

Infinite it were to report all the blasphemous speeches and practices of
Papists against the honor of Christ Jesus. but this may serve to show, that
they rather blaspheme than honor Christ, speaking so wickedly of his person, so
blasphemously of his body, so falsely of his actions, and taking away his
honor, and giving the same to others.

CHAP. VII. The strange, contradictorie and false opinions of Papists
concerning the sacraments.
AS Sacraments are seals of Gods grace, and holy mysteries, by the which God
works our sanctification; so are they enemies of Gods grace and the
sanctification of Christians, that pervert the Apostles doctrine, and Christ's
institution concerning sacraments. how then the doctors of the synagogue of
Rome shall be able to excuse themselves, and to prove themselves not to be
envious of the good of Christians, I report me to their common doctrine, and
practice concerning this argument. for first they deny that the sacraments of
the law of Moses did open heaven, and thereupon thrust all the ancient fathers
down to hell, and place Abraham's bosom there, as appears by the doctrine of
Francis a victoria art. 1. de sacrament. in com. but this argues first, that
God works diversely by the sacraments of the law and gospel, and is
changeable in his operation, which is absurd: and next that Christ is not one
yesterday and to day, as the Apostle teaches. and thirdly places the father
of all faithful people in hell, damning all that believed in Christ before his
coming to hell. and fourthly denies that their sins were remitted that
believed in Christ before his coming. and lastly ascribes more to sacraments
devised by men, such as is extreme unction, and other Popish sacraments, than
to circumcision, and the Paschal lamb, and other sacrifices and sacraments
instituted by God.

2. The master of the sentences did. 1. lib. 4. holds, that all that died
before circumcision under the law were damned. but others contradict their
master.

3. The synod of Trent pronounces them anathema, which shall say that there
are either more, or fewer sacraments of the new law than seven: to wit,
baptism, confirmation, the eucharist, penance, extreme unction, order, and
matrimony. but this curse falls first upon the old Latin interpreter, that
Apocalypse. 17. calls the mystery of the great whore sacramentum mulieris. the
same also falls upon Saint Augustine and most of the ancient fathers, that
never knew, nor acknowledged more than two sacraments properly and truly so
caled, to wit, baptisine and the Lords supper. de latere dormientis
prosluxerunt sanguis and aqua, quae sunt nostrae redemptionis sacramenta. that
is, out of Christ's side (sleeping on the cross) flowed water and blood, which
are the sacraments of our redemption, as says Augustine in gloss. in 4. ad
Ephesians. and super Psalm. 40. Justin in his 2. apology, Ambrose de sacramentis,
Tertullian, Dionysius called Areopagita, Chrysostom, Cyril, Gregory, Cyprian,
Rahanus, Paschasius, whersoeuer they talk of the number of the sacraments of
our redemption, mention only baptism and the eucharist, and where they speak
in general (...) of holy mysteries mention diverse more, and others than the
seven popish sacraments. beside that it is absurd to think, that marriage and
Priesthood and penance were of one nature under the law, and of another under
the gospel.

4 The same synod does curse them also, that shall say, that all the above
named 7. Sacraments were not instituted by Jesus Christ. where it is apparent,
that marriage was instituted in paradise, and priesthood under the law. it is
certain also, that the fathers before Christ did rise by repentance from their
falls. furthermore what man among the Papists is able to show, where the
determinat words, and the external signs and rites of popish sacraments were
instituted by Christ? if then Canisius in his catechism c. de sacramentis.
teach truly, that Sacraments have certain determinat words, and set rites:
then is it certain, that neither Popish confirmation, nor Popish orders, nor
Popish penance, nor matrimony, nor extreme unction was instituted by Christ.
and therefore Francis a victoria de Sacramentis in co^. deriueth the
determination concerning seven sacraments from the Florentine council under
Eugenius the 4. hoc determinatum est says he speaking of seven sacraments, in
concilio Florentino sub Eugenio 4. and there indeed we find first, that the
matter of Popish confirmation is chrisme made of oil and balm, and the form
set down in these words, signo te signo crucis and confirmo te Chrismate etc.
and yet now the Papists have left off balm. the matter of extreme unction is
oil, and that for a strange medecin the Priests put in the eyes and other
organs of senses. the form of extreme unction is this, per istam sanctam
vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordia^ indulgeat tibi dominus etc. The
matter of priesthood is the Chalice, and the host: and the form, take power to
offer Sacrifice in the church for living and dead, and so forth. but no man
will affirm, that Christ instituted the form and matter of these Sacraments,
unless he be either stark mad, or mad-like desperate. in matrimony they are
neither able to afrigne certain form, nor certain matter.

5. All Papists hold, that the Sacraments of the new law both contain grace,
and confer grace ex opere operato, that is by the work wrought, as may
appear by the canons of the seventh session of Trent, and by the common
proctors of the Popes cause. Sacramentum confert gratiam ex opere operato,
says Nauarrus in his enchiridion, and Bellarmine lib. 1. de sacrament. c. 14.
says they justify. and this is the common opinion of all. but first it is
absurd to attribute as much to matrimony, confirmation and extreme unction, as
to baptism and the lords supper. secondly it is absurd to make Priests
forswear matrimony, seeing it contemeth grace, and works it, as they say.
for of this grace the Mass Priests have extreme need. thirdly if grace be
nothing else but charity, or a habit not distinct from it; it will be a hard
matter to show, how charity may be contained in oil, or the rites of
matrimony, or external signs. fourthly no Papist can show, that such as
receive their popish confirmation, or order, or extreme unction, or are married,
are more just, then they were before. finally God works by Sacraments that
which he promises. but we do not read, that ever he promised justification,
or grace to married folks, or to such as are greased in order, or extreme
unction. the master of the sentences lib. 4. did. 2.. 1. says, that some
Sacraments give remedies against sins, and helpefull grace, others only give
a remedy, as wedlock. alia in remedium tantum sunt. says he, vt coniugium.

6. Bellarmine lib. 1. de sacramentis, and Canisius in the Catechism teach,
that sacraments are external signs. and yet the inward contrition of penitent
sinners, and the consent of the parties married appears not externally.
further, this being granted, it will follow, that the body and blood of Christ
in the eucharist are no sacrament, because they appear not to the eyes, nor
can be discerned with other senses. so the Papists whatsoever they brag of
their mass, give no sacrament to their followers, but only bare accidents,
shows and shadows.

7. In the seventh session of the conuenticle of Trent they curse such, as
shall say, that the received and approved rites of the Catholic church may be
contemned, omitted or changed. but this curse falls upon their own pates.
for themselves have omitted love feasts frequented at the time of the
Communion, and the old rite of Christians then kissing one another, and the use
of milk and honey in baptism, of which Tertullian speaks lib. de coron.
milit. and of milk and wine mentioned by Hierome in Isaiae c. 55. and the
forms of dipping in baptism.

8. Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 64. art. 8. says, that the intention of the
minister is required in the administering of the sacrament. intentio ministri,
says he, requiritur ad perfectionem sacramenti. and this is so necessarily
required by all Papists in consecration of the eucharist, that without the
same, they say, there is no consecration. the being then and perfection of
sacraments depending upon the priests intention, it follows, that the state
of things in the Roman church will be brought to very great uncertainty. for
neither can it be proved, that he that ordered the Pope, had an intention to
order him, or that the Romish priests have an intention always to baptize and
consecrate, or the parties among them, that do mary do intend any such matter.
how then can the Papists be assured that the Romish church is the true church,
or that the Popes judgment is infallible, or whether they be idolaters or no,
when they worship the sacrament, when they are uncertain, whether the Pope be
either well ordered, or baptized, or whether their Priests be well ordered, and
have truly consecrated the eucharist?

9. The master of the sentences lib. 4. did. 3.. ex his. determines, that
true baptism is administered in the name of Christ only, or the father only, or
the holy Ghost only. ex his aperte intellexisti, says he, in nomine Christ's
verum baptisma tradi. vnde nihilominus insinuari videtur verum baptisma dari
posse in nomine Patris tantum, vel Spiritus sancti tantum, si tamen ille qui
baptizat sidem Trinitatis teneat. But this is as much as if he should say, that
every Priest may alter Christ's institution, and that their own orders and
rites are not to be altered. Thomas Aquinas. 3. p. q. 66. art. 6. does condemn
his masters opinion.

10. Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 66. art. 4. determines, that Christians may be
baptized in lie, or in beef broth, or porredge. in lixiuio and aquis
sulphureis sieri potest baptismus. he says also, the water is not changed by
boiling flesh in it. do we then marvel, if Mass Priests be so fat
Christians, seeing they allow baptism in lie and beef broth? this certes is
far from the decency, that is required in the administration of holy
mysteries, and sauoureth of strange curiosity. heereto also may be added, that
they baptize bells, and give them names, and this the Germans touch in their
grieuances.

11. Vrbane the Pope c. super quo. 30. q. 3. gives that authority to women,
which all Papists allow not the fathers certes neither knew it, nor allowed it.

12. The conuenticle of Trent sess. 7. pronounces him anathema, that shall
say, that baptism is not necessary to salvation. but this falls on Thomas
Aquinas, 3. q. 68. art. 2. that supposes it sufficient to have baptism in
voto, and those which allow baptism as well of blood and the holy ghost, as of
water. the conuenticle of Trent thinks it all one to say, that baptism is
not necessary, and that baptism is free. as if man not sinning necessarily had
not free will to commit sin.

13. Martin ab Aspilcueta in enchir. c. de baptismo, says, he does sin, that
annointeth him, that is baptized with chrisme kept over the year. of which
sin neither the Apostles nor ancient fathers ever heard any thing.

14. Kellison in his Survey does not take them to be perfect Christians, that
are not confirmed after his popish fashion. but this fashion of greasing was
never known to the ancient fathers. furthermore this being granted the Papists
in England should be very imperfect Christians, the most of them wanting this
supposed unctuous consignation.

15. The sacrament of baptism they say may be administered not only by Priests,
but also by laymen and women. but they do not permit any to consigne men with
chrisme but their Prelates. and for that they bring forth the testimony of
Euscbius a bishop of Rome de consecrat. did. 5. manus. so sarre do they
prefer their own inventions before Christ's institution: and so little are
they ashamed to allege counter fait writings.

16. Whether the sacrament of the cucharist be one or more sacraments, they
stand in doubt, because in a certain collect the same is both called
sacramentum and sacramenta. and Thomas Aquinas 3. q. 73. art. 2. resolves,
that it is one formally, and two materially: so that materially he makes more
than seven sacraments.

17. In this sacrament of the eucharist they require bread of wheat, and wine
of the grape as the matter of the sacrament. and yet they say neither bread nor
wine remains therein after consecration.

18. They say Christ's body is truly in the host, and his blood in the chalice
after consecration. and yet is he neither felt, nor seen there, nor can a
body of that quantity be contained in so little room.

19. Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 75. art. 3. will not grant, that bread and wine is
annihilated after consecration. as if there could at one time be no bread nor
wine in the sacrament, and yet no annihilation of the bread and wine; or as if
no part of bread and wine remaining, it might not be said properly to be
brought to nothing.

20. Franciscus a victoria in his book of sacraments c. de eucharistia, will
not yield, that the Priest may consecrate barley bread, because barley, as he
says, is meat for horses. but he says that rye bread may well be consecrated,
forasmuch as that is bread for men. yet others think otherwise.

21. The accidents of bread and wine we see remain in the sacrament. but they
cannot tell, how they should subsist, where there is neither bread nor wine.

22. Christ ordained this sacrament to be eaten and drunken, but the Papists
oftentimes neither eat nor drink the sacrament, but carry it about, or hang
it upon the altar.

23. If a mouse or other living creature take away the consecrated host, they
will have the same to be taken, if it be possible, and to be burned, and the
ashes to be kept for relics, as we read in the treatise de defect. in
celebrat. miss.

24. They beleene that Christ's body is in the eucharist, because Christ said,
this is my body. why then do they believe, that his soul and blood is there,
seeing he spoke there of neither?

25. In the sacrament they tell, how sometime there has appeared true flesh,
true blond, and Christ in the form of a child. but if this be true, then is he
not there, as they hold, sub specie aliena, that is, under another kind.

26. Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 77. art. 2. will have other accidents to be
sounded in quantity, as in their subject. but it is absurd, to make one
accident the subject of another, and yet does this absurdity being granted
little relieve them. for they cannot show how the accident of quantity should
subsist without subject.

27. They say that accidents in the sacraments due nourish. but of that it
follows, that accidents are turned into substance: which is more than
alchymisticall tran^ (...).

28. In the sacrament they see by experience worms to be engendied if it be
long kept, and that both the kinds are corrupted. but it is blasphemous to say,
that either Christ's body and blood are corrupted, or that worms can issue and
be engendered thereof. to avoid this inconvenience they say, they are engendered
of the accidents, or of the bread and wine returning again. For the engendring
of worms of mere accidents is absurd. and for the return of bread and wine
they can bring forth no words of scripture.

29. Thomas Aquinas p. 3, q. 77. art. 7. confesses, that Christ's body is not
broken in the Sacrament. and gladly would he show, how the accidents there may
be broken. but he traueileth with vanity, and brings forth nothing but
foolerie.

30. Commonly Mass Priests say that Christ at his last supper did eat
himself, and drink his own blood before it was shed. matters that imply
manifest contradiction, and dissolve rules of reason.

31. Now the spaniards will not deny, but they are canibals and eaters of men's
flesh, that eat the same whether roasted, broiled, baked or otherwise dressed.
why then should not the Mass Priests be avoided as eaters of man's flesh, and
drinkers of man's blood, as they say themselves, albeit they eat Christ's flesh
and drink his blood prepared under other forms?

32. The fathers say, that Christ's body is meat for the soul, and not to be
eaten with the teeth. but Nicholas the second will have it torn with teeth, as
his words import c. ego Berengarius. de consecrat. did. 2. others will have it
swallowed into the belly.

33. Christians abhor to hear, that Christ's body should be eaten and his
blood drunken of brute beasts. but Papists teach and confess both.

34. Christ gave his disciples the cup of the new testament. the Pope and his
accomplices sacrilegiously take the same from Gods people.

35. Christ said, take and cate. the Mass Priests suffer them that have them
to gape and gaze, and give them often nothing to eat.

36. Christians believe, that they receive the same Sacrament, that Christ's
disciples received at his last supper. but Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 81. art. 3.
says the disciples received it passible, and such as it then was. but now no
man can receive his true body but he must receive it as it is in heaven, that
is, as it is glorified and impassible.

37. They say that the eucharist is both a Sacrament and a sacrifice, and for
those two ends instituted. but that implies a plain contradiction. for as the
sacrifice is offered to God, so the Sacrament is ordained and given to men.

38. If poison after consecration be mingled in the Sacrament, Thomas Aquinas
3. p. q. 83. art 6. will have the same kept among Saints relics. but what
Christian will rescrue poison for a relic?

39. The Apostle says Christ was once offered the Massepriests say he is offered
continually, and that for quick and dead: a matter unknown to Christ's
Apostles.

40. Our Savior instituted this Sacrament for a remembrance of his death and
passion. but the Mass Priests offer the Sacrifice of his body and blood for
quick and dead, for sick, for hole, for sailers, for travelers, in the honor
of Saint and Angels, for peace and good success in all things. which be
matters never thought upon in the institution of this Sacrament.

Finally they have no less strange, false and contrary positions in their
doctrine of matrimony, order, penance and extreme unction: which they make
Sacraments. but by this it may appear sufficiently, how little they regard
either the institution of Christ, or the doctrine of the ancient catholic
church in the matter of Sacraments. I shall also have occasion otherwhere to
touch these points particularly.

CHAP. VIII. That popery is a mixture of old and new heresies.
IT were long to insist upon every article of Popish doctrine. I will therefore
rather in a generality show the qualities, proceedings, and practices thereof,
running through the whole, then dilate the absurdities and falsities of every
particular, standing upon every small point. now then that I have touched the
grounds, and certain principal doctrines of Popery, I have thought good to
show, that the rest is nothing but either old or later heresies. They glory in
their works, and hope to be justified by the law, as may be gathered out of
Bellarmines disputes de iustificatione, and also out of diverse of their
treatises of good works. the Iebusites of Collein censur. fol. 22. say, that
all their life and salvation consists in the precepts of the law, whose
fullness is love. they do also extol the merits of their works. but the
Apostle Romans 2. taxes them that glory in the law, and Galat. 3. condemned
those false Apostles, that taught justification by the law.

2. They make Gods law void by their traditions of worshipping images,
maintaining public stews, banks of usury and such like practices. the which
is noted as an error in the scribes and pharisees, reprobastis mandatum Dei,
says our Savior Marc. 7. per seniorum vestrorum traditionem. and as they had
their Talmud, so have the Papists their decrees and decretales, which they
follow as the law of God.

3. The Monks and Iebusites are also like to Pharisees. dicebantur pharisaei,
says Epiphanius haeres. 16. ante Christum, co quod separati essent ab alijs,
propter spontaneam superfluam religionem apud ipsos receptam. the Pharisees
were so called, for that they were separated from others for voluntary and
supersluous religion received by them. they compassed also sea and land to make
Proselytes, and when they had won them, they made them twice more the children
of hell, then they were themselves, as our Savior Matthew. 23. teaches us. so
likewise for a spontaneous and superfluous show of religion these irreligious
Iebusites and Monks do separate themselves from others, and take great pains
to win Proselytes to the synagogue of Rome, and in the end abuse many, and
make them much worse than themselves.

4. In their supersophisticall exposition of the law, and their often washings
and affectate holiness they imitate the scribes, who for this cause by
Epiphanius haeres. 15. ante Christum, are enrolled in the catalogue of
heretics.

5. By their often washing in holy water, the Papists hope to wash away
sins, as the Hemerobaptists among the Jews, which for this were reputed
heretics, as Epiphanius shows, haeres. 17. ante Christum. but there he
tells them, that neither drops nor rivers of water, nor the whole ocean can
wash away sins.

6. The Dositheans were reputed heretics for their affectation of virginity,
and abstinence from marriage, and punishing their bodies. why then should not
the like account be made of those Papists, that run into the same errors not
sparing their bodies, more than they did whom the Apostle Coloss. 2.
reprehendeth?

7. John the 23. was condemned in the council of Constance for denying the
immortality of the soul. the like opinion, as Zegedinus in spec. pontif. and
others report, had Alexander the sixth, Leo the tenth, Clement the seventh, and
diverse other Popes. this heresy therefore they seem to borrow from the
Sadduces, or rather from the Epicures.

8. Among the followers of Christ the first heretics were the Capernaites,
that believed that Christ's flesh was to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken
really: and that both were to be received into the mouth and swallowed down
into the belly. the same notwithstanding is taught by Pope Nicolas c. ego
Berengarius de consecrat. did. 2. and generally is beleened among the Papists.
his words are, sensualiter tractari, and dentibus sidelium atteri. as if
Christ's body were handled with hands sensually, and torn with teeth of the
faithful grossly.

9. With Simon Magus the Pope and his mates think it no sin, either to buie
or to sell the gifts of the holy ghost. thereof comes the mart of Masses, the
portsale of indulgences, the chaffering for benefices and all spiritual
linings and dignities. Mantuan Calamit. lib. 3. says they sell churches,
altars, sacraments, yea heaven and God himself. the bishop of Chems onus
eccles. c. 23. says, that Priests did sell Christ more execrably than did
Judas. Furthermore both Simon Magus, and the Papists count it a small sin to
use common women. Finally both the followers of Simon Magus and the Monks and
Friars worship the images of their founders. this Augustine de haeres. c. 1.
accounted heresy in Simon and his followers. docebat detestandam turpitudinem
indifferenter vtendi foeminis. and again, imagines and suam and Helenes
praebebat discipulis adorandas.

10. Irenaeus lib. 1. aduersus haeres. c. 23. reputeth the Basilidians,
heretics in regard of their use of images, enchantments and diverse
superstitious exorcizations. What is this then but a sentence against the
Papists, that conjure water, and salt, and other creatures, saying, exorcizo te
creaturasalis, and exorcizo te creatura aquae, and so forth. they do also
abuse the name of God in their exorcismes, and yet make exorcists an order, and
that order a Sacrament of the church. lastly they do follow Simon Magus in
magical enchantments, and use images most superstitiously to diverse purposes.

11. Carpocrates also worshipped images, and for that was put into the
catalogue of heretics by Ireney lib. 1. aduers. haeres. c. 24. Marcellina one
of his followers adored the images of Jesus, Paul, Pythogoras and Homer. colebat
imagines Jesus, and Pauli, and Homeri, and Pythagorae, adorando, incensumque
ponendo, says Augustine haeres. c. 7. so likewise Papists adore and burn
incense to the images of Saints, yea sometime to the images of heretics and no
Saints; as for example, to the images of George the dragon killer, of
Catherine, of Papias and such like.

12. The Carpocratians and Basilidians did conceal and hide the mysteries of
their religion, lest holy things should be cast to dogs, as we read in Ireney
lib. 1. c. 23. and Epiphanius in haeres. 24. and 27. and what do Papists? do
they not likewise abuse the same words of casting holy things to dogs
against Gods people, to exclude them from talking of the mysteries of religion,
and reading scriptures?

13. Epiphanius haeres. 34. testifies, that the Marcosians did baptize in an
unknown language, and Ireney lib. 1. c. 18. shows, that they anointed with
Chrisme such as they baptized, and that they had a kind of extreme unction for
the dead. Epiphanius says also, that Marcus in the eucharist brought in (...)
or transubstantiation, and that his followers accounted themselves perfect. in
their steps therefore the Papists tread, using tongues in administering
Sacraments not understood of the vulgar sort, greasing their sick, and them
whom they baptize, believing transubstantiation, and accounting Monks and
Friars in the state of perfection. but as Ireney says, perfectus apud cos
nemo, nisi qui maxima me^dacia apud eos fructificat. both old and new heretics
tell abominable lies, and for proof allege forged and apocryphal writings.

14. The Papists consecrate every year paschal lambs, and observe the Jewish
Iubiley, and in their massing sacrifice use Jewish apparel and ceremonies, as
Durand confesses. Innocentius in c. per venerabilem. qui filij sunt legitimi.
determines that Deuteronomy is now to be observed. quod ibi decernitur in nouo
testamento debet obseruari, says he. if then the Nazarites were justly
condemned for heretics for mingling Jewish ceremonies with Christian religion,
as Augustine de haeres. c. 9. and Epiphanius in haeres. 29. testify; then we
do the Pope and his poleshorne flock no wrong to call them heretics. both
Papists and Nazarites brag much of their revelations and miracles. this is
therefore another point of heresy wherein both concur.

15. The Heracleonites gave their followers departing out of this life extreme
unction, and murmured words in an uncouth language over them. feruntur, says
S. Augustine de haeres. c. 16. suos morientes nouo modo quasi redimere, id est,
per oleum, balsamum and aquam, and inuocationes, quas Hebraicis verbis dicunt
super capita eorum. this is also in part testified by Epiphanius in haeres. 36.
this practice therefore is common to the Papists with them. and both of them
abuse the words of S. James c. 5. where he talks of anointing the sick, and
draw them to their purpose.

16. The followers of Helzai, and heretics called Osseni, as Epiphanius
haeres. 19. ante Christum tostifieth, used to swear by bread and salt and
other creatures, and worshipped the spittle and relics of two of their sect.
the same Helzai taught his disciples also to pray in a tongue not understood,
saying to them: let no man ask the interpretation, but only say these words:
and then followed certain barbarous terms. the Papists therefore swearing by
bread and salt and other creatures, and worshipping the rags and excrements
of their Saints, and praying in Latin, that is not understood of the vulgar
sort, do herein rather imitate heretics, then true Christians or catholics.

17. Marcion extolled virginity. A Marcione says Epiphanius haers. 42.
virginitas praedicatur. yet did he corrupt a maiden. he gave also women power
to baptize, as Damascene de haeres. testifies. Irenaeus lib. 1. c. 30. says,
that he and Saturninus began first to teach abstinence from living creatures.
he taught also, that by Christ's descending into hell diverse men's souls were
thence delivered, as Epiphanius witnesses. finally he separated marriages for
religion. so likewise Mass Priests and votaries praise virginity, wallow in
fornication. allow women to baptize. believe that eating of fruit and roots is
better, than eating of flesh. separate married couples entering by consent into
monasteries: and believe that not only the patriarchs were delivered out of
limbus patrum, but that Traians and Falconillaes souls, and diverse others were
by their saints fetched out of hell. as for purgatory, that is a part of hell,
it is the Popes inheritance, and from thence, they say, he may deliver whom,
and as many as he list.

18. The Messalians believed, that baptism was only available to cut away
former sins. so likewise do Papists teach. against them both, Theodoret de
divine. decret. c. de baptismo, teaches, that baptism is the earnest of future
graces, and the communication of Christ's passion. and again, non vt dicunt
amentes Messaliani baptismus nouaculam imitatur, quae praecesserunt peccata
auferens. hoc enim ex superabundanti largitur. likewise both Papists and
Messalians mumbled over their prayers, and thought to be heard for their much
babbling. the Papists for saying the ladies rosary, and certain number of
creeds, and pater nosters have many indulgences given them by their holy father.

19. The Angelikes were condemned for worshipping and praying to Angels.
Synodus quae conuenit Laodiceae says Theodoret. in Coloss. 3. lege prohibuit,
ne precarentur angelos. this is also testified by S. Augustine de haeres. c.
39. Epiphanius haeres. 38. condemns the Caians for inuocating Angels. and
Tertullian de praescript. aduers. haeret. shows that this heresy proceeded
from Simon Magus. this condemnation of the Angelikes therefore serves against
the Papists, that inuocat, worship, and say Masses in the honor of Angels.

20. S. Augustine taxes the Seuerians for their forged miracles. Philumena one
of that sect, as he testifies, de haeres. c. 24. did work a strange miracle
drawing a loaf of bread out of a narrow mouthed glass. but all their miracles
are nothing to the popish miracles reported in legends. Bellarmine makes
miracles a mark of the Church. herein therefore they resemble heretics.

21. The Tatians and Encratites condemned marriage, as not so pure, as single
life. so likewise Papists think that it cannot stand with the perfection of
orders. in the chap. proposuisti. did. 82. they call marriages fleshly
pollutions. and in their legends account them corruptions.

22. As the Manichees condemned marriage in their Priests called electi, so do
the Papists. they abstained from the cup in the eucharist as Leo ser. 4. de
quadrages. does testify, and as it may be gathered out of the chap. relatum.
and comperimus, did. 2. de consecrat. and so do the Papists. the Manichees
give Christ no solid body, and place it in diverse places. this heresy
therefore is also common with them to the Papists. lastly both Manichees and
Papists abstain from flesh in their fasts, but use other delicate and
banqueting dishes.

23. From Montanus the Papists have received their laws of fastings, and
learned to advance their unwritten traditions. from him also they have borrowed
their sacrifices for the dead, and their doctrine of purging small sins after
this life. S. Augustine epist. 86. ad Casulanum shows, that he found not in
any commandment of Christ or his Apostles what days we are to fast, and what
not. as Apollonius, and Eusebius write li. hist. 5. c. 57. he did first appoint
laws for fasting. Tertullian montanizing in his book de corona militis,
derineth sacrifices for the dead from tradition, and from his Paraclet. and in
his book de anima, teaches that small sins are done away after this life.
Epiphanius in haeres. 48. shows, that Montanus disputed, that the scriptures
were not perfect. and with him in this point do Papists concur.

24. The Papists take Rome to be their Jerusalem, as the Pepuzians did the
town of Pepuza. and both of them admit women to baptize. nay among the Papists
we read of a woman that was Pope, which was a degree above the Pepuzians, that
never made a woman chief priest.

25. With the Catharists the Papists brag of their merits, purity and
perfection. further they will not admit heretics relapsed. lastly as the
Catharists, so Papists sometime use rebaptization, as the histories of France
and Flanders testify against Papists.

26. The Iacobites and Armenians were condemned for heretics for making the
images of God the father, and God the holy ghost. Imagines, says Nicephorus
lib. hist. 18. c. 52. patris and spiritus sancti effigiant, quod est perquam
absurdum. yet do the Papists offend therein, and give these images divine
honor; which is more than those heretics did.

27. The worshippers of the cross called Chazinzarij were reputed heretics,
as Nicephorus hist. lib. 18. c. 54. testifies. crucem tantum, says he,
adorare and colere dicuntur. yet is either tantum added, or else he means
they worshipped no images, but the cross. for if he should say they worshipped
not God, then had they been pagans. with them also the Papists concur. for
they adore the cross and pray to it, which I doubt, whether those foolish
heretics did.

28. The Collyridian heretics worshipped the Virgin Mary and offered cakes in
her honor. how then can the Papists shift their hands of this heresy, that
worship the Virgin, and more deifie her then they did, offering their
consecrated cakes; nay offering Christ himself, as they say, in her honor.
some say they worshipped her as a God. but that does not appear by any
presumption. some say they offered triangular cakes. as if Epiphanius did allow
round cakes, and only condemn triangular cakes, whose whole purpose was to
show, that she was not to be adored. she was a virgin, says he, and
honorable, but not to be adored. he shows that to give adoration to creatures
is idolatry, and gentilisme. non dominabitur nobis, says he, haeres. 79.
antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem, and adoremus ea, quae ab ipso facta
sunt.

29. The council of Franck ford under Charles the great condemned the second
Nicene council under Irene, and all that worshipped images set up in churches;
which is a plain condemnation of the error of the Papists in this behalf.
they pretend that this council was disallowed by Adrian the Pope. but what if
Liberius should have condemned the council of Nice, when he joined with the
Arians? and what if Marcellinus, when he sacrificed to idols, should have
condemned Christian religion? shall all Christianity depend upon one man's
pleasure?

30. S. Augustine de haeres. c. 68. tells us of an heresy of certain
fellows, that went barefooted. est alia haeresis, says he, nudis pedibus
semper ambulantium. the barefooted friars therefore and such as go on
pilgrimage barefooted, are to take his report, as a sentence pronounced against
themselves.

31. The Apostolikes were condemned as heretics, for that they received none
into their communion, that had wives, or possessed goods in propriety. for
Clergy men and Monks in those days had both wives and goods in property, as
S. Augustine de haeres. c. 40. shows: Apostolici, quise isto nomine
arrogantissime vocauerunt, says he, non receperunt in suam communionem vtentes
coniugibus, and res proprias possidentes, quales habet Ecclesia Catholica and
monachos and clericos plurimos. see therefore I pray you, how he excludes
Papists with the Apostolikes out of the Catholic Church.

32. The Heraclites says Isidore orig. lib. 8. c. de haeres. were heretics
that received only Monks, and excluded married folks out of their company.
monachos tantum recipient, coniugia respuunt. they believed not also, that
children dying young should possess the kingdom of heaven. and do not all
sects of Monks and Friars among the Papists exclude married folks out of
their cloisters? do not the Mass Priests also exclude all children dying
before baptism, yea where it was much desired, out of the kingdom of heaven?

33. Priscillian says Augustine haeres. 70. disioined married folks. his
words are, coniuges disiungens. his followers to hide their filthy opinions
and beastliness make no account to forswear themselves. propter occultandas
contaminationes and turpitudines suas habent in suis dogmatibus, iura, periura,
secretum prodere noli. they refuse also to eat flesh, as unclean meat. and
come not the Papists near them in these points, that separate Monks and
Priests that do marry from their wives, and teach their scholars to
forswear themselves? the Rhemistes in Act. 23. say that oaths taken against
Papists, which they falsely call Catholics, may and must be broken under pain
of damnation. this perjury is also allowed by 2. rinegued English traitors
Allen and Parsons in their resolutions of cases of conscience, wherein they
teach their scholars to play the villains, and to periure themselves with a
good popish conscience. the Carthusians also and diverse Monks forswear eating
flesh, which they cannot do in reason, but that they think it less clean
than fish.

34. The Helcesaites make Christ in heaven to differ from Christ on earth, as
Theodoret. de haeret. fab. c. de Helcesaeis does testify. Christum non vnum
dicunt, says he, sed hune quidem superne, illum inferne. so Papists above make
Christ visible and palpable. but in the Sacrament neither visible nor palpable.

35. The Eutychianistes deny, that Christ after the union of the two natures
had a true body, but as Leo signifies ser. 6. de teiumo 7. mensis, a body
without shape, dimensions or circumscription. they said also that Christ was
both in heaven and earth, at one time: against whom Vigilius disputing lib. 4.
contr. Eutych. c. 4. says, that the flesh of Christ, when it was on earth, was
not in heaven, and being now in heaven, is not on earth. and these points of
Eutychianisme the Papists have retained. for they say, Christ's body is really
in the eucharist, where no shape nor dimensions of a body do appear. they say
also that Christ's body is both in heaven and earth at one time, which takes
away all circumscription from Christ's body, and is contrary to the doctrine of
Vigilius. Theodoret also Dial. 2. does refute this heresy by similitude of the
eucharist; for that the substance of bread remains in the Sacrament after
consecration.

36. The Papists also in many points conspire with the enemies of Gods grace
the Pelagians. Augustine de haeres. c. 88. says that they hold, that without
grace a man may perform all Gods commandments. and Bellarmine de great. and
lib. arb. lib. 5. c. 5. and 9. has these words, solis naturae viribus posse
aliquem ad breuissi^u^ tempus omnia sernare, scilicet, diuina mandata. he
shifteth off the matter by adding, quoad substantiam operis. but the Pelagiani
no doubt being pressed would say so much. nay if man have freewill, as well to
observe the law, as to break the same; then must he needs be able always to
perform all the law by force of his freewill.

The Pelagians believe, that a man may be without all sin; so likewise do
the Papists in effect. for they say, that every man has freewill to abstain
from all sin, and Bellarmme lib. 4. de iustific. c. 11. says that man is
able to perform the law of God perfectly: of which it follows necessarily,
that he may be without sin. for he that performs the law of God perfectly,
is without all sin.

They teach that concupiscence by baptism is sanctified, and being before
evil, does afterward begin not to be evil, as may be collected out of S.
Augustine lib. 6. contr. Inlianum c. 6. and their argument is, for that the
guilt of concupiscence is removed by baptism. the Papists also hold, that
concupiscence after baptisine is no sin, and of this it follows, that
concupiscence is sanctified by baptism.

The Pelagians say, that we have a strong and firm freewill not to sin, and
the censurers of Colein^ and Bellarmine in diverse places affirm, that sin is
subject to our will, and that man by freewill has power to do good, and to
abstain from evil. he that list to fee diverse other points of concordance
between Papists and Pelagians, let him read my last challenge. Andradius
handling the point of freewill says, that Philosophers by force of their
freewill were able to atteine true faith and justice, by which they might be
saved. do not then Papists come near Pelagians?

37. The Donatistes, as S. Augustine says haeres. 69. believed, that Christ's
church was confined in Afrike, and remained in the faction of Donatus. quod
ecclesia Christian Africa, and Donati part remanserit. they rebaptized also
catholic Christians. the Papists likewise confine the church within the
jurisdiction of Rome, and saction of the Pope. they presume also to rebaptize
better Christians then themselves.

38. As the Circumcellions, so the Papists think it meritorious to kill all
that are opposite to their sect, as the practices of Pius the fifth, Sixtus the
fifth, and other Popes against Queen Elzabeth, the French King Henry the third
and fourth, Prince Maurice and diverse other Christian Kings and Princes, the
massacres of France and Flanders do show. Sixtus Quintus did commend the
execrable murder committed by James Clement a Dominican Friar. John Ghineard a
Iebusite was hanged for mainteining the bloody doctrine of murdring Princes
excommunicat by the Pope.

39. Sigebertus Gemblacensis does account it an heresy to believe, that the
Pope can assoile subjects from their obedience, or excommunicat such as will
not rebel against Princes. haresis says he, pestilentissima populu^
percellit. yet this heresy do Papists maintain both by their doctrine, and
practice.

40. The Audeans or Anthropomorphites did imagine God to have a shape and
figure like to a man. which if the Papists do not believe, then why do they
worship God the father in the similitude of an old man? and if this be not the
likeness of God, but of an apparition, why do they give Gods honor to their
own fancies?

41. Origens heresy was, that he believed, that the damned might in the end be
saved, as Augustine de haeres. c. 43. shows. from this they digress not far,
that believe that Traiaus soul was fetched out of hell by the prayers of
Gregory. furthermore if Purgarorie be in hell; why may not souls as well be
fetched out of other parts, as that part of hell?

42. Eunomius taught, that so a man were of his religion, it skilled not
greatly what sins he committed. asseuerabat, says S. Augustine de haeres. c.
54. quod nihl cuiquam obesset quorumlibet perpetratio ac perseuerantia
peccatorum, si huius, quae ab ipso docebatur, fidei particeps esset. so
likewise the Popes grant indulgences to all those, that fight for their sect,
whatsoever outrages and villainies they have committed. neither do Priests
refuse absolution to any of their sect, if they be ruled by them. Bellarmine
lib. 2. de eccles. c. 2. requires neither faith, nor virtue in a Christian, if
he profess outwardly the Romish faith.

43. The Apostle 1. Tim. 4. does condemn them as heretics, that forbad men to
mary, and entoined them abstinence from certain meats. recte posuit
prohibentium nubere, says Theodoret in 1. Tim. 4. neque enim caelibatum, aut
continentiam vituperat, sed eos accusat, qui lege lata ea sequi compellunt. but
Papists by laws forbid the marriage of Priests, and of such as have vowed
single life, and have made diverse laws against eating flesh, burning all that
teach otherwise.

44. The heretics called Anomi were condemned for corrupting the law of God.
but I have showed that the Papists by their irregular doctrines and traditions
have not only corrupted it, but also disanulled it for the most part.

45. Irenaeus aduers. haeres. c. 2. rangeth them among heretics, that accuse
scriptures, as if they were not right, or not of authority, or diversely to be
understood, or not sufficient without tradition. quasi non recte habeant, neque
sint ex authoritate, and quia vary sunt dictae, and quia non possit ex his
inueniri veritas ab his, qui nesciant traditionem. all which qualities are
incident to the Papists. for they complain of their flexibility and
insufficiency, and without the churches determination make them to us of no
authority. Tertullian lib. de praescrip. aduers. haeret. says some heretics
by their hand, others by expositions pervert scriptures; alius says he, mancel
scripturas, alius sensu expositiones interuertit. the Papists excel in both.
for by their additions and false versions they have falsified scriptures, and
their commentaries in cases controuersed are nothing but peruersions and false
expositions of scriptures. Turrian writing against that worthy servant of God
Master Sadeel, does call the scriptures delphicum gladium, or an instrument
serving to diverse purposes. others call them a nose of wax, or a shipmans
hose: some esteem them a matter of strife.

46. Isidore lib. 8. orig. c. de haeres. does declare them to be heretics,
that do otherwise understand the scriptures, then the meaning of the holy
ghost requires. quicunque aliter scripturam sacram intelligit, says he, quam
sensus spiritus san^^i flagitat, licet de Ecclesia non recesserit: tamen
haereticus potest appellari. but this is a common fault of Papists throughout
all their books of controversies and commentaries.

47. As the Herodians did give the title and honor of Christ to Herod, and
were therefore reputed heretics by Damascene lib. de haeres. so the Papists
do give Christ's titles and honor to the Pope, calling him the head, and
foundation, and spouse of the Church: yea the king of kings, and Christ. why
then should they not be called papal heretics, as well as the other Herodian
heretics?

48. Damascene accounts them heretics, that were enemies to the knowledge
of Christians, and misliked their study of scriptures. Gnosimachi, says he,
omni Christianorum cognitioni ac scientiae ita aduersantur, vt vanum and minus
necessarium laborem esse dicant little, qui in diumis scripturis aliquam
exquirunt scientiam. the Papists likewise condemn laymen, that read and study
scriptures especially in vulgar tongs, and commend ignorance. they do also
speak high commendations of a colliars faith, and think it sufficient,
without more ado, that they believe, as the Church does.

49. The Ethnophromans are likewise put in the role of heretics, for that
they brought in diverse heathenish dustomes into the church, as we may read in
Damascene de haeresibus. if then the Papists have their right; they are there
also for their carnenal, candle bearing, holy water, censing of images and
infinite such tricks to be calendred among heretics.

50. The dislike of second marriages expressed c. de his. 31. q. 1. and for that
they debar such from Priesthood, is borrowed from the Montanists.

51. In the Roman Cathechisme part. 1. in exposit. 3. art. fid. they teach,
that our Savior passed out of his mothers womb, as the rays of the sun do
pearce through the substance of glass. quomodo solis radij concretam vitri
substantiam penetrant. but this heresy does quite overthrow the article of the
nativity of our Savior.

52. The conuenticle of sect. 6.
Trent teaches us always in this life to doubt of Gods favor toward us, and
of our own salvation. but this heresy shows that the Papists teach
infidelity, rather then true faith.

53. Finally if heresy be an opinion contrary to faith as Ocham says, or to
scriptures, as Robert Grosthed affirms, apud Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3. or to
conclusions deduced out of scriptures, as the council of Basil signifies apud
Aen. Sylu. de gest. council. Basil. lib. 1. then are all the opinions of Papists
condemned by the church of England for heresies, as being repugnant to
canonical scriptures, and the faith deduced out of them.

And these heresies albeit anciently condemned are yet generally holden by the
Papists. but if I should rehearse the particular heresies of Popes and their
chief doctors, there would be no end of the rehearsal. Gelasius the Pope in
his epistle to the Bishops of Picenum says, that the substance of man is
depratied by original sin. which imports rather the destruction of nature,
than the loss of grace, according to his opinion.

The master of sentences lib. 2. did. 31. teaches, that the flesh only, and
not the soul is made unclean by original sin.

Likewise lib. 1. did. 24. Trinity, which overthrows the real distinction of
the three persons in the Trinity.

Again lib. 1. did. 17. he says, his addendum, says he, quod ipse idem
spiritus sanctus est amor, sieve charitas, qua nos diligimus Deum and proximum.
which overthrows the subsistence of the holy ghost.

John the 22. Michael Cesenas placed after the works of Occham, denied the
personal distinction of the father, the son, and the holy ghost. he denied
also that the souls of the faithful do see God before the day of judgment.

The abbot Ioachim, damnamus. de sum. trin. and sid. cath. says, that the
father, the son, and the holy ghost are one, non vnitate essentiae, sed
collectionis tantum, not by unity of essence, but by unity of collections as
diverse citizens make one people: which overthrows the unity of the divine
essence.

Albert upon the first book of sentences did. Thomas Aquinas in scripto
confess, that speaking of the persons of the Trinity, we may say three
eternals adiectiuely; which is direct against the Creed of Athanasius.

The Friars of the order of Dominicke and Francis, anno D. 1243. as Matthew.
Paris testifies in Henrico 3. p. 593. taught, that the divine essence is not
formally the same in the holy ghost, that is in the father and the son: which
may not stand with the deity of the holy ghost.

Augustine Steuchus in princip. genes. says, coelum empyreum was coeternall
with God. he might as well have made two Gods.

The same man in Genes. 2. says, that Adam should have died, although he had
never sinned. he denies also that sin is the cause of death, opposing his
opinion to the Apostles doctrine Romans 5.

Hector Pintus in Danielis 12. denies the resurrection of infants dying not
baptized.

To let others pass for this time, Bellarmine, whom our chatemiticall
Mass Priests, call master, first lib. 2. de Christo. c. 26. he says, that it
is not repugnant to one person, to be both the son and the holy ghost; as if
there could be three persons, there being but two only.

Secondly every act, whereby virginity is lost, coinquination and turpitude,
lib. 1. de matrimonio c. 5. as if the marriage bed were not truly undefiled, as
the Apostle says Heb. 13.

Thirdly he says, that Christ never had, but the Christian church for his
spouse, de cleric. lib. 1. c. 24. which excludes the church of God before
Christ from his espousals, and from the right of the Catholic church, which is
truly his spouse.

de bonis operibus he seems to allow community of wives.

In his second book de amiss. great. c. 18. he teaches, appointing a several
place of the city to common whores, like a lusty Cardinal allowing whores, but
like a false Apostle condemning marriage.

In his book de monachis c. 14. the Saints do participate the nature of God.
but better divines than he define, that Gods essence is incommunicable.

In his first book de purgatorio c. 10. he confesses, that a man may be
called his own Savior and Redeemer. thus he has brought his scholars to a
fair pass. for diminishing and denying the merit of Christ in our formal
justification, and redemption, he would make them believe, that every man may
redeem and save himself.

And thus you have seen a large pack of popish heresies at the first survey.
but we shall add more, if need be, at our next.

CHAP. IX. A catalogue of diverse notorious impicties and blasphemies contained
not only in Popish books, but also in the corpse of Popish religion.
IF it be no small sin to take the name of God in vain, how heinous a sin
is it to blaspheme the holy name of God? all sins compared to blasphemy says
Strabus in Isaiae c. 18. may seem light. so grievous it is, that the
scriptures sometime avoid the naming of it, and in liew thereof use the word of
Job. 1.
Benediction. yei is blasphemy so common in the mouths and writings of
Papists, that all the rest of their impieties, though otherwise intolerable,
seem small in comparison. hardly can they speak without blaspheming. the
Roman catechism in the exposition of the third commandment, or the second as
the Papists reckon, confesses against them this abuse. quis non videat, say
the authors of the catechism, omnia iureuirando affirmari, omnia
imprecationibus and execrationibus referta esse? that is, who sees not that
all things are affirmed with oaths, and that all men's mouths are full of
cursings and execrations? whosoever has been conversant among Papists knows
this to be true. they tear God in pieces, and neither respect the laws of God
nor man; albeit the emperor in the law ne quis luxurietur etc. calls this
tearing and blaspheming unnatural luxury.

They teach, that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament blood, flesh, and
bone, and call it their Lord and God, and yet like Canibals, they cate and
swallow down their Lord and God, and make no bones of it.

Blasphemously also they affirm, that a dog or a hog eating a consecrated
host, does eat Christ's true body. If a dog or hog, p. 4. q. 45.
says Alexander Hales, should eat a consecrated host, I see no cause, but the
Lords body should go therewithal into to that dogs or hogs belly. and
Thomas Aquinas 3. p. sum. where some of his fellows were ashamed of this
error, reprehendeth them for it, allowing this beastly devouring of Christ's
body.

Gregory the seventh, as we read in Beno Cardinalis, consulted with this God of
paste; and when he could receive no answer threw him into the fire. Ioannes
Portuensis, as he reports, disclosed the matter. tale quid fecit
Hildebrandus, vnde deberemus viut incendi, says he. this fact, says Beno,
was, that he threw the sacrament of the lords body into the fire, because he
could receive no answer of it against the emperor.

Pius the fist cast one agnus Dei into the water of Tiber, another into the
fire, as says Hierome Catena in Pius his life. Cresciuto il Teuere. says he,
pio vi gitto un agnus dei, and il fuoco appreso in vna casa piena di fieno, vi
si git to un altero. if then latria be due to the images of Christ; then did
Pius cast that into the fire and the water, that he worshipped as God.

Clement the sixth in the chapter vnigenitus ext. com. de poenit. and remiss.
makes the Romanistes thus to cry to the Pope, domine aperi eis thesanrum tuum
fontem aquae viue. Lord open to them thy treasure, the founteine of living
water. as if the Pope had with him a treasure of graces, and as if his
indulgences were the water of life. The Mass Priests every day sell Christ,
and that for mere trifles. Brigit therefore, as one reports in a treatise
called onus ecclesiae. c. 23. says they are worse then Judas, for he sold
Christ for good money: these sell him for every commodity. pro omni mercimonio.

The honor of God they ascribe to the Virgin Marie, and to Saints. Confessing
their sins they join Mary with God, and leave out Christ, saying consiteor
deo omnipotenti B. Mariae semper virgini etc.

Likewise in a certain provincial constitution beginning authoritate dei
omnipotentis de sent. exc. they pronounce excommunication by the authority of
God and our lady, and vouchfase not once to name Christ.

Against the breakers of their laws they denounce the anger of Peter and Paul,
as appears commonly in late decretales. Christ they quite forget.

Horatius Tursellinus in an epistle to Peter Aldobrandini prefixed before the
history of our Lady of Loreto, and allowed much by the Iebusites, says, that
God made the Virgin Mary, as much as could be companion and partaker of his
power and Majesty, and gave to her the rule both of heavenly things, and of men
on earth; and that God himself, as sarre as is requisite for man's defense, does
at her pleasure govern the earth, the sea, the heavens, and nature, and at her
beck gives divine treasures and heavenly gifts. matrem suam praepotens ille
dens diuinae maiestatis potestatisque sociam, quatenus licuit, asciuit. huic
olim caelestium mortaliumque principatum detulit, ad huius arbitrium, quoad
hominum tutela postulat, terras, maria, coelum, naturamque moderatur. hac
annuente, and per hanc diumos the sauros mortalibus, and coelestia dona
largitur.

Bernardinus likewise in Mariali does say, that all graces come down from God
by Mary, as sense and vigor descend from the head to the other members of the
body.

Bonauenture, or rather some wicked falsary under his name, has transformed
the praises and honor of God set out by the Prophet David to the Virgin Mary.

Commonly they give power to the Virgin Mary over her son. iure matris, say
they, impera redemptori.

In the Roman Breuiary she is called dulcis amica dei, and the happy gate of
heaven, and to her they pray, to have their bands loosed. In the missal of
Sarum they pray thus, per te matter aboleri filiorum slagitamus crimina, nosque
omnes introduci insempiterna paradisi gaudia, as if she were the savior of the
world.

The missals and breuiaries are full of impieties. for beside the confession of
sins made jointly to Angels and Saints with God, first they offer the
Masse-cake, as they say; for the redemption of their souls, pro redemptione
animarum suarum. secondly, they make the Priest a mediator to God for the body
and blood of Christ, as if by his prayers God did accept his own and only
begotten son. supraquae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, say the
Mass Priests speaking of Christ's body and blood. thirdly, they compare Christ
to brute beasts, and the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood to the sacrifice
of Abel, that offered brute beasts. digneris accepta habere, say they, sicut
accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abel. fourthlie they desire
God that Angels may carry Christ's body into Heaven. fifthly they make God
oftentimes a mediator or intercessor to Saints, as appears by this prayer,
praesta quaesumus, vt quem doctorem vitae habuimus in terris, intercessore^
habere mereamur in coelis. the same is also proved, for that Saints know
nothing done in earth, as some of them suppose, unless it please God to
reucale matters unto them; which if he do, then is God a mediator betwixt the
Papists and Saints. sixthly they pray to the cross for increase of justice,
and pardon for sin, augepijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam. seventhly in
coniuring salt, they pray it may be salt exorcised for the salvation of them
that believe, vt essiciaris sal exorcisatnm in salutem credentium. it were
infinite to report all their blasphemies, and these may serve for a taste. only
this may not be forgotten how praying before a certain counterfeit picture of
Christ's face given, as they say, by Christ to Veronica, they pray thus, salve
sancta facies impressa panniculo, nos ab omni macula purga vitiorum, atque nos
consortio coniunge beatorum. hail holy face, printed in a cloute, purge us
from all blot of sin, and icine us to the company of blessed spirits in
heaven.

Bellarmine allows this common saying of Friars speaking to the crucifixe,
thou have redeemed us, thou have reconciled us to thy father, as we may read
lib. 1. de cult. sanct. c. 23.

That the Gospel is a rule of perfection they deny. but they doubt not to
give that honor to the rules of Benet, Brendan, Francis, Dominicke and such
authors of sects. of the holy scriptures they speak more blasphemously, than
the Turks and Saracens. for they honor the books of the old testament,
albeit they oppugn the Christian faith: whereas the papists profess the faith,
but speak evil of scriptures. some call them a nose of wax, others a dead
letter, the Rhemists call them a killing letter. Stapleton in his doctrinall
principles end enoureth to prove that all heresies proceed from scriptures. the
surueying Kellison p. 158. of his survey, says the devil does wrap himself
from top to toe in scriptures: as if scriptures were the habit of the devil.
page 41. he says the letter of scripture with a false meaning is the word of
the devil. Turrian writing against Sadeel does call scriptures Delphicum
gladium, or an instrument to all purposes. Bellarmine de verbo Dei accuses
them as imperfect and insufficient. neither is there any swad amongst them, but
he has somewhat to say against scriptures.

To the images of the cross and crucifixe, they give as much honor as they
give to God. they give the same also to the images of the Trinity, teaching
their followers, that it is but one honor, that is given to the image and the
thing represented by the image. but the things being two, and that so
different, as there is no proportion betwixt them, they must needs blaspheme
giving the name and honor of God to these base creatures

The Pope aduanceth himself above all that is worshipped, and refuses not the
name and titles of God. in the chap. satis, did. 96. he is called God. and
hereupon Steuchus in his treatise for defense of Constantines donation: audis,
says he, summum pontisicem a Consta^tino Deum appellatum and habitum pro Deo?
In the chap. quoniam. de immunitate in 6. he calls himself the spouse of the
church. in the chap. inter corporalia. de transla. praelat. we read these
words, quando Papa dissoluit matrimonium, vnletur quod Deus solus dissoluit
matrimonium. he is called a God in the earth by Felin. in c. ego N. de
iureiura^do. and by Baldus m l^g. vlt. C. sententi^e reseindendae. Abbas
Panormitanus expressly says, that Christ and the Pope have but one consistory.
the gloss in c. cum interextr. Joan. 22. de verb. signif. does call the Pope
our Lord and God.

Further he makes a scorn of Christian religion. Julius the second, upon
Easter day sought with the French at Rauenna. Gregory the seventh his army
upon their good Friday fought with Henry the 4. in S. mary's church he sought
to murder the Emperor by throwing down a stone upon his head from a vault.
Sixtus the fourth his agents at the elevation of the sacrament endeavored to
murder Laurence and Julian de medicis, as Volaterran Geograph. lib. 5.
testifies. that of Gregory is written by him that wrote the Emperors life,
and by Beno Cardinalis. Leo the tenth called the gospel a fable. commonly the
Popes send the sacrament before them, together with their baggage and the
scullery.

And as if Christ had given us no sufficient rules of religion, so he inuenteth
and confirms daily new religions, as for example of late the religion of the
Iebusites, and in former times the rules of Benet, Francis, and Dominike.

His followers fall down like beasts before him and worship him as God. Paulus
Aemilius lib. 2. tells how the Ambassadors of Sicily cried thus to the Pope,
thou which take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us, thou which
take away the sins of the world give unto us peace. and Simon Begnius
bishop of Modrusa in the Council of Lateran ses. 6. calls Leo the 10. his
savior. te beatissim^ Leo saluatorem exspectauimus, says he. Stapleton
writing to Gregory the 13. calls him, supremum numen in terris. his epistle
is extant before his doctrinall principles. they call him the vicar of Christ,
the monarch of the church, the head, the spouse and foundation of the church,
most blasphemously ascribing to him the honor due to Christ.

Most shamefully also they rack scriptures to apply them to the Pope. Thomas
Waldensis that fleering friar in his prologue before the first tome of his
works; turns the words which the apostle spoke to Christ, to Martin the fifth.
Domine says he, salua nos, perimus. Lord save us, we perish. declaring that
the Pope is the savior of friars. Cornelius bishop of Bitonto in the
conuenticle of Trent, utters these blasphemous speeches, the Pope the light
is come into the world, but men loved the darkness more then light.

Antoninus part. 3. does compare Dominike with Christ, and says he wrought
more miracles then Christ. dominus Christus, says he, est dominus absolute and
authoritatiue, Dominicus possessiue. that is, Dominicke is Lord of the world by
possession, Christ by authority and absolutely. likewise the book of
conformities of Christ and Francis does contain nothing, but blasphemous
comparisons betwixt them two. Francis they call the figurative Jesus, and in
heaven they say, he and his company is kept in Christ's side. To S. Dominike and
his company they give a place under our Ladies gown. Fulbertus bishop of
Charters says Radulphus niger, was nourished with our Ladies milk. they tell
also blasphemous tales of Alane de rupe the author of our Ladies Rosary, and
say that he was very familiar with the blessed virgin.

Finally it is no marvel, if Romish religion be full of impieties and
blasphemies, seeing the same was devised by Popes, that were most impious and
great blasphemers. Benet the 9. and Syluester the second, gave themselves to
the devil, as Beno testifies. Gregory the 7. in a solemn Council was
condemned for a sotthsayer, a necromancer and a wicked fellow. the Council of
Pise, as Theodoric a Niem lib. 3. c. 44. reports, condemned Gregory the 12.
and Benet the 13. as notorious wicked men. Alexander the 6. as is said,
believed not that there was a God. John the 23. in the Council of Constance was
convinced, that he believed not the resurrection. Leo the 10. and Clement the
7, by Papists themselves were reputed atheistes. Paul the 3. was a great
magician, and very familiar with Cecco d'ascoli. Julius the 3. called for his
gambon of bacon al dispet to di dio, that is, in despite of God, and said that
he had more reason to be angry for a peacocke, then God for an apple. Boccace
in his second novel brings in a Jew maruelling, how Reme could stand, in
which there was no religion at all.

If I should report all the blasphemies of particular authors, I should fill up
a whole volume with them. only thus much I thought good to say, for to give
you an assaie of greater matters. Faber in his book aduers. anatomen missae
fol. 25. compares Christ to the drunken Silenus. annon says he, mirisi^us
Silenus suit Christus? in another place he calls Christ an iuchanter.
Bellarmine lib. 1. de sanct. beat. c. 13. alleging a place out of Iustine
martyr, but most falsely, places angels before the holy ghost, and would have
them worshipped together with the holy Trinity. to the Pope also in his
Preface before his books de Pontif. Romans and in his book de Pontif. Romans c.
31. he gives the proper titles of Christ. but I cannot in this short treatise
report all. he that list to see diverse examples of Parsons his impieties and
blasphemies, let him read my answer to his Warneword, and 3. conuersions.
Kellison is convinced of the same crime in my answer to his Survey.

CHAP. X. That Popery is a sink of heathenish idolatry.
OF this argument I have spoken at large in my last challenge. much therefore I
shall not need to say in this brief survey. yet for that we perceive, that by
the secret and cunning practice of the Devil, the idolatry of the heathen
nations, overthrown by the preaching of the Gospel, is brought back again
under color of Christianity, briefly we are to say somewhat of the former
argument. It may please God percase to open the eyes of some Papists, and to
work a detestation in them of popery, if they may see, that as a sink it has
together with heresy received into it self most gross and heathenish
idolatry. but this is proved first by these words of the law Exodus 20. thou
shall have no other Gods before me. for this being directed principally against
the heathenish worship of more Gods than one, certain it is, that whosoever
does worship more Gods than one, or gives the honor of God to creatures, is
an idolater. but this fault is diversely incurred by the Papists. for first they
call the Pope their Lord and God, in gloss. in c. cum inter. extrau. Joan. 22.
de verb. signific. and both Felm, and Baldus, as I showed in the last chapter,
do call him a God on the earth. absolutely also he is called God in the chap.
satis, did. 96. and diverse other places. secondly they call the sacrament their
Lord and God, as appears by Allens treatise de sacrsic. eucharist. c. 41. and
Bristow in his 26. motive. neither will they deny, but they give unto it divine
honor, as to God. thirdly Bellarmine lib. 1. de cult. sanct. c. 9. does call
Saints Gods by participation. but whosoever is God by participation, he is
absolutely God. for the deity is not communicable to any creature. lastly to
the sacrament, and to the cross they give divine honor saying to the cross, o
crux, aue spes vnica, and falling down like beasts before the pixe. they do
also make vows to Saints, swear by Saints, and confess their sins jointly
to them, and to God. therefore plainly are they idolaters. for these are
honors not due to any but to God, as at large I have showed in my treatise
against Bellarmines disputes de culiu sanctorum.

My second argument is drawn from the second commandment directed against the
heathenish idolatry of those, In breuiar. Romans
auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam. that is, increase righteousness in
the godly, and grant pardon to sinners. to these images they burn incense, as
did the heathen to their idols. nay Alexander Hales p. 3. q. 30. art. vlt. and
Thomas Aquinas 3. p. q. 25. art. 3. and other schoolmen affirm, that what
honor is due to the original, the same is also due to the image. which is
more than the heathen ever supposed. lastly they kiss these images, touch them
with their beads, and because they are blind, set up light before them.

Thirdly we read Deuteronomy. 4. that God to repress the idolatry of his people told
them, Horeb, yet they saw no likeness of any thing. do they not then run into
this sin, that make the likeness of God, and represent God the father in the
image of an old man, and God the holy ghost in the figure of a dove? if this be
not idolatry, yet it is certainly idolatry to give the same honor to one of
these images, which they give to God. neither will they deny, that it is
idolatry to give Gods honor to creatures. they must therefore either deny
these images to be creatures, or confess themselves to be idolaters.

Fourthly, where God by the Prophet Psalm. 81. the having of new Gods, or
worshipping strange Gods, saying, non erit in te Deus recens, neque adorabis
Deum alienum, we are taught, that it is idolatry to have new Gods, or to
worship strange Gods. but the Papists every day make new crucifixes, and new
Gods of the altar, and the Pope also canonizeth new Saints, which every one of
his followers is bound to worship. these are also most strange Gods. for
neither were they known to the people of God before Christ, nor were any such
things worshipped by the ancient catholic Church. finally some crucifixes are
so euilfauoured, and some saints so huge and monstrous, that they are more fit
to scare crows, than to be worshipped of Christians.

The holy scriptures Amos. 5. and Act. 7. served the host of heaven. but the
Papists deny not, but that Dulia and service is due to Angels, and Saints, and
all the host of heaven, and accordingly they do them service in most ample
manner.

The gentiles are condemned Psalm. 114. images of silver and gold, and the work
of men's hands. images I say, that had mouths and spoke not, eyes and saw not,
noses and smelled not, hands and handled not, feet, but walked not, and that
were not able to viter one word out of their throat. now gladly would I have
any Papist to show me, that their images are of other matter and form, and
that they have more perfect senses, then the images of the gentiles. the lady
of Loreto, notwithstanding the report of her great miracles, neither sees, nor
speaks one word.

The gentiles did think they offered sacrifices pleasing to God. yet the
Apostle 1. Cor. 10. offered them to devils. if then the Papists have no warrant
for their sacrifices in the honor of Angels and Saints, then are they to be
reputed as idolaters and sacrificers to devils.

The Prophet Hicremie c. Queen of heaven, and serve her most diligently,
saying more aue Mariaes, then prayers to God.

In the book of Baruch c. Babylonians are reputed to beidolaters, for that
they carried their Gods of gold, silver, wood, and stone upon their shoulders,
adorned them with costly apparel and jewels, worshipped them, albeit their
faces were dusty, and they unable to guard themselves from rust, corruption, and
thieves. why then should not the Papists be so reputed likewise, seeing they
adorn dumb idols, and worship them, that cannot guard themselves from
corruption and rust, and are often stolen away by thieves, or molten to serve
base uses? is it more ridiculous in the heathen to carry about their images,
then for the Papists?

The idolatrous Jews were condemned for saying to a stock, thou art my
father, and to a stone thou have begotten me; as we read Hieremy 2. and yet the
Papists before stocks and stones say pater noster, and the babbling Friars in
their chaires turning to a little crucifixe of wood or metal set by them,
say, thou have redeemed us, thou have reconciled us. and this Bellarmine lib.
2. de cult. sanct. c. 23. is not ashamed to allow. but all of them together
must be thrust into the roll of idolaters.

S. John gives Christians warning to keep themselves from graven images 1.
John. 5. but why so, simulachra, and themselves to worship them, or confess
themselves to be idolaters.

The Israelites Judges 10. Baalim or other Lords, to be lewd and idolatrous,
and God taxes them there for serving and inuocating other Gods. if then the
Papists call upon their volto santo, or their crosses, or the Queen and host
of heaven, and serve them; they cannot clear themselves from the faults of
the idolatrous Israelites.

The worship of Angels both by scriptures and fathers is condemned as
idolatrous. the Apostle Coloss. 2. least they be seduced by humility and
religion of Angels. the Angel Apocalypse. 22. forbad John to worship him, and
adds this reason, for that he was his fellow servant. the worship of Angels
by the council of Laodicea c. 35. is declared to be idolatrous. Christians
must not leave the church says the council, and make meetings for the
idolatrous worship of Angels. Theodoret in Coloss. 2. says that by this
council those were condemned, that prayed to Angels. S. Hierom. in epist. ad
Riparium says, that Christians neither adore Angels nor Archangels. we honor
them with love says S. Augustine de ver. relig. c. 55. and not with service,
nor do we build temples to them. God will not have us to adore Angels says
Epiphanius haeres. 79. finally Tertullian de praescript. aduers. haeret.
shows, that the service of Angels was accounted to be idolatry, and that it
descended from Simon Magus. but the Papists cannot deny, but they serve
Angels. they also pray unto them in their public letanies saying, sancte
Michael, sancte Gabriel, sancte Raphael, omnes Angeli and Archangeli orate pro
nobis. in their Mass they confess their sins to Angels, saying, confiteor
Beato Michaeli Archangelo. in their breuiaries they pray to an Angel unknown,
whom they call their guardian. but praying to them, and serving them they show
themselves to have a tacke of heathenish idolatry.

It appears both by scriptures, Paral p. 30. are noted as burning incense to
their idols. Marcellina burned incense to the images of Jesus, Paul, Homer and
Pythagoras, and is therefore taxed by S. Augustine de haeres. neither did the
heathen Emperors require more at the hands of Christians, than that they
should offer certain grains of incense to their Gods. but every man knows
how the Papists place images on their altars, and continually offer incense
unto them. they burn also incense in the honor of Angels and Saints, and set
up lights before their images.

They that offer sacrifice to creatures are idolaters.

Saint Ambrose teaches us, Inuenit Helena crucem Domini, says he, De obitu
Theodosij.
regem adorauit: non lignum vitque, quia hic gentilis error, sed adorauit
illum, qui pependit in cruce. Helena found the Lords cross, and adored her
king; not the wood; for that is the error of the gentiles. but she adored him,
that hung upon the cross. the Papists therefore adoring the wooden cross,
naie adoring every stick put a cross, are gross idolaters, and like the
gentiles, if Ambrose may sit judge.

Epiphanius haeres.

Francford, under Charles the great shows, that images being worshipped in
Churches, are idols, as may be gathered out of these words that are in his
book de imaginibus. non nos imagines in basilicis positas idola nuncupamus,
sedne idola nuncupentur, adorare and colere eas recusamus. we do not call
images placed in great Churches, idols, but we refuse to worship and adore
them, least they should be called idols.

Hierome in Abacuc. 2. writes, that all perverse opinions, which of the
inuenters thereof are adored, are graven images. and by that he means idols.
but I have showed, that Papists maintain many heretical opinions.

Finally their own confession does testify against them. Bellarmine does
confess lib. 2. de imaginib. c. 5. that an idol is a false similitude, and
represents that, which is not. but Papists worshipping S. George that killed
the dragon, and S. Catherine that broke the wheel, and the image of God the
father, worship false images. for neither shall they prove, that God is like an
old man, or that the images of George and Catherin express any truth. they say
also, that it is idolatry to give divine honor to creatures. but they give
divine honor to the sacrament, to the crosses and to the images of the
Trinity: which I hope they will not deny to be creatures.

Neither do they bring any better excuses, then the heathen idolaters.
Bellarmine lib. 2. de imaginibus c. 24. says, that images are not worshipped
by them per se and proprie, that is for themselves, and properly. but well
could the gentiles say as much.

Again he says, they worship not images as Gods. so likewise did the
gentiles answer, as Lactantius shows instit. lib. 2. c. 2. non ipsa, inquit,
timemus etc. we do not fear them, say the idolaters speaking of images, but
them, to whose likeness they were made, and for whose sakes they were
consecrated. the same may be proved by the testimony of S. Augustine in psalm.
113.

Lastly they say, they put no trust in images. but never did the gentiles trust
so much in the images of Jupiter or Juno, as the Papists trust in the images of
our Lady of Loreto, James of Compostella, the Rood of Mantua, and such like.

CHAP. XI. That Popish religion never came from Jerusalem.
TRue Christian religion was first preached in Jerusalem, and from thence was
derived throughout all nations unto the ends of the world. ye shall be
witnesses unto me says our savior to his Apostles Act. 1. both in Jerusalem,
and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and to the ends of the world. and herein was
the Prophecy of Isay. c. 2. fulfilled, that told us long before, how the law
should go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem.
neither need we insist much upon this point. for Stapleton in his relection of
doctrinal principles contr. 1. q. 5. confesses so much, and every odd
Mass Priest, that takes upon him to handle these matters, is still talking of
the beginning of religion at Jerusalem. but little wot they poor souls how
little advantage this brings to their cause. for if they be not either
impudent or desperate, they will never say, that these grounds, these
doctrines, these heresies and idolatries which before are mentioned, came from
Jerusalem. but should they run beside themselves with fury, yet will they
never be able to prove their assertion.

To give them further particular instances, gladly would I have Kellison the
surueior, or (because he is bu^ a kettler newly come forth with the droppings
of Divinity, out of Stapletons tubs, and Aquinas his water barrels) the
stoutest champion of the Pope to prove the principal pillars of Popery to have
come from Jerusalem. Petrus Fontidonius in a Sermon of his in the conuenticle
of Trent told his auditory, that the two principal pillars of the Roman church
were the Mass, and the Pope. let us then see, whether any of the^ can show,
that these two came from Jerusalem. we have invincible reasons to the
contrary. for first Missa is a Latin word, as Bellarmine de missa, and the
lernedst of the adversaries confess. but it is not likely that Latin Masses
should come from Jerusalem. secondly the Latin Mass does differ much from
that of S. James, both in the canon, and other parts. thirdly Gregory says,
the Apostles consecrated, saying only the Lords prayer. fourthly the
massemonger Priests confess, that Celestine made the introit, and Gelasius and
Gregory other parts: which were no bishops of Jerusalem, but of Rome. fifthly
the Eastern church to this day defieth the Latin Mass, which it is not like
it would have done, if it had come from Jerusalem. sixthly there is no
probability, that in Jerusalem these words and aeterni, and mysterium fidei
were added in the consecration of the cup. for Christ used them not, neither
are they Hebrew but Latin. seventhly in Jerusalem it was never believed, that
Christ either did eat up himself, or offer himself to his father at his last
supper, or that he offered himself twice, or that there was any priest after
the order of Melchisedech, but Christ. for the Apostle to the Hebrews teaches
contrary. finally we never read that the Christians in Jerusalem believed,
that some Masses were wet, some dry, some in the honor of Angels, some in the
honor of Saints, some in the honor of confessors, some good for pigges, others
for horses, some for quick, some for dead; or that all those tricks and skips
are commendable, which the Mass Priests use at the altar; or that Christ
ordained either the consecration of Churches with the alphabet in Greek; or
that Priests were to use those ceremonies, which now are frequented in the
church of Rome in the celebration of the Mass.

That the Pope came not from Jerusalem, first, for that among all the ministers
of the church described Ephesians. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. there is no Pope, nor monarch
of the church expressed. we read of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and others: but the Pope is quite forgotten. which is most unlikely, especially
considering that he is by the Papists supposed to be the head and foundation of
the church. secondly the name is rather Latin, then Hebrew, or Syriake. for
some derive it from pape, because the Pope is the wonderment of the world. some
from (...), some from the 2. syllables of pater patrum. Thirdly at Hierissalem
never was there any termed by the name of Christ's vicars general, or that wore
a triple crown, and had a guard of Switzars attending upon him. fourthly Saint
Peter never took upon him to depose kings, or to translate kingdoms from one
to another, which the Pope now usurps. fifthly the Popes decretales and
decrees, which contain the Popes office and authority, and the marrow of his
religion, have proceeded from Rome, and not from Jerusalem. sixthly we read,
that the law of God, and not the Popes laws came from Jerusalem. finally the
faith and doctrine of the Pope for the most part has been invented and
published since Jerusalem came to be subject to the Saracens and Turks. if
then it came from the Turkey Jerusalem, it must needs be rather Turkish, then
Christian. the decretales are rather like the Alcoran, then the new testament.
the force that the Pope uses against Christians proceeds rather from
Mahomet, then from S. Peter. The pilgrimages to Rome are like the pilgrimages
to Mecha. lastly both Turks and Papists worship Saints, and pray for the dead
alike.

To proceed a little further, Jerusalem. for albeit marriage, Priesthood and
repentance were always practiced by the people of God under the law, yet were
they not used as Sacraments. neither in these matters did either the people of
God under the law, or the first Christians use the Popish orders and forms or
Sacraments now at Rome frequented. in time past neither were Priests prohibited
to marry, nor were there any times limited for marriage, nor was it deemed
unlawful for gossips to marry.

In Jerusalem never was any such form of ordering of Priests known,
Jerusalem believe, that there were seven orders, and every one a Sacrament,
and yet but one Sacrament in all, or that Priests were to have shaven crowns.

To think, Christians at Jerusalem confessed their sins every year at the
least in the Priests care, is most absurd. likewise to say that the form of
absolution that is now used, was then known. thirdly Christians then did
neither lash themselves, nor think to satisfy for sins by eating saltfish
or going barefoote. lastly they neither believed, that Christians were to
satisfy for their sins in purgatory, nor that the Pope carried the keys of
purgatory, and could deliver souls from thence by indulgences.

This form of Confirmation, signo te signo crucis, and confirmo te Chrismate
salutis etc. was by authority first established in the conuenticle of Florence
under Eugenius the 4. a Venetian, and not by any, that came from Jerusalem. he
also ordered that oil and balm should be the matter of this Sacrament.
Bonauenture and Alexander Hales affirm, that Confirmation was instituted at
Melda. popish confirmation is far degenerated from that Confirmation that was
used in the primitive church, and which we retain in England.

The form also and matter of extreme unction was there appointed by Eugenius.
character, and effects of extreme unction are not to be found, but in the
frapling schoolmen.

Now he that should seek for the original of holy water, Jerusalem, he
should but seek to draw water out of a flint, and as well might he light a
candle in the sea water. in the Roman missal we find these words, I exorcise or
conjure thee thou creature of water, and exorcizo te creatura salis, and such
like. but Stapleton should show these things out of some Hebrew or Syriake
missal.

The eating of Paschal lambs, I confess, Jerusalem: but not by Christians,
but by Jews, observing the ceremonies of Moses his law.

The Romish missals, breuiaries, our ladies Psalters, Jerusalem, as I think
our adversaries will confess, if they be put to the question.

In Rome upon good Friday they make agnus Dei, do defend Christians from
lightning and tempest. hiagnia fulgure and tempestate fideles and credentes
defendunt, says Durand. rational. diumor. lib. 6. c. 79. but this ceremony
came never from Jerusalem. neither did the Christians there believe any such
doctrine.

When a church is consecrated the bishop sprinkleth the walls with holy water,
attollite principes portas vestras. then he makes crosses on the pauement, and
describes all the Greek and Latin alphabet, as Durand shows lib. 1. rat.
divine. c. 6. but if popery had come from Jerusalem, it is more likely, he
should describe the Hebrew alphabet. such abuses of scripture and foolish
ceremonies, certes, never came from the Christians of Hicrusalem, but from the
followers of Antichrist at Rome.

The conuenticle of Trent makes the old Latin vulgar translation authentical.
Jerusalem, the same would never have neglected the Hebrew text.

The Church of Jerusalem diligently observed Gods commandment concerning the
making and worshipping of granen images, Philo in legate. ad Caium says, the
Jews thought it impious, either in picture, or graven work to represent God,
that is invisible. inuisibilem Deum pingere aut singere nefas duxerunt maiores
nostri, says he. neither if we run through the Bible shall we find any
precedent of the popish invocation and worship of Saints used in the Romish
church.

Finally if the Church of Jerusalem had known or suspected, Peter or his
successors had been designed Christ's vicars general, and monarchs of the
Church, and appointed to give laws to the whole world; then would they never
have suffered him to depart from Jerusalem.

The Pope and his accomplices therefore must seek some other place, than
Jerusalem, whence to derive their doctrine, laws, ceremonies, and forms of
government, or else they will never find out the true descent of their church.
In Babylon, certes, they shall rather find out these matters, than in
Jerusalem.

CHAP. XII. That popish religion was never taught either by the old Prophets,
or by the Apostles of Christ Jesus.
Faithful Christians, as the Apostle teaches us, Ephesians. 2. are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. and this the Papists must needs confess, although much to their
grief, unless they will deny the words of the Apostle. but popery is built
upon the Pope and upon his decretales and determinations, and supported stoutly
by his purple Cardinals, and the merchants of Babylon the Mass Priests, and
neither upon Christ nor the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets.

The Apostle 2. Tim. 3. shows, make us wise to salvation, and are given of
God, that the man of God may be absolute, and made perfect unto all good
works. but Papists teach, that they are an imperfect rule, and without
traditions insufficient. for that is the doctrine of Bellarmine, and all his
consorts. they do also rail against holy scriptures, and call them a dead and
killing letter.

The holy Prophets brought no message to those nations, thus says the Lord.
and the Lord has spoken it. but the conuenticle of Trent confirmed their
doctrine by their own pleasures for the most part. and albeit sometime the
same alleges scriptures, yet their best and common argument was, placet
nobis. their school doctors also for matters controuersed do more commonly
allege the Popes decretales, than holy scriptures.

Romans 10. comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. but Camsius in
his catechism de sid. and symb. signifies that we are not to believe Gods
word revealed, unless the same be also propounded by the church. and by the
church he understands the Pope and his adherents.

Peter and John Act. 4. show, that God is rather to be obeyed than man.

The conuenticle of Trent Sess. 4. teaches us that we are to embrace
traditions not written, with equal affection to traditions and holy
scriptures. but this doctrine was not known either to the Apostles or
Prophets. nay Moses does teach quite contrary. ye shall put nothing to the
word, which I command you, nor shall ye take ought therefrom, says he, Deuteronomy.
4. and S. Paul Galat. 1. if any man preach unto you otherwise, than that ye
have received, says he, let him be accursed. this curse therefore does fall on
the Friars and Mass priests, that preach the Popes doctrines, which they shall
never prove to have been received from the Apostles, though they read until
their eyes drop out of their heads.

The religion of Papists does for the most part consist in prayers to Saints,
Mary, martyrs, confessors, and the Popes canonized creatures, in erecting of
crosses and crucifixes, and other images, in burning incense before images. nay
they give divine honor to creatures, which themselves cannot deny to be
idolatrous. cum Christus adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est, quod cius
imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda. seeing Christ, says Thomas Aquinas p.
3. q. 25. art. 3. is worshipped with latria (or honor properly belonging to
God) it follows, that his image is also to be worshipped with the adoration
of latria, or divine worship. either therefore must our adversaries show, that
the Prophets and Apostles offered sacrifices in honor of Angels and Saints,
and made prayers unto them, and set up images to be worshipped in temples, and
used to burn incense unto them, and to honor them after the manner of Papists,
or else they must confess that their religion proceeds not from the Prophets
and Apostles. how hard this proof will be, it may appear in this, that Gods
laws Deuteronomy. 4. and Exodus 20. directly forbid the making of graven images after
the likeness of God, and the worship of idols, and Christ ordained the
eucharist to be received in commemoration of his death and passion, and never
so much as mentioned the offering of his own body and blood or other
sacrifices in the honor of Saints and Angels.

The Mass Priests that plotted the ruin of religion at Trent sess. 6. ascribe
man's justification to his works, Abacuc chap. 2. and S. Paul Romans 1. affirm,
that the just do live by faith. the Apostle also 1. Cor. 1. says, that our
Saour Christ is made wisdom and righteousness unto us. which if it were
wrought by our works, then should we have been made wisdom and
righteousness unto our selves. nay the Apostle Romans 3. says, if Abraham were
justified by works, that then he had wherein to rejoice, but not with God.

Popish religion consists most in external ceremonies, Matthew. 15. teaches
that in vain they seek to worship God, that teach for doctrines the precepts
of men. he shows also John 4. that true worshippers worship God in spirit and
truth. and the Apostle Coloss. 2. condemns such as put religion in touching,
fasting and such like vain ceremonies.

The Mass Priests call the Pope the spouse and head of the church. c. 2. and
Ephesians. 5. the title of spouse of the church is declared to belong to Christ,
and him only the scriptures declare to be head of the Church. Gregory lib. 4.
ep. 38. ad Joan. Constantinopol. shows that neither Paul, nor Andrew, nor
John, nor Peter was the head of the universal church, but all members of the
church under one head.

The Prophets and Apostles do teach us, Peter commanded to feed. God says by
his Prophet Isay c. 11. that there shall be no hurting nor killing in all his
holy mountain, and that the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the pard he
with the kidde. but the Romish Church is full of blood, and wholly vpholden by
cruelty. in France the Pope and his accomplices have caused above two hundred
thousand persons to be murdered for the profession of the true faith. the fires
and butchers axes of their executioners have consumed also infinite Christians
in Italy, Spain, England, Scotland, Germany, and the Low countries. very
ignorant therefore he is of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, that
supposes, that the massacring Romish church is founded upon the doctrine of
the Apostles and Prophets.

The Prophet Daniel does prophecy how a certain king shall arise, that shall
speak words of blasphemy against the most high, and consume his Saints, and
that shall think that he may change times and laws. the Apostle also 2 Thessalonians. 2. shows, that there shall come a departing, and that the man of sin
shall be disclosed, and exalt himself against all that is called God, and that
he shall sit in the temple of God. S. John also in his Apocalypse shows, that
Antichrist shall rise after the decay of the Roman Empire, and give life to
that state, and that the great whore shall sit upon the seven hills, and have
her garments died red in the blood of Saints. but this argues that the Pope is
Antichrist, and that Popish religion is not Christian religion grounded upon
the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, but rather Antichristian heresy
founded upon the Popes decretales, and schoolemens fond and foolish inventions.

Finally it is not only desperate ignorance, Kellison the Popes grand surueier
undertake to prove unto us all the Popes traditions concerning the Mass, the
dirges and offices for the dead, purgatory, indulgences, holy water, holy
candles, paschal lambs, rascal Friars and Monks and such like trash by the
testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, he should but lose his labor, and
percase his wits too. for in their divine writings such fond, superstitious and
impious doctrines have no defense nor shelter. but if he mean to find their
true beginning, then must he search the Popes decretales, the writings of
schoolmen and canonists and other the Popes adherents, and there he shall not
only find out the first authors, but also the rest of the novelties, fooleries
and impieties of the synagogue of Satan.

CHAP. XIII. That popery was either condemned, or not known by Kings and
Princes professing Christian religion in old time.
THe Popes Agents, when they are upon their own dunghils, and among their own
disciples and favorers, do make great crackes, as if the Popish religion,
which is now taught at Rome, were the only religion professed by ancient kings,
princes and emperors of Rome, that made profession of the Christian faith. but
who so list to read the ancient confessions of Christian kings, and the laws
made by them, both for mainteinance of the Christian faith, and for the
repressing of diners errors, shall find, that the grounds, doctrines,
impieties and absurdities of Popery were either disallowed by them, or unknown
unto them.

The first Christian king of Britain, Bid, and others of latter times (for in
more ancient histories there is no record of such a king or such matters, as
then passed) was Lucius. but we do not find, that the Popish Mass was then
hatched. or that Eleutherius bishop of Rome pretended the universal monarchy
of the Church. nay we read, that Irenaeus does make as great account of other
churches, as of Rome, albeit the same be first placed in regard of the
splendor and authority of that city. furthermore Lucius neither had images
nor worshipped them, nor did he give Latria to the cross. of Purgat one and
indulgences he could not hear any thing, for that Eleutherius as yet took not
upon him to deliver souls out of Purgatory, nor to grant pardons a poena and
culpa. finally if Kellison seek to prove the articles of Popery before
mentioned by the testimony of Lucius; you shall soon see, that the man will be
at a stand.

The first Christian Emperor of Rome was Constantine the great. Rome, nor a
professor of Popery. for first by his authority both was the council of Nice
assembled, and the acts thereof established, as Enschius in vita Constantini,
and other ecclesiastical writers do testify. secondly that faith, which the
council of Nice published, he professed. but therein is not one article of
Popery established, but rather diverse refuted, as namely the doctrine of
Papists concerning Christ's humanity, and the Popish real presence, and
dissoluing priests marriages. for if Christ be true man, then is not his body
invisible and impalpable in the Sacrament. again if Christ's body be ascended
into heaven, then is not the same in every pixe. if the same be to come from
heaven, then is not the same to creep out of a pixe. if marriage of Priests be
honorable, and not to be dissolved, as was decreed in the counceil of Nice by
the advice of Paphnutius: then do the Papists teach doctrines of devils, that
condemn such marriages, and separate Priests from their wives. thirdly all the
acts of that council were confirmed, and not only received by Constantine.
but that shows that the Bishop of Rome then had no more authority in his
province, then the Bishop of Alexandria in his, as the sixth canon of the
Nicene council testifies. the 4. canon shows that the Bishop of Rome had no
greater authority in ordeining bishops, then other metropolitans. the fifth
canon equalleth his power in excommunication to that, which other Bishops had.
to abridge this matter, we find, that the Bishops of Rome. were as well
subject to the canons of the council of Nice, as other Bishops. finally we
find, that Constantine made laws for church government in his time, and not
the Bishops of Rome. Nay the bishops of Rome, as is said in the counterfeit
donation of Constantine, had their privileges from Constantine, and not
contrariwise. priuilegium Romanae ecclesiae pontifici contulit, says the
author of that donation, vt in toto orb Romani pontifices vel^saecendotes ita
hun^ caput habeant, sicut iudices regem. so it appears, that the preeminence
of Roman bishops over all Priests proceeded from the Emperors grant, and not
from any ordinance of Christ, or divine authority.

Likewise we read, that the councels of Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon
were called by the authority of Emperors, and that their acts and decrees were
ratified by them, and not by the bishops of Rome, more than other bishops, as
is pretended.

Further in the confessions of faith published by those councels, and received
by Theodosius, Martian^^s and other Christian Emperors, there is not one
article of popery so much as mentioned. nay albeit the bishops of Rome oppugned
the decree of the council of Chalcedon concerning the privilege of the Church
of Constantinople; yet prevailed they not. lastly the condemnation of Eutyches
in the council of Chalcedon does overthrow the popish real presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament, and transubstantiation. for if Christ have a
true body, that is circumscriptible and solid, then is not Christ's body really
in every consecrated host. and if that, according as after the union of the
natures both remain, so the bread and wine remain after consecration, as the
fathers of that council pretend; then away flies the fancy of popish
transubstantiation.

Recaredus King of Spain, Toledo, chased Arianisme out of his dominions,
published a confession of the faith, which all Christian bishops of that
country received, and governed and confirmed the council. publico regis
edicto confirmatum est concilium. the council was confirmed by public
proclamation of the king, says the compiler of the acts of that council.
finally in all the acts there is not one article of popery confirmed. but the
21. canon, that allows Psalms to be sung at burials, does utterly overthrow
dirges and masses for the dead, and the doctrine of purgatory. for how can they
choose but sorrow for the dead, that believe their friends souls to be in
purgatory? the 22. canon forbids dances and immodest songs on holy days.
the 16. canon is directed against the worship of idols. the 11. canon reproves
Priests, that absolve public sinners without due acts of repentance. which is
an abuse very common in the mass priests. finally in this synod the Spaniard
followed the rules of the Church of Constantinople, and not of Rome, as
appears by the second canon.

Justinian the Emperor, inter claras. Cod. de sum. Trin. published a
confession of faith, which he commanded to be received throughout his
dominions. but therein is not any article of popery mentioned. nay diverse of
his laws concerning the ordination of bishops, the ordering of Churches and
other ecclesiastical matters declare, that unto his time the government of the
Church belonged to kings and princes, and that yet the Pope had not usurped his
general authority, nor excluded temporal Princes. he decreed that the
sacraments should be administered contrary to the Popish form in an audible
voice, and in atongue that might be understood.

Gregory the first acknowledged himself subject to the Emperor, and willing
to execute his commandments: which shows, that the Emperor as yet held his
authority and would not yield it to the bishop of Rome. his faith also was the
same, which other Emperors professed. for as yet Antichrist had not gained the
primacy. Gregory himself in his epistle to Serenus of Massilia praises him,
for that he suffered not images to be adored: and no man needs to doubt, but
that Maurice the Emperor concurred with him in matters of faith.

Leo the fourth in the chapter de capitulis. did. 11. professes, that he will
see the Emperors orders by all means kept. de capitulis vel praeceptis
imperialibus vestris etc. irrefragabiliter custodiendis, says he, quantum
valuimus, and valemus, Christ propitio and nunc and in aeuum nos conseruaturos
modis omnibus profitemur. this therefore is an argument, that the christian
faith as yet was maintained by the authority of the Emperors, and that the
bishops of Rome had then made no alteration by their decretales, as not having
as yet settled their supreme and tyrannical authority in the Church. in the
time of this Leo neither was transubstantiation, nor the necessity of auricular
confession in the Priests ear for all sins, nor communion under one kind
heard of.

Beda in the Preface of his Ecclesiastical history praises king Ceolulphus,
for that he heard the words of holy Scriptures diligently. but now among
papists laymen are not commended for hearing scriptures. at that time neither
were the 7. sacraments confirmed, nor the Popes doctrine of Purgatory and
indulgences once delivered.

Irene though a semipagan Empress,

Charles the great in a synod at Francford condemned the idolatrous decrees of
the 2. Nicene synod assembled under Irene. Ansegisus lib. 2. c. 19. shows,
that he decreed, that nothing should be read in the church beside canonical
scriptures. the same author reports diverse laws made by him and his son
Ludouic contrary to the practice of the modern Romish church. Kellison
therefore should work a wonder, if he could prove, that either of these
Emperors believed, that the bishop of Rome was head of the church, and had
both the swords, and ruled both on earth and in Purgatory. neither shall he
be able to show, that they believed that public service and sacraments were to
be celebrated in a tongue not understood, or that those were the Apostles
successors, that neither preached nor administered the Sacraments.

Before the conuenticle of Laterane Christian kings and princes knew now what
transubstantiation meant. Constance. in the conuenticle of Florence under
Eugenues the 4. the doctrine of the seven Sacraments, of Purgatory, of the
Popes supremacy began to be in more reputution. the rest of their heresies the
Pope and his accomplices could not procure to be authorized before the
conuenticle of Trent. and yet the French refused to admit the acts of that
conuenticle, and the Emperor Charles the fifth by his agents protested against
them. the Queen of England, king of Denmark, Princes of Germany and many
other States resolutely rejected and contemned them.

So we see that the doctrine of the Romish church was nener received by many
Christian princes, Trent. the Popes excommunications, provisions, rapines,
violence and tyranny we find to have been of most Christian kings resisted.
when the Popes of Rome began to lift up their heels against the Eastern
Emperors Leo Isauricus; and others, and to excommunicate them; they neglected
their censures, and in the Eastern parts were obeyed as before. Henry the 4.
emperor of Rome drove Gregory the 7. out of his seat, and appointed another
in his place. Henry the 5. his son took Paschalis prisoner, and made him
swear to certain articles. he broke them afterward, I confess, but that is
rather an argument of the Popes perfidiousnesse, then a proof against the
Emperors authority. neither did the Emperors succeeding for many years cease
to defend their right against the Popes encrochments and usurpation, until
such time as the Popes by force of arms and rebellion of subjects had
prevailed against them. and when they could not by force resist, yet did they
often publish their complaints, as appears by the message of Maximilian the
first, to the Pope, by certain memorials of Charles the fifth concerning wrongs
offered by the Pope, by the greenances collected by the princes of Germany
presented to Adrian the 6. by the apologies of the Bohemians, English, French,
and other nations.

Philip the French king writing to Boniface the 8. used these words. Sciat tua
maxima fatuitas, nos in temporalibus nulli subesse. I do thy great foolery,
says he writing to him, to wit, that for temporal matters we are subject to
none. the same king did also handle the Popes nuncioes according to their
deserving.

Henry the 2. as Matthew Paris testifies, Peter pence; and such as appealed to
the court of Rome he committed to prison. appellantes ad curiam Romans mandauit
custodiae. afterward writing to the bishop of Colein he threatueth to impugn
the Pope, and to thrust out of his kingdom all his favorers. Papam and omnes
suos, says he, manifest impugnabimus, and quicunque in terra mea inuentus
fuerit, qui Papae posthac adhaerere voluerit, expelletur e regno. happy had he
been, if he had always persisted in this purpose. the kings of England
afterward by their laws against provisions restrained the Popes authority:
and in the end that famous and worthy Prince King Henry the eight did utterly
exclude the Pope and his Agents from all jurisdiction within his kingdom.

Furthermore albeit some princes were so senseless, complain thereof. Alan
Chartier shows that Priests in the eyes of the people were become most vile,
and that the hearts of men were alienated from the Popes obedience. corda
hominum ab obedientia (scilicet Papae) alienata. Julian the cardinal writing
to Eugenius the fourth shows it was to be feared, lest the laity should fall
upon the clergy. ne irruerent in ecclesiasticos laici. The Germans in the end
of their grieuances, say, that they neither would suffer, nor could endure the
wrongs offered them by the Pope. Dixerunt Germani Principes, says he that
reported their grieuances, se onera Papae nec perferre velle, nec tolerare
posse. Nicholas de Clemangis shows, that both Princes and others murmured
against the Popes exactions. Charles the French king inueying against Benet the
13. signifies, that God would displace the Popes out of their seats for
oppressing and spoiling Christ's sheep. facti sunt greges mei in rapinam etc.
propterea cessare eos faciam, vt non pascant vlterius gregem meum. these words
Charles applied against the Pope. the English being excommunicated in king
John's time, called the Popes agents marcidos ribaldos, that is rotten rascals,
and signified, that they would not endure their tyranny. Petrus de Ferrarijs in
form. resp. rei conuenti. bewaileth the misery of Christian princes. that
endured so many wrongs at the Popes hands, and made themselves his slaves, and
yet provided no remedy for it. heu miseri imperatores and principes seculares,
says he, qui haec and alia sustinetis, and vos seruos Pontificum facitis, and
mundum per eos infinity modis vsurpari videtis, nec de remedio cogitatis!
Christian Princes and Kings therefore have always abhorred the Popes tyranny,
and refused his religion, and the more christian they have showed themselves,
the more resista^ce they have made both against his corruptions in doctrine,
and his usurpations and abuses in government. Vlrichus Vttenus in his preface
to Laurentius Vallaes treatise against the counterfeit donation of Constantine
does thus exclaim against the Popes, as enemies and spoilers of all
Christians. annon fuerunt Christianorum hosts illi pontifices, qui omnium ad
se opes attraxerunt, onmibus liberis seruitutem moliti sunt? qui imper to
reges, pe^ unia ci^es de^l aliabant? were not the Popes enemies of Christians,
which drew unto themselves the wealth of all, and endeavored to oppress all
free men? which spoiled kings of their government, and the subjects of their
money?

CHAP. XIIII. That the ancient Britans and English were not first converted to
Popish religion.
LEt that abide in you, says S. John 1. epist. 2. which you have heard from
the beginning. so likewise we say, let us abide in that faith, and let that
faith abide in us, that was first preached by the Apostles scholars and
successors in this Island, and let us not be carried away by the poleshorne crew
of the Pope to believe popish novelties and fables. that the ancient
Christians of this land whether Britans, English or Scots, were not converted
to popish religion, that is now predominant in the kingdom of antichrist, we
have three most evident demonstrations to assure us.

Frst those doctrines and grounds of Popery, which before I have mentioned, S.
Peter or S. Paul, or any of their scholars did plant religion here, we must
not think, that they taught one thing, and wrote another, or that the
scholars preached otherwise then they had learned from their masters. If
Joseph of Arimathaea did first convert the Britans, and Fugatius and Damianus
confirm them in the faith, or if Austen the Monk and his fellows did first
convert the Saxons or English; yet can it not be showed, that any one of these
did teach, that the traditions of the church of Rome and holy scriptures were
with equal affection to be received, or that the doctrine of Popish holy
water, paschall lambs, tosaries, images and such like traditions, is the word
of God, or that Christ's true body is torn with teeth and received down into
the belly, and may be eaten of dogs and hogs, or that Christians are
justified by extreme unction, or eating saltfish and redherrings upon fridaies
and fasting days, or that incense is to be burnt to images, or the Sacrament
adored for God, and carried about in procession, or the rest of the points of
Popery before mentioned. either therefore let Parsons show us, that the several
points of Popery before touched were taught by S. Peter the Apostle, and
Eleutherus, and Gregory Bishops of Rome; or else he must know, that whatsoever
he fableth of his three supposed conuersions, the same will make for the
destruction of Popery, and the overthrow of the cause, which he mainteineth.

Secondly we are able to prove, Eleutherius and Gregory the first. the
idolatrous worship of images was first confirmed by the second cou^ncell of
Nice under the Empire of Irene, and by little and little brought into the
Western church, being long oppugned by the bishops of France, Germany and
Britain.

That the images of the cross and Trinity should be worshipped with latria,
was not allowed in that idolatrous council, but first taught by Thomas Aquinas
and his followers, and grounded not upon Gods word, but upon this rule of
Philosophy, that the same motion is directed to the image, and the thing
imagined. which rule by him is mistaken, being meant of the species or
representation of things in our understanding, and not of material images,
that come not within our understanding.

The Popes authority began to be established first by the rebellion of Gregory
the second, and Gregory the third, that caused Italy to revolt from the
Emperor under pretense of worship of images. and afterward the same was
confirmed by Gregory the seventh and his successors, that by force and violence
overthrew the empire, and made way by the diuisious of Christendom to the
victories and conquests of the Turks and Saracens. Boniface the third obtained
of Phocas, that the church of Rome should be reputed head of other churches.
Boniface the 9. as Theodoric a Niem in his book of schism testifies, by
fraud usurped first the temporal government over the City and territory of
Rome, which before that belonged either to the emperor, or to the citizens. and
thus by fraud and violence the Pope made himself great, and by little and
little exalted himself in the church, and erected the kingdom of Antichrist.

The carnal eating and presence of Christ's body in the sacrament was first
decreed by Nicolas the second in the Chap. ego Berengarius. did. 2. de
consecrat. for there we read first, that Christ's true body is handled with the
hands of Priests, broken and torn with the teeth of the faithful. his words
prescribed to Berengarius are, verum corpus and sanguinem domini nostri Jesus
Christi esse and sensualiter non solum sacramentum, sed in veritate manibus
sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.

Transubstantiation got reputation first by the decree of Innocent the 3. as we
read in the chapter Firmiter. de sum. Trin. and fid. cath. for there he
decrees, that the bread is transubstantiate into the body, and the wine into
blood, by the power of God. but yet two inconveniences will here fall out, if
we yield to his words. for there he says, that Christ is both the priest and
the sacrifice, and that this transubstantiation is wrought by the power of God.
whereof the first overthrows the priesthood of the polshorne priests of Baal,
the second does take away the efficacy from these words, hoc est enim corpus
meum, and hic est sanguis meus, and ascribes all to the power of God
absolutely.

In the conuenticle of Constance we find it first resolved, that the accidents
of bread and wine do remain without subject, and that the Pope is Christ's
immediate vicar. and sess. 13. that although Christ did institute the eucharist
in bread and wine, yet laymen were only to receine it under one kind.

Auricular confession was established by Innocent the 3. in the chap. omnis
vtriusque sexus. de poenit. and remiss. for before that it was free to
confess, or not to confess. the doctrine of confession was enlarged by the
canonistes and schoolmen.

In the conuenticle of Florence we read, that the form of ordring
masse-priestes, of popish confirmation and extreme unction, and of other popish
sacraments was then first settled by law. there also Purgatory and the Popes
supremacy was first enacted by force of law.

Clement the 6. in the chapter vnigenitus. extr. de poenit. and remis. did
first devise the treasure of indulgences. Boniface the 8. and Sixtus the 4.
ordered the Popish Iubiley.

That the Pope is above the Council, it was first decreed in the council of
Lateran under Leo the 10. who also began first to thunder out his
excommunications against M. Luther.

Finally the conuenticle of Trent gave final complement to the Popish doctrine
of Traditions, of the Latin vulgar translation, of concupiscence, of formal
justification by charity and works, of seven sacraments, of the sacrifice of
the mass, of purgatory and indulgences, of framing the images of God the
Father and the holy Ghost, and the rest of their heresies and abuses. for what
before the schoolmen had taught vainlie, that began now by the decrees of the
Pope and his accomplices to be established, and held for law. then also the
missals, breuiaries, offices and other rituall books began to be confirmed by
the Popes authority.

Thirdly it is an easy matter to prove, that the doctrine of S. Peter and of
the times, wherein Joseph of Arimathaea, Eleutherius and Gregory the first
lived, is direct contrary in diverse points to popish religion. S. Peter 1. ep.
2. exhorted all Christians to submit themselves to kings and governors. but the
Pope commands subjects to rebel and take arms against princes, and
excommunicateth such as refuse so to do, as appears by the excommunication
of Paul the 3. against king Henry the 8. and of Pius the fifth against Queen
Elizabeth: both which are extant in Sanders his libell de schismate. S. Peter
1. ep. 1. would have Christians to trust perfectly on gods grace. the Papists
teach their disciples to distrust gods grace, and to doubt of their salvation,
and to trust rather in their own works and merits. he says we are not
redeemed with corruptible things, but with Christ's most precious blood. these
teach, that men are redeemed after a sort by indulgences, and by the
satisfaction and merits of Saints, to whom Bellarmine in his book of
indulgences doubts not to give the title of redeemers. S. Peter exhorts
Christians to desire the sincere milk of Gods word, that they may grow
thereby. the papists bar men from hearing Gods word in tongues which they
understand, and send them to believe the traditions of the church of Rome, and
the impure trash of the schoolmen, and the Popes decretales. he excludes the
lordship of Popes over Gods inheritance: these false teachers enforce it. he
exhorts us to make our election sure: these fellows teach, that Christians
cannot be assured of their election or make it sure.

Joseph of Arimathaea and the godly bishops, that lived in his time, and diverse
hundred years after him, continued, we doubt not, in the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets. and therefore we may not think, that they taught, that
Christ had a body invisible or inpalpable, or that his body was in heaven and
earth at one time, and yet not continued to it self, or that his soul was
omnipotent or omniscient, or that Christians were to believe that dogs and
hogs did eat Christ's body, and yet that all the communicants, save the
Priest, were to be excluded from the cup of the new Testament, or that Christ
is only the meritorious cause of our justification and salvation, and that
formally we are justified and saved by our own works, or that remission of
sins cannot be obtained unless we come to auricular confession, and have the
Mass Priests absolution, or that the Pope by his indulgences out of
superfluous merits of Saints is able to deliver souls from purgatory, or other
popish heresies and wicked doctrines before mentioned. for these doctrines are
contrary to the holy scriptures, in which the sum of the Apostles preaching
is contained.

Gregory the first lib. 4. epist. 32. does dislike the title of universal
bishop, and calls it sacrilegious and profane. he does also condemn the
worship of images lib. 7. epist. 109. and lib. 9. epist. 9. and commends
Serenus the bishop of Massilia for reproouing the adoration of images. neither
does he allow any more than the historical use of them. that Purgatory which
Gregory the Dialogist speaks of, differs much from popish purgatory being
rather designed for venial sins, than for satisfaction for temporal pains
after the fault remitted. lib. moral. 19. c. 16. he shows that the books of
the Machabees are not canonical scriptures. and lib. 14. moral. c. 32. that
Christ's body is solid, and not like a spirit, and lib. 4. dial. c. 55. that
things above in the eucharist are united to things below, summa imis
consociantur. of which it follows, that there is no such presence, as the
Papists imagine, nor any transubstantiation. for if the body of Christ
residing above be united to things below, then is not Christ's body included
within the accidents of the host, nor is the bread and wine abolished.

Augustine the Monk brought with him a cross, and the image of our savior in
a table, and did sing litanies, as Bede testifies lib. 1. hist. Angl. c. 25.
but we do not read, that hoe filled Churches with images, or that he
worshipped Christ's image, or the cross with latria, or that in his litanies he
called upon Saints or Angels. Bid says they prayed to God, litanias canentes
etc. domino supplicabant.

If then we cannot find the points of popery, which we refuse, in the writings
of the Apostles, or in any record mentioning the doctrine of Joseph of
Arimathaea, Eleutherius, Gregory or Austen, but rather find them to be
opposite to their doctrine, and denised afterward, then unless we mean to
remove the ancient limits and bounds set down to us by our fathers, and to
refuse the counsel of the holy ghost Proverb. 22. we may not return to
popery. forasmuch as the first conuerters of the inhabitants of this land were
no authors nor favorers of popish superstition, heresies, impieties and
blasphemies.

CHAP. XV. That popish religion is most falsely termed Catholic religion, and
Papists Catholics.
Catholic religion, Vincentius Lirinensis in his commonitory chap. 3. does
teach us, is that, which always has been believed, and of all Christians.
we are to hold, says he, that which always has been believed of all
Christians. for that is properly Catholic. but the faith of the Romish church
contained in the Popes decretales and disputes of the canonists and schoolmen
has not always been believed of all Christians. their faith therefore is not
catholic, the assumption is proved not only by the novelties of the
decretales, glosses of Canonists and sums and resolutions of the school
divines, but also by the falsehood and contrarieties of the doctrine therein
contained. Nicholas in his decretale ego Berengarius. de consecrat. did. 2.
teaches, that Christ's body sensually is handled with the hands of Priests and
torn with teeth. but this is contrary to scriptures, fathers and truth.
Innocent in the chapter firmiter. de sum. trinit. and fid. cath. says, that
the bread is transubstantiat into Christ's body. which is false, for Christ
said of bread which he took, this is my body. The Canonists honor the Pope
as a God on earth, as the head, foundationmonah, rcand spouse of the Church.
the schoolmen brabble one with another, and sometimes change their own
opinions. Bellarmine lib. 2. de purgat. c. 3. confesses that Thomas Aquinas
changed his opinion concerning the merit of souls in Purgatory. most
schoolmen build doctrines of faith upon Philosophical grounds, and vary both
from scriptures and fathers in their doctrine of the divine attributes, of
Christ's body and soul, of merits, of sacraments, and diverse other points. how
then can we repute these doctrines to be catholic?

It is the Property of Catholics, says Vincentius Lirinensis commonit. c. 34.
to keep the doctrine committed to them, and left with them by the ancient
fathers, and to avoid profane novelties. but the doctrine of schoolmen
concerning the divine attributes, concerning the examples of the persons of the
Trinity brought by the master of sentences, the eating of Christ's body by
brute beasts, and diverse other points is full of profaneness and novelties.
their reasons also are more philosophical and sophistical, then Apostolical.
all the points in controversy betwixt us and them are mere novelties, as the
decretales, whereon they depend, declare.

Leo epist. says, that there is one true, only, perfect and inviolable faith,
whereto nothing can be added, and from which nothing can be taken. but unto
this faith the Popes have added their determinations concerning traditions, the
carnal real presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament of the Lords
supper, transubstantiation, the communion under one kind, the Popes vicarship
general, and universal power, purgatory, indulgences, the worship of images,
and diverse other points of doctrine. does it not then appear, that popery is
nothing else but a corruption of doctrine coming in after the publication of
the Christian Catholic faith, and added unto it?

Furthermore as the Apostolic doctrine is catholic and universal,

Lastly by many particulars it may be proved,

First they teach that the scriptures are an imperfect rule, and insufficient
without traditions, and speak lewdly of them calling them a nose of wax, a
killing and dead letter, a matter of strife, and what else they list to devise
in their reproachful humors. but never did Catholics so teach. the Apostle
2. Tim. 3. says, they are able to make us wise to salvation. and that they are
given of God to make the man of God perfect. S. Augustine lib. 2. de doct.
Christ. c. 9. says, that all things necessarily belonging to faith or manners
are contained in plain places of scriptures. the ancient fathers do every
where speak honorably of scriptures, and Ireney says, it is the property of
heretics, when they are convinced by scriptures to accuse them.

Secondly, these are special points of Popery, Trent sess. 4. the rest is
holden by the canonists, and the Popes proctors. these doctrines are contrary
to the words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 3. who shows us, that no other
foundation can be laid, but Christ Jesus: and Ephesians. 2, where it is said that
the faithful are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone. Irenaeus lib. 3. aduers. haeres. c. 1.
shows that the scriptures are the pillar and foundation of our faith.
Chrysostom hom. 6. in Matthew. says the church is Jerusalem, whose foundations
are laid upon the mountains of the scriptures. that the Pope should be the
foundation of the church and not be subject to error in determining matters of
faith, is contrary both to scriptures and fathers, as I have already showed in
my books de pontifice Romans the diversity and contrariety of diverse editions
of the old Latin vulgar translation of the bible we have proved heretofore.
that it differs from the original, it is apparent, and Arias Montanus,
Erasmus, Caietan and diverse others acknowledge it. the fathers in matters of
doubt send us to the originals. the falsehood of Romish traditions, and the
repugnance betwixt them and scriptures I have proved in my book de scripturis
against Bellarmine.

Thirdly, against that sense, Cont. Trident. sess 4.
which the church of Rome holds. contra eum sensum, quam tenuit, and tenet
sancta matter ecclesia. and by the church they understand the Pope principally.
but that was never the opinion of Catholics. nay the Pope and his followers
allow diverse interpretations contrary to the judgment of all ancient fathers
and catholics. they believe that these words of Christ, feed my sheep, do
properly belong to the Pope, and that thereby he has power to depose Princes.
these words Hiercm. 1. I have appomted thee over nations and kingdoms, they
transfer to the Pope. Boniface the 8. in the chap. vnam sanctam. extr.
demaior and obed. does thereof conclude, that the Pope has power to judge all
earthly princes. Innocent the 3. in the Chap. solitae. de mayor. and obed.
because it is said, Genes. 1. that God made a greater and lesser light in the
firmament, collecteth, that the Pope is above the emperor. Christ said, do
this in remembrance of me. they interpret it, as if Christ had said, offer up
my body and blood to my father, and do it in remembrance of Angels and Saints.
Christ said, search the scriptures, and drink ye all of this, which they
expound, as if he had forbidden laie-men either to search scriptures, or to
receive the cup. They have also infinite other such like perverse
interpretations of scriptures contrary to the exposition of Catholic fathers:
and yet stiffle maintain them.

4. Catholics never allowed the legends of S. George. S. Christopher. S.
Catherine, S. Vrsula, S. Cyprian the magician, and such legends, as the Papists
read in their churches publicly, and believe them as traditions of their
Elders, and grounds of faith. the legend of S. George, of Cyricus and Iulitta,
of Abgarus, and of the invention of the cross is condemned by Gelasius c.
sancta Romana. did. 15.

5. Tho. Aquin. opusc. cont. errores Graec. says, it is a matter of faith to
believe the determination of tho Pope in matters belonging to says or manners.
a matter never believed by Catholics.

6. Bellarmine and others say, that the Popes laws do bind us in conscience.
but this never entered into the thought of Catholics. S. James. c. 4. says, we
have only one lawgiuer and judge, that can save and destroy.

7. They believe, that images are to he made and worshipped: and consequently
fill every corner of their churches with images. they also think it lawful to
picture God the father like an old man, and the holy ghost in the figure of a
dove. but the law of God expressly forbids the worship of graven images,
and all such similitudes. and Lactantius lib. 2. instill. c. 19. says there is
no religion, where such images are. S. Augustine de fid. and symbolo says,
that it is impious to place the image of God in the church. tale simulachrum
deo nefas est Christiano in templo collocare.

8. The Iebusites of Collem in their censure teach, that we are justified by
the law, and that our life and salvation does consist therein. but the Apostle
teaches us, that the law is the minister of death. and Irenaeus testifies
lib. 3. aduers. haeres. c. 20. that the law being spiritual does only manifest
sin, and not kill it. and so do Catholics believe.

9. The conuenticle of Trent sess. 5. teaches, that concupiscence is not sin
in the regenerat: but the Apostle Romans 7. shows the concupiscence is sin.
and all true Catholics must needs confess it, seeing it is forbidden by the
law.

10 Bellarmine and his consorts believe, that all Christians are able to
perform the law perfectly. but Catholics believe, that this sauoureth of
Pelagianisme. for if they be able to perform the law of God perfectly, then
may they live without all sin; which Augustine and Hierome in their disputes
against the Pelagians declare to be heresy.

11 Papists believe, that the Pope is able to dispense with oaths, and to
absolve subjects from their obedience and fealty to their Princes. but
Catholics assure themselves that it is impious to take Gods name in vain,
and to violate lawful oaths upon the Popes, or any other man's warrant.

12 Papists teach, that the Virgin Mary was exempt from original sin, as we
may perceive by Bellarmine lib. 4. de amiss. great. c. 15. and by the decrerale
of Sixtus 4. and this is the most common opinion. but Catholics think
contrary. for the Apostle Romans 5. says that through the offense of one, all
men are subject to condemnation.

13. They believe that the blessed virgins house was carried out of Galiley into
Dalmatia, and from thence into Italy by the ministry of Angels, and that the
same is now at Loreto. but Catholics laugh at such fables, and esteem the
worship of her image there to be idolatrous.

14. They celebrate the feast of our Ladies conception, and of the assumption
of her body into heaven, as appears by their missals and breuiaries. but
Catholics drslike both, as grounded upon apocryphal fables, and lying
legends. S. Bernard epist. 174. speaking against the feast of her conception
says, she needed no false honors.

15. Catholics never believed, that Christ had a body invisible, impalpable,
and not comprehended in a place. S. Augustine de essentia diuinitatis, says,
that Christ according to his humane nature is visible, corporal and local. but
our adversaries teach, that his true body is in the sacrament, where it is
neither seen, felt, nor circumscribed in a place.

16. They speak reverently of Christ's body, and hold it blasphemy to say,
that the same may be cast into the fire, or eaten of dogs or hogs, or other
brute beasts. but the Papists do not so much as go about to clear themselves
of this blasphemy.

17. They teach, that Christ had a body like to ours in all things, sin except.
the Papists believe that his body is really in the sacrament, and contained in
the compass of a consecrated host, and that the same is invisible, and able to
penetrat other solid bodies without the dissolution of their substance. but
such abodie no man ever yet had, nor by nature can have.

18. They believe, that every body is continued to it self, or as Logicians
call it, continua quanutas. but Papists believe, that Christ's body is in heaven
and earth, and every altar, and yet not in the middle places: whereby it
follows, that Christ's head in heaven is not continued to his feet being in a
consecrated host in earth.

19. Vigilius lib. 4. cont. Eutych. says, that Christ's body being now in
heaven is not on earth, and that is the faith of Catholics. but the false and
pretended catholics believe, that his body is both in heaven and earth, and
diverse distant places at one time.

20. Catholics believe, that Christ only is our redeemer. for so the Apostle
teaches us, Romans 3.1. Cor. 1. and diverse other places. but Bellarmine in his
first book of indulgences teaches us, that saints and others may be called
redeemers. all his consorts also teach, that the Pope by his indulgences
redeemeth souls out of purgatory.

21. Catholics acknowledge that Christ is our justice. for so the Apostle 1.
Cor. 1. expressly says. they believe also that we are justified by faith in
him, as we read Romans 5. but Kellison in his survey and his consorts teach, that
he is only the meritorious cause of our justification, and that we are
formally justified and saved by our own works.

22. Catholics doubt not to make their election sure, and being justified by
faith have peace with God, and are persuaded that nothing shall separate them
from the love of God. for all this is Apostolic doctrine. but Papists teach
their followers to doubt of their election, and of the grace of God toward
them; and deprive them both of peace of conscience, and of all assurance of
Gods grace.

23. Catholics believe, that Christ was wounded for our transgressions, and
that he has borne our infirmities, and that by his stripes we are healed. for
so the Prophet Isay cap. 53. teaches us. but the pretended popish catholics
do lash themselves, and hope by their own stripes to heal their sins and to
satisfy for them. and without this satisfaction they believe, that no man can
obtain remission of sins.

24. Catholics ever spared their own bodies. but certain heretics and
idolaters did usually afflict their bodies and lash themselves before their
idols. in lashing of themselves therefore the Papists imitate the Priests of
Baal, and not true Catholics.

25. Catholics believe, that their sins are purged by the blood of Christ,
as we read Hebr. 1. but Papists believe that their sins are purged in
purgatory, and by their own satsifactions.

26. The Greeks to this day never believed Purgatory, neither do any of the
ancient fathers believe that after our sins are remitted, Christians are to
satisfy for temporal pains, either in this life or in purgatory. the
doctrine therefore of purgatory will never be proved Catholic.

27. The Apostles and ancient fathers never knew nor heard of the doctrine and
treasure of the Popes indulgences. this doctrine of Papists therefore is to be
abolished, as not Catholic.

28. True Catholics never believed, that Christians were justified by
marriage. the master of the sentences says it is only a remedy against sin.
but Papists hold they are justified by marriage, as well as by other Sacraments.

29. The doctrine of the conuenticle of Florence concerning the form of
priesthood, popish confirmation, extreme unction and their number of seven
sacraments cannot be proved to be Catholic.

3.. Bellarmine lib. 2. de effectu sacrament. c. 3. and other his consorts
affirm, that Christians are instified by the sacraments ex opere operato, or
by their own act and work wrought. whereby it follows, that they are
justified by greasing, crossing, and such like acts. but this doctrine is not
catholic. the Greeks to this day acknowledge no such doctrine nor is any
such thing to be found in ancient writers.

31. The Greeks to this day renounce the Popes supremacy. the ancient fathers
never heard of a triple crowned Pope, with a crossed slipper, and a guard of
Suitzers. the doctrine therefore of the Popes general vicarship taught by
Bellarmine in his books de pontisice Romans and by others is not Catholic.

32. Papists teach, that some sins are done away by holy water, and without
repentance, and that such sins deserve not death. but the Apostle Galat. 3.
shows him to be accursed that abides not in all the words of the law to do
them, and Romans 6. says, that the wages of sin is death. this is also the
faith of all Catholics. but of the efficacy of holy water to do away
sins, true Catholics say nothing.

33. Papists offer the sacrifice of the mass pro redemptione animarum suarum,
for the redemption of their souls. but Catholics do not hope for redemption,
but by the sacrifice of Christ once offered upon the cross.

34. They make Christians eaters of man's flesh, and drinkers of man's blood
really and literally, as their words in the chapter, ego Berengarius. did. 2.
de consecrat. do import. but our Savior says, that the spirit quickens, and
Saint Augustine tract. 25. in loan. shows that Christ's flesh is not to be
received with our mouth or teeth. vt quid paras dentem, says he, why do
thou prepare thy teeth?

35. They make their Priests creators of their creator, as Innocentius in his
books de myster. missae, stella Clericorum, and Boner in his speech to the
Priests in Queen Mary's time in express words do declare. but Christians and
Catholics abhor to hear Priests called creators, or God to be made a
creature.

36. They make the Priest to intercede for Christ's body and blood saying,
supra quae propitio and sereno vultu respicer^ digneris, etc. upon which
vouchsafe, says the Priest speaking of Christ's body and blood, to look with a
propitious and serene countenance. but true Catholics do hope, that God will
look upon them favorably for the sacrifice once offered on the cross by their
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

38. They compare the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in the Mass with the
sacrifice of Abel, that offered brute beasts: which no Catholic ever did.

39. They make God an intercessor to Saints, praying to him, that by the
intercession of saints they may obtain their desires, and saying that God
reueleth our thoughts to saints: which is far from the doctrine and belief
of Catholics.

4.. True Catholics never added these words and aterni, and mysterium sidei,
to the words used by Christ in the consecration of the cup, as the Papists
do in the Mass.

41. True Catholics believe, that Christ was once only offered to his father
for the sins of the world. the Apostle Hebr. 9. says that Christ was once
offered to take away the sins of many. but the Papists say, that Christ
offered himself twice, and that every priest does offer him up, and cat him up
continually in the Mass.

42. True Catholics never confessed their sins in the celebration of the
Lords supper to the Virgin Mary, to Michael the Archangell, and to other Angels
and Saints. let Kellison but name us one Catholic father, that made such a
confession, or else we must needs conclude, that he and his consorts be
idolatrous Mass Priests.

43. True Catholics never believed, that they could do penance by a
procurato or atturnie, as the Papists believe they may.

44. Neither did they ever believe, that no Christians could be absolved from
their sins without auricular confession, and the Priests absolution, as the
false Romish Catholics do.

45. The false catholics believe that the Popes are the successors of Peter,
but true Catholics never believed or thought them to be successors of that
holy apostle, that neither taught nor administered the sacraments, and in liew
of feeding, cause Christ's sheep to be massacred and killed.

46. True Catholics are often persecuted, but persecute none. Optatus lib. 2.
contr. Parmen. speaking of himself and his fellow catholics, which of us,
says he, has persecuted any man? but the Papists like cruel wolves persecute
all, that are not of their own opinions.

47. Catholics keep their words and perform thehir promises, yea though it
be to their hindrance. Papists teach, that faith is not to be kept with
heretics, and burned John Husse in the conuenticle of Constance contrary to
the emperors safe conduct and faithful promise.

48. In the 13. session of the conuenticle of Trent the mass priests curse al,
that shall affirm, that the principal fruit of the eucharist is remission of
sins: which falls upon al Catholics, that shall believe Christ's words
Matthew. 26. this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for
remission of sins.

49. Christ taught true Catholics to pray to the father in his name. neither
ever do we read that true Catholics did pray thus, aue maris stella, Dei
matter alma, atque semper virgo, foelix coeli porta, solue vincula reis, profer
lumen caecis. or that they hoped to come to heaven, or to have remission of
sins by the Virgin Mary's prayers and intercession.

50. True Catholics never said to a crucifixe of wood, thou have redeemed us,
thou have reconciled us to thy father. nor did they pray to the cross, as the
Papists do saying, o cross of Christ protect^m^. nay Ambrose de obitu
Theodosij, shows, that Helen finding the cross did not worship it, but
Christ, that hanged upon the cross.

51. True Catholics never consecrated any paschall lambs, as the
Mass Priests are prescribed to do in their missals.

52. True Catholics never said any Psalter in the honor of our Lady, nor
repeated an hundred and fifty aue Mary's, and after every fifty aue Mary's one
creed, and after every ten Aue Mary's one Paternoster, as he Papists do
after the prescription of their ladies psalters and rosaries.

53. Never did true Catholics devise new religions, nor allow the swarms and
sects of Iebusites, Franciscans, Dominicans, and the filthy rabble of Friars,
which we see in the Romish church.

Finally all those devises, tricks, fooleries, novelties and impieties of
Popery, which we refuse, were never admitted by true Catholics, or allowed in
the practice of Catholic religion.

CHAP. XVI. That Popish religion is not the ancient religion of the primitive
church.
ID verius quod prius, says Tertullian lib. 4. contra Marcionem. that is true
that is former, and that is former, that was from the beginning, and that was
from the beginning, that came from the Apostles. Hierome also epist. 65. ad
Pammach. and Ocean, said to a certain newly vp-start teacher in his time, cur
profers in medium, quod Petrus and Paulus edere noluerunt? why do thou now
bring forth that, which neither Peter nor Paul would ever teach? if then
Popish religion were that ancient religion, which the Apostles first
published; then had the Papists cause to rejoice, but if Popery be nothing else,
but cockle, that has been by heretics, and others the devils ministers sown
in the Lords field since the first plantation of the Gospel, and if the
principal points thereof prove new devises brought in by the Pope and his
accomplices many ages since the Apostles time, then I hope every Christian will
reject the same as novelties, and Papists hereafter will blush to talk of
antiquity.

That Popish religion is not the ancient religion of the primitive church, it
may be proved, first by the grounds of Popery, that are of a later standing;
next by the founders and cheese authors of this sect, that are not ancient;
thirdly by the particular points of Popery, whose original is found in later
authors; and lastly by the repugnance betwixt the doctrine of Popery, and
Christian religion.

The principal grounds of Popery are the Popes decretales, Gregory the ninth,
who first published them, and authorized them, before his time Gratian and
others had made diverse rapsodies and collections of the Popes decrees, but the
canonistes themselves do not allow them for law. beside that, not one of the
Popes before the time of Gregory the 7. who is the first that took upon him to
give law to the whole church, and whose epistles are first recorded in the
great bullary, took upon him to publish his decretales for laws, if any
decretales be set out before his time under the names of ancient bishops of
Rome, the style, arguments, simplicity, and fooleries contained in them bewray
them to be counterfeit.

The Popes authority began to flourish about the times of Boniface the 3.
who, as Platina says, obtained of Phocas the Emperor, that the church of Rome
should be called and holden the head of other churches.

The council of Rome, that authorized the Popish real presence of Christ's body
and blood in the Sacrament was celebrated under Pope Nicolas the 2. some 1050.
years after Christ. the 2. Nicene Council that established the worship of
images in some sort, was assembled long before under the reign of Irene; but
the acts of the council could not be received in the Western church till
long after, the council of Lateran, that decreed transubstantiation, was
assembled in the times of Innocentius the 3. the council of Constance, that
first brought in the communion under one kind, and the subsistence of accidents
without subject, was summoned about the year of our Lord 1414, the synod of
Florence that first established the 7. sacraments, and began to talk of
their forms, and confirmed the Popes supremacy and Purgatory, published her
decrees about the year of our Lord 1439. the acts of the conuenticle of
Trent, that made up a complete body of Popery were confirmed by Pius the 4. in
the year of our Lord 1564. and this is the antiquity of those conuenticles,
that do principally confirm the doctrine of Popery.

The scholemen crept into the church about the year of our Lord 1200. the
father of them al was Peter Lombard, that flourished some 1140. years after
Christ.

The canonists began after the times of Gregory the ninth, that lived and
flourished about the year of our Lord God 1230.

The chief founders of Popery were the Popes by their authority, the Cardinals
by their counseill, the Monks and Friars by their books and preaching, the
Mass Priests by their massing and practicing, the dinel himself by his craft,
malice and violence. the Popes authority in ecclesiastical canses was not
great before the times of Boniface the third. nor in temporal matters before
Gregory the seventh. Boniface the ninth, as Theodoric a Niem testifies, by
craft entered upon the temporal inrisdiction of Rome. The cardinals were but
parish priests until such time, as the Pope of a Priest became a Prince. the
monks in the West church are descended from Benet of Nursia that lived about
the year of our Lord 530. the Friars arose out of the bottomless pit about
the year of our Lord 1230. their first fathers were Francis and Dominicke. the
last brood of Friars flew abroad into the world under the leading of Ignatius
Loyola, a lame soldier, anno Dom. 1540. the devil being bound up for a
thousand year, counting from the time of Constantine, began to be loosed
again about the time of Innocent the third, and by all fraud to work in the
heads of Popes, Friars, Monks and Mass Priests, and with violence to make
opposition against all those, that preached the truth.

The foundation therefore of Popery being so lately laid, and the chief
founders thereof beginning to stir so long after the times of the Apostles,
and ancient fathers; it were great simplicity, if we should affirm popery to
be ancient.

But the same does most clearly appear by the particular doctrines of
popery, which the Popes factours maintain against us. first they hold that
holy scriptures are imperfect, and no sufficient rule of faith. Bellarmine lib.
4. de verbo Dei c, 12. affirms, that they are only apart of the rule. but
none but heretics in ancient time did derogate from scriptures.

2. They teach, that holy scriptures and the traditions of the church are to be
received with equal affection. but that was first determined in the 4. session
of the conuenticle of Trent.

3. In that wicked conuenticle also they first determined, that the old Latin
vulgar translation of the Bible should be authentical.

4. That the bishop of Rome is sovereign judge of al controversies of
religion, and the principal interpreter of scriptures, is a point taught of
late, since Friars began to steel their faces with a double mask of impudency.

5. Before the late conuenticle of Trent we never read, but that concupiscence
was sin both in the regenerat, and unregenerate, as being contrary to the law
of God.

6. Stapleton in his preface to his relection of doctrinall principles is the
first man that ever taught, that we hear God speaking in the Pope, and that
the church is founded upon his authority.

7. The first that ever called the Pope a God on the earth are the Popes
canonists. they likewise began first to call him the head, and spouse of the
church, an universal bishop.

8. The Papists of late time only began to prohibit scriptures to be read
publickely in vulgar tongues, and to repine at Gods people, that desire to
read them in those tongues. for the ancient fathers exhort men to read
scriptures.

9. Since Dioclesians time we do not read of any that burned books of
scriptures besides Papists. neither did any since his time hold out his feet to
be kissed.

10. Of late time Papists believe no Catholic church, but that which is
subject to the bishop of Rome, whereas in time past the Catholic church was
held to be dispersed through all nations, and not universally subjected to
other head, than Christ.

11. The Romish church now observes not the old canons of the Apostles, as
they are commonly called. ex 84. Apostolicis canonibus, says Medina de sacror.
hom. continent. c. 105. quos Clemens Romanus pontifex and eorundem Apostolorum
discipulus in vnum coegit, vix sex aut octo Latina Ecclesia nunc obseruat.
Martin Perez also de tradit. part. 3. c. de authorit. cc. Apost. confesses,
that the Apostles canons now are not well observed.

12. The ancient Christians did never confess their sins to the blessed
virgin, to S. Michael, to Peter and Paul, and other saints, as the Romish
Mass Priests do.

13. Of late the Clerk at Mass has taken upon him to absolve the Priest, and
to pray for him: a matter both strange and absurd.

14. The confession of the faith set out by Pius the fourth, concerning Romish
traditions, instification by works, the seven sacraments, the sacrifice of the
mass, indulgences and such like points of Popery, was never heard of before
the time of that wicked Pope.

15. The Papists can not show, that any Christian before of late durst cut out
the second commandment out of the first Table, as they have presumed to do in
their short Catechismes. This they did, knowing themselves to be guilty, in
worshipping images, of the breach thereof.

16. The decree of Sixtus the fourth concerning the conception of the blessed
virgin without original sin, is but a late device.

17. It is not long since the Papists taught, that venial sins are done away
with holy water.

18. He should be very shameless, that would say, that Christians in time past
did whip themselves either going in procession, or before the crucifix, as now
Papists do, hoping to redeem their sins with their own blood.

19. Ancient Christians never believed, that it was sin to transgress the
Popes laws, as the resistance of the churches of Asia against Victor, of the
churches of Afrike against Sozimus and other Popes declare.

20. Of late time friars, especially the Capucins, have attired themselves like
chimney sweepers, and burners of houses.

21. The rules of monks and friars are diverse from the rules of Christian
religion, and can not be elder then the orders of monks and friars.

22. Gregory the seventh, as Otho Frisingensis says, was the first that did
excommunicate the Emperor, and taught that he had power to assoile subjects
from the others of obedience to Princes.

23. The use of private masses without communion is but new, as the old
ordinall of Rome, that has no masses of that nature declares. the canons of
the Apostles forbid Christians to depart before they received the communion.

24. Innocent the third in the chap. omnis vtriusque. de poenit. and remiss.
did first bring in a necessity of auricular confession. he also was the first
father of the monster transubstantiation, as we find by the chapter firmiter.
de sum. Trinit. and fid. Cathol.

25. Purgatory for satisfaction for temporal pains of sins, whose guilt
before was remitted, was first devised by schoolmen.

26. The Iubiley among Christians was first devised by Boniface the eigth. he
also decreed first, that all temporal princes and others upon pain of
damnation must be subject to the Pope.

27. Popish indulgences are but of a late stamp, and the school doctrine
thereof much latter, the Papists themselves being as yet not fully resolved,
what to think of them.

28. Clement the sixth, first devised the treasure, out of which indulgences
are supposed to be granted, as appears by the chap. vnigenitus. extr.
depoenit. and remiss.

29. The doctrine of cases reserved to the Pope is not once spoken of in the
writings of the fathers. and yet the Mass Priests make a great matter of them.

30. The doctrine of the Popes penitentiarie tax for dispatch of pardons for
murders, incest, sodomie and all villainies, I think, Kellison will not contend
to be very ancient.

31. Bellarmines doctrine lib. 1. de verb. Dei. c. 3. concerning the new
Testament, where he says, it is nothing else, but the love of God shed into
our hearts by the holy Ghost, is new. for it contradicts Chrysostom,
Theodoret, and others in 2. Cor. 3. who teach that the new Testament is God
grace remitting sins.

32. The prohibition of marriage between spiritual gossips is a late device of
the Pope for gain.

33. The separation of married couples for religion before consummation of
marriage, without consent of both the parties, is both new and wicked.

34. The popish ceremonies used in baptism are of a late invention, as for
example salt, spittle, candles and popish exorcismes.

35. Of late they have begun to exorcise salt in salutem credentium, for the
salvation of the faithful, and holy water to cast our Devils, and to drive
away discases. these consurations are not found in the old Romish ordinals.

36. The Masseppriests have now gotten a new trick to sprinkle the altar with
holy water, and to say, thou shall sprinkle me with hyssope, and I shall be
cleansed: applying the scriptures contrary to the meaning of the holy ghost.

37. Honorius the third in the chapter, sane cum olim. de celebr. miss. did
first ordain, that the sacrament should be worshipped, and safely kept, and
carried with light to those that are sick.

38. Half communions are direct contrary to Christ's institution, and the
practice of the church; and first established in the conuenticle of Constance.

39. The Mass cannot be old, for that Nauclerus, Platina, Polydore and others
confess is was innented by diverse authors long after the Apostles times.

40. The prayers for the dead now found in the Mass are not to be seen in the
book called Ordo Romanus.

41. In old time the fathers never believed, that Christ had a body invisible
and incircumscriptible, and that might be in heaven and earth and many places
at one time.

42. The godly bishops of old time did neither swinge the chalice about their
head, nor make crosses about it, when they celebrated the eucharist.

43. The saying of service and administration of Sacraments in tongues not
understood is a foolish novelty.

44. Now in the Roman Catechism they teach, that every Mass Priest
consecrating works three miracles. but in old time they were never taken for
such workers of miracles.

45. The Papists after their Pater noster, say their aue Maria, and pray to our
Lady. which practice is neither ancient, nor Apostolical.

46. The Psalter of our Lady and her peculiar offices, and Masses in honor of
Saints will not be justified by ancient precedents.

47. Hardly will the Papists bring a precedent of 300. years old to prove,
that Christians prayed to the cross for increase of justice, and remission of
sins.

48. In the missall of Sarum the Priest says to the sacrament, aue, or hail,
and boweth to it contrary to all ancient practice.

49. The worship of Papists must needs be new, for that both their Saints are
new, and their prayers and offices new.

50. The missals, breuiaries and offices of our Lady have their antiquity from
the conuenticle of Trent.

51. Popish idolaters worship the sacrament, and the cross with divine honor.
but they shall never bring allowance of antiquity for this practice.

52. They burn also incense to dumb images kiss them and bow to them. but
these unchristian tricks were not known in old time.

53. Of late time they have decreed, that the Pope is above the council. but
it is since the council of Constance.

54. Now the Pope pretends right to handle the temporal sword. but that did
not the Bishops of Rome for a thousand years after Christ.

55. Of late time the Pope has trodden upon the necks of Emperors. but in
ancient time the bishops of Rome were subject to Emperors.

56. In time past the bishops of Rome were persecuted and martyred. now the
Popes of late time persecute and martyr others.

Finally all the points of doctrine differing from the faith o this church,
which the Pope and his accomplices seek now to thrust upon Christians, are for
the most part novelties.

And this does clearly appear in this, for that they are contrary to the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as before has been particularly
declared. the same is also coutrary to the doctrine of the fathers and ancient
churches practice, as we shall declare hereafter.

Further the Papists have turned the whole service of God into a massing
mommery. Finally for God they worship Saints and dumb images. the institution
of Christ Jesus in the eucharist they have altered. new sacraments they have
devised. are they not then ashamed to call popery ancient Christian religion?

CHAP. XVII. That Poperic is repugnant to ancient councels.
MVch doc Papists brag of councels. Campion says the first, last, and midst
are his. concilia generalia, mea sunt, general councels, says he, are all for
me. thus says Campion, and great crackes do others also make, when they come
once to mention councels. but if councels do make so much for the Popes cause,
as these Popish agents praetend, what is the reason, why the Pope is so much
afraid, when he does but ouce he are the name of councels? Gaguine in Carolo 7.
says, that the Popes resuse to assemble general councels, searing lest their
large authority should be restrained by their decrees. Petrus de Alliaco also
in his treatise de reformat. ecclesiae shows that many supposed, that the
Popes were negligent in gathering councels, that they might more fully rule at
their pleasure, and usurp the right of other churches. the author also of the
book entitled onus Ecclesiae does allege the same reason, why councels were
so slowly assembled. experience certes teaches us, that nothing is more
fearful to the Pope, then the name of a lawful and christian council,
Gregory the 12. and Petrus de Luna, as Theodorio a Niem testifies, by all
means delaied the assembly of a council, and Martin the fifth, notwithstanding
the decree of the council of Constance for assembling councels from every ten
years to ten years, would no more hear of the matter. of late time Clement
the 7. rejected the petition of diverse princes requiring a general council.
and Paul the third would not yield to have one, before such time as he had so
settled his affairs, that no man should dare to speak the truth freely, or to
touch his authority. Nay albeit Trent were no indifferent place for us; yet did
not Julius the third think himself safe enough there, nor did he rest until
such time, as he had removed the council to Bononic. lastly whatsoever they
here speak magnifically of the council, yet otherwhere they say the Pope is
above the council, and that without his confirmation the acts of the council
are of no force. and so they bring the authority of councels to a low price.

But admit the authority of councels to be as great, as the Papists would have
them; yet neither do they esteem much of councels, nor do councels make much
for them.

For the time of assembling provincial councels we find diners canons. the
council of Nice c. 5. decreed, that prouniciall conncels should be assembled
twice every year. visum est per singulos annos in singulis prouincijs bis in
anno concilium episcoporum sieri. the like course we find taken in the 20.
canon of the council of Antioch. but the Pope regards neither. The council
of Constance sess. 39. an. 1417. decreed, that from thence forth general
councels should be celebrated, vt amodo concilia generalia celebrentur: and
that the first should begin within sieve years after the end of the council,
the second 7. years after that, and that so from ten years to ten years
councels should perpetually be celebrated. deinceps de decennio in decennium
perpetuo celebrentur. but the Popes have made a scorn of this decree.

The cannons of the Apostles decree, that a bishop should be ordained by two or
three bishops. but the Pope supplieth the room of Bishops oftentimes with
Abbots and tituler bishops, as is proved by practice, and confessed in part by
Bellarmine. the sixth canon excommunicateth bishops and Priests, that under
pretense of religion put away their wives. the Mass Priests separate such
violently from their wives, and forbid men to marie upon pretense of religious
vows.

The ninth and tenth canons determine them worthy to be excommunicated, which
being present at the oblation of the eucharist do not communicate. qui facta
oblatione non communicauerint, and again, qui sacram communionem non
percipiunt. the Papists esteem them that hear mass only, good Christians, and
do little regard these canons.

The seventeenth Canon pronounces him unworthy, nay incapable to be Bishop
or Priest, that keeps a concubine. which is a plain sentence against most of
the Romish clergy.

The 28. canon forbids Bishops and Priests to strike Christians offending.
but popish prelates cut Christian men's throats, albeit they offend not.

The 36. canon prescribes bishops their limits, and forbids them to ordeine
clerks out of their jurisdiction. but this is not observed by the Pope nor his
accomplices, that ordain certain Priests of Baal and send them for England,
where they have no jurisdiction.

The 83. canon deposes him that shall use reproachful words against the
Emperor, or Magistrate, qui imperatorem aut magistratum contumelia affecerit.
yet do Popes rail upon Emperors and Magistrates, that displease them, at
their pleasure.

The 84. canon leaves Judith and Tobia and Wisdom out of the catalogue of
holy books of scripture. the conuenticle of Trent reckons them in the canon
as well as the best.

When diverse in the council of Nice went about to prohibit the use of wives
to Bishops Priests and Decons, Paphnutius resisted their determination, and the
synod consented unto him, as Socrates lib. 1. c. 8. Sozomen. lib. 1. hist. c.
22. Nicephorus lib. 8. hist. c. 9. do testify.

There it was determined also c. 5. that those, which by one bishop were
excommunicated, should not be received of others, vt hi qui ab alijs
excommunicantur, ab alijs ad communionem non recipiantur. all which
notwithstanding the Pope separateth married Priests from their w iues, and
receives most infamous offenders being e xcommunicated, when they appeal to
him.

The Pope also manifestly breaks the 6. canon, which boundeth his
jurisdiction, and gives like jurisdiction to the bishop of Alexandria and Rome.

The 18. Canon forbids clergymen to follow filthy gain, and to put out
their money to usury. all which notwithstanding the Popes task rents of public
whores at Rome, as is publicly known and testified to the world, and
ordinarily have their b ankes of usury called by them monti di pieta, where men
may borow money, at 12.10.8. and six in the hundred, as Onuphrius witnesses in
the lives of Julius the 3. Paul the 4. and Pius the 4.

In the council of Ancyra c. 10. deacons protesting, that they would mary, and
could not contain, were permitted to continue in the ministry aster marriage.
hopostea si ad nuptias venerint, maneant in ministerio. the same council c.
16. condemns Sodomits, that live against reason to 15. years penance. and
can. 20. puts adulterers to 7. years penance; and c. 23 inflicteth upon
soothsaiers, or magicians 5. years penance. but the Pope, as he neglects the
punishment of adulterers, Negromancers, and Sodomites, which in Rome and Italy
abou^d, as every trauailer knows, that is acquainted with the manners of that
country; so he forbids the marriage of deacons, and separateth such, as mary,
notwithstanding any protestation they can make.

The council of Neocaesarea can. 2. condemns her, that shall mary two
brethren. yet do the Papists account the marriage of Queen Catherine to prince
Arthur and Henry the 8. King of England his brother lawful, because the Pope
dispensed with that marriage. so we see neither the Pope, nor his accomplices
regard councels, if they make against their profit or pleasure.

Bishops, Priests, Deacons committing adultery, and practicing usury are
grievously punished by the council of Eliberis. c. 18. and 20. but now these
offenses are common among Mass Priests. and the Pope shows them by the
chapter and si clerici. d^ indicijs. and by his example, how little he
regards the acts of councels against these sins. in the same synod can.
34. Christians, are forbidden to light candles in the churchyard in the day
time, and c. 36. to set up pictures in Churches. cereos per diem says the
council, placuit in coemiterio non incendi. and again placuit picturas in
ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus deping
atur. yet Papists do superstitiously set up lights in church yards, and fill
their churches with images and pictures.

Those which accuse their brethren falsely by the first council of Arles c. 14.
are shut from the communion to then dying day. de his qui accusant fratres
suos, placuit says the council, cos vsij, ad exitum non comunicare. the same
council decrees that no bishop should tread down his fellow Bishop. yet the
Popes and their accomplices do hire parasites and scrrilous companions to
traduce and falsely to accuse their brethren and all good bishops are now
trodden down by the Pope.

The Council of Gangra condemns those that dispraise marriage, or do tax
him that eats flesh; or that despise the oblation of a married priest, or make
meetings without the church, qui extra ecclesiam scorsim conuentus cilebrat, or
that take a pride in virginity, or use peculiar habits, and despise those that
use common apparel, or depart from their parents upon praetence of religion.
quicumque silij a parentibus praetextu diuini culius abscedunt. the same
likewise condemns those women, which cut their hair propter dminum cultum,
for religion sake; or that contrary to scriptures and ecclesiastical canons
shall b ring in new precepts. but Papists despise matiage as pollutions and
fleshly life, and esteem monks that eat no flesh more holy and perfect then
other Christians. they despise also the oblations of married Priests, and Monks
and Friars have their conuenticles apart. further the Massepriests extol their
pretended virginity, and Monks and Friars use peculiar habits, and despise
such as use common apparel. Children among them depart from their parents and
creep into monasteries, and nuns cut their hair, when they vow to enter
into religious houses. finally according to the diversity of monkish sects they
observe diverse rules and precepts without warrant of holy scriptures or
ecclesiastical canons, and do many things contrary to holy scriptures.

The second council of Arles c. 23. pronounces that Priest to be sacrilegious,
that shall suffer men superstitiously to light candles, or to worship trees,
fountains, or stones: and those that worship such things are condemned as
Infidels. and yet maste-priests suffer Christians at Candlemas, and in diverse
processions to go about with candles, and great pilgrimages are made by their
followers to stocks, and stones, and wells after a paganicall fashion.

The council of Laodicea c. 35. condemns such as worship Angels, or assemble
together to honor them. and c. 36. that use exorcismes or enchantments, or
that read books in the church, that are not canonical. the same excludes the
books of Tobia, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and the Machabees out of the
canon. the which acts forasmuch as they condemn the superstitious worship of
Angels, the coniurations of Mass Priests in casting out of Devils, and the
reading of lying legendes, and the false canon of the conuenticle of Trent, are
no more regarded by Papists, then as if there never had been any such made.

The council of Constantinople c. 2. restreineth the ambition of Bishops, that
began to stretch forth their hands to the diocesses of their neighbors, and c.
5. gives the next place of dignity after the Bishop of Rome to the bishop of
Constantinople. which also was confirmed by the authority of the council of
Chalcedon. that council also adds this reason, because Constantinople was
called new Rome. but the pope neither regards the acts of this council, nor
the reasons thereof, but encrocheth upon every bishops jurisdiction, calling
himself universal bishop, and challenging his authority not from the
privilege of the city, but from Christ's institution.

The 3. council of Carthage c. 24. decrees, that nothing more be offered in
the sacrament of the Lords body and blood, then he has appointed, to wit bread
and wine mingled with water. but this overthrows the mass utterly, wherein
the Mass Priests say, they offer neither bread nor wine, but Christ's body and
blood. the same synod decrees, that the bishop of the metropolitan see shall
not be called the Prince of Priests, or chief priest, or any such title. which
overthrows the pride and arrogance of the Pope, that will needs be called
the chief Priest, the head and monarch of the church, and other far more
arrogant titles.

The forms of ordring Priests and deacons prescribed by the fathers of the
fourth council of Carthage the Popes accomplices in the synod of Florence have
quite altered. likewise have they abolished those canons of the council, that
concern his house, apparel, study, preaching. nay they account him now a
bishop sufficient, that preaches not, if he be formally greased and
apparelled. in the 100. canon women are forbidden to baptize. mulier baptizare
non praesumat. the Popes decretales contrariwise allow women to baptize.

The fist council of Carthage c. 14. reproves altars erected by vain
reuclations and dreams: and it means such, as are supposed to be made over
some martirs relics. but that is the case of many Popish altars, who are
erected for the most part upon supposall of relics, and vain dreams.

By the 4. canon of the first council of Toledo it appears, that subdeacons
married wives. the same synod condemns those, that receive the eucharist and
cat it not, and which believed Christ to have an imaginary body, such as that
is, which the Papists suppose to be in the eucharist.

The council of Mileuis, c. 22. forbids appeals to Rome. ad transmarina
qui putauerit appellandum a nullo infra Africam in communionem suscipiatur.
this canon therefore cannot stand with the Popes supremacy.

The council of Agatha c. 13. forbids Nuns to be veiled before the age
of forty years. the synagogue of Rome admits them before twenty, and few
after forty. the same council separateth the monasteries of men and women. the
Papists put them near together.

The council of Orevge pronounces them guilty of Pelagianisme, that say the
liberty of the soul remained after the fall of Adam, and that a man can do
that, which is good of himself.

The 8. canon of the council of Turon shows, that bishops had wives and
dwelt with them, although they are commanded to use them as sisters.

The 3. council of Toledo was summoned by K. Recaredus, who by his authority
proposed a form of faith which was allowed by the council. the same also
followed the form of the Eastern church. all which the synagogue of Rome now
misliketh.

In the 6. synod the Emperor presided, as appears by diverse acts of that
synod. there it was decreed c. 13. that Priests and Deacons should not be
separated from their wives. that none should fast on Sundaies or Saturdaies in
Lent. that Christ should not be painted in the similitude of a lamb; and that
the communicants should receive the sacrament with their hands. all which
canons condemn the modern practice of the synagogue of Rome.

The 2. Nicene council says, that God is not to be formed. and Act. 7. that
the cross and other images are not to be worshipped with latria. which is
direct contrary to the doctrine of Papists.

The council of Lateran under Innocent the third, mentions only two
sacraments in the chap. Firmiter. de sum. Trinit. and fid. Cath. there also
somewhat is said of penance. but the same is not reckoned there as a sacrament.

If then later councels make sometime against Papists; little are they to hope
for proof of their heresies out of the first ancient councels. the popish
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ contained really in the eucharist,
the communion under one kind, transubstantiation, the adoration of the
sacrament, the Popes supreme power in dispensing against laws, or rather in
breaking laws, the popish worship of images, Angels and Saints, and the rest
of their heresies shall never be proved out of ancient councels. but easily
may they be reproved by them.

CHAP. XVIII. That Popery is not the faith of the ancient fathers of the Church.
TO handle this point fully would require a large volume. but we will only
allege a few arguments for proof of our assertion, referring the Reader for
the rest to our larger disputes against the Papists, wherein we challenge them,
that in no one point of faith in controversy betwixt them and us they iumpe
with the fathers. and that may appear in a generality first, for that in most
points, and that of greatest difference they are destitute of fathers. as for
example where they go about to prove the book of Machabees and others not
found in Hebrew, to be equal to the books of the 4. Evangelists. that
scriptures are to be read publickely in a tongue not understood of the
hearers. that the Latin vulgar translation is more authentical, than the
original books in Hebrew and Greek. that Christ's body may be both visible
and invisible at one time, and is in many places also at once. that the body
and blood of Christ is really and carnally contained and offered for quick and
dead in the mass. that Christians not consecrating are to receive the
communion only under one kind. that in purgatory souls satisfy for temporal
pains of sins remitted. that the Pope by dispensing the merits of Saints by
indulgences is able to deliver souls from the pains of purgatory. that
charity is the form of faith, and is that grace, that makes us acceptable to
God, and diverse other doctrines of that nature.

Secondly they oftentimes acknowledge the fathers errors. Bellarmine de gratia
primi hominis c. 16. taxes Theodoret and Procopius for their opinion
concerning the cherubim set for the guard of Paradise. haec opinio, says he,
tam est inepta and ridieula etc. like wise lib. 2. de concilijs c. 8. he
reprehendeth Irenaeus, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and Oecumenius. Canus lib. 7. loc.
theol. c. 7. rehearses diverse of the fathers, and namely of those, which
believed, that Adams soul was created before his body, and that Angels were
created before the world, and that denied, that the souls of the faithful do
see God before the last judgment. generally they tax Origin for diverse
heresies and novelties, Eusebius for favoring Origin and Arius, Papias and
Irenaeus for holding the heresy of the Millenarians, Cyprian for rebaptizing
heretics, Hilary for teaching, that Christ in his passion felt not any pain,
as we may see in Lombard seut. lib. 3. did. 15. Russine for maintaining both
the errors of Origin and Pelagius. in these points therefore and such like they
follow not the fathers by their own confession.

Thirdly diverse books are published under the name of the fathers, that were
never written by them. as for example the decretales that bear the names of
the ancient Bishops of Rome, the canons of the Apostles, diverse acts of the
Nicene council, of the council of Sinuessa, Neocaesarea, Rome under
Syluester, and diverse others, the commentaries upon Job set out under the name
of Origin, certain treatises of Sion and Sina, and of the invention of S. John
Baptists head, set out under the name of Cyprian, a sermon de assumptione
beatae Mariae, set out under the name of Hierome, diverse sermons and epistles
set out under the name of Ambrose, Chrysostom and other fathers, diverse
legendes condemned by Gelasiu^ c. sancta Romana. did. 15. and some of these
the adversaries themselves deny not to be counterfeit, as does appear by the
censure of Gelasius above mentioned, of Erasmus; Caietan, Sixtus Senensis, and
other Popish writers. now they that bring forth counterret and basterdly
writings of heretics, and men unlearned, in liew of the testimonies of
fathers, must first prove, that the writings alleged by them are authentical
before they can say, that they allege fathers.

Fourthly the fathers were not all of one opinion. Chrysostom homil. 18. in
Genes. Nyssenus de creat. hommis c. 18. Hierome lib. 1. in Iouinianum and
others suppose, that if Adam had not fallen, neither woman should have been
subject unto man, nor should mankind have been propagated by marriage. but S.
Augustine lib. 14. de ciuit. dei. c. 21. and lib. 9. de Genes. ad lit. c. 3.
and Eucherius and others are of a contrary opinion. Hierome in c. 1. Eccles.
and others do hold, that Solomon repented himself of his sins. Augustine in
Psalm. 126. thinks otherwise. concerning the beginning of souls, and their
estate also after this life the fathers are divided. some think, that after
divorce the party innocent may marry, others think contrary. great difference
also there was in the beginning about the feast of Easter, the fast of
Saturday, and Lent. these therefore that allege a father or two, where the
soundest and best learned think otherwise, cannot say, that fathers make for
them.

Finally, albeit all the fathers should speak against the Pope, yet do not
the Papists value them at any thing. si totus mundus sententiaret contra Papam
etc. if all the world should give sentence against the Pope, says a canonist,
yet are we to stand to the Popes determination. commonly the Papists make as
light account of fathers, as any men, if they speak against them. Caictan in
the beginning of his commentaries upon Genesis signifies, that he goes
against the stream of the doctors in expounding scriptures. The Popes regard
them not one straw, if they talk against their triple crown, two swords, or
glorious and pompous state, as may appear by the light account made of S.
Bernardes books de consideratione ad Eugenium. all of them, if the Pope
defines otherwise, reject the fathers with great facility. Bellarmme lib. 1.
de verb. dei c. 3. declaring his opinion of the new testament departs from
the exposition of Chrysostom, Theodoret, and other fathers.

Generally in the account of the books of canonical scriptures of the old
testament, they reject the testimony of Hierome in prologo Galeato, of Ruffine
in the exposition of the Creed, of the council of Laodicea c. 59. of
Athanasius in synopsi. of Gregory Nazaanzen in his verses, of Epiphanius lib.
de ponderib. and mensuris, and diverse other fathers; and will have the books
of Tobiah, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and the Machabees to be of equal
authority with the law and the Gospel in despite of all the fathers.

Contrary also to their opinion they prefer the old Latin vulgar
translation of the bible before the Hebrew text of the old, and the Greek text
of the new testament, that is, the standing puddles before the clear
fountains of holy scriptures.

The fathers exhort Christians, the Papists dehort them from reading and
hearing scriptures read in tongues understood. Origin homil. 2. in Isaiam
wishes, that all Christians would perform that, which our Savior Christ
speaks of searching scriptures. Hierome writing upon the Coloss. c. 3. here,
says he, it is showed, that laymen ought to have the word of Christ, not only
sufficiently, but also abundantly, and that they ought to teach and admonish
one another. Ghrysostome also in his 9. homily in 1. ad Corinth. attend, says
he, as many of you, as are secular persons, and govern wife and children, how
the Apostle does command you also to read the scriptures above all, and that
not lightly and carelessly, but with great diligence.

That the Pope should be above all councels, it never entered into the fathers
thought. nay all of them have recourse in matters of doubt concerning faith,
not to the decretales of Popes, but to the determination of general councels,
next after holy scriptures.

The bishop of Rome oftentimes consulted with learned fathers concerning the
interpretation of scriptures, and no learned bishop did in time past attribute
more to the bishop of Rome, then to other bishops. the Papists therefore making
the Pope that is often blind in matters of religion supreme interpreter of
scriptures, digress from all the fathers, and have not so much seuce herein,
as little children, that know that blinde-men cannot judge of colors.

The conuenticle of Trent determining, that traditions and holy scriptures are
with equal affection to be received, digress from all the fathers, that make
not traditions, but the scriptures to be canonical, and of sacred authority.

The Papists, that say, that scriptures are not authentical to us without the
determination of the Pope, and Romish church are of an opinion contrary to all
the fathers, who derive their authority and credit from God, and not from man.

Bellarmine lib. 3. de eccles. c. 16. says, that Hierome, Apollinaris, and
Hippolytus were deceived in the exposition of the ninth chapter of Daniel
concerning the times of Antichrist.

In his 2. book de Purgatorio c. 1. he rejects the opinion of Ambrose,
Hilary, Lactantius, Hierome and Aleuinus, that teach, that as well good, as bad
need to be purged.

In the number of 7. Sacraments the conuenticle of Trent departs from the
opinion of all the fathers. for not one can be alleged, that says there are
just 7. Sacraments, and neither more, nor less. Ambrose in his books de
Sacramentis, and de initiandis in myster. mentions only two. so does Iustine
Martyr long before him in his 2. apology. S. Augustine lib. 3. de doctr.
Christ. c. 9. reckneth only the Sacrament of baptism and of the body and blood
of Christ, where he talks of sacraments. he says also, Christ left but few
and easy. but Popish sacraments are many, and hard to be performed.

The fathers no where mention spittle, salt, blowing, light and such
ceremonies, as the Pope has added to baptism.

These words this is my body, are expounded figuratively by Tertullian lib. 4.
contr. Marcion. Origin in leuit. Chrysostom homil. 46. in Joan. Augustine
contra Adimantum and lib. 3. de doctr. c. 16. and in comment. in psalm. 3. but
the Papists in this exposition forsake all the fathers.

Gregory dial. lib. 2. c. 43. wills those to depart, that communicate not. si
quis non communicet, says he, det locum. the Apostles canons do excommunicate
him, that departs before communion. the same is also confirmed by the chap.
si quis. did. 2. de consecrat. the Mass Priests therefore in the practice of
their private Masses depart from the canons of the Apostles, and all the
fathers.

Innocentius the third, lib. 4. de myster. missae c. 6. thought that Christ
consecrated without words. others believe, he consecrated by prayer. the
modern Papists reject both.

Bellarmine lib. 4. de eucharist. c. 26. makes the best proof he can for the
communion under one kind. but it appears by his silence, that the fathers are
all adverse to him.

Gelasius in the chap. comperimus. de consecrat. did. 2. condemned those of
sacrilege, that receiving one kind abstained from the cup. and Lyra in 1. Cor.
11. declares, that in the primitive Church all Christians received both kinds.

The fathers speaking of the sacrifices of Christians call them sacrifices of
praise, and spiritual sacrifices, and signify, that the eucharist is a
commemoration of Christ's only sacrifice on the cross. that is confirmed by the
testimony of Justin in dialog. cum Tryph. of Tertullian. lib. 4. contr.
Marcion. of Eusebius lib. 1. de demonstr. euangel. of Cyprian aduers. Iudaos.
c. 16. of Basil in Isaiae c. 1. and others. this is proved partly by the same
authors, and by Chrysostom in Psalm. 95. and in epist. ad Hebr. homil. 13. and
Theodoret. in epist. ad Heb. c. 8. and 10. and by diverse others amply cited by
me in my books de missa against Bellarmine. all which do show, that the
Papists bringing an external and real sacrifice of Christ's body and blood
actually offered, as they teach, by every Mass Priest into the church, are
departed quite from the doctrine of the fathers.

Canus lib. 7. loc. Theol. c. 1. confesses that all the fathers, which speak
of the Virgin Mary's conception, teach that she was conceived in original
sin, as Ambrose in Psalm. 118. ser. 6. Augustine in Psalm. 34. Chrysostom,
Eusebius Emissenus, Remigius and others. yet most of the Popes proctors
especially the Franciscans reject these fathers.

The fathers with one confent teach, that we are not to fast between Easter and
Pentecost, nor upon Sundaies, as Bellarmine de bon. oper. in part. c. 23,
consesseth. yet does he reject their authority, and all Papists do contrary.

Leo in epist. ad Rusticum Narbonensem, and all the fathers almost deny
public penance to Priests and Deacons fallen into notorious crimes. but the
popish faction regards them not one jot.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de eucharist. c. 11. says, that Augustine did not well
weigh these words of Luke, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine.

Augustine lib. 22. de ciuit. Dei c. 10. says that Christians do not worship
martyrs, or erect remples in their honor. lib. 1. de morib. eccles. c. 3. he
denies that we are to adore any ereature. Hierome also ioineth with him in
this opinion mepist. ad Riparium. but the popish sect does not regard what they
say, nor follows their doctrine.

Finally it were an easy matter to show the fathers to be adverse to popery
in all material controversies. but what shall we need to do it, seeing
their late corruptions and false allegations of fathers do plainly testify,
that they do not hope for victory, if the fathers may be truly alleged? of
late they have set out indexes expurgatory teaching Printers how to falsify
fathers. Sixtus Senensis inepist. ad Pium 5. ante biblioth. sanct. shows how
that Pope had caused the fathers to be purged, or rather corrupted. expurgari
fecisti omnium authorum catholicorum, says he, and praecipue veterum patrum
scripta. Pameluts has most shamefully corrupted Cyprian. and the like course
all Papists take with the books of the fathers lately set forth.

Sometime also they confess the corruption of fathers. Aeneas Sylu. lib. 1. de
gest. council. Basil. shows, how Popes stand upon these words, vocaberis
Cephas, and lanch into the deep, and such like, neglecting the exposition of
all the holy doctors. posthabitis omnino omnium sanctorum expositionibus. Alan
Chartier says, they reject the holy doctrine of fathers. sanct^^ patrum
doctrine reiectae and posthabitae sunt. Matthew. Paris in Wilhelmo Conquest.
speaking of Hildebrandes decree against married Priests, says, it was made
without consideration, and against the judgment of holy fathers, inconsiderato
iudicio contra sanctorum patrum sententiam.

CHAP. XIX. That Popish religion was never testified by the blood of Christian
martyrs.
STrange it were, if the martyrs of Christ should turn from Christ, and
testify for Antichrist. yet because the adversaries of truth do boast of
ancient martyrs, and Bristow in his 15. motive does place Martyrs, as setters
forth of the Popes glorious kingdom, we are briefly to show, that the
testification of Martyrs makes nothing for popish religion. and that appears
first, for that the Papists refuse to be tried by the doctrine of the
Apostles, which were principal Martyrs.

Secondly we have showed, that the principal points of Popery were neither
taught, nor received during the time of the primitive Martyrs, nor many ages
after, and that many points now taught and received among Papists, were then
refused as heresies.

Thirdly Papists adore idols and burn incense unto them. but the ancient
Martyrs were therefore martyred, and cruelly put to death, because they would
not consent to the worship of idols, nor burn incense to them.

Fourthly the practices of Papists declare, that they are more like to the
heathen Emperors, and persecutors of Christians, then to the ancient martyrs of
Christ's church. for as they massacred Christians for maintenance of the
Apostolic faith, so do the Popes and their accomplices massacre all that stand
for the same. as they by sword and fire sought to uphold idolatry; so do
these. as they hated them deadly, which taught the true faith; so do these.

Finally the confession of the faith published by Pius the fourth, and that
doctrine, which the conuenticle of Trent has of late confirmed, and commanded
to be taught and believed, is in many points contrary to the faith of ancient
martyrs, and in all points of controversy betwixt Papists and us utterly
unknown to them.

The holy Apostles commend scriptures, a nose of wax, and a killing letter.

Ancient martyrs were burned and put to death,

The Apostles and Primitive martyrs believed the scriptures, because they came
from God.

They taught neither heresy,

In ancient time the Bishops of Rome were martyrs. now those,

Ancient martyrs taught, their Lord and God.

Ancient martyrs did break down images. now the Papists erect them,

Finally ancient martyrs never believed, that either dogs or hogs could eat
Christ's body, Christ's body, or that Christians do with their teeth eat man's
flesh, or with their throats swallow man's blood, or that the bishop of Rome is
lord and monarch of the church, or that he can fetch souls out of Purgatory,
or that there is a treasure of Saints merits, out of which indulgences are
granted, or that Christians are justified by extreme unction, or eating fish,
and such like Popish devises.

Neither is it material, that these holy martyrs are put in Popish calenders.
for the Jews bragged of their father Abraham, and adorned the sepulchers of
the Prophets, although they neither abode in the faith of Abraham, nor followed
the doctrine of the Prophets.

Further, Bristow tells us, that S. Stephen helped all those, that sought
unto him. but his proofs are drawn out of legendes, and certain counterset
sermons of S. Augustine. in his 22. chapter de ciuit. dei. c. 8. there is no
such matter; and yet these reports, that are there inserted seem to be none of
S. Augustines. but suppose certain superstitious persons should pray to S.
Stephen; yet S. Stephen never taught them so to do, nor allowed such forms of
prayers.

Lastly he talks of Fisher, More, the Charterhouse monks, and diverse that
died in king Henry the 8. and the late Queens reign for the Popes cause, and
tells us, that they were of his religion. but it is first denied, that they
were martyrs, and next that Fisher, and More, were of the modern Romish
religion. the first is proved, for that they died for the Pope, and not for
Christ. Secondly they died as traitors, either by open rebellion, or by ouert
act oppugning the Princes authority. the second is evident, for that diverse of
them died before the conuenticle of Trent, which has now published a new form
of faith, and decreed many things, which then were not known nor believed as
matters of faith. these fellows therefore are liker the Martyrian heretics,
then to Christ's martyrs. and if they be honored of any, it is of rebels,
leaguers, and traitors combined with the Pope, and foreign enemies against
their Prince and country. so likewise the Circu^cellions were honored of their
consorts, as martyrs. yet Augustine epist. 58. speaking of them says, they
lived as robbers, and were honored as martyrs. viuebant vt latrones,
honorabantur vt martyrs.

CHAP. XX. That Popery is a mere humane devise, and not in any sort to be
deduced or proved out of holy scriptures.
In matters of religion we are diligently to take heed, that we pass not
beyond the commandments of God, upon whose word only all true religion is
founded. Whatsoever I command you, says Moses Deuteronomy. 12. take heed you do
it. you shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. our Savior Christ
Matthew. 15. tells us, that they worship God in vain, that teach for doctrines
men's precepts. finally the apostle Coloss. 2. condemns (...), or voluntary
worship taken up by men without warrant: and well does the old Latin
interpreter of the bible translate that word, superstition. let us then a little
consider, whether Popish religion be derived out of holy scriptures, or else
be only a pack of humane devises.

The mass, as our adversaries themselves confess, was framed at several
times, and by diverse authors. Polydore de inuentorib. lib. 5. c. 10. says, S.
Peter after consecration used only the Lords prayer, and that S. James, and S.
Basil did increase the mysteries. out of Walasridus, Platina, Naucler and
others we read, that Caelestine made the introit beginning iudica me deus,
that Damasus added the confession said by the Priest, and Gregory the
Antiphona, and Kyris eleeson, and Telesp horus Gloria in excelsis, and Gelasius
certain oraysons or clauses of oray sons, and the prayer te igitur, and
Syricius communicantes. and so we see how it was peeced by little and little.

In the consecration of the cup they have added to the words of our Savior
the words and aeterni, and mysterium fidei. Innocentius c. cum Marthae. de
celebrat. missar. says first, that they were added by the Apostles, albeit not
found in the gospel. as if it were not a simple matter to think that they did
not write, that which they thought sufficient. he says again, that they are
proved out of the words of the Gospel. but his proofs are ridiculous. for he
must show that these words were used, where they are placed: which he does not
so much as once endeavor to do.

The Masses in honor of Saints and Angels are devised by men, and that very
lately. Thomas Aquinas, as is said, devised the office said on corpus Christi
day. who devised the masses and offices said in honor of S. Francis and S.
Dominicke and other late Saints, the Papists themselves do not know.

The Psalter of our Lady, as some think, was devised by Bonauenture. her
Offices are of a latter stamp. all are mere humane devises without any ground
of scripture.

That Priests offer Christ to his father for the sins of quick and dead, nay
for sick horses and pigges, and whatsoever necessities else can be imagined,
is a devise of man, and no way to be justified by Christ's institution.

Christ instituting baptism said, baptize: and not spit, and salt, and grease,
and light candles. he said also to his Disciples being present, take and eat:
and not gape and gaze. the ceremonies therefore used in baptism, and in the
mass by Papists proceed not out of Gods word.

It is also a mere humane devise that no Priest may say Mass without water
and fire, and is prescribed, not by evangelical authority, but by the Pope in
the chap. literas tuas. de celebrat. missar.

The worship of the sacrament, and the custody thereof in a pixe depends on
the decretale Sane cum olim. de celebrat. miss. and was first brought in, and
invented by Honorius the third.

The practice of Priests in saying canonical hours comes from no canon of
scripture, but from the constitution presbyter. de celebrat. missar.

In ancient time the relics of martyrs were buried in the ground, and might
not be touched. but humane curiosity has thought it better now to dig them out
of the ground, and to place them in the altar, and to worship them, and that
without any instruction or direction of holy scriptures.

Popish litanies, wherein Papists pray to Angels and Saints, and sometime to
those which are no Saints, are diverse from the forms of prayers prescribed in
scriptures: and lately brought in by the devise of superstitious Monks,
Friars, and Mass Priests.

Benet, Francis, Dominicke and other authors of feined religions, took not
their rules from the Gospel, but thought they could frame a more perfect
religion then the Gospel.

The Popes triple crown, guard of Suizzers, crossed slipper, and such like
devises will hardly be found in the writings of the Apostles. S. Peter certes
never wore any such crown, nor had any such guard.

Where they pray to the cross in the breuiarie and say, increase
righteousness in the godly, and grant pardon to sinners, they do it of their
own head, and shall never find any such prayer in scriptures.

Boniface the eight first ordained the feast of the Iubiley, and Clement the
fifth appointed the feast of corpus Christi. but if you ask their warrant,
they will show you some other authority, than from the Apostles.

Sixtus quartus ordained the feast of our Ladies conception, and another Pope
of her assumption: but both upon false grounds, supposing that she was
conceived without sin, and that her body was taken up into heaven. they
maintain the same also by lies and apocryphal fables.

Finally it is an easy matter to show, that the forms and signs of popish
confirmation, extreme unction, and other new made sacraments are prescribed by
Popes and their adherents, without warrant of holy scripture.

CHAP. XXI. That popish religion in diverse points is directly contrary to holy
scriptures.
NEither is popery only destitute of warrant out of scriptures, but also
directly contrary in some points to holy scriptures. In the law Deuteronomy. 12. we
are expressly forbidden to add to the law of God, or to take from it. The
Papists offend both ways. for to the laws of God they add the precepts of
the Romish church and decretales of Popes, and say they bind the conscience.
they do also cut out the second commandment concerning the worship of images,
as their short catechismes and primers do testify, and by false
interpretations corrupt Gods law.

In the first commandment we are forbidden to have other Gods beside the God
of heaven and earth. but the Mass Priests, as before is declared, call the
sacrament their Lord and God, and honor the Pope as a God on earth, and give
divine honor to creatures: which is as much as if they should expresselie
command their followers to have other gods.

The law forbids us to make graven images and similitudes, to the intent to
worship them. the Pope commands his followers to make them, and to worship
them, and burns such as teach contrary.

The Apostle calls concupiscence in himself sin. the Mass Priests of
Trent deny it to be sin in the regenerate.

Our Savior in the fifth of John commanded his followers to search the
scriptures. these followers of Antichrist forbid Christians to search the
scriptures translated into vulgar tongues without license.

At his last supper after the blessing he said, take and eat. but these good
fellows say, gape and gaze on the Priest saying mass, and eat not, but
rather keep the sacrament in the pixe.

He said, do this in remembrance of me. they do it in remembrance of Angels
and Saints, and observe not that form which he prescribed.

The Apostles of Christ did receive and eat the sacrament. the false Apostles
of Antichrist command their scholars to heave it, to adore it, and to carry
it about in procession.

In the conuenticle of Constance the Popes adherents establish the communion
under one kind, and where Christ said, drink ye all of this, they say, drink
not all of this.

Christ taught his Disciples to pray to his father, and to say Pater noster.
they teach their Disciples to pray to our Lady, and to say, matter nostra, or
at least matter miscricordie.

God in the 50. Psalm says, inuoca me, call upon me. and the Apostle 1. Tim.
2. shows, that there is but one only mediator betwixt God and man. they
teach us to call upon Saints, and say they are our intercessours.

When S. John Apocalypse. 22. would have worshipped the Angel, he said to him,
see thou do it not. these say, see thou do it.

The Apostle 1. Cor. 14. commands him that speaks in a strange tongue, or
that is not understood to keep silence in the Church. he adds, that prayers
in a strange tongue, or without vnderstanning are without fruit. but the
Romanists contrary do enioine their Priests to read scriptures, and to say
service in Latin, which of the vulgar sort is not understood. Coster in his
Enchir c. de precibus latin recitandis says, that he that prays in Lattin,
albeit he understand not what he prays, receives fruit by his prayer. hune
tertium fructum (orationis) non minus percipit, says he, qui non intellecta
ase lingua precatur, quam qui verborum intelligentiam assequitur.

S. Paul 2. Tim. 3. teaches us, that scriptures are able to make the man of
God perfect. Bellarmine lib. 4. de verbo Dei, says, they are imperfect, and
insufficient without traditions.

The Apostle Hebr. 1. says God spoke by the Prophets. and this is to be
understood, when the holy Prophets delivered scriptures to Gods people. Staple
ton de author. eccles. in diverse places denies, that God speaks in
scriptures. and his meaning is, that he speaks in the Pope.

Both Prophets and Apostles teach, that the just shall live by faith. but the
Mass Priests say faith of it self is dead, and that the life and form
thereof is charity.

The Scripture says, it is better to marry than to burn. the Papists teach
that it is better to burn with lust then to marry after the vow made of
single life.

The Apostle 1. Tim. 3. will have a bishop chosen, that is the hush and of one
wise. and Hebr. 13. says, that marriage is honorable among all. the Papists
admit no married men living with their wives to be bishops, and count marriage
in Priests pollution.

The Apostle says, the law is the ministration of death, and that by the
works of the law no flesh is justified. the Massepriests teach their
followers, to seek for life in the law, and by the works thereof say, that
all the faithful are to be justified.

Finally, popery in effect is nothing else but a contradiction in most things
to the words of holy scripture.

CHAP. XXII. That the founders and defenders of popery do most wickedly abuse
holy scriptures.
ALl which notwithstanding, the Papists for proof of their false doctrines do
allege scriptures; but yet so, as any man may see, if he be not wilfully
blind, that they wickedly abuse scriptures, and wrest them contrary to their
true sense and meaning. Auentinus lib. 7. annal. Boior. speaking of Gregory the
seventh, says, he forced the scriptures to serve his purpose by false
interpretations. diuinas scripturas falso interpretando s^^e causae seruire
coegit. and Aeneas Syluius lib. 1. de gest. council. Basil. speaking of other
Popes says, they expound the words of Christ, not as the meaning of the holy
ghost requires, but according to their own humor. verba Christi, non prout
sensus sancti spiritus exposcit, sed suopte ingenio interpretantur. so in times
past false teachers, as S. Peter testifies, 2. Pet. 3. perverted scriptures to
their own destruction. and I would to God, that it were to their own
destruction only. but helas! such seducers destroy both themselves and their
credulous followers.

Innocentius 3. c. solitae. de mayor. and obed. expounds these words Hieremy
1. behold I have placed thee over nations and kingdoms: of the Pope, as if the
holy Ghost had appointed him over Nations and kingdoms, and made him superior
to the emperor; whereas he seems rather to be appointed by the devil then
the holy Ghost.

Likewise these words Genes. 1. God made two great lights in the firmament of
heaven, the greater to rule the day, the lesser to rule the night: he supposes
to be meant of the Pope and Emperor, as if the Pope were the great light ruling
by day, and the Emperor the less light ruling by night.

In the chapter nouit de iudicijs. he does understand these words Deuteronomy. 1. thou
shall judge the great, as the small; neither shall thou accept any man's person:
of the Pope, and of kings, as if by the law of God the Pope were made judge of
kings, and were as well to ouerrule them, as the most contemptible Mass Priest
of his own rascal retinue.

Again where we read 1. cor. 5: that the servant stands or falls to his
own master, he concludes in the chapt. nimis. de iureiurando, that laymen
are not to compel clerks to take oaths before them, as if all clerks were
the Popes slaves, and to fall down before him, and to serve him.

Clement the fifth. c. si dominum. de reliq. and venerat. sanct. out of these
words, praise God in his Saints, concludes, that we are to keep the feast of
Corpus Christi day.

Boniface the 8. extr. de mayor. and obed. c. vnam sanctam. concludes, that
the Pope is above all men, because we read Genes. 1. that in the beginning, and
not in the beginnings, God made heaven and earth. as if the Pope were the
beginning mentioned in that place.

Likewise of these words 1. Cor. 2. the spiritual man judges all, and is
judged of none: he concludes very wisely, that the Pope is judge of all men,
and not to be judged of any.

Again where we read in the Gospel, behold here are two swords: he presumes
the meaning of those words to be, that the Pope has two swords. he does also
in the same place abuse the words of God Hierem. 1. ecce constitut te hodie
super gentes and regna, in the same manner that Innocentius did, as is showed
before.

In the chapt. per venerabilem. qui filij sunt legitimi. Innocentius concludes
that Deuteronomy is to be observed of Christans, because Deuteronomium
imports as much, as the second law.

By the place which the Lord has chosen, spoken of Deuteronomy. 17. he understands
the Popes see. locus quem elegit dominus Apostolicasedes esse cognoscitur,
says he.

By the priests of the stock of Leui he understands the Cardinals. his words
are these, sunt sacerdotes leuitic^ generis fratres nostri.

Vocaberis Cephas, id est, caput. thou shall be called Cephas, that is, a head,
says Anacletus in a certain decretale epistle. and c. sacrosancta, did. 22.

Suscitabo super eos pastorem vnum, says God by his prophet Ezech. c. 34. that
is, I will set over them a shepherd. and he prophecieth of Christ. but
Turrecremata lib. 2. sum. c. 2. applies these words to the Pope.

The priest sprinkling himself and the altar with holy water, as is contained
in the missale in the consecration of holy water, says, thou shall sprinkle me
o Lord with hysope, and I shall be clean, as if the Prophet had prophesied of
holy water.

When a church is consecrated the Bishop without says, attollite principes
portas vestras, and then answers a certain quidamet fellow within, quis est
ille rex gloriae? and then out steppeth a fellow with a mitre, and says, I am
the king of glory. thus do they play with the words of holy scripture, and
blasphemously apply the words spoken of Christ to a mumming Mass Priest.

Alexander the third, treading upon the Emperors neck uttered these words of
the 91. Psalm to his disgrace, thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe: and
Boniface the eigth, for these words, remember man that thou art dust, said to
the bishop of Genua, remember man thou art Gibelline, and with them thou shall
be beaten to dust.

The canonists in the chapter translato. c. de constitutionibus, believe, that
the Pope has power to make laws, because the Apostle says translato
sacerdotio, necesse est vt legis translatio siat. but in these words the
Apostle speaks not of the Pope, but of Christ and his priesthood.

Turrecremata lib. 1. sum. c. 90. finding these words 2. King. 7. I will
establish the seat of his kingdom for ever: imagines, that this prophecy
shows, how the Popes kingdom shall endure for ever. and lib. 2. sum. c. 80.
by the faithful servant set over the whole family, Luke 22. he understands
the Pope, which as he says, is set over the whole Church. and lib. 1. c. 8.
expounding these words Apocalypse. 4. seeds posita est in coelo, and supra sedem
sedens, and in circuitu eius sedil (...) 24. and super thronos 24. seniores. by
the seat he understands the Popes see, and by heaven the church of Rome, and
by him that sat upon the seat, the Pope; and by the 24. elders, the Cardinals.

Isay 40. we read quis appendit tribus digitis molem terrae: and by these
words Hosites confess. Petricou. c. 10. supposes to be meant, that the sign
of the cross is to be made with three singers.

Bellarmine in his preface unto his book de Pontif. Romans does wrest the words
of scripture spoken of Christ the corner stone laid in the foundation of the
Church, and draws them most impudently to the Pope.

These words of the Prophet, adducentur regi virgins post eam, which are meant
of the church, the synagogue of Rome in their missal upon the feast of S.
Catherine wrest so, as if they had been meant of her.

On the feast of Clement, in their missall they apply these words, thou art a
Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, to Clement.

On the feast of Cecilia likewise in the missall these words, audi filia and
vide, and inclina aurem tuam etc. which are spoken of the church, they apply
to Cecilia.

These words, ego ex ore altissims prodiui, primogenita ante omnem creatur^^^,
they apply in their breuiaries to the Virgin Mary, as if she were the first
borne before all creatures.

Thus it were an easy matter to bring infinite examples out of the books of
our adversaries, and to make it apparent, that they make no conscience of
wresting scriptures. but these are sufficient for this first taste.

CHAP. XXIII. That the Pope and the principal proctours of his cause are great
forgers and falsifiers of fathers, profane writers, and of public records.
Seeing then they make so little scruple to wrest the words of holy scriptures,
we may not think, that our adversaries will be scrupulous in falsifying
either public records, or the writings of the fathers and other authors. for
first we find diverse counterfeit writings avouched by them, which were never
written by those, who are pretended to be the authors. under the names of the
Apostles they have set forth canons, which contain diverse errors. in the 46.
canon they condemn the baptism of heretics. in the 84. canon Ezdras and
Nehemias is omitted, and Clements epistles put among canonical scriptures. Leo
c. Clementis. did. 16. and Isidore c. canones. in the same distinction, and
Gelasius. c. sancta Romana. did. 15. do reckon them among apocryphal
writings; which they would not do, unless they were counterfeit.

2. They have also falsified the acts of councels. of the acts of the council
of Sinuessa, Peter Crabbe sets out 3. copies never a one agreeing with the
other. the style is so simple, that it can no way agree with the form of
speech of those times. the like falsitie is committed in the acts of the
council of Rome supposed to be assembled under Syluester.

Russine reports only 20. canons made in the council of Nice, and Stephen
bishop of Rome c. viginti. did. 16. confirms his saying. but Gratian under
color of the authority of Athanasius says there are 70. as appears by the
chap. septuagint. did. 16. now one Alphonsus of Pisa a Iebusite, has
published 80. canons of that council translates, as he says, out of Arabicke.

In the sixth council of Carthage, Sozimus bishop of Rome was convicted
manifestly to have falsified a canon of the Nicene council concerning appeals
to the bishop of Rome.

Paschasius one of the Popes agents in the 16. action of the Council of
Chalcedon thrust in a piece of counterfeit stuff into a canon of the council
of Nice, as if that council had said, that the church of Rome had always the
primacie. this he did, or at the least some under his name, as appears in the
acts of that council.

Likewise Bellarmine lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans foisteth in the same words into
the sixth canon of the Nicene council. but he may be convinced of falsitie by
the testimony of all ancient copies, and of Russine, and all that record the
canons of Nice in their histories.

Pius the fist in certain letters of his to the emperor Maximilian recorded in
his life written by Hierome Catena, alleges a false canon of the council of
Nice, to prove, that the Pope is governor of all Christian Princes.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de cult. sanct. c. 19. does falsify the 7. canon of the
sixth synod to prove the invocation of saints. and this falsification is also
committed by those, that have lately published the acts of councels. but they
may be convinced by the original copies in Greek, and by all ancient
editions of that council in Latin.

In the 35. canon of the council of Laodisea, Surius and Carrauza in their
editions of the decrees and acts of councels for angelos write angulos, least
it should appear, that the worship of angels is condemned by that council as
idolatrous. but this gross falsehood is discovered by Theodoret in Coloss. 2.
and Chrysostomes homilies upon the same epistle, and confessed by Bellarmine
lib. 1. de cultu sanct. c. 20.

In the chapter renouantes. did. 22. the 36. canon of the 6. synod is
notoriously falsified. for there it is ordered that the church of Constantinople
shall not be magnified as Rome, directly contrary to the sixth synodes meaning,
and contrary to the acts of the council of Constantinople and Chalcedon.

Gratian has corrupted the 22. canon of the council of Mileuis, adding these
words, nisi forte sedem Romanam appellauerit, whereas expressly that council
forbad priests and deacons to appeal beyond the seas. this appears by the
chap. placuit. 2. q. 6.

The donation of Constantine is confessed to be counterfeit by Cusanus, Valla,
and diverse papists; yet still maintained by Gregory the 13. in his new
correction and edition of the canon law.

The constitution also of Ludouicus did. 63. c. ego Ludouicus, is manifestly
forged, as may appear by the contradiction of the copies of Gratian, and
Volaterran Geograph. l. 3. and for that it contradicts the histories of those
times.

The Popes agents have also counterfeited two epistles under the name of
Justinian and John bishop of Rome, and thrust them into the code C. de sum.
trin. and fid. cath. l. inter claras. Alciat. parerg. lib. 5. c. 23.
testifies, they are not found in ancient copies. and the contradictions and
notorious falsities declare them to have been devised of purpose for the
advancement of the church of Rome.

Alexander the 3. upon color of some counterfeit grants, does in his registre
affirm, that the kingdom of England from the first time the same was
converted to Christianity, was under the defense and subjection of the prince
of the Apostles. and that which belonged to him the Popes do now challenge as
their own proper right.

Boniface the 9. as Theodoric a Niem lib. 2. de schism. c. 6. does testify,
would antedate any grant of his for money. vendidit prioritates datarum plus
offerentibus: which is a notorious trick of falsehood.

Bellarmine lib. 3. de bonis operib. in part. c. 11. does confess, that the
epistle of Clement to James is counterfeit, and did he not confess it, yet may
the same be proved by most evident arguments.

The decretall epistles set out under the names of ancient bishops of Rome
before Syluester are most shamefully forged. the style, and repugnancie, which
they carry with the state of things in those times do plainly convince them to
be such. Contius also in his annotations in c. septuagint. did. 16. does
confess it, and says he has proved it.

Bellarmine lib. de monach. c. 40. acknowledges, that the epistle of Anicetus
concerning shauing of crowns, is not undoubtedly authentical. he might as
well have said, plainly forged.

Melchiades 12. q. 1. c. futuram. tells how Constantine was Christened, and
gave his seat and other great possessions to the church of Rome. yet it cannot
be denied, but that Melchiades was dead before the time of Constantines
Christening.

Under the name of Clement they have published certain constitutions, which
they call Apostolical. yet Gelasius does account them apocryphal. under his
name also pass certain counterfeit recognitions.

The books of Tertullian and Origin are often cited. yet does Gelasius note
them as corrupted. the commentaries upon Job set out under the name of Origan
were written by an Arian heretic.

Diverse treatises set out under the names of Abdias, Prochorus, Martialis,
Africanus, Egesippus, Amphilochius, and other ancient fathers, were never
written by the authors, whose names they bear. yet are they commonly alleged
by our adversaries.

Under the names of Cyprian, Hierome, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Basil, Nazianzen,
Augustine, and other fathers, the Papists have published diverse commentaries,
treatises, sermons, epistles, prayers, and fragments most unworthy their piety,
and learning. Bellarmine de bonis operib. in party. lib. 2. c. 15. confesses
that the sermons d^ tempore, that go under S. Augustines name were collected
by a later author. the sermons ad Eromitas, are taxed by Paulus Langius in
Chronico Citizensi, and by Hilgerius. his Manual sauoreth of Pelagianisme. his
meditations in some editions are ascribed to Anselmus. Bellarmine lib. 2. de
missa c. 16. rejects certain epistles, that go under the name of Hierome
and Damasus, as foolish. and certes very foolish he must needs be, that
allows all the books, set out under the names of these fathers, as
authentical.

In their expurgatory indexes they put out, and put in what they please in the
books of diverse authors. Sixtus Senensis in epist. ad Pium 5. ante biblioth.
sanct. says, he caused the writings of fathers to be purged. Bertram is
shamefully mangled, and visibiliter changed into inuisibiliter. Posseuin in his
book entitled selecta bibliotheca, shows how Hermes, Melito, Cabasilas,
Anastasius and other authors are to be corrupted. for so we must say rather
then corrected.

The writings of the fathers they allege most falsely. Bellarm. lib. 1. de
sanct. beat. c. 13. corrupts a place out of Eusebius de praeparat. euangel.
lib. 13. and another out of Eusebius de praeparat. euangel. lib. 13. and
another out of Euscbius his history lib. 4. c. 14. and infinite places out of
Origin, Tertullian, Hilary, Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom, and other fathers,
as I have particularly declared in my answers to his most corrupt allegations.

Adrian the Pope in his epistle alleged in the 2. synod of Nice cites these
words as out of Basil. deiparam virginem, sanctos Prophetas, Apostolos and
martyrs suscipio, qui pro me apud deu^ supplicant etc. which words are no
where found in Basil. Nay the term of Deipara was first by act of the Ephesine
Council devised to meet with the heresy of Nestorius, which was celebrated
long after Basils time.

To prove that the Popes decretale epistles are to be reckoned among
canonical scriptures, Gratian c. in canonicis. did. 19. does falsify S.
Augustine.

In our country the Papists have falsified a statute anno 2. Henrici 4. c. 15.
by adding these words, ac etiam communitates dictiregni, thereby to authorize
their cruel burning of Christians, as by statute, whereas in the original
roll no such words are to be found. so it appears, that all the cruel
executions of Christians in Queen Mary's time were contrary to law. he that
looks into the original record in the tower shall find this most true.

We may therefore say of our adversaries that, which Hierome in symbolum
Russini says of men of their quality. peruersi homines ad assertionem dogmatum
suorum sub virorum sanctorum nomine interseruerunt ea, quae illi nunquam
scripserunt: nonnulli Hiberas naenias libris authenticis praeferunt. perverse
men for proof of their opinions, have interlaced, under the names of holy men,
things which they never wrote. and some prefer idle fables before
authentical books.

May we think them then honest men, which practice such falsitie?

CHAP. XXIIII. That Popery stands much upon heathenish obseruances and
customs.
CHristian religion intends the overthrow of heathenish impiety and
idolatry. Yet such is the craft of Satan, that by the ministry of the Pope he
has established many heathenish customs under color of Christian religion.
for first as the laws of heathen nations were partly written, and partly
unwritten, so our adversaries have one word of God written, and another
unwritten, and as we read sess. 4. council. Trid. do esteem both with equal
affection. but the Apostle teaches us, that the scriptures are able, to make
us wise unto salvation, and Ireney lib. 3. c. 1. says the scriptures are the
pillar and foundation of our faith, neque hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet,
sed Dei veritatem, says Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. that is, we are not to
follow men's customs, but Gods truth. our church says Saluianus lib. 5. de
provident. des, is more happily founded upon the scriptures only. videtur
nostrae ecclesia ex vna seripturafelicius instituta.

Secondly the schoolmen build their opinions as well upon Aristotle and other
Philosophers, and their authority, as upon the Prophets and Apostles. Bernard
of Luzemburg in catal. haeret. shows how the doctors of Colein defined, that
Aristotle was the forerunner of Christ in naturalibus, as John Baptist was his
forerunner in diuinis. writing upon the first book of Lombards sentences did.
3. they seek out the distinction of the 3. persons in the Trinity by
similitudes drawn out of Philosophy. by the same also they hope to find out
the eternal generation of the son of God, albeit the Prophet do declare it
to be menarrable. and the like they attempt in disputing of the proceeding of
the holy Ghost.

Gratian in the chap. decretis. did. 21. talking of diverse orders and degrees
in the Romish hierarchy, confesses that this difference was diduced from the
gentiles. horum discretio, says he, a gentilibus maxim introducta est, qui
suos flamines, alios simpliciter flamines, alios archislamines, alios
protoslamines appellabant.

Gregory the first writing to Mellitus, as we may read in Bid lib. 1. hist.
Angl. c. 30. permitted the English to build boothes in the day of the
dedication of their churches, and to kill oxen for the praise of God: which
were customs of pagans serving idols.

Boniface the 4. consecrated the Church called Pantheon, wherein Cybele, and
all heathen Gods were worshipped, to our Lady and all Saints, as is testified
by Platina, John di Pineda and others. this shows that the worship of Saints
is succeeded in liew of the worship of Idols and heathen Gods.

Baruch c. 6. speaking of the Priests of the gentiles, says, they have their
heads and beards shaven. from them therefore came the Popish shauing of their
Priests heads and beards.

From them also the Papists borow the scourging themselves before the cross
and other images. for before their idols the Priests of Baal did lance
themselves. the Priests of Cybele did also whip themselves as, Apuleius
testifies.

The gentiles did keep secret the mysteries of their religion. so do the
Papists likewise, uttering the canon of the Mass in a low voice, lest the
people should hear it, and reading the scriptures in unknown and strange
languages. and they yield this reason, lest holy things should be cast to
dogs.

The best ground, that Bellarmine lays for proof of the Popes monarchy is,
for that the gentiles thought that form of government best. but God in
disposing of matters of ecclesiastical government boroweth no precedents from
the gentiles.

Thomas Aquinas p. 3. q. 59. art. 1. by a Philosophical argument drawn from
the similitude between our sprituall and corporal life, proves the number of
his seven sacraments.

By Philosophy also the Popes agents prove, that one body may be in many places
at once, and yet sill no place. out of holy scripture certes they are not able
to derive any proof for it.

The worship of Saints is a mere trick of Gentilisme. for as the Gentiles had
one principal god, and diverse demie and inferior gods, so have the Papists.
Ambrose in chap. 1. ad Romans says the gentiles used the mediation of others to
God, as men use to come to princes by tribunes and hushiers. so likewise do
the papists. they gave the honor of God to creatures, honorem nominis Dei
deferunt creaturae. so likewise do Papists.

Likewise the worship of images is a mere invention of Pagans. in the book of
Wisdom c. 14. they are called idols of the nations. this is plainly declared
by Athanasius in his treatise against idolatry, and Cyprian de idolorum
vanitate. Ambrose in Psalm. 118. ser. 10. says, gentiles did worship wood,
because they thought it to be the image of God. gentes lignum adorant, quia dei
imaginem putant. so likewise Papists worship images, not because of the matter,
but because they represent the image of God. and in his commentaries upon the
first chapter to the Romans, he says the gentiles changed the glory of God
into the likeness of men, so that the form of a corruptible man is by them
called God. and so likewise Papists call the image of God, God; and the image
of Christ, Christ; and change the glory of the incorruptible God into the
likeness of man.

At Rome the temple of Romulus and Remus is now turned into the church of S.
Cosmas and Damianus. The temple of Faunus into the church of S. Stephen, and at
Loreto the church of Juno Cupra into the chapel of our Lady of Loreto.
Gregory in his dialogues lib. 2. c. 8. shows, that Benet in stead of Apollo
substituted S. Martin in the castle of Cassinum, and that he erected an altar
to S. John in the place, where an altar stood dedicated to Apollo. nay so little
difference there is between paganism and popery, that the image of Inpiter in
brass does now serve in S. Peter's church at Rome for the image of S. Peter, as
every one may see, and their antiquaries dissemble not.

The Gentiles did deifie their Emperors and benefactors, and erect temples and
altars in their honor. And what do Papists? do not they canonize their
Popes, and do not Popes canonize Saints? and do they not erect temples and
altars to Saints? they will not deny it. but S. Augustine lib. 22. de ciuit.
Dei. c. 10. shows, that Christians built no temples nor altars to martyrs, as
gods. nos, says he, martyribus nostris non templa sicut dys, sed memorias
sicut hominibus etc. fabricamus. nec ibi erigimus altaria.

Heathen nations, as Tertullian shows us, did so dispose of God, that they
assigned the chief Empire to one, and distributed his offices and duties to
many. diuinitatem sic disponebant, us imperium summ^^ dominationis penes vnum,
offieia eius penes multos esse vellent. so the Papists acknowledging one God in
terms, do assign the parts of his government to many Saints, making our
Lady chief of all, as may appear by their practice, and by the express words
of Horatius Tursellinus before rehearsed. to S. George they assign the charge
for the wars, to S. Antony the custody of swine, to S. Apollonia the cure of
the toothach, to S. Roch and S. Sebastian the remedy against the plague, to S.
Fiacre the healing of quartan agues, to S. Margaret the charge of women in
travel of childbirth, to S. Jews the government of horses.

Eusebius hist. eccles. lib. 7. c. 17. shows, that ancient Christians, after
the custom of the Gentiles, kept the images of those with them, of whom they
had received benefits.

In the Mass also diverse tricks are borrowed from the Gentiles. they did
offer for the dead, and so likewise do the Papists. Polydore lib. 6. de
inuentorib. c. 9. proves the yearly sacrifice for the dead out of Macrobius
and Cato. and c. 10. the 9. days sacrifice out of Horace. fichat sacrificium
pro mortuis, says he, nono die. from thence also he fetches mourning and
mourning blackes.

The use of burning incense, says Polydore lib. 5. de inuentorib. c. 10. came
from the heathen. apud nos Leo tertius idem fires sanxit, says he, quod etiam
ab Ethnicis seruabatur. then he brings Virgiles testimony for burning incense.

From the heathen the Priests also take their washing of hands at Mass. ab
Ethnicis sumptum est, says Polydore, apud quos sacrificantes primum omnium n^
uius lausabant.

Likewise of them they borrow their skippings and turnings. for as Apuleius
says, the Priests turned about, sprinkling the blood of the sacrifice.

The clause of the mass, as appears by the testimony of Apuleius lib. 11. of
the golden ass cited by Polydore de inuentoribus lib. 5. c. 11. came from the
Gentiles. for as the Priest said there, (...), so the Priest says here, ite
missa est.

The consecrating of images Durand deriueth from the example of Nabuchodonosor,
that called all his Princes to the dedication of the golden image. as we read
rational. divine. lib. 1. c. 6.

The gentiles did not sacrifice without fire and water. no more do Mass
priests, as appears by the chapter literas tuas. de celebrat. miss.

In their prayers the Mass Priests turn themselves to the East. and this
custom Polydore lib. 5. de invent. c. 9. does prove to have been borrowed
from the gentiles. for God forbad his people to pray toward the East.

The Mass Priests carry about their corpus Domini upon a hackney, when the
Pope goes in progress. so likewise did the Priests of Isis carry the image of
their goddess about with them, and the Chaldeans the fire, which they
worshipped as God.

Choul in his book of the religion of the Romans confesses, that tunicles,
albes, and the pomp and ceremonies of the Mass have been taken from the
Egyptians and Gentiles.

That Purgatory came from the Gentiles it cannot be denied. Virgil Aenead. 6.
does testify so much. ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum, says he,
supplicia expendunt.

So likewise the Papists suppose that souls are there purged for their sins.
likewise from them they borrow their purgation by holy water, as is signified
by Polydore de inuentoribus lib. 6. c. 1.

As the Gentiles believed, that every one had his good and bad genius, so the
Papists assign to every Christian a good and bad Angel.

The Gentiles allowed no married Priests, as Hierome. lib. 1. contra Iouin.
does testify. the same practice have Papists used concerning their Priests.

The 2. council of Arles c. 23. shows it to be a custom of Pagans, to
worship trees, or stones, or founteines. yet our English Papists cease not to
go on pilgrimage to S. Winifrides well, nor to worship stocks and stones.

How then can the Papists call themselves Christians, that have in fresh
practice so many heathen customs?

CHAP. XXV. That popery borrows also diverse fashions from the Jews.
What they have not from the Gentiles, that for the most part of their
ceremonies is borrowed from the Jews. from them also I have showed how they
have borrowed diverse heresies. with the Pharisees they boast in the law, and
are more curious in observing their own traditions, than the law of God.

With the Hemerobaptists they sprinkle themselves continually with holy water.
with the same they consecrate their clergy, as the Levites were consecrated
Numbr. 8. by the law of Moses. they do also borrow their shauing at the time
of their ordination from the law. God speaking of the consecration of Levites,
aspergantur aqua lustrationis, says he, and radant omnes pilos carnis suae.

Innocentius the third in the chapter per venerabilem, proves the supreme
authority of the Pope, and of his see, out of the words of the law Deuteronomy. 17.
thence also he proves his Cardinals. nay to show himself more Jewish, he
tieth Christians to the observance of the ceremonial laws of Moses contained
in Deuteronomy.

In the chapt. cleros. did. 21. they endeavor to prove the seven orders of
their clergy, and their several functions from the Leuiticall law.

The burning of incense at the altar Polydore lib. 5. de inuentorib. c. 10.
shows to have been borrowed from the example of Aaron. quod thus adoletur ad
altar, id primus fecit Aaron, says he.

The Jews began their feasts with washing of hands. and from thence does
Polydore think, that the washings of mass priests at the altar are derived.

As the Jews adorned the tombs of the Prophets, so do Papists adorn the
tombs of their martyrs hoping to be relieved by them.

Durandus rational. divine. lib. 1. c. 6. deriueth the consecration of Churches,
altars, and vessels, and the greasing of them from the law of Moses. and this
is also proved by the chap. tabernaculum. de consecrat. did. 1.

The apparel of Priests is transsiumpted from the Jewish ceremonial law, as
Durandus witnesses lib. 3. rat. divine. c. 1. sacrae vestes, says he, a veteri
lege videntur assumptae. praecepit enim Dominus Mosi etc. and again, noster
Pontifex plura, quam octo induit vestimenta, quamuis Aaron non nisi octo
habuisse legatur, quibus moderna succedunt.

From thence also the Mass Priests have borrowed their altars, sacrifices and
priesthood. for in the Gospel we find none of these things instituted, as
they use them.

Alexander the first did institute the consecration of holy water in imitation
of the aspersion of the ashes of the red cow.

The burning of incense by Durand. rat. lib. 4. c. 8. is drawn from the manner
of the Priests of the law, and out of the 30. chapter of Exodus.

The salutation, Dominus vobiscum, is borrowed from Boos Ruth. 2. who with like
words saluted his reapers. as if the Mass were only to be said in harvest
time, and among mowers and reapers.

The feasts instituted in the dedication of churches are derived from the first
of Machabees c. 4. because the Jews did keep holy the day of the dedication
of the temple.

Durand. rat. divine. lib. 6. c. 6. proves the four ember fasts by the example
of the Jews. nam and Iudaei, says he, quater in anno ieiunabant. and he
alleges a brave reason for it, viz. for that the four elements of the body
being corrupted, by these four fasts may be purged.

In the later end of the missale the Papists show, how the paschale lamb is to
be consecrated; which is is a ceremony sauouring of the relics of the
Leuiticall law not yet sufficiently purged out of popery.

The heauing and lifting of the sacrifice the mass priests borrow from the
ceremonial law, wherein a heave offering was prescribed. and from thence also
comes the swinging of the chalice about the priests head.

Garret from the testimony of Auerroes and other Rabbines goes about to
prove the popish real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament.
Robert Parsons in his book of 3. conuersions endeavors to prove prayers for
the dead by the corrupt custom of the Jews.

Finally it were an easy matter to show, that many other popish cymbales and
ceremonies are drawn partly from the Gentiles, and partly from the Jews. but
by this, which I have already brought, it appears sufficiently, that Popish
religion is either grossly heathenish, or ceremoniously Jewish, or at the
least corruptly and stiffely heretical.

CHAP. XXVI. That Popish religion is full of contradictions, and contrary
opinions.
AS truth is always consonant to it self, so in falsehood there is much
iarring and contradiction to specify this matter by examples, we need to seek
no further, then in the corrupt and false religion and doctrine of Papists.
for notwithstanding their crackes and bragges of unity, hardly shall you name
any point of doctrine, wherein the chief founders and defenders of Popery hold
not singular opinions, and vary one from another. nay whosoever has leisure
to peruse the whole corpse of their doctrine, shall find, that it contains
strange pieces and points one contradicting another. In the article of the
Trinity, wherein we agree with the common doctrine of Papists, they are so
curious and contentious, that they agree not, almost in any point among
themselves.

First they contend about the distinction of the divine attributes, whether it
be real, or formal, or imaginary, or rationis. Dionysius Richel in lib. 1.
sent. did. 2. says, that this is one of the chief difficulties of divines,
and that about it there is great dissension, and contention. he tells
further, how Aegidius does herein lance Thomas, and others run upon both.

Aegidius in lib. 1. sentent. did. 2. would have the persons of the Trinity
distinguished by a certeiue thing in one, that is not in another: which
displeases the rest of his consorts.

Most of the schoolmen deny the examples and similitudes of the master of
sentences lib. sent. 1. did. 3. brought to illustrate the unity of the
essence and Trinity of the persons: and that, which one affirms, another
misliketh.

Bonauenture says, that a man may atteine to the knowledge of the holy
Trinity by the light of reason. others say contrary.

The Scotistes lib. 1. sent. did. 5. inueigh against Henricus de Gandauo for
his singular opinion about the eternal generation of the son of God.

Aegidius holds, that the son of God is able to beget another son: which
displeases Thomas and Bonauenture, and is very strange divinity.

Thomas Aquinas 1. q. 32. art. 4. holds, that doctors may hold contrary
opinions, cire a notiones in diuinis. he teaches also, that the holy Ghost
does more principally proceed from the father, then from the son: which
others mislike.

If then they agree not about the doctrine of the holy Trinity, what little
hope can we conceive, that they will better accord in other matters? Durand
denies Theology to be scientia. Thomas and Richard hold that it is.

About the words vti, and frui, there is great variety of opinions, some
dissenting from their master, others one from another, as their disputes in 1.
sent. did. 1. do testify.

Pighius lib. 1. de eccles. hierach. c. 2. says, that Scriptures are not above
our faith, but subject unto it. Stapleton lib. doct. princip. 12. c. 15.
teaches, that the church and scriptures are of equal authority.

Eckius in enchirid. loc. com. c. de ecclesia, determines, that the Scriptures
are not authentical without the authority of the church. Bellarmine thought
best to pass over this question without resolution.

Nicholas Lyra, Hugo de S. Victore, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo cardinalis,
Thomas de vio and Sixtus Senensis lib. 1. biblioth. S. reject the last seven
chapters of the book of Hester, as not canonical Scriptures. the conuenticle
of Trent, and most popish doctors of later times hold them to be canonical.

John Driedo lib. 1. de scriptur. and ecclesiast. dogm. denies the book of
Baruch to be canonical scripture. Bellarmine lib. 1. de verb. Dei, and most of
his sellowes be of a contrary opinion.

Caietan and Erasmus in their Commentaries upon the Epistles to the Hebrews,
of James, Jude, the second of Peter and the 2. and the third of John do
dissent from the rest of their fellows, and that partly concerning the
authors, and partly concerning the authority of those epistles.

James bishop of Christopolis in praefat. in Psalm. and Canus lib. 2. loc.
theolog. c. 13. affirm, that the Jews have depraved, and corrupted the
original text of the old restament: an opinion false and blasphemous, and
therefore contradicted by Bellar. lib. 2. de verb. dei. and by diverse of his
consorts.

Sanctes Pagnmus in Praefat. interpret. suae biblior. and Paulus bishop of Foro
Sempronio lib. 2. c. 1. de die passionis domini, deny, that the vulgar Latin
translation of the Bible was made by Hierome. Austen of Eugubium and Picus
Mirandula hold contrary. Bellarmine and D^sedo say, that it is part his, and
part others.

Alexander Hales and Durand hold, that the divine attributes are not
distinguished, but in respect unto creatures. Henricus and Albertus in 1. sent.
did. 2. hold contrary.

Richardus in 1. sent. did. 3. holds, that the mystery of the Trinity may
be demonstrated by natural reasons. Scotus, Maronis and Thomas affirm the
contrary.

About the faculties of the soul called potentiae the schoolmen are divided
into three sects, as may appear by their disputes lib. 1. sent. did. 3. some
hold, they are all one with the substance of the soul; others that they are
accidents; the third, that they are between substances and accidents.

Abbot Ioachim, and Richard de sancto victore taught, that the divine essence
might generare and gigni. the contrary is taught by Peter Lombard and his
followers.

Peter Lombard lib. sent. 1. did. 17. taught, that charity, wherewith we love
God, and our neighbor, is the holy ghost, and that it is not any thing
created. but now most of his followers in this point forsake him.

In the 24. did. of his first book of sentences Peter Lombard says, that the
words of number spoken of God are spoken only relaturely, and that the word
Trinity implies nothing positiuely, but only priuatiuely; which because it
overthrows the mystery of the holy Trinity, is almost generally contradicted
by his followers.

In the 44. distinction of the same book he says, that God can always do
whatsoever he could ever do, and that he wills whatsoever he would at any
time, and knows whatsoever he knew at any time. but his Disciples hold
direct contrary.

Thomas p. 1. q. 46. art. 2. holds, that the world, or at the lest some
creature might have been from everlasting. so likewise holds Bonauenture and
some others. Richardus maintains the opposite opinion, and that rightly, for
that the other sauoureth of Arianisme.

The master of sentences in 4. did. 1. and Gabriel and Vega lib. 7. pro Conc.
Trid. c. 13. hold, that not only substances, but accidents also are created.

Alexander Hales q. 9. m. 6. and q. 10. m. 1. and Thomas p. 1. q. 45. art. 4.
affirm, that only substances are created.

About this question an omnium aeuiternorum sit vnum aeuum vel multiplex, there
are 5. different opinions, the first of Scotus, the second of Thomas, the third
of Durand, the fourth of Henricus, the fifth of Bonauenture.

Likewise about this question, quae sit ratio formalis, cur Angelus sit in
loco, there are five opinions all repugnant one to another.

Thomas and Richardus do affirm, that two Angels cannot be in one place
together. Scotus, Occham and Gabriel hold the contrary.

Thomas holds, that Angels have not intellectum agentem and possibilem.
Scotus does directly contradict him.

Scotus and Gabriel teach, that both Devils and good Angels do understand
naturally both our thoughts, and the thoughts one of another, but to Thomas p.
1. q. 57. art. 4. this seems absurd.

Antisiodorensis lib. 2. sum. says that Christ had Angelum custodem. other
schoolmen deny it.

Scotus in 2. sent. did. 1. holds, that the soul and an Angel do not differ
as two diverse kinds. others teach contrary.

Some doctors hold that Angels consist of form only: others hold contrary,
as appears by their disputes in 2. sent. did. 3.

The second council of Nice Act. 5. determines, that Angels and souls are
corporal. nemo dixerit, says the council, vel angelos, vel daemones,
velanimas, incorporeas. but this opinion will not now be believed of any
learned Papists. Why then should they rather believe that synod in the article
of worship of images, than in this?

Scotus says, that the will is the only subject of sin. Thomas denies it.

Concerning the place of paradise there are three different opinions. some
hold, that it reaches to the circle of the Moon. Thomas in 2. did. 17. and
Bonauenture do place it upon a high mountain, they know not where. others
place it in the East.

Concerning the nature of free will there are diversities of opinions among
schoolmen and others, as Josephus Angles in lib. 2. sent. did. 24. and 25.
shows particularly.

Richardus holds, that freewill cannot be changed by God. others for the most
part hold the contrary.

Thomas, Bonauenture, and Setus hold, that grace is not a quality infused, but
a quality inherent in the soul. Alexander Hales and Scotus hold, that it is a
quality infused.

Josephus Angles in lib. 2. sent. did. 26. rehearses three several opinions
of schoole-doctors about the division of grace, in gratiam operantem and
cooperantem: whereby it may evidently appear, that Papists in talking of grace
go about to shut out Gods grace.

Most schoolmen and others affirm, that Adam and Eve believed not Gods words
concerning the forbidden fruit. Bellarmine lib. 3. de amiss. great. c. 6. says
they believed.

In the same book c. 9. Bellarmine says Adams offense was greater then that
of Eve: contrary both to ancient doctors, and to schoolmen.

Lib. 5. de amiss. great. c. 17. he shows great diversities of opinions among
his schoolmen and fellows about orginall sin. and himself dissenteth from
all.

About the conception of the blessed Virgin, whether it was in original sin,
or not, there have been not only contradictions, but also tragical stirs
and contentions.

Certain scholars of Aquinas believe and teach, that no man being of years
of discretion can be justified by the absolute power of God, without the act
and concurrence of free will. Scotus, Vega, and Caietan hold contrary. both
their opinions are touched by Josephus Angles in 2. sent. did. 27.

Richardus in 2. did. 27. art. 2. q. 1. Scotia in 1. did. 17. q. 1. art. 1.
and Durand in 1. did. 17. q. 2. and others, hold, that a man may merit the
first grace do Congruo. Gregorius Arimineusis in 2. did. 26. Lyra in Joan. 1.
Waldensis and others deny it. Sotus. lib. 2. de not. and great. c. 4. says,
that the former opinion is near to Peligiamsine.

Gregorius Ariminensis and Capreolus in 2. did. 27. q. 1. hold, that no man
without the illustration of Gods special grace can attain to the knowledge of
any moral truth. but Thomas and Scotus in 2. did. 27. do hold contrary.

Durand places original sin in the carnal appetite. Thomas places it in
the whole substance of the soul. Scotus differs from both, and places it in
the will of man.

Josephus Angles in 2. did. 27. rehearses three several opinions about this
question, whether a sin of omission may be committed without a positive act.

The same man reckons 5. different opinions about the difference of mortal
and venial sins. and three opinions concerning this question, what is sin
of malice.

Catharin and Caietan do strive about faith of infants, and diverse other
matters; and greater would the contention have been, if the matter had not
been taken up, or at least silence commanded by the Pope.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de pontif. Romans c. 12. says, that the keys of the church
are nothing, but order and jurisdiction. the Master of sentences, and Caietan
de just. and auth. pontif. Romans hold, that they contain somewhat more.

Pighius lib. 4. hierarch. eccles. c. 8. holds, that the Pope cannot fall
into heresy, nor be deposed. Turrecremata lib. 4. sum. p. 2. c. 20. says,
that the Pope falling into heresy ipso facto is deposed before God. there he
adds also, that the Pope neither for manifest, nor for secret heresy is
deposed. Caietane in tract. de authorit. Pap. and concilij. c. 20. and 21.
says that the Pope proving a notorious heretic is not deposed ipso facto; but
that he may and ought to be deposed by the church. Bellarmine lib. 2. de
pontif. Romans c. 30. holds, that if the Pope be a notorious heretic, he then
of himself cease to be Pope.

Hostiensis in c. nouit. de iudicijs, and Austen Triumphus in summa de potest.
eccles. q. 1. art. 1. and others very triumphantly affirm, that the Pope by
the Law of God has full power over the whole world, and that as well in
civil, as ecclesiastical causes. Turrecremata, Driedo, Sotus, Sanders and
others reckoned by Bellarmine lib. 5. de pontif. Romans c. 1. are content to
abate somewhat, and say, that directly the Pope has not power over all the
kingdoms of the whole world.

Petrus De Alliaco, Gerson, Almain and others in their treatises de potestate
ecclesiae, hold, that a general council is above the Pope. Turrecremata lib.
2. sum. c. 99. and 100. confesses, that the council of Constance, and Basil
decreed, that the council is above the Pope. and so must it needs be, or else
neither was John the 23. or Petrus de Luna rightly deposed, nor Martin the sift
rightly chosen. others notwithstanding hold, that the Pope is above the
council, as Iacobatius de concilijs, Sanders de visibili monarchia, and
Bellarmine lib. de concilijs. others auerre, that although the Pope be above
the councels, yet he has power to make the council above himself, as may be
gathered out of the gloss in c. non si. 2. q. 7. and in c. in synod. did. 63.

In the chap. in nouo. did. 21. it is said, that Peter was made Pope by these
words, thou art Peter. but in the chapter considerandum, and Fidelior. did.
50. the contrary thereof is determined.

In the chapter secundum. did. 19. it appears, that Anastasius not only held
opinions contrary to other Popes, but also published contrary decretales.
contra decreta praedecessorum, and successorum suorum haec rescripta dedit,
says Gratian: likewise Stephen did annull the acts of Formosus, and John the
9. cancelled the acts of Pope Stephen.

Turrecremata lib. sum. 2. c. 111. says, that John the 22. did publish a
decretale contrary to that, which Nicolas the 3. determined, concerning Christ's
poverty. and in his third book c. 57. he proves, that a Pope may define
against the canons of his predecessors.

Euaristus determined, that all marriages not consecrated by a priest were
incestuous, as Platina, and Genebrard in Chronolog. do testify. but now the
current opinion is otherwise.

Concerning the kingdom, seat, and proceedings of Antichrist, Papists hold
different opinions, as may appear by the disputes of Bellarmine.

Iansenius denies, that the coming again of Helias can be proved out of
Ecclesiasticus c. 48. Bellarmine lib. 3. de pentif Romans wondreth, that he
should be of that opinion.

Francis victoria relect. 2. de potestate eccles. q. 2. and Alphonsus a Castro
de haeret. just. punit. says, that as well bishops, as Apostles did immediately
receive jurisdiction from God. Turrecremata lib. 2. Sum. c. 54. and Iacobatius
de concilijs, hold, that the Apostles received their jurisdiction from Peter,
and other Bishops from Peter's successor. Caietane in tract. de auctorit. Papae.
Dominicus a Soto in 4. did. 20. and Hernaeus de potestate Papae teach, that
the Apostles received their power from God, and all other bishops from the
Pope. and this is also Bellarmines opinion.

The Roman catechism in the exposition of the Creed, Waldensis lib. 2. c. 9.
Turrecremata lib. 1. c. 3. and others do shut out excommunicat persons from
being members of the church. but this is misliked by others, as Bellarmine lib.
de eccles. milit. c. 6. confesses.

Alexander Hales 3. p. q. vlt. art. 2. and Turrecremata lib. 1. de eccles. c.
30. affirm, that in the time of Christ's passion only the Virgin Mary had true
faith. Bellarmine lib. 1. de eccles. milit. c. 17. maruelleth at them for it,
and condemns their opinion.

Mayor in 4. did. 24. q. 2. says, that by Gods law Priests are forbidden to
marry. with him also does Clichtouey concur de continent. sacerd. c. 4. but
Thomas in 2.2. q. 88. art. 11. and Bellarmine holds that the vow of
continency is annexed to Priest hood by the laws of the church only.

Gregory the first forbad marriage within the 7. degree. Yet without the 4.
degree schoolmen commonly hold marriages lawful. likewise they have contrary
opinions as touching affinity, and marriages between gossips, as may appear by
their disputes in 4. sent. did. 40. and 41.

Innocentius the 3. permitted men in Liuoma to marry their brothers wives, as
appears c. sin. de diuortijs. but, I think, few Papists now will allow this
for law. the Master of sentences in 4. did. 2. says, that marriage does not
confer grace. alia in remedium tantum sunt, says he speaking of sacraments,
vt coniugium. his disciples teach all contrary.

In time past marriage contracted by words of the present time might be
dissolved, though Alexander decreed contrary in c. licet. de sponsa duorum.

Thomas Aquinas 3. q. 52. art. 2. says, that the soul of Christ as touching
the essence descended to limbus patrum. Bellarmine lib. 4. de Christ. c. 16.
faith the soul of Christ did for three days pass through limbus puerorum,
and the place of the damned.

Thomas 3. q. 76. art. 5. says, Christ's body is in the sacrament, but not as
in a place. Bellarmine says, it is there locallie.

The master of the sentences in 4. did. 13. holds, that heretics and
schismatickes consecrate not. the schoolmen in this point are adverse to him.

The master of the sentences would not yield that Christ's body is devoured by
mise, or brute beasts. but the masters of Paris in this point censure their
master for it and say, magister hic non tenctur.

Marsilius de Padua writes, that Clerks are subject to secular princes. the
canonists in c. tributum. 23. q. 8. and in c. quamuis. de censibus in 6. hold,
that both their persons and their goods are exempted. Francis. victoria relect.
1. q. vlt. de potest. eccles. and diverse others cut the controversy in the
midst, and hold, that they are free for their persons and their goods partly by
the law of God, and partly by privileges of princes, and partly by neither.

How the souls of Saints departed do know, what we say or do, Bellarmine
brings in three diverse opinions lib. de cult. sanct. c. 20.

Caietan in Exodus c. 20. takes an image and an idol for one thing. Bellarmine
lib. 1. de cult. sanct. c. 7. reproves him for it.

Ambrose Catharine tractat. de imaginibus. says, God prohibited images simply:
but that this prohibition was positive. others deny both images to be
forbidden, and the second commandment to be positive.

Occham, Mayor, and Richardus are of opinion, that a sacrament cannot be
defined. Scotus in 4. did. 1. q. 2. holds, that it may be defined
imperfectly. Ledesma in tract. de sacrament. in genere q. 1. art. 2. says it
may properly be defined.

Finally to show the contradictions of Papists we need to seek no further,
than to Bellarmine. who in every controversy brings in different opinions of
men of his side.

Gardener a pillar of popery did oftentimes contradict himself and his
fellows. sometimes he swore against the Popes supremacy, sometime like a
forsworn creature he stood for it. sometime he consented to the dissolution of
monasteries, as sinkes of Sodomy, and all tibaldrie and villainy; sometime be
spoke for them. his book entitled Marcus Constantius is full of
contradictions. M. Fox has scored up great multitudes.

The contradictions of Robert Parsons in his book of three Conuersions, I have
noted in my answer to that treatise.

The whole mass also of Popery does consist of contrary pieces, as I have
showed in the contradictions of the doctrine of the Mass, of purgatory, of
indulgences, of the Pope, and diverse other principal points, and have proved
the same in treatises of that argument.

For example they say the Mass is an unbloody sacrifice, and yet teach, that
every Priest does really offer and drink Christ's blood.

Sometime they say the sacrifice is but one sacrifice, yet in the canon they
say sacrifices in the plural number.

Sometime they say the Priest only offers this sacrifice. but in the cano^
they make the people to offer sacrifices.

In the canon they pray, that Angels may carry Christ's body unto Gods high
altar. but all confess, that Christ's body is in heaven before.

There also they make the Priest a mediator for Christ. but where they speak
soberly, they make Christ a mediator both for the Priest and others.

In heaven they say Christ is visible and palpable. on the altar they make him
invisible, and impalpable.

They say the Mass is an external sacrifice. yet no man ever yet could see
Christ's body externally sacrificed.

In purgatory they say souls suffer extreme pains. but in the Mass they
say they sl^epe in peace.

They teach, that Christians may perform the law of God perfectly. but they
will not grant, that they may live without sin; which is all one.

Talking of auricular confession they make it necessary. but in the chap.
Petrus doluit. and lachrymae. did. 1. de poenit. they deny it.

The Pope calls himself servant of servants. yet does he take upon him as
lord of lords.

Order they say is one sacrament. yet they teach also, that there are seven
Orders, and every one of them a sacrament: which is as much, as if they should
make one seven, and seven one.

The Pope, they say, is head of the Church. but that is as much as if they
should teach, that their Church in the vacatio nis headless.

If then the catholic faith be one, and those that profess the faith agree
in one; then cannot popery be the true Catholic faith, that contains so
many contradictions.

CHAP. XXVII. That popery is a most foolish and absurd religion.
AS the laws of God are full of wisdom, and give us a true understanding; so
when man of his own brain undertakes to add unto his commandments, the
same in proof falls out to be nothing, but vanity and foolery. the same we
sind verified in the additions of the superfluous religion of Papists. for
although it have a show of wisdom, as the voluntary worship of Angels had,
of which the Apostle Coloss. 2. speaks; yet compared with the wisdom of God
revealed in the Gospel, it is mere foolery.

For first what is more foolish, then to forsake the living springs of holy
scripture, out of which do sally waters of life, and to follow after the puddle
streams of Romish traditions? of scriptures we are assured, that they are the
word of God. but no man can affirm that of Romish traditions, or the Popes
decretales, that either professes piety, or loves truth. is it not then
strange, that any Christians should be so foolish, as to match the word of man
with Gods word, and where we have a certain rule, to seek for a broken,
uncertain, and crooked rule?

Again, it is most absurd, not to believe the scriptures without the Popes
warrant. but to say that Christians are not to believe in God, nor in Christ
Jesus, nor to receive the rest of the articles of our Creed, unless the church
of Rome do deliver them unto us, is not only a piece of great foolery, but
also a very high streine of madness. and yet this is the doctrine of Popery.
for Stapleton says, that the church must needs consigne the scriptures unto
us, and the authority of the church both he and others give to the Pope.
likewise in their catechism the Papists signify that faith is of things only
proposed to us by the church. so that if the church propose not the articles of
faith, we are not to believe them, if these men teach truth. further this
shows the Romish church to consist of a pack of infidels. for if the same
believed not without the authority of the church, then did she believe nothing
of Christ; seeing the Papists acknowledge no other Church, but that of Rome,
and no church can teach it self.

Finally this is as much, as if they should say, that the law of the Prince is
not to be received, unless it be proposed by the crier, or other such like
officer.

The Mass Priests of Trent sess. 4. most absurdly prefer the old Latin vulgar
translation of the Bible before the original text. which is as much, as if
they should prefer S. Hierome and other interpreters before the Prophets and
Apostles, and the streams before the fountains.

Generally they forbid scriptures to be read publickely in vulgar tongues. but
they permit most fabulous legends to be read publickely.

The holy scriptures they will not permit to be read in vulgar tongues of the
multitude without license. but they are content that any of their followers
should read the Popes decretales, or the miracles of their god of paste, or
the history of our Lady of Loreto, and other such lying legends without license.

To say that the Pope is the head of the universal church is mere foolery.
for grant that, and it will follow, that the Church is sometime without head,
as in the time of vacation of the papacy; and sometime a monster with two or
three heads, as when two or three Popes reign at once; and sometime a mad
Church, as having a mad and frantic head.

The church they say albeit catholic, yet is always visible. but this being
granted, it follows, that universal things may be the object of sense, and
that the church of Rome before our times is not the church, because no man can
now see it.

They hold also, that the true church may always be seen and discerned. but
this being so, how happens it, that the Pagan Emperors in time past, and the
Turks now do neither see it, nor discern it? for we may not think, that if
they knew the church, they would hate it, and persecute it.

They bear men in hand, that the Pope desining out of his chair cannot err.
but it is as much as if they should say, that a blind man sitting in a chair
cannot do amiss in judging colors, or that the Pope should be more wise
sitting in a chair, then standing in a pulpit, or walking in a hal; sitting at
the table in his chair, and feeding daintily, then disputing in schools:

They call him Christ's vicar. yet our Savior did neither wear triple crown,
nor thunder out his excommunications against Gods children, nor persecute and
cut the throats of Christians.

By the right of S. Peter the Pope challenges power to depose Princes, and to
translate kingdoms. yet it is absurd to think, that Peter had any such power.

They know, that Peter was charged to feed Christ's sheep. are they not then
absurd fellows, that believe the Pope to be S. Peter's successor, that never
feeds nor teaches, but rather murdroth and massacreth Christians?

Peter was never borne upon men's shoulders, nor did he give his feet to be
kissed of his followers, as a favor. nay when Cornelius fell down at his
feet, he willed him to rise up, and would not suffer himself to be
worshipped. are they not then strange fellows, that believe the Pope to be S.
Peter's heir, who is heaued on men's shoulders, and requires that Princes and
all others should kiss his feet and worship him?

They permit public stews, and forbid honest wedlock. they dispense with
adultery and fornication very easily, as appears by the chap. and siclerici.
de iudicijs, but depose and burn their priests and friars, if they join
themselves in honest marriage with lawful wives. are they not then absurd
fellows, that make good evil, and evil good?

Every continued quantity is in one place. are they not then strange teachers,
that say Christ's body is in many places at once, and that it is in heaven, and
in earth, and not in the middle place, nor continued to it self?

Reason teaches us, that accidents have their being in a subject. but these
fellows against reason say they subsist in the Sacrament without a subject.

The Egyptians absteined from eating such creatures, as they worshipped for
God. but the Mass Priests, as men more senseless, then the barbarous heathen
nations, have no sooner made their God, but they devour him. and hereof
proceeded such a scandale, that Auerroes for this only cause pronounced the
Romish religion to be the most foolish and absurd religion of all others.

Christ's body in heaven, they confess, is to be felt and seen. how then
comes it to pass, that this body being at the same time in the Sacrament,
as Papists say, is neither felt nor seen? is not this notorious patcherie?

They confess also, that Christ's body is of a just length, breadth, and
thickness. are they not then absurd fellows, that believe, that such a body
can be contained in a piece of an host no bigger then a counter? and are they
in their wits, that teach that one host being consecrated, Christ's whole body
is there, and that the host being broken, Christ's body is also whole in every
piece thereof?

Are they not also impious and absurd fellows, that say, that a dog, a
hog, a mouse, or a sparrow, may cate up the Savior of the world?

That the same man should be both a creature and a creator, nay a creator of
his own Creator, is an absurdity passing the bounds both of religion and
reason. and yet this is a piece of Popish divinity. Innocentius lib. 4. de
mist. missae. c. 19. says, that daily a creature is made the creator. ita ergo
quotidie creatura sit creator. and in Stella Clericorum we find these words,
Sacerdos est creator sui Creatoris: that is, a Priest is the creator of his
creator.

Papists also make Christians barbarous Canibales, and eaters of man's flesh,
and drinkers of man's blood.

Nay when they eat his flesh, they suppose they drink his blood by a
necessary concomitance, making Christians both to cate and drink with one
breath. and in a certain provincial constitution, beginning, ignorantia. de
summa Trinit. the Mass Priests teach their followers, neither to cate, nor to
drink Christ's body, but to suppe it up perfectly, tritum modice sorbere
perfect.

Christ's blood has redeemed us, and saved us, as holy Scriptures teach us.
but the papists say, that Christ's blood is really in the chalice after
consecration, in which notwithstanding we read in stories, that both Victor
the third, and William archbishop of York, that lived in the days of
Anastasius the 4. was poisoned.

In the Sacrament they confess, that worms may be engendered, and that the
consecrated wine may be corrupted. is it not then a most absurd piece of
doctrine, to hold, that Christ's body and blood should be in the Sacrament,
where vermin is engendered, and which is subject to corruption?

Is it not also extreme folly to abandon Christ, in whose name we are commanded
to pray to the Father; and to pray to God in the name of Saints, which is no
where commanded, but rather forbidden as derogatory to Gods honor?

In the office of our Lady at Matins in a certain antiphona, they say, gaude
Maria virgo, cunctas haereses sola interemisti in toto mundo. Resoice virgin
Mary, thou only have killed all heresies in the whole world. but what more
foolish, then without warrant, to ascribe this to the virgin Mary, and to take
this honor from almighty God?

They also say their Pater noster before stocks and stones. but what is more
absurd, then to pray to those, that cannot hear, and to look for help of
them, that cannot help themselves?

The Mass Priests in their prayers looking upon a little wooden crucifixe,
say, thou have redeemed us. thou have reconciled us to thy Father, as
Bellarmine lib. 2. de cultu sanct. c. 23. confesses. may we then think, that
these are well in their wits, that make a piece of wood, or metal, their
Savior, and take this honor from the Son of God, to give it to a dumb
image?

In their breuiaries they pray thus to the cross, auge pijs iustitiam reisque
dona veniam. iner^ase justice in the godly, and grant pardon to sinners. are
they not very blockish then, trow you, that thus pray to a block, and hope to
find pardon of a dumb creature?

At Cahors in France they pray to Christ's winding-sheete, which they call
sudarium, saying, holy sudary pray for us: and again, sudarium Christi liberet
nos a peste, and morte tristi. the winding sheet of Christ let it deliver us
from the plague and heavy death. as if a sheet could pray for us, or deliver
from the plague. do they not deserve to be trussed in a clokebagge, whose
trust is in a counter fet winding-sheete?

They give the same honor to the sacrament, and to the cross, that is due to
God, very absurdly transferring the glory of God to creatures. are they not
then absurd worshippers, that cannot distinguish between God and creatures? and
do they not very absurdly deny themselves to be idolaters?

Absurdly also they celebrate the feast of the cross whereon our Savior was
dishonored, not celebrating the feast of the ass, on which he was honored.
Durand rat. diui. 7. c. 11. disputing this matter is much pusseld about it.

They believe verily, that images have talked and walked, and all this because
it is said so in the legend. but they show themselves very foolish, that
believe legends, and believe not the scriptures, that say they have mouths and
speak not, feet and walk not.

The grounds of their religion are very absurd and foolish: for they sound
themselves upon the Pope and his decretales; the Pope being oftentimes soolish
and ignorant, and his decretales being rude, false, and oftentimes ridiculous.
Baldus in c. 1. de nature. seud. says, that Pope Celestine the sift was a
simple fellow. vnum pecus. Innocent the 3. in the Chap. solitae. demaior. and
obed. argues, that the Pope is above the Emperor, because the sun is bigger
then the moon. an argument merely lunaticall. in another place he gathers,
that we are now to observe the laws of Deuteronomy, because Deuteronomium
signifies a second law. Bonisace the eight in the chap. vnam sanctam. extr. de
mayor. and obed. proves the Pope to be above al Princes, because we read
Genes. 1. that God in the beginning made the world. Clement the 6. in the chap.
Vnigenitus extr. de poenit. and remiss. says, that unless the overplus of the
merits of Christ had been bestowed in dispensing the treasure of indulgences,
that the same had been void and superfluous, and like treasure laid up in a
napkin. that the decretales are full of lies we shall declare, when we come to
speak of Popish-lies.

They say it is a point of faith, to believe, that the Pope is Saint Peter's
successor, and head of the church. yet if the Priest, that baptized the Pope
had no intention to baptize him, then he is no member of the church: if he that
ordered the Pope had no intention to order him, then is he no priest. If he have
no intention to consecrate, then does he not consecrat. so all depends upon
men's secret and unknown intentions.

They confess also, that Christ's body is not in the sacrament, if the priests
have no intention to consecrat; of which it follows, that all Papists, for
ought they know, are absurd idolaters.

Their ceremonies are full of foolerie. first in the mass the Priest absolueth
the clerk, and then the clerk absolueth the Priest, which is all like, as if
one mule should scratch another. it is absurd also to put the keys into a
boys hand, that is no Priest.

The Priest kisseth the altar, and prays for remission of sins by the
merits of Saints whose relics are there contained. so a stock kisseth a
stone, and forgetting Christ prays for remission of sins by the merits of
Saints, whose relics are said to be there, where there is no relics at all,
and percase the bones of dogs, or apes, or other beasts, for ought the wise
mass priest knows.

In the Missale of Sarum after the priest has consecrated, he makes a low
leg worshipping the work of his own hand, and says aue, which is as much,
as God save you sir, or you are welcome to town.

The priest is apparrelled like a moriske-dancer, and skippeth and danceth
about the altar like an ape in a chain. his head is shaven and well greased,
his hands washed, but his heart unclean. and this gallant takes upon him, not
only to offer Christ in sacrfice, but also to swallow him down like a pill
without chawing.

The Friars for the most part are apparrelled like chimney-sweepers, or burners
of houses, with a hood upon their head like a bag of hippocrace.

The Popes when they are first chosen do cast money abroad saying, argentum and
aurum non est mihi, as is prescribed lib. 1. caerem. but most unlike they are
to him, whose words they abuse. further, absurdly they deny themselves to have
money, when they cast money a broad, and enjoy so great riches.

When they take the Pope from the perced stool, where his humanity is tried,
they say he has raised the poor out of the dust. ex stercor ariae eleuantes
dicunt, suscitat de puluere egenum. and yet absurdly this beggar, as they say,
is lord of lords and King of Kings.

Their demands and answers in matters of religion are not very wise. Austen
asks of Gregory, as Bede reports lib. 1. hist. Angl. c. 28. whether a woman
with child were to be baptized, as if not she, as well as others. Boniface of
Mentz asked the Pope; if it were lawful to eat Bacon. and he answers, yea:
but provided alwaie, said he, that it be dried with smoke, or boiled.

Their legends are feriall. Ruffine one of S. Francis his scholars disputing
with the devil, told him he would do Sir reverence in his mouth. Ruffinus
dixit diabolo, aperi os tuum, and ego stercorisabo in illud.

S. Francis in an award betwixt a wolf, See S. Francis his conformity, etc.
and the men of Eugubium, condemned the townsmen in expenses, and speaking to
the wolf he said, brother wolf. it is reported also that he preached to
swallows, and said, sorores meae hirundines audite verbum dei.

S. Aidus, as Capgraue tells, having compassion on 8. hungry wolves gave them
8. of his lambs, and after they were eaten got them out of the wolves belly by
prayer.

Austen the monk by prayer obtained, that the men of Dorset, that had scorned
him, and all their posterity, had tails. belike the race is now failed. the
whole legend is full of foolish fables. but I shall have occasion to speak
thereof elsewhere.

The reasons of their religion are absurd. Coemiterium, says Durand. l. 1. c.
5. dicitur a cimen, quod est dulce, and sterion quod est statio etc. vel quia
ibi sunt cimices, vel vermes vltra modum foetentes. and again, (...) dicitur
quasi pollutu^ antrum. in the same book c. 4. he says, the bell-rope
betokens the humility and life of preachers, and the measure of man's life. it
is great pity that the Iebusites and mass priests are not haltred with this
sign of humility, and compassed with this measure.

Lib. 3. cap. 10. he says the priests stole betokens the light yoke of the
Lord. Stolalene domini iugum significat. lib. 3. c. 11. speaking of the
vestiment called dalmatica, he says it has wide sleenes, because charity
ought to be stretched out to our enemies. Charitas enim extendi debet etiam
vsque ad inimicos.

The school distinctions are as absurd, as the doctrine of Papists. they
distinguish between the worship of latria, and doulia, as if that were proper
to God, this to creatures. but the use of these Greek words admit no such
distinction. beside that distinguishing terms they give in effect the honor
of God to creatures.

They say the first justice is without works, the second is of works. but the
holy scriptures speak but of one sort of justice, whereby Christians are to be
justified before God.

They speak strangely of opus operatum, and opus operans. but scriptures
acknowledge no such inkepot terms, nor doctrine.

The distinction of merits of congruity and condignity is as absurd as the
rest. for how can a man that is unworthy of favor, be said to merit?

With the sprinkling of holy water they think to drive away Devils. but it is
most absurd to think, that they are scarred with water.

In the church service they use a tongue not understood. but in the primitive
church, as Aquin. in 1. Cor. 14. confesses, that was counted madness. they
pray also like parrats, and know not what they say: which is foolish and
fruitless.

In consecrating of churches they write the Greek Alphabet upon the pauement.
but what is more foolish than to teach stones the Alphabet?

They do also grease the altar and set up lights before crosses, that every
simple soul may see their soolery.

And when their Disciples lie a dying, then they put light in their hands, and
grease their eyes. but it is ridiculous to show light to dead men, or to think
that men can see better having oil in their eyes.

What then remains, but that we beseech God to open the eyes of Papists, that
they may in the end see the fooleries and absurdities of that superstitious
religion, whereto now they are so much addicted?

CHAP. XXVIII. That popish religion does keep Christians in blindness and
ignorance of God and godliness.
IF none but fools despise wisdom and instruction, as the wiseman Proverb.
1. teaches us; then cannot we think the Papists wise, that not only delight
in ignorance, but also debar laymen from all ordinary means of instruction
in the doctrine of true piety.

That they delight in ignorance, it appears, in that they commend the
colliars faith, that could answer the Devil nothing, but that he believed as
the Church believes, albeit he knew not what it was. they do also teach their
followers, that for simple people it is sufficient to believe the articles of
the faith implicit. for so says Linwood in Gloss. in c. ignorantia. de sum.
Trinit. Thomas Aquinas 2.2. q. 2. art. 6. compares Gods people to asses, and
their teachers to oxen, and says it is sufficient for them in matters of faith
to adhere to their superiors. and although he say, that they are to believe
the articles of the Creed explicit, yet Syluester in summa in verb. fides;
expounds it, that they are to believe these articles explicit, as far as
they direct us to the last end. in 2.2. q. 82. art. 3. Thomas says, that the
women and simple people are most devout. and M. Cole a man not lightly
accounted of among the Papists, said openly, that ignorance was the mother of
devotion.

That they deprine laymen of all ordinary means of instruction in matters of
faith, it appears first, for that they seldom permit scriptures translated
into vulgar tongues to be read by them. but Scriptures as the Apostle teaches
us 2. Tim. 3. are profitable to instruct.

Secondly, they expressly forbid them to be read publicly in the Church.
their service also and administration of sacraments, is for the most part in
tongues not understood of the vulgar sort.

Thirdly they will not suffer laymen to dispute of matters of faith. for they
are excommunicate, if they do it, as Nauarrus in enchirid. in 1. praecept. c.
11. declares.

Fourthly, their preachers seldom teach the people. and when they do it, yet
as Dante canto. 29. says, they preach their own inventions, and tell idle
tales without edification. Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. scient. c. de theolog.
says, that for the Gospel, and Gods word they preach mere toies, and humane
inventions. pro euangelijs and pro verbo Dei meras nugas and humana verba
crepant praedicantes euangelium, adulterantes verbum Dei.

Fifthly, if either any preach the truth syncerely, or else speaks against
the impieties and heresies of popery; then is he either forced to abjure, or
else adjudged to the fire.

Finally all books of religion in vulgar tongues, whereby Christians may come
to the knowledge of the truth are suppressed, and by great penalties forbidden.

This we find by experience, that both Priests and people are most ignorant of
matters of faith, where popery is professed. and first to begin with the
Popes, Alphonsus a Castro lib. 1. de haeres. says, that diverse Popes have
been utterly unlearned. constat plures Papas adeo illiteratos esse, vt
Grammaticam penitus ignorent. this sentence now in later editions they have
caused to be razed out of the book. but yet it is not to be forgotten, that
one Pope for fiat, said siatur.

Laziardus epit. c. 183. speaking of Gregory the sixth, says he caused another
to be consecrated with him for saying of mass, seeing he was rude and ignorant
of letters. vt dictum est, alium secum consecrari fecit, cum esset rudis
literarum.

Felin c. si quando. de rescriptis, says, the Pope cannot be deposed for want
of learning. Papa propter defectum literaturae non potest deponi.

How simple clerks they were, it appears, for that, as Auentinus testifies
annal. lib. 3. Pope Zachary condemned Virgilius a bishop of Germany as an
heretic, for saying there were antipodes. Paul the second, as Platina
testifies, determined them to be heretics, that named the word academy, and
was an enemy of learning.

John Peccham in the provincial constitution, beginning ignorantia sacerdotum,
thinks it sufficient for Priests, either by themselves, or by others once
every quarter to expound the articles of the Creed, the ten commandments, the
two commandments of the Gospel, the seven works of mercy, the seven deadly
sins, the seven principal virtues, and seven sacraments, and that without
any curiosity.

Platina complaining of the ignorance of Priests of his time cries out, quanta
ignoratio, cum suispsius, tum doctrinae Christiana? what ignorance, says he,
is in them, as well of themselves, as of Christian doctrine?

The two points of a bishops mitre, as Durand in his rational. teaches,
signify the old and new Testament. but Lois Mersilius an Augustinian friar,
being asked, what the two stroppes of the mitre that hang on the bishops back
do mean, said, they signified, that he neither understood the old, nor new
testament. And this is the case of most popish prelates.

Matthew Paris in Willielmo Conquaest. says, that clerks were then so
unlearned, that such as understood their Grammar were a wonderment to their
fellows.

Neither can it otherwise be, seeing so many for bribery, simony and carnal
respects were wont to be preferred to livings. venalitate curiae Romanae,
says the author of aureum speculum, inaniter praeficiuntur lenones, coqui,
stabularij equorum, and pueri. through the bribery of the court of Rome bands,
cooks, horsekeepers, and boys are vainly preferred to the government of the
Church.

The author likewise of the treatise entitled onus ecclesiae, c. 23. says,
that bishops admitted vnn orthy men to charges without all choice, and due
examination. indignos beneficiatos admittunt, absque omni delectu, and debita
examinatione instituunt.

Aluarus Pelagius lib. 2. de planct. eccles. art. 20. complains, that the
bishops of Spain commit thousands of souls to some yongue nephews of theirs,
to whom a man would be loath to commit two pears. Episcopi alicui nepotulo suo
committunt multa millia animarum, cui non committeres duo pyra.

What the learning was of their best preachers, we may understand by the
profound sermons of friar Menot, Maillard, Bromyard, and their fellows; which
were full of ridiculous fables, and void of all edification and learning.

The Germans of late complained to Adrian the 6. Grauam. 47. that bishops
advanced unlearned idiots, unfit, vile, and ridiculous fellows to the order of
priesthood. episcopi, say they, saepenumero indoctos, idiotas, inhabiles,
vilesque ac ludicras personas ad sacerdotij functionem admittunt.

The ridiculous reasons of Durand in rationali diuinorum, and deriuations of
words in their legends and glostes, do bewray singular ignorance.

The monks and fries now can scarce read their canonical hours, for the most
part. in the monastery of Fulda the monks accused Rabanus Maurus, as is
testified in his life, for that he was so studious in Scriptures, and neglected
their temporalties. and now lest children should mock the popish priests, that
cannot read their mass with true accents, every word in common missals, is
accented. and yet as we read in the chapter retulerunt. de consecrat. did. 4.
one baptized an infant saying, in nomine patria, filia, and spirita sancta.

Neither is it material, that diverse are learned in laws, or philosophy. for
what is that to the instruction of Christians in faith and manners? Bernard.
lib. 1. de consid. taxes Eugenius for this point. daily, says he, laws sound
in thy palace, but the laws of Justinian, and not of the Lord.

The schoolmen also are skillful in logic, and in decretals; but the
Scriptures and fathers they read not, as Ferdinand Vellosillo in the preface
of his aduertences ingeniously confesses. they do rather handle curious
questions, then matters of edification.

The guides then being thus blind, what blindness may we think is in the
multitude guided by them? may we not say of them, like priest, like people? Nay
Vincentius de sine mundi, says, that they did not hear sermons, nor know the
articles of the faith. praedicationes non audiunt, articulos fidei nesciunt.

John Billet in his prologue de divine. offic. says, that few in his times
understood, either what they heard, or what they read.

Commonly Papists are called Catholics if they hear Masle, albeit they
understand not what is said, but only gape and gaze one the Priest. when they
say, pater noster qui es in coelis, they neither know what is pater, nor what
is noster, nor what is, in caelis.

God give them therefore the light of his word to direct them, and grant that
they may understand the truth, that they be not in the number of those, that
see not light at noone time, and perish for want of knowledge.

CHAP. XXIX. That Popish religion gives the reins to licentiousness of life,
and leads Christians the broade-way to destruction.
TRue religion restreineth men's affections, and directs Christians in the
right way. the Psalmist ps. 119. asking this question wherewith a young man
shall redress his way? answers, in taking heed thereto according to Gods
word. the same also directs us by a strait and narrow way unto life. enter
in, says our Savior, Matt. 7. at the strait gate: and afterward, for the gate
is strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life. but popish religion
loses the reins to allicentiousnes, and leads Christians by a broad,
pleasant and easy way to the end of their desires. for first they account
adultery and fornication small sins, and give liberty to every Bishop to
dispense with them, as they teach publicly in the Chap. and si clerici. de
iudicijs. de adulterijs, and alijs criminibus, quae sunt minora, says
Alexander the third, potest episcopus cum clericis post peractam poenitentiam
dispensare.

Next they allow public stews both in Italy and Spain, and in Rome it self
the Pope makes a great gain of them.

Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. scient. c. de Lenocinio, says, that the revenue
of the Pope arising of the tribute of whores, amounts to twenty thousand
crowns. but now it far passes that sum. the gloss upon a certain
prouincial constitution of Otho, de concubinis cleric. remouend. says, that it
seems reason, that the church should wink at the sin of leacherie. nam and
mareschallus Papae de facto exigit tributum a meretricibus. for de facto the
Popes marshall exacteth a tribute of whores. this is also testified by Ioannes
Andreas in c. inter opera. de spon. and matrim. a certain Mass Priest also in
Wisbich maintained not long since, that whores were in Rome with approbation,
and with as good right as any citizen of Rome, or as the Pope himself.

Thirdly it is notorious, that Mass Priests both in Italy and Spain and other
places keep concubines. the same is also testified by Aluarus Pelagius de
Planct. ecclesiae. Theodoric a Niem tractat nemor. union. and diverse others.
Cornclius Agrippa de vanit. scient c. de lenocinio reports, that they kept
whores to hire. Ambrosius Ansbertus in Apocalypse. 18. says, that archdeacons
take money of adulterous Priests. archidiacont a presbyteris adulteris pretium
accipiunt.

Fourthly they teach, that concupiscence is no sin. and in Italy and Spain
the common people go as commonly to common women, as if it were no sin.

Lastly, albeit the Friars and Priests condemn such sins, yet if any come unto
them for absolution, they deny it not, and that upon some small hope of alms,
or else some other small satisfaction. and this is the reason, that lust does
reign in Popery.

The Germans in their greeuances complain, that the facility of granting
indulgences was a warrant for men to commit all filthiness: and In Italy it is
known, that they that come oftenest to confession are most loose livers. after
their offense they come for absolution, and after absolution offend again.

The way also, by which Popish Priests lead their followers, is broad, easy
and pleasant. Bellarmine de eccles. militant. c. 2. requires in a true member
of the Catholic church, neither inward faith, nor other virtue, but only, that
he profess outwardly the Romish religion and be subject to the Pope; a matter
of no great difficulty.

If a man take upon him the habit of a Monk or a Friar, they make it a second
baptisate, and that state, they say, is a state of perfection. so you see how
easy a matter it is with Papists, not only to be a true member of the church,
but also a perfect Christian. for who cannot take upon him a Friars or Monks
weed? in the apology for Herodotus it is testified, that a certain Friar
taught, that the only way for the Devil to be saved, was to put on Saint
Francis his coule.

Further they teach, that the Pope has power, to grant pardons for
fornication, adultery, incest, rapes, murders, perjury, treachery, sodomitrie,
maranismes and all vices, as appears by the Popes penitentiary taxes, and
that for no great sums of money. now what more easy then to obtain the Popes
pardon?

If a man hear Mass every Sunday and holyday, and confess at shrouetide, and
be houseled at Easter, and fast from flesh, and observe the rest of the Romish
precepts and ceremonies, he is taken for a good Catholic. but these are
matters to be performed without any great difficulty.

The Papists also teach, that Christians are justified by extreme unction:
which is a matter to be obtained at every pild Priestes-hands.

They promise also general indulgences to such as visit certain churches at
Rome, and else where; which may be done with small labor.

Now for venial sins they say, that knocking of the breast, and holy water is
remedy sufficient. for such matters they say Christians need not to repent
them. they hold also, that holy water is good to drive away devils. but in no
place is there want of holy water.

If a man live all his life most leudly and loosely, yet if he confess to a
priest when he lies a dying, and promise satisfaction, he fails not to have
absolution; and if he satisfy not in this life; yet they hold, that either by
Masses, or indulgences, he may be delivered out of Purgatory. but indulgences
are not dear, and Masses are dog cheap. a trentall is not valued at 30.
pence, nor whole fardels at great sums.

By every small good work, nay by eating red-herrings and saltfish on
fridaies, and such obseruances they hope to merit heaven. so broad they make
the way to heaven, and so easy a matter to come thither.

Finally as Eunomius promised them, that professed his faith reward in heaven,
howsoever they lived; so likewise do the Papists promise heaven to their
followers, so they profess and set forward the Popes cause. whether they be
murdrers of Kings, or massacrers, or rebels, or filthy whore-mongers, or
Sodomites, it skilleth not; the Mass Priests promise not only pardon, but also
reward in heaven, so they die in the Popes obedience, and profess his religion.

This religion therefore that gives such liberty to sinners, and leads them
such pleasant ways, feeding the eyes of people with sights, their ears with
pleasant soundes, and satisfying all their senses with carnal pleasures,
cannot be true.

We could also specify the same by infinite examples, and by particulars show,
that papists run the broad way, but that we reserve it to the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXX. That Popish religion brings forth such bitter fruits, that the
professors thereof have no reason to boast of their works.
GOod trees are known by their fruits. let us then see what fruits have come
of Popery, that we may know, whether the tree be good or no, from whence they
have issued. Bristow in his 39. Motive imagines, that we have nothing to say
against his consorts, and therefore braggeth much of works, and despises his
adversaries, as running the broade-way to destruction. but when his consorts
shall see our discourse concerning the fruits and effects of Popery, and their
strange and enormous wicked lives, they will wish, that for this matter we had
never been called in question. First then we say, that the Papists err in
the doctrine of works, and next that their lives are so disorderly, as if they
did only study to excel in all wickedness, lewdness and villainy.

Christians believe, that the law of God is a perfect rule of good life. but
they hold, that not only Gods laws, but all scriptures are imperfect, and
insufficient without traditions.

Christians believe, that the perfection of Christian life consists in the
Gospel. but these teach, that the rules of Benet, Francis, Dominicke and other
monks and friars, do direct us to a further perfection, then is commanded in
the Gospel.

They do as well believe, that the laws of the Pope do bind our consciences,
as Gods laws, and think, that the works done according to the Popes laws do
as well please God, as the works commanded in Gods laws.

They make more conscience to abstain from flesh on Friday, then to murder
Christians, as their curiosity in keeping that form of fast, and their
cruelty in murdring and massacring Christians does declare.

The Mass Priests give absolution to most heinous sinners, and enjoin them
penance afterward. the Pope grants indulgences to most horrible offenders.

They believe not that concupiscence is sin, or that it is better for
Votaries to marry then to burn, or that Venial sins deserve the curse of
the law, or eternal death.

They teach that every Christian is to satisfy for the temporal pains due to
sins, and that either in this life, or in the life to come, in purgatory.

They believe that a man may be justified by extreme unction, and other popish
sacraments, and by the works of the law, and not by faith in Christ Jesus.

They suppose, that every man is able to perform the works of the law
perfectly. of which it follows, that, as the Pelagians taught, a man may live
without sin.

Finally by their works they hope to merit eternal life; which is directly
contrary to the Apostles doctrine Romans 6. who teaches us, that eternal life
is the gift of God.

If then the Papists err so grossly both in the doctrine of works, and also
in the rule of our works, it is not like, that their works are excellent.

Nay we find by practice, that their works are for the most part impious, and
displeasing unto God, as for example the adoration of the cross and sacrament,
their blasphemous prayers to the virgin Mary, to Angels and Saints, their
sacrilegious taking of the cup of the new testament from Gods people, their
worship done to Antichrist, their periuries and rebellions against Princes;
their murdring Gods saints, their mainteining of public stews and banks of
usury, and such like. the rest cannot much please God or man: as for example,
the begging of vagabond friars, the forswearing of marriage, the eating of
muscles, cockles and red herrings in Lent, the taking of ashes on Ashwednesday,
the ringing and singing for dead men, the shauing of priests crowns, the
greasing of sick men, of altars, bells, and such like toies and ceremonies.

But to let these works pass, wherein the papists please themselves more then
God or good men, we will declare, that no sect of heretics ever did commit more
heinous offenses, or offended more commonly in matters by themselves not denied
to be sins, then the principal of the Popish sect. the form of confession
commonly prescribed to Romish penitents by the ordinall is this. Confiteor quia
peccaui nimis in superbia, inani gloria, in extollentia tam oculorum quam
vestium and omnium actuum mcorum, in inuidia, in odio, in auaritia tam honoris,
quam pecuniae, in ira in tristitia, in acedia, in ventris ingluuie, in luxuria
Sodomitica etc. so they confess themselves guilty of all their 7. deadly
sins, and add Sodomie and many other villainies.

Of their public stews in Spain, Italy, and Rome it self, and of the
concubinage of Mass Priests, we have spoken before.

Boccace in his second novel shows, that the Pope, Cardinales, Prelates, and
other citizens of Rome did live dishonestly, and offend not only in natural,
but also in Sodomiticall luxury. non solo nella natural, maanchora nella
Sodomitica.

Hulderichus of Augusta in his epistle to Pope Nicolas, declares, how the
Popish clergy refusing marriage committed incest and abominable Sodomiticall
villainies, both with men and beasts. Sub falsa continentiae specie placere
volentes grauiora vides co^mittere, masculorum ac pecudum amplexus non
reformidane.

Petrarch in his 106. sonnet does call Rome, a slave of lechery and gluttony
and drunkenness, and says, that luxuriousness is come to extremity in her
De vin serua, di letti, e di vuiande
In cui lussuria fa l'vltima proua.


In his nineteenth epistle he charge the court of Rome not only with
incontinency, and unbridled lusts, but also with all perfidiousnesse,
impieties and villainies. Quicquid vsquam persidiae and doli, quicquid
inclementiae superbiaeque quicquid impudicitiae and effrenatae libidinis
audisti aut legisti, quicquid denique impietatis and morum pessimorum sparsim
habet aut habuit orbis terrae, totum istic cumulatim videas, aceruatimque
reperias.

Vguetinus in his visions does diverse times exclaim against the sodomiticall
abominations of the friars. Iterum atque iterum, says the collector, de
scelere sodomitico verbum intulit. speaking against Priests he said, they gave
themselves to follow harlots and luxuriousness, and supposed gain to be
godliness. neither may we think the Mass Priests have now changed manners,
as may appear by John Casaes sonnets, and a lewd book entitled Cicalamento
del Grappa; both of them approving the sins of Sodom, and justifying the
city of Gomorrha in respect of Rome. in the visitation of the abbeies of
England in king Henry the 8. his days such abominations were discovered, as of
modest men cannot handsomely be reported. Huntington lib. 5. and Cestrensis
report, how Anselme in one synod forbad priests marriage, but in the next made
laws against Sodomites, and there condemned eight abbots beside inferior
monks, priests, and friars. At Gant, as appears by records, four
Franciseans and one Augustinian friar were burnt for Sodomy since these late
troubles. the manners of the Italians are known to those, that have travailed
that country, and therefore I need not to speak much of them.

Luitprandue lib. 6. c. 6. says, that the Popes palace in his time was become
a brothell house. Lateranense palatium, olim sanctorum hospitium, nunc est
prostibulum meretricum.

Gregory the 12. as Theod. a Niem tract. 6. union. c. 34. reports, charge
two and twenty monasteries with impiety and filt by life. pene omnis religio,
and obseruantia dicti ordinis, ac dei timor abscessit, libido ac corruption
carnis inter ipsos mares and moniales, necnon alia multa mala, excessus, and
vitia, quae pudor est effari, per singula sucereuerunt.

Cardinals, says 4. Brig. 49.
Brigit in her revelations, give themselves without restreint to all pride,
coueteousnesse and delights of the flesh. and again, now the stews are in
more esteem, then the true church of God.

Catherine of Siend c. 125. says, religious men should resemble Angels, but
are worse then devils.

Breidenbach in the history of his peregrinations, speaks generally of the
men of his time and says, recessit lex a sacerdotibus etc. that is, the law is
departed from priests, justice from princes, counsel from elders, good dealing
from the people, love from parents, reverence from subjects, charity from
prelates, religion from monks: and so he goes on not sparing any.

Walter Mapes, that lived in the days of Henry the second, testifies, that
the clergy did study wickedness and impiety. and calls them heirs of
Lucifer, and blind guides.

Robert bishop of Aquila in his sermons mentioned by Sixtus Senensis Biblioth.
lib. 3. turning himself to his country of Italy vttreth these words with
great vehemence, o Italia plange, o Italia time, o Italia cave etc. that is, O
Italy lament, o Italy fear, o Italy beware, lest for thy obstinacy the wrath
of God do not wax cruel against thee. thou art every day more and more
hardened, perseuering in thy sins and maliciousness. every where men set up
banks of usury. all places are desiled with most foul vices of the flesh and
most shameful sodomy. pride in pompous shows has now possessed cities and
the country. blasphemies against God, periuries, lies, injustice, violence,
oppression of the poor and such like vices do superabound. and all this is
spoken of the Popes country.

I need not tell, says Platina in Marcellino, how excessive the covetousness
of priests is, and of those especially, that are in principal places, nor how
great their lust, ambition, pomp, pride, sloth, ignorance of themselves, and
of Christian doctrine is grown, how corrupt their religion is, and rather
dissembled, then true; and how corrupt their manners are, in profane men, whom
they call secular to be detested, seeing they offend so openly and publicly,
as if they sought praise thereby. in Gregory the 4. he has these words, in
omnem luxum and libidinem se effundit ecclesiasticus ordo: writing of John the
13. he says, he was a man contaminated from his youth with all filthiness and
dishonesty. in the life of Gregory the 6. speaking of three Popes, he calls
them three most foul monsters.

Wernerus infasciculo temporum, bewaileth the state of the church, as if holy
men were failed, and truth perished from the sons of men. speaking of the times
about a thousand years after Christ, he says, Christian faith began to fail,
and that then men began to give themselves to soothsaying, and witchcraft.

Apud plerosque religionis nostrae primores, says Picus Mirandula in orat. ad
Leonem 10. ad quorum exemplum componi, atque formari pl^bs ignara debuisset,
aut nullus aut certe exiguus dei cultus, nulla been viuendi ratio atque
institutio, nullus pudor, nulla modestia. he says, that in the principal of
the clergy there was neither religion, nor good life, nor shame. afterward he
taxes the luxuriousness of all estates, but especially the furiousness of
lusts, the ambition, covetousness and superstition of the Romish Clergy.

Marcellus Palingenius in virgin, complains of a general corruption of
manners throughout the world.

imo libenter says he
Destituam hunc mundum, innumerisque refertum
Fraudibus atque dolis, incestibus, atque rapinis,
Est vbi nulla fides, piet as est nulla, nec vlla
Iustitia, and pax and requies, vbi crimina regnant
Omnia.
He says, that all vices reigned, and that there was neither faith, nor piety,
nor justice in the world: viz. among the Papists.

Matthew Paris in Henrico tertio complains, that religion was trodden under
foot, and that usury and simony reigned.

Erasmus de amicab. concord. says, that if a man look nearly, he shall find
all filled with frauds, injuries, rapines. si quis propius inspiciat, inueniet
fraudibus, iniurijs, rapini^referta omnia.

Hereupon Petrus de Aliaco lib. de reformat. ecclesiae complains, that
certain barators had destroyed the church, which the fathers had formerly
built. primitius theologi ecclesiam aedificauerunt, quam nunc baritatores
destruxerunt.

Simony and Usury among the Romanists is so common, that as Matthew. Paris says,
they account the first no sin, the second a small sin. Felin in c. ex
part. de offic. and potest. iudic. delegat. says, that without the rent of
Simony the popes sea would grow contemptible. heu Simon regnat, per munera
quaeque reguntur, says one in hist. Citizensi. Theodoric a Niem lib. 2. de
schism. c. 7. says, that usury did then so much prevail that it was accounted
no fault. Paul the 4. and Pius the 4. in their times were great banquiers and
usurers, as we may see in their lives written by a Parasite of the Popes called
Onuphrius. If we should speak of particular men, we should find no end of
their villainies. Wernerus speaking of John the 12. says he was wholly given to
lust. totus lubricus.

Beno, Platina and others testify, that Siluester the 2. and Benedict the
ninth were Magicians, and the Devils sworn sernantes.

Gregory the 7. was deposed by the council of Brixia, as a notorious
necromancer possessed with a diabolical spirit.

John the 23. was convicted in the council of Constance to be an incestuous
person, a Sodomit, and an atheist denying the immortality of the soul, as we
read in the acts thereof.

Clement the 5. as Hermannus testifies, was a public fornicator. the same is
also testified by Mattheo Villani hist. l. 3. c. 39. against Clement the sixth.

Sixtus the 4. passed Nero in cruelty and all villainy.

Gaude prisce Nero, says one, vincit te crimine Sixtus;
Hic scelus omne clauditur, and vitium.
Marullus and others testify against Innocent the 8. that he had sixteen
bastards, and was a dull fellow given to carnal pleasures.

Of Alexander the 6. we read, that he wasted the world, overthrew law and
religion. neither could Onuphrius dissemble his vices.

He that lists to see the like testimonies against Massepriests, Monks,
Friars, and their accomplices, let him read the second book of my answer to
Rob. Parsons his warne-word.

But what should proofs need in so plain matters? if the Popes, whom they
call most holy, be such, we must not imagine, that their base slaves, and
dependants are better.

The practice of this sect does justify this charge most fully. of late time
they have murdered millions of Gods Saints. In England of late they attempted to
destroy the King and his house, to blow up the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and to cut the throtes of all good men. they neither respect King
nor friend, old nor young, oath nor promise. Among themselves there is neither
justice nor honesty. poor people are abused with superstitious shows, and
dissembled gravity. through the practices of Popes, Christendom is divided,
and the kingdom of Turks enlarged.

Can those therefore be good men, that do such lewd acts? and have they
reason to boast of works, whose lives are so defiled with all vices?

CHAP. XXXI. That in Popery a base account is made of Princes, and all laymen.
HOly scriptures do give honorable titles not only to Kings and Princes, but
also to all the people of God. Princes Romans 13. are called superior powers, and
Gods ministers for our good. and in diverse places they are dignified, as Gods
anointed. Christians are also called Saints, and Gods heritage, and his sons
and children, and heirs of Gods kingdom annexed together with Christ. but the
Mass Priests and polshorne crew make but a base reckoning of them. for first
they appropriat to themselves the title of Gods inheritance, calling themselves
(...) and clericos, as if the Popes greasy shauelings were only Gods
inheritance, and the rest were profane and common persons.

Secondly in the church they divide themselves from laymen, as if laymen were
not holy enough to communicate with them in Gods service, or else as if they
were unworthy to come near the Popes poleshorne and greasy accomplices.

Thirdly they call themselves only spiritual men, as if the lay people were
gross and carnal, and without sense and feeling of piety. they do call
themselves also Gods anointed, interpreting these words touch not mine
anointed, of their own greasy company.

Fourthly the state of matried folks is termed a damned state of life, as
appears by their decretales de conuersione coniugatorum, where they talk of
married folks entering into monasteries no otherwise, then as if they should
talk of the conversion of sinners. Syricius c. plurimos. did 82. does talk
of married folks, as of men profane and unholy; and Innocentius in the same
distinction c. proposuisti. does interpret these words of the Apostle, those
that are in the flesh cannot please God, of married folks, as if they were in
the flesh and could not please God. for otherwise his conclusion is of no value.

Fiftlie they call lay people imperfect. for that is a word used by Faber
contra anatomen missae. the state of perfection they ascribe commonly to Monks
and Friars. some call them dogs and hoggs, and prove, that scriptures are not
to be permitted to be read in vulgar tongues, because holy things are not to
be given to dogs, nor pearls cast before swine.

Thomas Aquinas 2.2. q. 2. art. 6. compares Gods people to asses, holding,
that it is sufficient for them to adhere to their superiors in matters of
says, because we read Ioh 1. that the oxen were at plow, and the Asses fed
by them.

Summa Rosella, and Siluester in his sum in verb. fides, does take laymen
and simple people to be all one. and commonly they call them idiots and rude
fellows.

6 Pops Alexander trod upon the Emperors neck, calling him a lion and
basiliske. and Boniface the 8. indeuoreth to make Kings his subjects.

7 They make Kings and Princes their hang-men and exequutioners, forcing them
to put Gods Saints to death, whom the woluish inquisitors before have condemned.

Finally they take from Princes all command and authority in the church, not
suffering them either to make ecclesiastical laws, or to meddle with
ecclesiastical persons. as for other Christians they do excommunicate them,
curse them, burn them, massacre them, and set them together by the ears, that
one may tear another, if they repugne against their commandments.

Can we then esteem Popery to be Christian religion, that holds Christians
in so base account? and will Christians endure this yoke of bondage put upon
their necks by the Popes faction, that endeuoreth to take all liberty from
Christians?

CHAP. XXXII. That Popery is a doctrine of devils.
THe devil being the author of all untruth and falsehood, it may well be said,
that all the lying and false doctrine of papists is of the devil. but beside
this, there are particular reasons, why we call Popery the doctrine of devils.
for first diverse points of popish doctrine are specially said to proceed from
the devil, and next the best proofs and means which our adversaries have to
maintain their doctrine, are from the devil.

The Apostle 1. Tim. 4. calls the prohibition of marriage, and laws of
abstinence from certain meats, doctrines of devils. for speaking of doctrines
of devils afterward he specifieth the same, saying, forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created. but Papists by law
expressly forbid marriage to priests, and others that have vowed single life,
and the eating of flesh on fasting days, and white soul in lent. neither can
they excuse themselves, for that they do not condemn marriage as simply
evil, or flesh as unclean. for Thcodoret shows, that such came within the
compass of the Apostles censure, as by law prohibited these things, further
neither did the Encratites or Manichees absolutely forbid marriage as unclean,
but as not fitting such as tend to perfection.

Epiphanius in haeres. 79. esteems the superstition of those women, that
offered the sacrifice of a cake in the honor of the virgin Mary, to be
diabolical. totum hoc opus est diabolicum, and spiritus immundi doctrina. but
Papists do offer their mass cakes in the honor of our Lady, and of Saints.

Likewise he calls it a doctrine of devils, to give divine worship to dead
men. but this is a common practice among Papists. for by Saints they swear,
and to them they confess their sins, and in honor of them they build
churches and altars, and say masses: all which are special points of divine
honor.

Further he shows, that the desire that men have in making graven images is a
devilish endeavor. simulachrificum studium diabolicus conatus. but where is
there more labor bestowed in making images, then in the synagogue of Rome?

S. Chrysostom homil. 9. in epist. ad Coloss. says, that the devil first
brought in the superstitious worship of Angels. diabolus superstitionem
angelorum introduxit. here then we understand, whence the Papists have their
worship of Angels.

From the devil also has the Pope learned to advance himself above all that
is worshipped, and to take upon him, as if he were God. Apocalypse. 9. we read,
that the smoke that darkened the sun and the air came out of the bottomless
pit, and that locustes came out of this smoke. but this smoke is nothing else
but the fumes of the errors of Popery, which have long darkened the brightness
of the truth, and the locustes are the monks and friars, which with their
poisoned doctrine drawn from hell have infected the minds of simple people.

About the year of our Lord 1256. as Matthew Paris testifies, the friars
published a book entitled Euangelium aeternum, composed of certain dreams
of abbot Ioachim. and this, say they, exceeded the gospel written by the four
Evangelists, as far as the Sun the Moon, or the kernel the nut. but the
author of the Romant of the Rose, where he speaks of the hypocrisy of
friars, testifies, that this book came from the great devil.

Fut or baille (c'est chose voire) says he,
Pour bailler commun exemplaire,
Un liver de par le grand diable
Dit l'euangile perdurable.
That the Popes have served the devil, it appears by John the 12. that
called upon the devil, as he played at dice, by Syluester the 2. and Benet the
9. that were necromancers, by Gregory the 7. that Matt. Paris in With. Conq.
confessed at his death, that by the counsel of the devil he had stirred up
Gods anger against the world, and diverse others: but serving the devil, it is
not likely, but they learned somewhat of him.

Delrius lib. 4. de Magia. c. 1. q. 3.. 5. testifies, that the devil appeared
to a certain abbot in form of an Angel, and commanded him to say Mass. but
he would not have persuaded it, unless he had well liked it. Dibdale a
Massepriest in England coniured the devil to tell him, whether Christ's body
was present in the Sacrament or no. he said it was. and this was a great
satisfaction to the Papists present, as is said in a book of miracles, that
passes from hand to hand.

In the 2. Nicene council act. 4. a certain monk prooneth the worship of
Images by the testimony of the devil.

I sengrenius in libro de Maria in veteri ottinga, proves that the virgin
Mary, was to be worshipped by the witness of the devil, that said his aue
Maria.

In the 2. book of conformities fruct. 2. they make proof by the devils
testimony, of the virtue of indulgences granted to the church of Assisium by
the means of S. Francis. Likewise lib. 3. conformitatum fruct. 8. a certain
^i^el told one, as is said, how Angels were present at the death of S.
Francis. demon dixit cuidam angelos interfuisse in transitu B. Francisci.
another told, how S. Francis his soul passed through Purgatory. by the
testimony of another devil, they prove that S. Francis had Christ's wounds
imprinted in his body, and that he and Christ only of all that were in heaven
had these marks. the words of the book of conformities are these. diabolus
dixit, quod Christus videns, quod Franciseus sibi datus esset pro signisero
tanti ordmis, ipsi suorum vnlncrum stigmata impressit. and again, diabolus
adiuratus a quodam sacerdote de veritate dicenda, post plura per os mulieris
apud Ranennam morantis nomime Zantese sic inquit, in coelo sunt tantum duo
signati, scilicet Christus and slomachosus Franciscus.

Baronius in his 4. tome, proves John and Paul to be martyrs by the devils
testimony. daemones clamantes ex corporibus obsessorum Ioannem and Paulum
martyrs esse testabantur. so here we see whence the Papists have the worship
of Saints.

In the 77. lombard legend it is said, that Dioclesians son being possessed
with a devil, the same devil cried out, that he would not dislodge before Vitus
came. lo here a brave testimony of the holiness of S. Vitus.

Finally the massacres and cruel executions done by the Papists of late
years upon the Saints of God, have proceeded from no other fountain, then
from the malice of the devil. for he was a murderer from the beginning. and
Apocalypse. 12. we read, that the great red dragon, that is, the devil
persecuted the woman, which was a figure of the church of God, and caused her
to fly into the wilderness. from the same fountain also do issue all the
forgeries, lies, and calumniations of Papists, whereby they have gone about to
suppress the truth. for the devil is the father of lies, and from their
father the devil the lying friars and Mass Priests have learned their lying
devises. who then is of God must needs hate this religion, that is partly
invented, and partly maintained by the devil.

CHAP. XXXIII. That Papists can have no assurance of the truth of their
religion.
OF the truth of our Christian faith we are assured. for the articles thereof
were delivered by Christ, taught by the Apostles and Prophets, contained in
Scriptures, and confessed by the catholic church of all times. but it is not
so with Popery. for neither did Christ deliver it, nor the Apostles and
Prophets teach it, nor is the same contained in Scriptures, or confessed by the
catholic church of all times, but depends partly upon traditions not
written, and partly upon the Popes determinations, and partly upon the opinions
of schoolmen and canonistes, and the monks and friars. now what assurance I
pray you, can any Papist have of these doctrines?

First no man yet could ever tell what these traditions are, which the Priests
of Trent would make equal to Scriptures. Bellarmine lib. 4. de verb. dei
talks at randon. but he dare not come to particulars, nor directly express
them.

Secondly, they dare not define, where these traditions are to be found. if
they say in the decretales; then all future traditions are cut off, and former
traditions founded on the Popes opinions. if they say in the legends, their
traditions will prove lies and fooleries. for such are the legends. if they
tell us of the pure fountains of traditions of Caesar Baronius, as Pope Sixtus
the fifth does, they will be laughed at, that were not auised of their grounds,
before the time of this babbling and confused Cardinal.

Thirdly, they cannot show, why some traditions should be observed, and others
not. but if traditions were to be receined with equal affection to holy
Scriptures, then might none be abolished.

As for the determinations of Popes, they can allege no reason, why they
should be true. if they bring the words of Christ to Peter, they concern them
nothing, that are so unlike to Peter. if they bring Christ's promises to his
church, they concern them much less. for they are rather enemies, then
members of the church. but were they members, yet what man is privileged so,
that he cannot err, but those which for writing of holy Scriptures were led
into all truth by the holy Ghost, which is the spirit of truth?

Finally there is such contention betwixt the schoolmen and canonists, and
such diversity of opinions among the several Doctors of both the sides, that
it is bard to say whether any of them teaches truly, and most certain, that
many of them teach falsely. nay scarce any point of doctrine is delivered by
schoolmen, wherein they dissent not one from another.

Now if they say, their faith is founded, not only upon the Popes
determinations, and Apostolic traditions, but also upon holy scriptures, yet
holding as they do, this shall not any whit relieve them.

For first they cannot assure themselves, that the Latin vulgar translation of
the Bible is more true, then the original text in Hebrew and Greek. for all
the fathers with one consent prefer the original fountains before all
versions.

Secondly they must needs stand in doubt, which is the old Latin vulgar
translation. for if they allow that which was set out by Clement the 8. then
cannot they allow of that, which was set out by Sixtus Quintus, the one so much
differing from the other. nor if they approve this, can they follow that.

Thirdly they do not believe the scriptures, because God speaks in them, nor
the traditions because they are Gods word, as they hold, but because the
church does tell us, which are canonical scriptures, and consigneth them unto
us, and does further deliver unto us these traditions not written. for this is
Stapletons opinion in his books de doctrinalibus princip. and authorit.
ecclesiast. defens. and is confessed of most Papists. but if the authority of
scriptures, and traditions in respect of us, does so depend upon the church,
that no man can be assured of either, without the authority of the Church, then
does the faith of Papists rest upon the Pope, who, as they say, is chief
governor of the church. the which will bring the Papists to great uncertainty.
for who is so mad, as to believe, that a blind Pope can well judge of colors,
or so senseless, as not to believe Gods word without the Popes warrant?

Fourthly they receive not the articles of the faith, because they are
contained in scriptures, but because they are delivered unto us by the Pope.

Thomas Aquinas 2.2.9.1. art 10. says, that the ordring of matters of faith,
and the publication of the articles of the Creed belongs to the pope, and
that Athanasius his Creed was received, because it was allowed by the Pope. and
this by others is delivered in more gross terms. Stapleton in his doctrinall
principles says, that the last resolution of matters of faith is in the Popes
desinitiue sentence. and Bellarmine lib. 3. de verb. dei c. 4. goes about to
show, that the Pope is the supreme judge, to whom the interpretation of
scriptures, and last resolution of all controversies of religion is to be
referred.

But the papists can neither assure thomselues, that he that sits at Rome is
true Pope, and S. Peter's true successor, nor that his determinations are
certain or true. That the Pope is S. Peter's true successor, it will be hard to
prove, considering that he preaches not, as S. Peter did, nor S. Peter wear a
triple crown, and command temporal Princes, as he does. it is very hard also
to know, whether he be true Pope or no after the common understanding of
Papists. for unless he be baptized, and truly ordered and chosen, he is no
true Pope. but it is hard to know, whether he were baptized, which depends
upon the Priests intention, which is uncertain and hidden. it is also more
hard to understand, whether he were truly ordered or not. for if he were not
baptized, then is he not capable of Priesthood, as Innocentius says c.
ventens. de presbytero non baptizato. and if he that ordered him, had no
intention to do it, then received he no orders. lastly it is a matter most
difficult, to know, whether the Pope was rightly chosen, or else by Simony, or
violence, or other means intruded. so it is always most uncertain, whether
the Pope be S. Peter's successor, and a lawful Pope, yea or no.

In the Popes determinations also there is great uncertainty and doubt. for
neither can the Papists, that were not present in the Popes consistory, believe
for certain, that the Pope has thus or thus determined, unless they will
believe, either this or that Mass Priest, that tells him so, or the notary
that subscribeth the decretale, or the decretale it self: nor can they assure
themselves, that the Popes determination is true. If they believe every
Mass Priest, or Notarie; then is the faith of Papists built upon every pild
pated Priests report, or notaries subscription. if they believe the Popes
decretales, because they find them written; then do they give more credit to
the Popes decretales, then to holy scriptures: which is most absurd and
impious. that the Pope determines infallibly true, how can they assure
themselves, seeing the scriptures pronounce all men liers, and subject to
infirmities? furthermore we read, that the chiese Priests under the law erred
diuerssie, as the offense of Aaron in making the golden calfe, of Vriah the
Priest, that made an altar, after the form of that of Damascus, of Annas and
Caiphas, that condemned Christ Jesus, does plainly declare. Peter also erred
in denying his master and dissuading his passion, and in Iudaizing, and
dissembling his religion. the bishops of Rome have erred, as Lyra confesses in
Matthew. 16. and may err, as Adrian lib. de sacrament. c. de co^sirmat.
determines. The examples also of Marcellinus, Liberius, Felix, Anastasius the
2. Vigilius, Honorius the first, John the 23. and other Popes do prove the
same. S. Augustine epist. 19. does testify, that the writers of canonical
scriptures only are privileged so, as they cannot err. of other writers he
thinks otherwise. and this is also the opinion of other fathers. finally
reason may persuade us, to acknowledge this truth. for we see no more in the
bishops of Rome, then other bishops, and less then in other learned men. but
other bishops and learned men both have erred, and may err. if they say, that
Peter's chair is privileged; then must they show, that the bishops of Antioch
and Alexandria, which have as much right to Peter's chair, as Rome, have never
erred. but this they know cannot be done.

Thus we see, that neither in the Romish traditions, nor in the Popes
decretales there is any certainty, all depending of the Popes supposed
determinations, of which no certainty can be had. the same also may be showed
by the contrary opinions of popish doctors in every point of controversy, and
for that all their errors are plainly convinced both by scriptures and fathers.
but because they place their principal defense in the sacrifice of the Mass,
we will only show their want of assurance in this point.

First then no Papist in the world is able to show, that either the whole
Mass, or the canon was instituted by Christ, or the Apostles. nay we see
plainly words newly thrust into the form of consecration of the cup; and
popish doctors themselves confess, that diverse parts of the Mass have been
made by several Popes.

Secondly, they cannot show for a thousand years after Christ, that any Priest
was ordained to offer Christ's body and blood really for quick and dead.

Lastly, suppose the Mass were lawful, and the Priest lawful, and all the rest
of the lawless and superstitious tricks lawful; yet can no man assure
himself, that the Priest has truly consecrated. for first no man can tell
whether the man at the altar be a Priest, unless he know, that he was
baptized, and that the bishop ordring him had an intention to do it. Secondly
no man can assure himself, that either he had an intention to consecrate, or
pronounced the words of consecration, or not. for they are pronounced softly.

Are not the Papists then miserable, who are so uncertain of their Mass, and
know not, whether they worship bread, or God, whether they serve God or
creatures, whether they be Christians or idolaters?

CHAP. XXXIIII. That Popery is repugnant to the laws of Nations.
But could the Papists persuade themselves, that their Massing sacrifice were
lawful and the rest of their religion were true; yet who would not abhor
that religion, which is grounded on such foundations, and contains such
impieties, heresies and false doctrines, and is so repugnant both to Catholic
religion, and all antiquity?

Further we find, that it overthrows the laws of nations, dissolueth the
bands of alliance and kindred, preiudiceth the authority of Kings and Princes,
hazardeth their lives and persons, oppresses the liberty of Christians, both
for matters of conscience, and their temporal estate, and is maintained by
lies, calumniations, forgeries, periuries, fire and sword, and most dishonest
and wicked means.

The laws of nations require, that oaths, promises, compactes, leagues and
treaties of trade and commerce be observed and kept. but all these bonds
neither Popes nor Papists regard. Formosus being deposed from his bishopric,
swore, that he would never resume the same again. yet regarded he not his
oath. Gregory the 7. was made Pope contrary to his oath, as appears in the
life of Henry the 4. Paschal the 2. solemnly swore to Henry the Emperor, to
observe certain articles agreed upon betwixt them. but he was no sooner out of
his hands, but he broke his oath, rebelled against the Emperor, and
excommunicated him. Charles the French King, as Theodoric a Niem testifies
tract. nemor. union. 6. c. 14. charge Gregory the 12. and Benedict the 13.
with violating their oaths, vows and promises. Violarunt sidem says he,
fregerunt votum, promissum non tenucrunt. Omiphrius charge Alexander the 6.
with more then Punicke persidiousnesse. persidia plus quam punica. Guicciardin
in his history speaking of Clement the 7. says, he regarded his oath but
little. era di poca sede. he shows also, how Julius the second endeavored to
prove, that the church, that is, the Pope, as he meant, was not bound by any
oath. and that appears to have been most current doctrine by diverse
perfidious prankes played by Leo the 10. Clement the 7. and diverse other Popes
mentioned by Onuphrius, and diverse of the Popes own friends and parasites.

Neither do they only break oaths themselves, but persuade all their
accomplices to do the like. the Bishop of Verdune, as we read in Conradus
Traiectensis relates, how Gregory the 7. esteemed faith to be sacrilege, and
them to be loyal, that broke their oaths to the emperor. periuria sidelitatem
dicit, fidem sacrilegium sacit. Henry the 4. also, as we read in Helmoldus
complained, that his subsects by the instigation of the Pope rebelled against
their lord, and broke their says and solemn oaths. lenarunt manus contra
dominum and regem suum, and violauerunt sidem, and iuramentorum sacramenta.

In the council of Constance the Pope and his accomplices persuaded the emperor
most dishonorably to violate his safe conduct granted to John Husse. there also
it was decreed that faith was not to be held with heretics. they endeavored
lately to persuade the emperor Charles the fifth likewise to break with Luther.
Paul the 3. in his bull against King Henry the 8. did pronounce them accursed,
that would not break oaths, and couenauts made with him, or with his
subjects. Eugenius the 4. was the cause that Ladislaus King of Poland did
break with the Turk. the like practices have diverse Popes used to cause
subjects to rebel against Princes. Innocentius the 3. moved the English
contrary to their oaths to rebel against King John. and the like course did
Paul the third take against King Henry the eight, and Pius the sist against
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory. the late traitors were diverse of them tied
by special oaths to King lames. but with gun-ponder they meant to blow away
oaths, and honesty. Finally it may truly be said of the Pope, and his
accomplices, that they take themselves no further bound by their oaths, then
their profit requires. so one said also in express terms of them. multis
annis iam peractis, nulla sides est in pactis. for many years they have
regarded no compactes. and by this stratagem they have prevailed against the
Emperors, and other Princes, and setting the Christian world upon a flame, have
warmed themselves by the fire.

We read also that diverse leagues and treaties of peace by the wicked
persuasions of Popes and their adherents and agents have been violated. The
Spaniarde and English in time past enterteined peace one with another, but Pius
the fifth by his agents set the one nation against the other. by the practices
of Popes and their agents we find, that the freuch King Charles the 9. broke
the articles of peace both with his subjects and other Princes, and caused many
thousand innocents to be murdered and massacred throughout his kingdom anno
1572. Philip the 2. King of Spain had not broken the privileges of the low
countries, nor the articles of the pacification at Gant anno 1576. but that he
was moned thereunto by the continual persuasions of the Pope. nay Paul the
third doubted not to curse all those, that would not break with king Henry the
8. upon his excommunication.

Furthermore, by the laws of nations, wars are either publickely proclaimed,
or after refusal of restitution of goods wrongfully taken, by some heralds or
others denounced. but the Pope contrary to all laws, caused the Spaniardes
anno 1588. to come against England, before any war was denounced. the same
course also did Paul the 3. hold in his wars against the Germans. neither do
the papists end euour any thing more, then to take Christians on sleep, and so
to steal upon them and to cut their throats. and this appeared lately most
clearly in the cruel conspiraracy of the ponder men, and undermining papists.

Great respect is always had to ambassadors and agents sent to treat of war or
peace. And this is C. in^gentium, did. 1.
confirmed by the laws of al nations. but Popes have oftentimes evil
entreated the Emperors ambassadors. Gregorius 7. nuntios Henrici Imperatoris
carceri mandauit, as we read in Orthuinus Gratius in certain epistles set
down together with the Emperors life. another Pope killed Frederic the 2. his
ambasladors, that brought news of his good success in Palestine. the Marquis
of Montigni and earl of Bergues in the beginning of the troubles of the Low
country, being sent into Spain to mediate some good conditions with the king,
were imprisoned and done to death. and now they are esteemed simple, that will
trust the Popes vassals, or treat with them without hostages.

Finally by the laws of nations, kings have sovereign power over their
subjects. and neither can subjects abandon their Princes, nor oppugn them, nor
may kings oppress their subjects, or suffer them to be massacred by the
adherents of antichrist or others. but by the doctrine of papists all Kings
are subject to the Pope, as they teach in the chap. vnam sanctam. extr. de
maiorit. and obed. and diverse other places. the same also is proved, for that
diverse Popes take upon them to take away Princes crowns. the Popes do dispense
with the oaths of Princes made to their subjects, and with the oaths of
subjects made to their Princes. of which, many calamities do proceed. Papa
cum Achaiae principem says Pachymeres lib. hist. 1. c. vlt. iureiurando, quod
Paleologo dederat soluisset, contmentium bellorum causam praebuit. the Pope
absoluing the Prince of Achaia from his oath given to Paleologus, was cause of
diverse troubles one following upon the neck of another. and the like
inconveniences have followed upon the like presumption of Popes in taking upon
them to control kings, and to stir their subjects against them. but what
need we to seek for examples in ancient histories, when the calamities happening
in France by occasion of the league against the King, and in England and
Ireland by the Popes insolent excommunications and dispensations in this case,
are so fresh in memory? is it not then marvel, that so many nations should
embrace the doctrine of Popery, that is so repugnant to the laws of nations,
and rights both of Princes and subjects founded on the laws of nations?

CHAP. XXXV. That Popery dissolueth the bonds of kindred, and alliance, and
civility.
THere is no bond straiter then that, which is betwixt parents and their
children. and naturally men are inclined to love their kinsmen and allies. but
this false religion, which is professed by Papists, and founded upon the Pope,
dissolueth all bands of alliance and kindred, and sets the children against
the parents, and the parents against the children. Paschale the 2. and his
adherents, as Helmoldus testifies, armed the son against the father.
Paschalis and Pontifices Germani, says he, silium Henricum contra patrem
armarunt, and vicerunt. likewise Gregory the 9. made Henry the son, head of a
strong league against Frederic the 2. his father, as is testified by Auentinus
in annal. Boiorum. Henricum Caesarem, says he, missis legatis aduersus patrem
conspirationis valentissimae principem facit. the same man speaking of
Innocentius the 3. assirmeth, that he set coosen against coosen, brother
against brother, and son against the father. Spectante atque concitante
Romano sacerdote, says he, Philippus and Otho cognatas acies inter so
committunt. frater aduersus fratrem, silius aduersus parentem consligere
cogitur. Marius Belga lib. de schism. c. 4. shows, how certain Popish
prelates set the sons of Ludouicus Pius against the father, and that Gregory
the 4. consented unto it. contrariwise Pius the 5. as we read in his life
written by Hierome Catena testifies, how Philip the 2. of Spain consented to
the death of his son Charles suspected not to favor popish religion. non
pepereit, filio suo proprio, says he, abusing the words of holy Scripture sed
dedit eum pro nobis. he spared not his own son. but gave him for us. In the
histories written concerning the persecutions of the church of late time by the
Popish faction in England, France, Flanders, Italy, and elsewhere, we read,
that diverse have been betrayed by their own kinsfolks, brethren, and friends,
and find that fulfilled, which our Savior Christ foretold us, Luc. 21. how
Christians should be betrayed of their parents, brethren, kinsmen and friends.
In Spain they force parents, to bring wood to burn their children, and
children to set fire to their parents. Alphonsus Dias came post from Rome, and
caused his own brother to be murdered for that he had embraced true religion.
it is reported, that in England Queen Marie, if she had lived any longer,
would have caused the bones of her own father to have been dug up and
burned.

It is also a common practice of children in places where Popery reigns, to
abandon their parents, and to profess monkerie. Airault of Angiers in France,
a man of good note, lost his only son, by the entisement of the Iebusites,
persuaded to enter into their superstitious order; neither could the father
ever after hear what was become of him. and so have many parents been
deprived of their sons and daughters under color of religion, oftentimes
drawn away to serve the Mass Priests abominable lusts. this among Papists is
counted religion. but the example sauoureth rather of Turkish, then Christian
religion. for as the children of Christians are taken from their parents and
friends and made Ianizars, and so employed in the wars against Christians; so
these nouices are by fraud and wily devises stolen from their Christian
parents and friends, and afterward employed in the defense of antichristian
doctrine against truth, and the professors thereof.

Finally they that profess Popery zealously do forget oftentimes all laws of
common ciuility. lately the pouder-men Papists had thought to cut all their
countrimens throtes. the Masle-priests esteem laymen no otherwise then dogs
and hogs commonly when they appear before magistrates, that are not of their
own religion, they give them no reverence. Alexander the third trod upon the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossaes neck. Adrian the 4. suffered him to hold his
stirrup. other Popes have used Kings and Princes as their stassiers. and for
their hands they give Christians their feet to kiss.

Neither is this a fault of the practice, but also of the doctrine of Popery.
for these facts they commonly defend, and forbid al speech, communication,
dealing with excommunicate persons. os, orare, vale, communio, mensa negatur,
says Nauarrus in enchirid. c. 27. these words spoken of Leui, Deuter. 33.
which said to his father and mother, I know you not: are applied to all, that
enter into any order of monkish religion, as we may perceive by the doctrine of
Bellarmine lib. de monach. c. 36.

Whosoever therefore looks for filial obedience at the hands of his
children, had need ^o look, that they be not nouzled in Popery. whosoever
expects for kind and frindly usage must not consort himself with Papists,
who toward Christians use neither respect of kindred, nor of friendship, and
upon every warrant of the Pope take themselves absolved from their obedience to
their superiors, whether they rule in church or commonwealth, and by all means
suppose themselves bound to cut Christian men's throts.

CHAP. XXXVI. That Popish religion either disannulleth, or greatly preiudiceth
the authority of Kings and Princes.
CHristian religion does give an eminent authority and prerogative to Kings. S.
Peter 1. epist. 2. exosteth all Christians to subinit themselves unto them. and
S. Paul Romans 13. teaches every soul to be subject to the higher powers.
Tertullian in his treatise ad Scapulam shows, that the Emperor was next under
God, supreme governor. colimus imperatorem, says he, sic quomodo and nobis
licet, and ipsi expedit, vt hominem a deo secundum. we honor the Emperor etc.
as a man, that has the next place to God. can we then with any reason suppose
Popery to savor of Christian religion, that either makes the Emperor and
other Kings subject to the Pope, or else takes away a great part of his
authority?

That the Papists hold all temporal Princes to be inferior and subject to
the Pope it cannot be denied. Innocentius the third in c. solitae. de mayor.
and obed. disputing this matter, compares the Pope to the Sun, and the
Emperor to the Moon, as if the Emperor were as many degrees inferior to the
Pope, as the Moon is to the Sun. quanta est inter solemn and lunam, tanta
inter pontifices and reges differentia cognoscitur.

Clement the sift in the chapter Romani principes. de iureiurando, declares,
that the Emperors of Rome have submitted their heads to the bishop of Rome. sua
submittere capita non reputarunt indignum. again he shows, how they ought to
take an oath of fealty and obedience to the Pope.

The author of the Gloss in c. Romani. clem. de iureiurando, assigns all
this subjection of Princes to Christ his institution. Jesus voluit, says he.

In the chapter Pastoralis. clem. de sent. and reiudicat. the Pope determines
that by right of the Papacy he has superiority over the Empire, and that in
the vacancie of the empire himself has the right of the Emperor.

Bonisace the 8. writing to the French king, gave him to understand, that he
was the Popes subject both in spiritual and temporal matters. scire to
volumus, says he, quod in spiritualibus and temporalibus nobis subes. in the
chapter vnam sanctam. extr. de mayor. and obed. he determines, that the Pope
has both the swords, and that he has power both to make kings, and to depose
them. spiritualis potestas potestatem terrenam instituere habet and iudicare,
si bona non fuerit. that is, the spiritual power has right to ordeine the
earthly power, and to judge the same, if it be not good.

Josephus Vestanus lib. de osculat. pedum Pontisicis. p. 137. among the
dictates of Gregory the 7. sets down this for one, that it is lawful for
the Pope to depose the Emperor.

Pius the fist in his blundring bull against Queen Elizabeth our late dread
sovereign, blusheth not to affirm, that the Pope alone is made a Prince, and
set over all nations and kingdoms to pull up, to destroy, to dissipate and
spaile, to plant and to build. hunc vnum, says he, super omnes gentes, and
ommae regna principe^ constituit, qui cuellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat,
plantet and aedisicet. This also is the doctrine of modern Iebusites and their
accomplices. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Pontis. Romans c. 6. speaking of the Pope,
teaches, that he has power to change kingdoms, and to take from one, and to
give to another, if it be necessary for saning souls. and this he offreth to
prove. Potest mutare regna, says he, and vni auferre, atque altericonserre,
si id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem, vt probabimus.

The Iebusites of France in a discourse entitled la verite defendue, blush not
to defend the Popes usurped power in deposing Princes: nay to assirme, that
this great authority is prositable for Princes.

Ghineard a Iebusite was hanged in Paris anno 1594. for writing and mainteining
diverse seditious positions concerning the Popes authority in disposing the
crown of France, and translating the same from the family of Bourbon.

Parsons in his warne-word p. 2. f. 127. allows the deposing of Henry the 3.
of France. neither would he have desired, that the Bull of Pius the sift
against Queen Elizabeth might be suspended against the Papists, but that he
imagined, that she was justly deposed. the same man in his seditious book of
titles lib. 1. c. 1. endeuoreth to prove, that the succession in kingdoms by
necrenesse of blood is by positive laws of the common-welth, and may upon just
causes be altered by the same. in his third chapter he pretends, that not
only unworthy claimers may be put back, but also that kings in possession may
be chastised and deposed. his drist in the fourth chapter is to show, that the
people sometimes may lawfully proceed against princes. is it not then strange,
that the factious scholars of this seditious teacher are still harbored in the
bowels of this state?

William Rainolde, a rinegat Englishman, in a certain treatise set out under
the name of William Rosse, and titled, de iusta reip. Christianae supra reges
impios and haereticos authoritate etc. does in express terms defend the
wicked league of the French rebels against the King, and give the people power
to depose their kings. the same man in the 2. chapter of that book assirmeth
impudently, that the right of all the Kings and kingdoms of Europe is laid
upon this foundation, that common-welthes, or the people may depose their kings.

I us omnium Europae regum and regnorum, says he, hoc fundamento nititur, quod
resp. possint suos reges deponere. In all Europe therefore it will be hard to
find more arrant traitors, then himself and his accomplices.

Bellarmine lib. 5. de pontif. Romans c. 6. says, it is not lawful for
Christians to tolerat a king, that is an insidell, or an heretic, if he go
about to draw his subjects to his heresy or infidelity. non licet Christianis
tolerare regem infidelem aut haereticum, si ille pertrahere conetur subdit os
ad suam haeresim aut infidelitatem. a hard sentence against his Majesty, if
Papists had power to judge him.

Emanuel Sain his book called aphorismi confessariorum, holds these
aphorisms in verbo princeps. viz. that a prince may be deposed by the
common-welth for tyranny, and also if he do not his duty, or where there is
just cause, and that another may be chosen by the greatest part of the people.
in the word tyrannus he affirms, that a tyrant may be deposed by the people,
although they be sworn to be obedient unto him, if being admonished he will
not amend. now to the Popish faction all are tyrants, that will not admit their
Popish superstition, though otherwise they be never so mild and gentle. and so
it appears they account of our gracious king, whom of late they have sought
trecherously to murder.

If then we admit this common doctrine of Papists of the Popes authority in
deposing Kings, and giving them Law; we diminish the authority of Kings, and
make them subjects to the Pope. which is a matter abominable to be either
taught or believed. we do also endanger, not only the state of all Kings, but
also of their kingdoms. for how can any King stand against the violence of the
Pope, if he have authority to depose Kings? by this usurped authority Gregory
the 7. wrought Henry the Emperor and his subjects many troubles.

Paschall the 2. made the son to rise against the father; and the subjects
against their Princes, and in the end caused the en peror to be taken prisoner,
and to resign his Empire. the same man also, as he subdued the father, so
quarreled he with the son, and caused his subjects to take arms against him.

Innocent the 2. by force of arms thought to vanquish Roger King of Sicilia,
and in a pitched field had prevailed against him, if the son had not
succored his father Roger.

Adrian the 4. and Alexander the 3. did so far prevail against Fridericke
the first, that he held the stirrup to the first, and was trodden upon by the
second.

Celestin the 3. proudly demeaned himself against Henry the 6. casting the
crown from his head, with his foot, as he kneeled before him, as we read in
Rogor Houeden.

Innocent the 3. brought the Emperors Philip and Otho to destruction by his
furious persequution. the same man caused King John of England to surrender his
crown, and was the cause of the loss of Normandy to the English. Neither did
he alone offer wrong to John King of England. for before his time king Henry
the second had received a great scorn of the Pope in the cause of Thomas
Becket. Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4. with great fury set upon Friderike
the 2. and employed Christians, that had made vows to fight against the
Saracens, to the ruin of the Emperor.

John the 22. Benet the 12. and Clement the 6. with implacable hatred
prosequuted Jews of Bauier, and that for no other cause, then for that he
took on him as Emperor, without the Popes allowance. and for the same cause
Harold encurred the Popes displeasure, not submitting himself to receive his
crown of the Popes faction. Boniface the eight while he sought to subdue
Philip of France, and the houle of Colonna in Italy, troubled both Spain and
Italy. the Popes of late time have caused all the stirs in Germany, Italy,
France, Flanders, England and Scotland. the leaguers of France, were confirmed
in their rebellion by the Pope, and drove King Henry the third out of his
palace, and killed him by a Dominican Friar, as he beseeged Paris; and long
withstood the king now reigning. Upon the excommunication of Paul the third,
the papists of England rebelled against King Henry the eight. in his bull of
excommunication recorded by Sanders he commanded his subjects to resist him,
and to throw him out of his kingdom. principibus viris ac ducibus Angliae,
says he, caeteraeque nobilitati praecipit, vt vi and armis se Henrico
opponant, illumque e regni sinibus eijcere nitantur. by the Popes
excommunications the rebellion was raised in the North of England by the Earls
of Westmerland and Norththumberland, and diverse tumults in Ireland against
Queen Elizabeth. nay albeit our King be not denounced excommunicat, yet did
the gun-pouder Papists seek to blow him up with the principal men of England.
neither had the Spaniards anno 1588. any better ground to invade England, then
the Popes commandment and warrant.

Seeing then the Pope takes upon him a superiority over all Kings, and seeks
to depose all such, as will not conform themselves to his will; it is much to
be wondered, that Christian princes, that do embrace his doctrine, do not see,
in what danger they stand, either to be disgraced, or dispossessed of their
crowns. disgrace it is to acknowledge any in earth their superior, and an
evident danger to fall out with the Pope, where the subjects are affected to
Popery.

CHAP. XXXVII. That Kings professing Popish religion are either no Kings, or
but half Kings.
But were not Kings in danger to lose their crowns and Kingdoms living under
the Pope; yet have they no reason to take upon themselves as free Kings and
Princes, or to believe, that they can enjoy all the right that belongs to
lawful Kings and Princes.

For first no King can freely dispose of matters belonging to his government,
that acknoledgeth any man to be his superior. as for example, Herod and other
Kings, that ruled under the Romans, who could proceed no further, then pleased
the Emperors, and people of Rome. if then the King of Spain, or France, or
other nations do acknowledge the Pope to be his judge and superior, he may not
refuse his judgment, or resist his authority.

Secondly we find, that Kings before Christ's coming in the flesh gave laws
both to the chief priests, and to all their people; and not the chief priest
either to the Kings of Israel and Judah, or to the people, as may appear by
the laws of Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Hezekia and Josiah. we do also
read, that Constantine and other Christian Kings, until the times of Charles
the great and long after, gave laws to the Bishops of Rome and other
clergymen, as may be evidently proved by the laws yet extant Cod. de sum.
trinit. and sid. cath. de episc. and Cleric. de episcop. audient. de
haereticis, and in diverse other titles, and books. but where any bishop of Rome
all this time made any law to bind either kings, or their subjects, we find
not, unless we list to admit counterfeit decretales for current laws, which no
man of any understanding will do, nor any modest Papist can require. wherefore
taking upon them authority to make laws to bind both Kings and their
subjects, the Popes plainly declare, that Kings lining under the confusion of
Antichrists tyranny, are no kings.

Thirdly Bellarmme lib. 1. de pontif. Romans c. 7. determines that temperall
Princes are no governors of the Church. and generally both the Pope and his
accomplices teach, that kings have no power, either to make ecclesiastical
laws, or to reform abuses of doctrine, or to settle matters ecclesiastical.
finally the Papists of England in their glosing petitions to his Majesty,
wherein they pray his favor, yet will allow him no authority, save only in
temporal and civil causes. does it not then manifestly appear, that Papists
take from kings half their authority, and give the same to forreiners, and
public enemies?

Fourthly in temporal matters, which they are content to leave to the
disposition of Kings, they restrain them in such sort, that they will not have
them either to rest in peace, when the Pope commands them to make wars, or
to make wars further then the Pope permits. Bomface the eight in c. vam
sanctam. extr. de maiorit. and obed. shows how princes are to use their
swords, ad nutum and patientiam sacerdotis. that is, at the Popes beck, and as
long as he lists to suffer it.

Fifthly the Pope shareth half the kings revenues, claiming tenths, first
fruits, subsidies, and other rights out of ecclesiastical livings. he does
also claim the disposition of diverse ecclesiastical livings in diverse cases,
and right to confirm bishops, and gets great sums of money for pardons,
licenses, and other rescripts, and faculties.

Sixthly, if a king need a dispensation against an ecclesiastical law, or an
absolution from an offense. he is sent to Rome to obtain it if be can, and
oftentimes such faculties and absolutions cost full dear. King Henry the 8.
spent great sums of money to be divorced from his brothers wife, and yet
failed of his purpose. Frederick the 2. could not be absolved from his
excommunication by Gregory the 9. but it cost him 125. M. ounces of gold, as
Nauclere and Iuan de Pineda a Spaniard do signify. John the king of England
to obtain absolution was forced to resign his crown.

Seventhly, Alex. inder the fourth in the chapter quia nonnulli. de immunit.
eccles. in 6. exempteth the possessions and goods of clergy men from toll and
custom.

Finally Bomface the 8. in the chapter clericis. de immunitat. eccles. m 6.
does excommunicate both kings and others, that impose taxes and subsidies upon
the clergy. and this is the common doctrine of the Popes agents. Bellarmine de
exemptione clericorum c. 1. sets down these propositions, that clerks in
ecclesiastical causes are free from the command of secular Princes by the law
of God. and again, that clerks are not to be judged of secular judges, albeit
they transgress temporal laws. and lastly, that Princes in respect of
clerks are not sovereign Princes. Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms for
confessaries, first printed and alleged by him, that wrote the Frank
discourse, has these words, clerici rebellio in regem non est crimen
laesaemaiestatis, quia non est subditus regi. the rebellion of a clerk against
the king is no treason, because he is not the kings subject. nay of late both
the mass priests and their fiery followers have thought it meritorious to
rebel against the king.

And consonant to this doctrine is the practice of papists, for in matters of
contention betwixt the Pope and their kings, they take part with the Pope, and
rebel against their kings, as the rebellions of the Germans and French in
time past, of the English and Irish against king Henry the 8. and Queen
Elizabeth; of the leaguers of France against king Henry the 3. and 4. do
manifestly declare.

When the Pope does give law to Princes, they take themselves bound to execute
it, and upon every excommunication rise in arms against them, and seek to
depose them.

In ecclesiastical causes they run for direction to the Pope, and care not a
straw for the ecclesiastical laws of their kings.

When the Pope commands a Prince to execute his bulls, they are ready to
follow the wars. if he command them to surcease, they forsake their kings in
the midst of his conquests.

If the Pope leuy tenthes or subsidies upon the clergy, or Monks, or Friars,
they willingly bear all burdens, and to him they run for dispensations, and
all faculties.

Kings also seek to the Pope in their own cases for dispensations, and
absolutions, where the Popes law says, they are necessary.

Finally both the possessions and persons of clergy men are the Popes to
dispose, as may appear, for that he lays what charge he lists on their
possessions, and sometimes alienateth them to maintain his wars, and finds
their persons pressed to do him service.

If then kings bear themselves as inferiors to the Pope, and receive laws at
his hands, and are excluded from all disposition and rule in ecclesiastical
causes, and both draw their swords and put them up at his command, and suffer
him to tax their subjects, and run to him for faculties and dispensations, and
finally can neither dispose of the possessions of the church, nor of the
persons of churchmen; we may boldly say, that Popery either makes kings no
kings, or but half kings.

CHAP. XXXVIII. That Kings live not in any security of their lives where
Popery is professed by their subjects.
David the man of God would not suffer any of his followers to lay his hands
upon Saul, although God had appointed him to succeed in the kingdom, and
rejected Saul. and great respect always have Christians had to their
sovereign Lords and Princes. In the canons attributed to the Apostles c. 83.
every contumelious spech against the Emperor, or magistrate is judged worthy of
punishment. what are we then to think of the Popes of Rome and their
accomplices, that not only curse and rail against princes and magistrates, but
also stir up all the world against them, if they will not yield to their
Lordly will and pleasure? such certes are the children of Belial, and not the
servants of God. I hope therefore Christian Princes will open their eyes, and
every day grow more wary in their dealings with the popes of Rome and their
agents, which are no less dangerous in respect of their lives and persons,
then their royal estats and kingdoms.

For first they hold, that is lawful for the Pope to change kingdoms, and to
take from one, and to give to another, as Bellarmine in express terms
determines l. 5. de pont. Romans c. 6. And this is declared by the continual
practice of Popes, who these many years have gone about to take from one, and
to give to another, now giving the kingdom of Sicily and Naples to the French,
now to the Spanish, now challenging it themselves. the kingdom of Navarre is
holden from the French king by no better warrant, then the Popes grant. by the
same also the Spaniards and Portingals have divided the Indians betwixt them.
Boniface the eight by his bull made Philip and the kingdom of France subject
to Albert. Philippum ciusque regnum Alberto regi subijcit, says Platina in
Bonifacio 8. but what king does not with his sword defend his state, and
chooses not rather to loose his life, then his kingdom?

Secondly they teach, that the Pope is to judge of Kings, as is defined by the
extranagant vnams. inctam. de maiorit. and obed. they give the Pope also power
to depose kings, and to take away their crowns. but it were great simplicity
to think, that any magnanimous Prince will either lose his crown, or submit
himself to be judged by a pole-shorne Pope without force. nay sooner will he
hazard his life, then either loose his crown, or submit himself to the Popes
judgment.

Finally, both by their doctrine and practice it appears, that the Popes and
their agents have sought to murder, empoison and destroy such kings and
princes, as either were excommunicat by them, or else were opposite unto them.
Gregory the 7. watching the Emperor, that was wont to pray in the church of S.
Mary. as Beno testifies, hired a fellow to place great stones upon the beams
or vault of the church right over the place where he prayed, which being
thrown down might kill him. his words are these. imperator solitus erat
frequenter ire ad oration: mad ecclesiam S. Mariae, quae est in mente Auentino.
Hildebrandus autem cum per exploratores omma eius opera solicit inquircret,
locum in quo frequentius imperator, velstans vel prostratus orabat, notari
secit, and quendam promissa pecunia ad hoc induxit, vt supra trabes ecclesiae
occulte lapides magnos collocaret, and ita aplaret, vt de alto super caput
imperatoris demitteret, and ipsum contereret. again the same Beno says, that
the Pope went about by secret traitors to destroy the emperor. eisdem diebus
parauit imperatorem perdere per occultos proditores. and when by secret
treachery he could effect nothing, by public force and arms he sought to
subdue him.

Innocent the second having raised an army fought with Roger King of Sicilia
in a pitched field, thinking to destroy him.

Philip the Emperor, and his successor Otho were both brought to their
destruction by the practices of Innocent the 3 about this time also John king
of England was poisoned by a Monk of Swinsted-abby, for that he was supposed
to be adverse to the Popish faction. his empoisonment is particularly set down
in Caxtons chronicle.

Henry of Lucemburg the emperor was poisoned in the Sacrament by a Dominican
friar about the year of our Lord 1313. quidam religiosus, says Vrspergensis,
porrexit imperatori intoxicatam eucharistiam. the same is also testified by
baptista Igantius, supplementum Chronicorum, Textor in officina. c. veneno
extincti, and diverse others. Sleidanus says, the Friar was moved thereunto by
Clement the fifth. and the reason was, for that the Emperor grew too strong in
Italy. this act committed by a Dominican Friar, was the cause of the death of
many Friars of that order slain by the Emperors soldiers.

Matthew Paris in Henrico 3. testifies, that Pope Innocent the 4. was charged
with the empoisonment of Fridericke the Emperor by the means of Peter de
Vinea, and that the fame of the Pope was not a little stained by this foul
fact. obsorduit domini Papae fama, says he, per hoc non mediocriter. in the
end he was murdered by Mansrede, as is said, not without the secret practice of
the Pope.

Joan the Queen of Naples being taken by her enemies was murdered with the
priuitie and consent of Vrbane the sixth.

Charles the king of Naples by the bloody council of Clement the 4. caused
Conradmus and Frederike duke of Austria to be put to death. vita Conradim mors
Caroli, said Clement, which cost that young Prince his life.

Sixtus the fourth was the principal contriuer of that treason, whereby Julian
de medic^s was slain, and his brother Laurence hurt in the church of Reparata
at Florence at the elcuation of the sacrament. conscio and adinuante pontifice,
says Volateran Geograph. lib. 5.

Alexander the 6. caused Gemes the Turks brother to be empoisoned, being
hired thereto by promises and money by the great Turk. so little conscience do
Popes make of murdring princes.

Paul the 3. in his bull against Henry the 8. King of England exhorted the
Nobles and principal men of England to oppose themselves against him with
force and arms, and sent Cardinal Poole to foreign princes, to stir them
up against the king, giving him and his people as a pray to his enemies, and by
all means seeking to destroy him.

Pius the fifth excommunicated all that would not take arms against Queen
Elizabeth our late dread Soueraign, and by secret practice stirred her subjects
against her.

Sixtus Quintus anno 1588. in his declaration against the foresaid Lady
exhorts her people to lay hands on her, to arrest her, and to concur to her
punishment. and to this end tends the most seditious and wicked libell set
out by Allen, yet not without the help of Parsons, and directed to the
nobility and people of England and Ireland.

When force prevailed not, the Popes of Rome and their adherents by treachery
sought to murder her. William Parry anno 1584. resolved to murder that innocent
Queen, and his purpose did so well please Pope Gregory the 13. that Cardinal
Como in the Popes name promised him pardon of all his sins, and a great
reward besides for his endeavor. Monsignor, says he, his holiness has seen
your letters, with the credential note included, and cannot but commend the
good disposition, which as you write, you hold for the service and benefit of
the public weal: wherein he exhorts you to continue until you have brought
it to effect. and that you may be helped by that good spirit, that has moved
you, he grants you his blessing and plenary indulgences, and plenary
remission of all your sins. assuring you beside the merit which you shall have
in heaven, that his holiness will make himself your debtor to acknowledge your
deserts in the best sort he can. thus the Pope promises heaven to a wicked
murderer: and with him concurred one Benedict Palmio a Iebusite of Venice, and
other Iebusites and Massepriests in France, all setting this assassin and
cutthroate on to murder an innocent Queen. Parsons that ringleader of
traitors, when an English gentle man went about to discover this treason, by
all means disturned and distwaded him, furthering with his desires this most
wicked resolution of Parry, as is cuident by his letters dated the 18. of
October anno 1598. which are yet to be showed.

That which Parry intended, diverse other traitors also promised to perform, as
Savage enduced thereto by the persuasion of D. Gifford, and other priests at
Paris; Ballard, who was set on by Allen; Somerfield, who was encouraged in the
enterprise by Arden, and a Romish maste-priest; Patricke Collen, York and
Williams, who were enduced thereto by sir William Stanley, Hugh Owen, Holt,
Sherwood, Gifford, Worthington and others to commit this villainous fact.

In the end Lopez the Queens Physicion undertook to empoison the Queen upon
hope of a great sum of money, and one Squire promised Walpoole to practice
the same treason, damning himself, if he did not execute that treacherous act,
and receiving the Sacrament upon it. such zeal have these wicked Iebusites to
do mischief. neither do they now desist from these wicked attempts, as their
treacherous plots against king James declare.

Of late time Henry the 3. of France was most shamefullie murdered by a
Dominican Friar called James Clement, and the fact was highly praised by the
Pope.

The like fact did Peter Barrier attempt against Henry the fourth, animated
therein by diverse Iebusites and mass priests, as appears by his confession
set down in record.

John Chastell stroke the same king with a knife, thinking to murder him, and
this he learned, as he confessed in his examination, of the Iebusites.

The late Prince of Orange was first wounded by John Iauregui, and afterward
murdered by Balthazar Gerard. both which were persuaded by Mass Priests and
Friars, that such facts were meritorious. finally diverse have been hired and
sent by the Popes agents to murder Prince Maurice, as namely Michael Reinichon,
Peter du Four, and Peter Pan. and this is evidently declared by their
confessions, by diverse presumptions, and by their execution for this cause.

If then such rewards be promised to such, as attempt to empoison, and murder
Princes; let all Christian Princes beware, how they admit such near their
persons, as beleene this wicked doctrine. and let them never forget the
villainous treason of the English-miners and gun-pouder-men.

If Papists think it meritorious to kill princes excommunicate by the Pope,
and are therein animated by him and his agents; then can Godly Princes have no
assurance of their lives before they root out all the professors of this
King-killing and bloody religion. and this appears evidently by the treason
contrived the fifth of November last.

CHAP. XXXIX. That Popery lays grievous burdens on men's consciences.
Our Savior Christ Matthew. 23. denounced a woe to the Scribes and Pharisees,
for that they shut the Kingdom of heaven before men, and neither entered
themselves, nor suffered others to enter therein. he taxes them also, for that
they bound heavy and importable burdens on men's shoulders, and did not so much
as once touch them with one of their singers. but better may the same woe be
denounced against the Pharisaical Friars, Monks, and Mass Priests, which
keeping the people of God from the knowledge of Gods word, and nouzeling them
up in ignorance, as much as in them lies, do fast shut the kingdom of heaven
against them, and while they seek to maintain their pompous state, and refuse
to hear all speech of reformation, neither enter themselves, nor suffer others
to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Furthermore they do not only tie their
followers to observe unwritten traditions, as did the hypocritical Scribes and
Pharisees, but also lay upon them diverse other most heavy and grievous burdens.

First they press men with diverse heavy statues and laws. for example, they
bind men to confess to their parochial priest once every year. they require
that confession be simple, humble, pure, faithful, frequent, naked, discreet,
willing, bashful, full and secret, etc. according to these verses: Sit
simplex, humilis confessio, pura, fidelis,
Atque frequens, nuda and discreta, libens, verecunda,
Integra, secreta, and lachrymabilis, accelerata,
Fortis, and accusans, and sit parere parata.
And unless all mortal sins be confessed, they say it avails nothing. but
who can either tell all his sins, or observe all these conditions? they also
bind men to keep certain holy days and set feasts and fastes, and that with
certain conditions. Further they teach, that all Christians are to observe the
statutes of the church of Rome and decretales of Popes, and acts of their
pretended councels.

Secondly, every transgression of the statutes of the Romish church, and of the
Popes decretales they punish with grievous penalties. to eat flesh on
fridaies, to eat eggs in Lent, to read holy Scriptures in vulgar tongues,
without recantation, is capital.

Thirdly they hold, that every law of the Romish church does bind in
conscience. nay if subjects rebel not against their Princes, and lay hands
upon them, they teach that they sin mortally. if then all transgressions of
the Popes laws be sin; then are Papists tied with infinite chains of
sins. they loose all these laws, I confess, lightly, but always this
scruple will remain, whether they have rightly confessed, and have fully
satisfied, and are justly absolved.

Fourthly the censures of the Romish church even to Papists have always seemed
intolerable. Peter de Aliaco in his book de reformat. eccles. complains of
it, and shows how the sword of the church by frequent excommunications is
grown contemptible. he complains also of the multitude of irregularities.
add hereunto the greeuances proceeding of suspensions and interditements, and
then the burden must needs seem more greenous.

Fifthly, such as do not in matters of faith or Sacraments iumpe with the
Romish church, they pronounce heretics, as appears by the chap. ad
abolendam. de haereticis. they give them also over to the secular power to be
put to death.

Sixthly they make Kings and Princes their butchers and executioners, sorcing
them by sentence of excommunication to cut the throat of Christ's lambs, whom
they most wrongfully have pronounced heretics.

Seventhly they burden their clergy and their religious orders both of men and
women with a vow of single life, albeit they find themselves most unable to
perform it. they force also the monks, friars, and nuns to observe monkish
rules, which are oftentimes full of fooleries, and stand for the most part
upon external ceremonies.

Finally like to Scribes and Pharisees they have brought into the church
infinite traditions and ceremonies. nay the conuenticle of Trent does paragon
and make equal unwritten traditions to Gods written word. and yet no Papist
ever yet could tell, what those traditions were, or in what books they were to
be found. In baptism they use salt, spittle, blowings, lights, and greasing in
the Mass the priest turns, heaueth, skippeth, swingeth the chalice to and
fro, moppeth, moweth, ducketh, speaks sometimes high, sometimes low, and
makes no end of ceremonies. the consecrating of salt, holy water, oil,
paschal lambs, new houses, new ships, is not done without many ceremonies.
in hallowing and rehallowing of churches, saying of canonical hours and
offices many ceremonies pass, but few to purpose. the Bishop in consecrating a
church walks round about it, as if there were no entrance in. and in the end
abusing a versicle of a psalm says, attollite portas principes vestras. and
entering makes the Greek and Latin alphabet, and sets lights before
crosses, made on walls, and greaseth stones. the year of Iubiley abounds
with ceremonies. the Pope knocks first at S. Peter's church door with a golden
hammer, showing that no man obteineth indulgences, but he must spend gold. then
the Priests show their wares, and ignorant people goes about visiting certain
churches and relics, of which we never read word in the Gospel, or writings
of the fathers.

The Papists therefore are entangled with a miserable yoke of bondage, and are
utterly ignorant of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. God open
their eyes, that they may see, and give them grace, that they may feel their
burdens, and shaking off the yoke of Antichrist may in the end be partakers
of the light of the Gospel, and submit themselves only to Christ's yoke, that
is easy and light.

CHAP. XL. That Popish religion is very grievous in regard of the Popes and
Mass Priests manifold taxes and exactions.
IT follows now, that we show, how the Pope and his pole-shorne crew does
as well pole Christian men's purses, as grieve their consciences. wherein I need
not to use any long discourse, seeing the same is apparent not only by
practice, but also by confession of the Papists themselves. commonly they buy
the papacy in gross, and therefore no marvel if they sell it by retaile.
Vendit Alexander, says one of Alexander the sixth,
Vendere iure potest, emerat ille prius.
But this was not his fault alone. Benet the 9. sold the Papacy for 1500.
pound (of gold) to Gregory the 6. as Beno testifies. Benedictus 9. Papatum,
says he, pro libris mill quingentis vendidit Gregorio 6. and no man now
obtains that place but for great sums of money, and large promises, as the
discourses of diverse late conclaues testify.

Therefore no marvel, if they seek money greedily both before and after they
come to sit in the Popes chair. Brigit in her revelations says, the Pope
has turned all Gods commandments into this one, viz. give money. conuertit
december praecepta in hoc vnum, da pecuniam. for money they sell churches,
priesthood, altars, masses, crowns, fire, incense, prayers, yea heaven and
God himself.

Venalia nobis, says Mantuan,
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis thura, Preces, caelum est venale deusque.
Fridericke the 2. for one absolution paid to Gregory the 9. an hundred twenty
five thousand ounces of gold, as is recorded in the pontifical, or 120.
thousand as Naucler, epitome rerum German. John of Pineda and others do reckon.

Josephus Angles in 4. sentent. c. de indulgentijs signifies, that the King of
Spain paieth sometime to the Pope a hundred thousand ducats for one
indulgence. Leo the 10. gave such a scandale by the sale of indulgences in
Germany, that men began to examine more narowly these popish commodities:
and the rather, for that the profit of this sale came to Magdalene the Popes
honest sister.

Boniface the ninth, as Theodoric a Niem testifies lib. 2. de schism. c. 11.
sold benefices, as he was hearing Mass. in missarum solennijs benesicia
vendidit.

Mitred prelates sell imposition of hands, ecclesiastical liuinges, church
censures, and whatsoever is reserved to their office, as the Germans complain
in their grieuances. Theodoric Trudo complains, that Christ's sheepe-foldes
were broken down with hammers of silver. Malleus argenti consregit ouilia
Christi.

The rascal Mass Priests sell Masses, dirges, sacraments, sacramental
ceremonies, and other Romish wares, every man according to the faculties given
him by the Pope. Brigit in her revelations brings in Christ complaining, how
Priests dealt worse in selling him, then Judas, for that he sold him for money,
they for every commodity. deteriores sunt Judah, qui pro solis denarijs me
vendidit, illi autem pro quouis mercimonio. the Papists themselves know, that
the Mass Priests and Iebusites sent from the Pope into England live upon sale
of their faculties.

Of these pillages diverse have complained from time to time. and yet we find,
that the Popes would never abide any reformation. Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.
speaking only of the rapines of one Popes legate, says, he had extorted more,
then was remaining behind in England, excepting the church ornaments. nec
remansit eadem hora says he, vt veraciter dicebatur, tantum pecuniae in
Anglia, exceptis sanctorum vasis and ornamentis ecclesiarum, quantum a regno
extorserat Anglicano. he compares the Kingdom at that time to a vineyard
spoiled by every one that passed by, and rooted up by the wild bore of the
wood. he says, that the court of Rome like a gulf swallowed up every man's
revenues. quae curia instar barathri potestatem habet, and consuetudinem omnium
reditus absorbendi. Boner in his preface before Gardiners book de vera
obedientia says, that the Popes pray, or spoils in England were equal almost
to the Kings revenues. the Emperor as Matthew. Paris testifies in Henrico 3.
reprehended the king of England for suffering his country to be empouerished so
shamefully by the Pope. imperator reprehendit regem Angliae, quod permitteret
terram suam tam impudenter per Papam depauperari.

Jews the 9. in his pragmaticall sanction complains, that his kingdom was
miserably brought to poverty by the Popes exactions, and therefore expressly
forbids them. exactiones and onera grauissima pecuniarum, says he, per
curiam Romanam ecclesiae regni nostri impositas vel imposita, quibus regnum
nostrum miserabiliter depauperatum existit, sieve etiam imponendas, vel
imponenda leuari, aut colligi nullatenus volumus. The University of Paris in an
appeal from Leo the 10. taxes the insatiable avarice of the court of Rome
confounding laws and canons by expectatiues and reseruations.

Bernard in ser. 6. in psalm. qui habitat. complains, that in his time the
offices of the church were turned to gain, and that monks were polled, Masses
said, and psalms song for money. ipsa quoque ecclesiae sacrae dignitatis
officia in turpem quaestum and tenebrarum negotium transiuere. nec in his salus
ammarum, sed luxus quaeritur diuitiarum. propter hoc tondentur, propter hoc
frequentant ecclesias, missas celebrant, psalmos decantant.

In the articles of complaints made by the senate of Paris, and exhibited to
Jews the 11. it appears, That 25. hundred thousand crowns were drawn out of
France in the time of Pius the 3. and great sums every year, upon pretense
of diverse faculties coming from Rome.

James Archbishop of Mentz paid diverse great sums of money for his pal, and
dying professed, that his death grieved him not, but that the poor people of
the cuntry was again to pay money to the Pope.

Valla in his treatise against the forged donation of Constantine accuses the
Pope, for that he made gain of church matters, and of the gifts of the holy
Ghost. Papa. says he, rem ecclesiasticam and spiritum sanctum quaestus habet.
and therein he says, he did worse then Verres, or Catiline, or any robber of
the common treasure.

Theodorie a Niem nemor. union. tract. 6. c. 37. speaking of the Popes
eschequer, compares it, to the sea, into which all rivers flow, and yet it
runs not otter. he shows also, how his officers do scourge poor
Christians worse then Turks and Tartarians. he compares the Popes collectors
to wicked spirits tract. union. 6. c. 36. collectores camerae, says he,
^nalignis spiritibus aequales. in his third book de schismate c. 22. he
shows how Gregory the 12. to make money sold the chalices, crosses, and
jewels of the church.

Alan Chartier shows, that by the Pope and his accomplices the church was made
a den of thieves, and Gods sanctuary a common market place, and lastly that the
Gospel, and canons being suppressed, trassike was made for benefices, and
gain sought every where. vos ecclesiam dei effecistis speluncam latronum,
says he, and sanctuarium diumum, vt iam sit forum cauponatorium. sancta
euangelia sunt suppressa, and canones sublati. exercitium autem simoniae and
lucri quam maxim vberis regnant.

John of Sarisbury lib. 6. polycrat. c. 24. affirms, that the Pope to all men
is become intolerable, and that he delights in the spoils of the church, and
esteems gain Godliness, and spoileth countries, as if he meant to gather
treasure like to that of Craesus. Ipse Romanus pontisex omnibus fere est
intolerab. lis. laetatur spolijs ecclesiarum. quaestum omnem reprt^ pie^^tem.
pr^uivciarum diripit spolia, ac si thesauros Craesi studeat reparare.

Vrspergensis in his chronicle shows how all men sought to Rome what for
dispensations for offenses, and what for decision of matters of justice, he
might have added suits for benefices. and thereupon he says, that whole
streams of money come thither. gaude matter nostra Roma says he, quoniam
aperiuntur cataractae thesaurorum in terra, vt ad te confluant rius and aggeres
nummorum in magna copia.

Ioannes Andreas in 6. de elect. and electipotest. c. fundamenta. says, that
Rome was founded by robbers, and yet retains a tacke of her first and
original qualities.

Albericus a Rosate in verbo Roma says, that Rome receives no sheep without
wool, and hears only such as give. curia Romana non petit ouem sine lana.
dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit.

Ioannes Petrus de Ferrar. insorm resp. rei convent. shows that the Clergy
by diverse tricks ensnared the people and enlarged their jurisdiction. nota,
says he, quomodo, and quot modis isti Clerici illaqueent laicos, and suam
iurisdictionem amplient.

The Germains in their complaints exhibited to the Popes legate, declare, that
the burdens laid on them by the Romish church were urgent, intolerable, and no
longer to be borne, vrgentissima, atque intolerabilia, penitusque non ferenda.
and least any man might suspect their faith, they prove their allegation by a
hundred particular greuances.

Petrarch therefore does rightly call Rome, covetous Babylon, l'auara
Babylonia. and in his epistles without titles he shows, that nothing in the
Popes court was more sought then money.

For money the Pope dispenses with incestuous persons, with Sodomites, with
Paricides, with Jews and Mahometans, and with most flagitious and wicked men,
as appears by his penitentiary tax printed at Paris anno 1520. and found
among the treatises published in diverse volumes, and made by diverse lawyers.

For money he sells sins, grants indulgences, Iubilies, cruciataes, and
all manner of pardons.

For money he promises heaven, and assures his favorites of deliverance out
of Purgatory.

For money he sells benefices and all spiritual offices. Heu Simon regnat,
says Paulus Langius in Chronico citizensi. per munera quaeque reguntur. alas
Simon now sits as king, and all things pass for bribes. Boniface the 9. did
make simoniacall compacts, first by mediators, then by himself. Primo per
mediatores, deinde per semetipsum simoniam exercuit. for so says Theodoric a
Niem. l. 2. de schis. c. 7. he says also, that first fruits of benefices were
first by him exacted and in the 8. Chap. of that book, he says, he sold one
and the same licnesica to two.

Finally this generation takes of quick and dead, and makes a great revenue
of public stews, and usury. the tribute of whoores is a matter publicly
known, and may be proved by the testimony of the gloss in c. licet. de
concubin. cleric. remou. which is one of the provincial constitutions of Otho.
and Agrippa de vanit. scient. c. de lenocinio. and Sansouinuo in lib. de. 1.
gouerni de regni. c. corte de Roma, and others. the Popes practice and gain by
usury, is proved by the banks called monti di pieta, whereof mention is made
by Onuphrius in diverse Popes lives. Theodoric a Niem de schism. lib. 2. c. 7.
says, that usury was so rise in Rome in the days of Boniface the 9. that it
was reputed for no sin. Vsura tantum inualuit, vt foenus amplius non
putaretur peccatum. Matthew Paris also in Henry the 3. does say as much, and
greatly complains of Roman Caursins, and usurers.

Are not then our modern Papists simple to continue under the government of
Antichrist, where they are pilled both alive and dead, and spoiled by diverse
frauds, and brought to extreme poverty through manifold oppressions and
exactions?

CHAP. XLI. That the Popish church has no true Bishops, nor Priests.
THe government of the Popish church being so burdensome and dangerous cannot
well be tolerated by rules of policy. but if the same be against both
scriptures and canons of the church, then as repugnant both to religion and
Christian policy it is to be abandoned of all Christian commonwealths. let us
then consider, what allowance it may have either of scriptures or ancient
canons.

The Apostle Act. 20. says, that the holy ghost has appointed Bishops to
govern the Church of God. in quo vos spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos, regere
ecclesiam dei, says he, speaking of the Bishops of Asia. but the popish church
has no true Bishops. and that is proved first, for that bishops cannot be
orderned but by true Bishops. but the prelates of the Romish church are ordained
by the Pope, that is no Bishop. the proposition is granted. of the assumption
the first part is not denied. in the second part our aduersaties insist firmly
and affirm the Pope to be a true bishop. but how can he be a Bishop, that
neither preaches, nor can preach, nor administreth the Sacraments, nor
succeeds the Apostles in their Apostolical office? the Apostle 1. Tim. 3.
shows that the office of a bishop consists in the work, and not in the
title. qui Episcopatum desiderat bonum opus desiderat.

Secondly antichrist can ordeine no true bishops. but that the Pope is
antichrist I have declared in my fist book de Pontif. Romans and it is apparent
in that he teaches doctrine contrary to that which we have receined from
Christ Jesus. and is plainly described in the Revelation by the whore of
Babylon Apocalypse. 17. and by the beast like a lamb rising out of the earth
Apocalypse. 13. which are figures of Antichrist.

Thirdly, none but the successors of Christ's apostles can ordain true bishops.
but the Pope succeeds Julius Caesar, rather then Simon Peter. for Simon Peter
fed Christ's flock. he murdreth Christ's lambs.

Fourthly, neither heretics nor simoniacall persons have power to ordeine
bishops, as the master of the sentences lib. 4. did. 25. proves by the
authority of Cyprian, Innocent the first, and Leo. and this is the practice of
the Romish church at this day, who refuses to allow them for bishops, that are
ordered by such as they repute heretics or schismatikes. some determine
otherwise, but they repugne against the Romish churches practice.

Finally, no woman can ordeine bishops. but Pope Joan was a woman. and
therefore all ordained by her, and their successors are no bishops by the
confession of the adversaries themselves.

Howsoever it is, the Papists cannot assure themselves, that they have any
bishops. for no man is ordained bishop, unless he that ordained him had an
intention to order him a bishop. but of this intention no man can assure
himself.

Furthermore the Popish synagogue has no true priests. for their priests are
all ordered to sacrifice for quick and dead.

The form of priesthood say the Mass Priests assembled at Florence is this,
accipe potestatem offerendi sacrificium in ecclesia pro vinis and mortuis. and
this is proved also by their rituall books, and by Bellarmines confession,
lib. deord c. 9. but such priests were never appointed by Christ, or his
Apostles. neither is there any footestep of such an ordination to be found in
ancient fathers.

Secondly, no true priests can be ordained by other, then true bishops, and the
Apostles successors. but such bishops the synagogue of Rome wants.

Lastly true priests and ministers of the Gospel are ordained to preach Gods
word truly, and to administer the Sacraments sincerely. but popish priests are
not ordered to this end.

If then that cannot be the church, that wants priests and bishops; then are
we not to look for the true church among the papists. but Hierome in dialog.
contr. Lucifer. denies, that to be the church, that has no priests. and
Cyprian lib. 4. epist. 9. teaches, that the church is a people or flock
united to the bishop.

Again, if all the ordination of bishops and priests in the Romish church
depends upon the Pope, and the Pope be not mentioned either Ephesians. 4. or 1.
Cor. 12. where all the ministers of the church given to the same by Christ, are
mentioned; then does the ordination of Roman priests and prelates take his
beginning not from Christ, but from Antichrist.

Lastly, if the function of mass priests does consist in saying Mass, and the
Mass be proved to be an humane invention; then is the Romish priesthood an
humane invention. but otherwhere we have sufficiently declared, that the Mass
was by little and little peeced together, and is a mere humane invention: nay
an invention contrary to Christ's institution of the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

CHAP. XLII. That Popery cannot be maintained without forgery and falsehood.
THis point of it self alone would require a large discourse, if we should
prosecure particularly and distinctly, whatsoever our adversaries have herein
offended. for whether we respect the diverse kinds of forgeries, or the places
of authors forged and falsified by them, it were a great work to comprehend
them all. we will therefore choose out some few examples out of many, whereby
all true Christians may have cause sufficient to suspect them in the rest.

First then we charge them with falsity, for that as much as in them lies,
they have gone about to suppress Gods eternal word comprised in the old and
new testament. that this is falsitie, it is apparent by the law, qui
testamentum. ff. ad legem corneliam de falsis. for by that law they are
condemned qui testamentu^ amouerint celauerint. that is, which shall amooue or
conceile a testament. but the Pope and his accomplices forbid expressly all
translations of the new testament made by our doctors, and only grant certain
translations made by themselves, and that with hard conditions: as is declared
in the index of forbidden books reg. 3. and 4. but publicly they will not
have scriptures red in vulgar tongues.

Secondly they burn the holy scriptures under pretense of false translations.
but the law formerly cited does pronounce him a falsarie, that shall abolish or
cancel or burn a man's testament. the words of the law are these: si quis
testamentum deleuerit: that is, if any shall cancel a testament.

Thirdly it is falsity to cancel, or break the seals of a testament, as the
practice of the law of this land declares. how then can the Popish synagogue
of Rome excuse it self, that depriueth the lords people of the cup which our
savior Christ calls the new testament in his blood? is not this, all one, as
if the same should breake^ the seals of Gods testament?

Fourthly they have added their own traditions to the old and new testament,
receiving with like affection and reverence both scriptures and traditions, as
they write sess. 4. synod. trid. Bellarmine speaks no otherwise of
traditions, then as if they were the word of God not written. but to add to a
man's testament is forgery. hominis testamentum says the Apostle Galat. 3. nemo
spernit aut superordinet. no man despises a man's testament, or takes upon him
to add unto it.

Fifthly they have added to the canon of the old testament the books of Tobia,
Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, the Machabies and certain fragments not
extant in the original books of scriptures. but to ascribe books to the
spirit of God, which were not published by the authority of Gods spirit, is an
audacious kind of falsity. that they are not canonical scriptures, it is proved
by the testimony of the council of Laodicea, of Hierome in prologo Galeato,
Athanasius in synopsi, Nazianzen in carminibus, and diverse others.

Sixthly, certain Friars anno D. 1256. in Paris, for Christ's gospel published
an other gospel, which they termed eternal. fratres noua quaedam
praedicabant, legebant, docebant deliramenta ex libris Ioachim abbatis,
incipitque eorum liber Euangelium aeternum, as Matthew Paris testifies. but no
greater falsitie by men pretending Christianity can be committed, then in
exhibiting a false Gospel. S. Paul Galath. 1. pronounces such teachers
accursed.

Finally, the conuenticle of Trent has committed an egregious falsity in
making the old Latin translation of the bible authentical. for the same in
many places dissenteth from the orginall books, as by conference it appears,
and as Isidore Clarius in his preface to the translation of the bible, Erasmus,
Caietane and diverse other learned interpreters confess, and declare. diverse
editions also of this Latin translation do much differ, as appears by the
bibles set forth by Sixtus quintus, Clement the eight, and diverse others. but
that cannot be true, that discordeth with it self. quod dissonat, verum esse
non potest. neither can they excuse themselves of falsity, that exhibit a false
copy, for the true original, and authentical books of scriptures.

Likewise have our adversaries corrupted and falsified both the acts of
councels, and the writings of the fathers. for first they suppress the true
acts of many councels, and the true books of many fathers, such especially as
touch the authority of the bishop of Rome. Posseuin in his select bibliotheke
counsels his consorts, to keep the Greek original books of councels and
fathers from the view of young students. but to suppress the depositions of
witnesses all law adiudgeth falsity.

Secondly they have set forth diverse false acts and canons under the names of
the Apostles, of the synod of Nice, of Rome under Siluester, of Neocesaria,
Sinuessa and other synods, which themselves cannot deny to be diversely
falsified. Isidore c. canones. did. 16. and Leo c. Clementis. did. ead. and
Gelasius c. sancta Romans did. 15. do number these canons among apocryphal
writings. the canons themselves condemn the baptism of heretics c. 45. and
once dipping in baptism c. 49. and Saterdaies fast. c. 65. and allows the 3.
book of Machabees, and Clements epistles for canonical scriptures; and yet
pope Adrian c. sextam synodum. did. 16. allows them.

Russin in his history, and Stephen Bishop of Rome c. viginti. did. 16. allow
only 20. canons of the council of Nice. others in c. septuaginta. ead. did.
say there are 70. one Alphonsus of Pisa of late in his sum of councels, has
set out 80. canons of that council. Sozimus in the 6. council of Carthage was
taken alleging a false canon of that council for appeals to Rome. Paschasius,
or some under his name, corrupted a canon of that council, as if the same had
decreed that the Church of Rome had always had the primacy. Pius the fifth in
certain letters of his to the Emperor alleges, that the council of Nice
made the Pope of Rome governor of all Christian Princes. the falsification is
notorious, and is extant in his letters set out by Hierome Catena.

Of the acts of the council of Sinnessa there are 3. copies extant in Surius,
and different each from other. they contradict themselves also. for where in
the latter end it is said, that the first See shall not be judged of any, the
fathers of that council notwithstanding condemned Marcellinus. damnauerunt eum
extra ciuitatem.

The acts of the councels of Neocaesarea and Ancyra are so simple, and so
repugnant to the state of those times, that blindemen, albeit void of sight,
may feel them to be counterfeit. in ancient stories there is no mention of
them. nay in times of persecution, and before Constantines time it is not
likely that so many bishops could meet, or would make such acts, and canons,
as are imagined to be made in those councels.

The synod supposed to be assembled at Rome by Siluester, contemeth diverse
fabulous points, as namely the report of Constantines leprosy, of Nuns
professing virginity after the age of 72. years. The bishops names are
barbarous. the style is Gothike. the number of bishops there assembled is
incredible. it is therefore mere impudency to affirm the acts of that synod
to be authentical.

The 18. canon of the council of Chalceden, and the 36. canon of the 6. synod
that gives equal authority to the sea of Constantinople and Rome, is
falsified. both by Gratian and Gregory the 13. in his new edition of the canon
law. for under color of those canons they determine quite contrary to canons,
that the Church of Constantinople should not be equal to Rome.

The fifth council of Carthage c. 3. determines that bishops, priests and
deacons should abstain from their wives in the time of their turns, or
service, (...). but the Romanistes did. 33. c. placuit. have falsified this
canon by adding subdeacons, and excluding bishops, priests, and deacons from
their wives at all times.

The council of Mileuis c. 22. forbids Priests, and inferior clerks to
appeal to Rome. but Gratian falsifying the canon, adds these words, nisi
forte sedem Romans appellauerint. which is direct contrary to the meaning of the
council.

In the 35. canon of the council of Laodicea the worship of Angels is termed
idolatrous and expressly forbidden. but Carranza in his sum falsifieth the
canon, and for Angelos, writes Angulos.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de sanct. beatitud. c. 19. shows, that in latter editions
of councels his consorts have established the invocation of Saints by the 7.
canon of the 6. synod. but all ancient copies declare both him and his
consorts to be notorious forgers of false canons.

It were an easy matter to show the falsehood of our adversaries in diverse
other canons. but the brevity of this discourse will not permit any larger
number of witnesses in this point.

Thirdly, under the names of fathers they have set out diverse counterfeit
treatises, and have falsely both translated the Greek fathers, and alleged
both Greek and Latin writers. under the name of Clement they have published
diverse constitutions, and do allege them very frequently. yet does Gelasius
c. sancta. did. 15. set a mark upon them, as Apocryphal. to him also they
ascribe certain recognitions and epistles, which savor not of an apostolical
spirit.

Under the name of Origin they publish certain Commentaries upon Job, which
contain plain Arianisme. and his lamentation which is noted by Gelasius as
Apocryphal. Tertullians and Russins treatises are diversely cited. yet not
allowed by Gelasius c. sancta Romana. did. 15.

Under the authority of Abdias, Martialis, Prochorus, Amphilochius, and diverse
ancient fathers, they cover diverse of their own bastardly inventions, no way
agreeing with those times.

Cyprian is said to have written the treatise de reuelatione capitis Ioannis,
wherein mention is made of king Pipin, and a book de montibus Sion and Sinah,
and diverse other treatises, neither according with his phrase, nor with those
times.

Hierome is made to father a sermon de assumptione B. Mariae, a tract. de 7.
gradibus ecclesiae; the rule of monks, and diverse other counterfeit treatises.
and yet the rule of monks is said to be collected by one Lupus in the time of
Martin the fifth.

The sermons ad fratres in eremo, and diverse others de tempore and sanctis,
attributed to S. Augustine, are plainly counterfeit. so are his meditations
also and soliloquies. in those meditations the worship of Angels is taught,
which Augustine in his book de haeresib. condemns for an heresy. in the
soliloquies we read the fable of Longinus. in his manual c. 16. we read, that
it is in man's power to merit the kingdom of heaven: which is plain
Pelagianisme, condemned by S. Augustine. the books entitled scalae paradisi,
de duodecim abusionum generibus, de vita Christiana, de assumptione beatae
Mariae, and diverse others of that nature set out under the name of S.
Augustine, are but gross devises of slow bellied monks and friars.

Under the name of Basil and Chrysostom, they have set out counterfeit Masses,
and diverse epistles, homilies and treatises, that are no where found in Greek,
nor any whit savor of the divine spirit of those fathers. nay so shameless
they are, that they stick not to set out Masses under the name of James and
Mark.

The like practice they have used in the works of other fathers. but to father
bastardes upon wrong fathers, is a notorious trick of falsitie, as appears
by the law cum suppositi. Cod. ad l. Corn. de falsis.

By their expurgatorie Indexes they cause the fathers writings to be changed,
not only by false additions, but also by detractions. Sixtus Senensis in
epist. ad Pium 5. ante biblioth. sanctam, shows, how that Pope did handle or
rather mangle and change the fathers writings. expurgari and emaculari curasti,
says he, omnia catholicorum scriptorum, ac praecipue veterum patrum scripta
haereticorum aetatis nostrae faecibus contaminata and venenis infecta. so under
this color it was an easy matter to take out what he listed. In Bertram they
change visibiliter into inuisibiliter, and cut out whole lines and sentences.
Posseuin a shameless Iebusite teaches his scholars, how Hermes, Melito,
Cabasilas, Anastasius, Antonius Abbas and other authors were to be corrupted
and framed to his purpose.

Fourthly they have corrupted diverse laws, and some they have forged under the
name of diverse Emperors and Kings. under the name of Constantine the Pope
challenges a right to most kingdoms of the Western Empire. but the donation
set out under his name both by testimony of learned men, and by diverse
arguments is proved counterfeit.

Likewise the constitution of Ludouicus did. 63. c. ego Ludouicus, is a plain
bastard. for it contradicts Constantines donation, was never executed, and
differs from it self, as appears by the diverse editions of Gratian and
Volateran Geograph. lib. 3.

The law inter Claras. Cod. de sum. Trin. and fid. cath. is not found in
ancient copies, as Alciat testifies Parerg. lib. 5. c. 23. likewise the same
is disprooued by diverse other arguments alleged by me in a treatise of Popish
forgeries and lies.

In the Popes archiues they show a solemn donation of the crown of England,
made by king John, and the state, to the Pope. but the same is clearly
counterfeit, being neither executed by the king, nor allowed by the state.

The statute anno 2. Henr. 4. c. 15. is plainly falsified by the Popish clergy
in a provincial constitution made at Oxford, by adding, ac etiam communitates
regni. whereas in the original role yet extant in the Tower there are no such
words found. it appears therefore, that by forgery they have made statutes
to serve their turns for the burning of Christians, and that they have murdered
them hitherto contrary to form of law.

Finally under the names of ancient bishops of Rome they have published diverse
counterfeit epistles differing from their form of writing in style, and
containing matters not agreeing with the times, when they are supposed to be
written. Clement epist. 1. writes to James of the death of Peter, who died
diners years before Peter. and epist. 2. takes upon him to instruct James an
Apostle.

Anacletus in his first epistle would have all matters referred to the church
of Rome. but at that time the church of Rome had no such prerogative. neither
was it reason, that S. John the Evangelist then living, all matters should be
referred rather to Anacletus then to him. in his 2. epistle he says, the 72.
disciples were instituted by the Apostles: which the Gospel says were
appointed by Christ.

Euaristus in his epistle talks idly of ordeining Priests without titles,
and consecrating churches, and stone altars, whereas these customs came not
into the church until many years after.

Sixtus begins his epistle thus, Sixtus vniuersalis apostolicae ecclesiae
episcopus. but Gregory the first long after him condemns this title, as proud
and Antichristian.

Hyginus wrote to the Athenians. but it is not like, that a Greek, would write
to Greeks in Latin.

Calixtus mentions those heretics, which denied repentance to such as fell
in time of persecution. but this was the heresy of Nouatus, who troubled the
church long after Calixtus his time.

Pontianus ioineth Christ with Peter. but that was no style in his time.

Marcellinus in his 2. epistle does insinuate, that the Emperor then professed
Christian religion, and disputes against the Arians, that were not in the
world in his time.

Melchiades 12. q. 1. c. futuram ecclesiam, tells us, how Constantine was
christened, and gave his seat and other possessions to the church of Rome. and
yet it is apparent, that he died before Constantines Christening, and before
any thing was given by him to the church.

It is an easy matter to show other epistles attributed to ancient bishops of
Rome to be counterfeit. but it is needless, considering how Antonius Contius in
annot. ante c. viginti. did. 16. confesses, that all the decretals of Popes
before Siluesters time are counterfeit, and says, that he has proved it.
Multas supra in praefatione rations adduxi, says he, quibus omnium
Pontificum, qui Siluestrum praecesserunt, decretales falsas esse manifest
ostendi. but in Plantins edition of the canon law, they have taken away this
Preface, with notorious impudency covering their gross falsities.

Thus we see, how they have forged whole books, treatises, epistles, laws and
other instruments. if then they have dealt so falsely in whole instruments and
books, we may not think that they are more scrupulous in adding or taking away
words, or sentences, and falsifying parts. c. in canonicis. did. 19. in the
rubricke they tell us, that the Popes decretales are numbered among canonical
Scriptures, and pretend Augustines authority. but he says no such thing, lib.
2. de doctr. Christ. c. 8. they add these words, and ab ea alij: unto the
words of S. Augustine.

Did. 1. de consecrat. c. Iacobus, they say, that James and Basil did deliver
to us, missae celebrationem, that is, the form of celebrating Mass, and cite
Synodum sextam, c. 32. whereas it is only said, that they taught how in the
holy celebration of the Lords Supper, the cup was filled with wine and water.

C. species. did. 2. de consecrat. these words species and similitudo illarum
rerum vocabula sunt, with the rest following are pretended to be taken ex
Paschali Gregorij papae. but most falsely.

C. vtrum. de consecrat. did. 32. these words vtrum sub figura, an sub
veritate hoc mysticum calicis sacramentum fiat, with all the chapter following,
are alleged as spoken by S. Augustine. yet neither is the place signed, nor
can those words be found in any place of S. Augustine.

In the chapter in Christo. did. 2. de consecrat. taken as is pretended out of
Hilary lib. 8. de. trinit. these words corpus Christi quod sumitur de altari,
are foisted into the text.

Into the words of consecration of the cup they have thrust in these words,
and eterni and mysterium fidei, committing falsehood in the very canon of the
Mass.

Durand Rat. divine. lib. 4. c. 4. alleges Pope Cyprian for proof of holy
water. Cyprianus Papa ait, quod ideo aqua benedicta homines asperguntur, quia
valet ad sanctisicationem, says Durand. but neither can he find a Pope of that
name, nor any such words in the writings of Cyprian.

Pius quintus in his Missall out of the 2. book of Machab. c. 12.46. writes,
Peccatis mortuorum, for peccato, and for 2. M. writes 12. M.

Turrecremat a lib. 2. c. 12. summae de ecclesia. makes Chrysostom to call
Peter the provost and head of his brethren, and to affirm, that they ought to
preach Peter: matters never thought of by Chrysostom.

Pope Syricius alleges these words, S. cerdotes mei semel nubant, out of
Moses. but no where in all the five books of Moses are any such words to be
found. in the 3. action of the 2. synod of Nice, Basil is made to say, that the
honor given to the image redoundeth to the original. but such words are no
where found.

Bellarmines forgeries are infinite. in his 2. book de Pont. Romans c. 31. he
falsifieth the words of Hierom in an epistle to Damasus writing, hanc Petram,
for illam Petram. as if Hierome called Damasus the foundation of the church,
where he expressly means Christ the rock.

In his book de reliquijs cap. 3. he alleges certain obscure books and
counterfeit testimonies for the proof of the worship of relics. in the same
place alleging Eusebius his history lib. 4. c. 14. he makes him say, that S.
James his chain is had in great veneration. whereas he says no such thing,
but rather shows in what honorable account holy men were holden in ancient
time.

Lib. 1. de sanct. beat. c. 13. citing Eusebius de praeparat. euangel. lib. 13.
he makes him to use these words, nos quotidie id factitamus. nam verae
pietatis milites, vt dei amicissimos honoramus. whereas no such words are to
be found. he says only that Christians honor the blessed souls of such as
contend for true piety.

Lib. 2. de pont. Romans c. 31. he falsifieth the words of the council of
Chalcedon making the same to say, that Leo did preside and govern the church,
as the head the members. for neither was this epistle, that is cited, the act
of the council, nor is it said there, that Leo was head of the church, as
Bellarmine would have it, but that he ruled his clerks, as the head the
members.

Likewise in the same book and Chapter rehearsing the titles given to the
bishops of Rome, he says, that Eusebius in his chronicle anno D. 44. does give
them the title of Pontifex Christianorum. but Eusebius does not so much as once
mention the bishops of Rome in that place.

Lib. de monachis c. 31. he changes Chrysostomes words in c. 19. Matthew. making
him to say, that it is easy to abstain from marriage, where he says only,
that it is possible. and in his book de Monachis c. 27. alleging a place out
of the 15. homily of Chrysostom, upon the first to Timothy, he adds these
words, id est, Christo nubit.

It were infinite to rehearse all the places which he has falsified, and not
necessary, considering that I have set down so many in diverse treatises
written against him already. the false allegations of Harding are particularly
noted by bishop Jewel of reverend memory. Stapleton is convinced of falsehood
both by D. Fulke and D. Whitaker. of Parsons and Kellisons forgeries and false
allegations I have spoken my self somewhat largely, and shall percase have
occasion to speak of them further hereafter.

Wherefore if it be the property of heretics, and not of catholics to mangle
the sentences of fathers; then Papists herein do declare themselves to be
heretics and not Catholics. non conuenit orthodoxis, say the fathers of the
8. council act. 8. circumtruncatas patrum voces deflorare. hareticorum hoc
potius proprium est. herein therefore they shall never be able to clear
themselves of a special note of heretics,

CHAP. XLIII. That Popery cannot be well vpholden without calumniations and
lies.
AS justice is accompanied with truth, so wicked causes cannot be vpholden
without lies and calumniations. a matter clearly verified by the practice of
the papists, whose false and erromous doctrine is built upon lies and
calumniations, as upon two pillars. by their calumniations they seek to bring
good men into obloquie and hatred, by lies they would willingly grace their
own false religion, and bring a scandale upon the truth.

To make proof hereof we need not to go farther, then to their wicked libels
lately published against Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Beza, and
all that have been actors in the defense of truth, to the lying traditions, and
legends of the synagogue of Rome, to the feined miracles of supposed Romish
saints, to the Popes decretals and decrees, and to the diverse treatises set
forth of late time in defense of their faction and heresy.

Against Luther they have hired one Staphilus a rinegat Christian, and Cochleus
a fellow not worth a cochle shell to speak as much shame, as their malicious
wits could devise. from these two Surius, Laingeus, Stapleton, and all the
kennell of curres let loose to bark against him, have borrowed the subject of
their slanders. if any thing more be objected by later libellers, that
proceeds of late invention. Bellarmine de notis ecclesiae and in praefat. de
Christo, and others charge him with teaching that Christ suffered according to
his divinity. he in his book de concilijs, from whence the ground of this
slander is taken, says only, that he had to do with certain Nestorians,
which denied that the divinity could suffer. so it appears these words were
the Nestorians. and Luther disputing against them shows, that the person of
Christ consisting of two natures could and did suffer. and if he did say, the
divinity did suffer, he took the word of the nature for the person, as
ancient fathers, and namely Vigilius contra Eutychem have done. Vigilius
says, the divinity of Christ was nailed with nails, consixa clauis.

Campian rat. 8. Bellarmine in praefat. in controuers. de Christo, charge
Luther to have said, that his soul hated this word (...). which is a mere
slander. he says only, if he should hate the word, and believe the thing
defined in ancient councels, that he should not therefore be an heretic.

Bellarmine lib. 4. de ecclesia militante c. 13. Cregorius de Valentia, and
others say, that Luther learned of the devil, that the Mass was naught. but
Luther has no such words. he says only, that the devil went about to make
him despair having so long said Mass, which long before he had learned to be
naught.

Others add, that in a certain disputation at Lipsia, Luther should say, that
the contention begun by him against popish abuses, was neither begun for Gods
honor, nor would end for Gods honor. but wickedly that which Luther spoke of
his adversaries, that for to please the Pope, took up the bucklers against
him, they apply to Luther himself, and his own actions.

Some say, that he taught, if the wife refuse, the husband may go in to his
maid, whereas he declares only how husbands use to threaten their froward
wives, not commending either any such act, or threats.

His life is traduced by them commonly, as if he were given to wine. but not
only all that knew him, and speak indifferently, testify the contrary, but
also Erasmus his adversary, that had reason to reprove him, if there had
been cause. Lutheri vita omnium consensu probatur, says Erasmus in ep. ad
Thomam Card. Eboracensem. id non leave praeiudicium est, tantam esse morum
seueritatem. Luthers life is approved by consent of all, and that is no small
prejudice, that such is the sincerity of his manners, that his enemies can not
sinde what to calumniate.

Finally they object, that endeavoring to cast out a devil he was evil
entreated by the party possessed, and that going to bed merry he died the same
night. but the first is refuted by Luthers doctrine, who commonly taught, that
Christian doctrine is not now to be confirmed by miracles. the second is a
slander falsely devised by such, as neither were at Luthers death, nor desirous
to understand the truth. Sleidan lib. 16. reports, that he was long sick
before, and that feeling his sickness to grow extreme, he called his friends,
and spending his time in prayer and pious exhortations quietly departed this
life. and this is also confirmed by Melancthon in Luthers life, and was
testified by all that were present at his end.

The principal libeller that undertook to rail against Calvin was Bolsec a
rinegat friar. who having either himself written, or suffering others to
publish diverse impudent slanders in his name, did in a public synod in France
retract the same. but his recantation they regard not: his first malicious
reports they wilfully embrace. Campian rat. 8. charge Calvin with saying,
that God is the author of sin. but his words instit. lib. 1. c. 18. do
evidently discharge him. flagitiorum causa extra humanam voluntatem quaerenda
non est, says he.

Bellarmine lib. de notis eccles. c. 9. tells us, how Calvin taught, that
hell was nothing else, but the horror of conscience. but no such words could
ever yet be found in Calvin. he says that the horror of conscience is a part
of hellish pains: but that Hell should be nothing else, he never said, nor
thought.

Calvin is also charged for speaking contumeliously against Saints, and calling
them shadows, monsters, and such like names. but he is much wronged. for
either he spoke of Christopher, and Catherine and such like forged Saints, or
of Dominick, Medard and such like superstitious fellows, who are rather for
their cruelty and other vices to be hated, then honored for any holiness.

Posseuin lib. 3. de notis verbi dei c. 74. charge Calvin with atheism for
teaching, that the son of God was God of himself or (...). but Bellarmine
excuses him, and discharges him, confessing he said well, if he spoke of the
son in respect of his divine essence.

The Rhemists in their annotations on the 5. to the Hebrews affirm, that Calvin
taught that Christ despaired. and the same sclander was also bruted abroad by
Campian Rat. 8. but never did any such words pass from his mouth, or his
pen. and if the Papists will not believe me, let them believe Bellarmine, who
lib. 4. de Christo c. 8. expressly affirms that Calvin says, that Christ
despaired not. Calumus dicit, says he, Christum non desperasse.

Others give out, that he was convicted of Sodomy, and burned on the back for
his offense at Noyon. but the notorious wickedness of those that first devised
this slander may be refuted by diverse plain arguments. first Sodomites are not
burned on the back in France, but burned at a stake. secondly never was he
conuented before any judge either for that or other matter. Lastly, the
sincerity of his life repugneth to such beastliness. neither was it like, that
he would have so violently pursued the Romanists for their unnatural
abominations, unless he had been clear of all suspicion in that behalf.

Bellarmine lib. 4. de eccles. c. 14. says that Calvin went about to work a
miracle by compact with one Bruley. but he shows himself therein
miraculously impudent. for in the same chapter he confesses, that Calum in the
preface to his Institutions should complain, that wrong was offered christians
by those, that required miracles at their hand, seeing they taught the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, which was confirmed by innumerable miracles.
further it is a shameless trick to allege the testimony of Bolsec who was
hired to write, what he could, against Calvin.

Finally Bellarmine and Coster say, that Calum was eaten up with lice, and
died blaspheming and calling upon the devil. a devilish slander refuted by
Galasius, Beza and the public testimony of the city of Geneua. a little before
his death, say they, he called his fellow ministers unto him, exhorted them
with many words full of piety and affection, and departed this life rather like
to one falling a sleep, then dying.

Beza is charged for affirming, that Christ had two hypostases or personal
subsistences. but his adversaries deal with him calumniously. for he
confesses and teaches, that Christ was one person, albeit the same Christ was
very God and very man, the two natures being united in one person, and the
soul and the body being united in one man.

Feuardentius in Jacob. 3. and Stapleton in prompt. hebdom. 3. quadrages. and
others rail at Beza for his verses, which he made being a young man. But Beza
did first condemn those verses himself, as being made while he was an impure
Papist. and yet compare them with the Italian rymes, that are every where
extant, and with the verses of Casa and other Italians, they may seem modest
and chaste in respect.

Finally of late time the shameless Iebusites of France published a pamphlet
of Bezaes recantation, and reconciliation to the Pope fraught with diverse lies.
but Beza himself refuced their impudent lies, and now the Papists themselves
selves will not deny, but that this was a lying and impudent pamphlet.

This is also the practice of Papists from time to time, to sclander and to
belly the servants of God. In the 8. session of the conuenticle of Constance the
Masse-priestes charge Wicklesse, that he taught, that God must obey the devil.
a matter no where sound either in terms, or in sense in his writings. they
said also, how he taught, that Princes being in mortal sin are not to be
obeyed. his drift was only to show, that prelates living loosely were unworthy
of their places, albeit he did not detract from the efficacy of sacraments
ministered by them. the right of kings against the usurpations of the Clergy he
stoutly maintained.

In the same wicked assembly John Husse was accused, that he taught, that
there was a fourth person besides the trinity, and that he called Gregory a
rymer, neither did it avail him, that he denied these accusations most
constantly. for his accusers were heard, and his defenses little regarded. he
was also most falsely charged with driving the Germans out of the university of
Prague: whereas it was proved, that the Germans did voluntarily depart thence,
for that they pretended their ancient privileges to be infringed.

Against Bucer they give out, that dying he turned Jew; and blasphemed the name
of Christ. a matter devised without proof or probability, and convinced by all
that were present with him at his death.

Grineus was present at the end of Oecolampadius, and testified, that he died
most quietly, godly and christianlie. and with him concurreth Wolfangus
Capito. yet are not the Papists ashamed to give forth, that the Devil st
angled him. of whom I would but ask only one question, to wit, who these
witnesses were, that saw the Devil committing this act?

Our English Papists seek matter to object against bishop Jewel of reverend
memory, but find none. only they tell us diverse false allegations are found in
his books. but all their accusations are answered, and rest so without reply,
although the shameless adversaries desist not to allege matters diverse times
answered. they say further, that D. Stephens, and William Raynolds were
converted to Popery by reading his books. but the first was a simple fellow,
and drawn away with hope, the second ran away forced by despair.

Against Bishop Granmer they have denised diverse slanderous tales, as if he
were unlearned, inconstant, and carried about his wise in a tronke. but for the
first his learned writings and disputes will testify, that it is untruth.
furthermore, very unlike it is, that he should have been employed in so great
affairs, if he had not been singularly learned. his constancy appears in
his continual travails against the Popes authority and Popish errors. the
last is an improbable tale devised by some standrous Popish parasite. and well
deserve they to be cased in cloke-bagges, that do believe it. for he had sent
his wife away before into Germany. and had he not, yet this devise is
improbable, if not impossible.

Sanders, Rishton, Stapleton, Parsons, and their pewfellows have published
diverse slanders against king Henry the eight, Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory, and diverse of their loyal subjects. but it is not to be marvelled, if
fugitives and traitors rail against their Princes, and all that favor the
state.

The unwritten traditions of the Synagogue of Rome are nothing but lies
devised, and falsely fathered upon the Apostles, and their successors.
Bellarmine de verb. dei lib. 4. c. 3. esteems the canon of the Mass to be a
tradition. yet was the same denised since the Apostles times. and is not found
in that form of Mass, which is in the old Romish ordinall. in the Apostles
time certes Christians neither prayed for Popes, nor for Emperors. nor did
Cosmas and Damianus and other Saints, mentioned in the canons, live in the
times of the Apostles, or their next successors.

Innocent the third c. cum Marthae. de celebratione missar. determines, that
these words of the canon, tum leuauit oculos in caelum ad patrem, and mysterium
sidei, and such like not mentioned in the gospel, are receined from Christ by
tradition. but of his assertion he alleges no proof. neither can he show
reason, why Christ should omit words now reputed so necessary.

The worship of Images in the second council of Nice is called an Apostolic
tradition. yet never do we read, that any Apostle, or Apostolic man did
teach it. Naie the law of God does expressly forbid the making of all Images
or similitudes, to the end they should be worshipped.

Some say, that prayers and sacrifices for the dead are confirmed by Apostolic
traditions. yet our Savior shows, that we are to work, while we have light,
and appointed the eucharist to be received of the communicants, and not to be
offered for quick and dead.

The kissing of the altar, and blessing of incense, Mass Priests do believe
to be commanded by tradition. from the same founteine do issue the washings of
hands, turnings of the Priest, the swinging of the chalice here and there, the
adoration of the host, the pompous perambulation of the host in the pixe, and
other ceremonies of the mass. but these traditions are founded upon lies and
fables, and are partly Jewish, partly Heathenish, and all of them mere humane
inventions and devises. nay some of them are fond and rediculous, as the kissing
of stones and stocks; some repugnant to scriptures, as the adoration of the
sacrament, with that honor, that is due to God.

In the missall salt is exorcised for the salvation of such as believe, and
water is hallowed for the driving away of the power of the enemy. for the same
end also candles are blessed. but that these creatures have these effects, we
do not learn, but out of lying traditions, and the authors of them.

From traditions also the bishops suffragan does challenge power to baptize
belles. and belles so baptized say they, do drive away devils. this is
recorded by Martinus de Arles tractat. de superstit. numer. 3.9. and 14. and of
this abuse the Germans complain in their greeuances.

Agnus dei, as the Papists feine, does purge sins as well, as the blood of
Christ. but this is a lying tradition, and contrary to scripture. for there we
learn that sins are purged not by lambs of wax, but by the blood of
Christ, the immaculat lamb, that takes away the sins of the world.

Such are also the rest of those Romish traditions, which the conuenticle of
Trent makes equal to holy scriptures.

The legendes contain more lies then leaves. for proof I report me to the
legendes of S. George, S. Christopher, S. Catherin, S. Margaret, and the rest.
S. George bad the Kings daughter of Silena to cast her girdle about the Dragons
neck. which she did, and the dragon followed her like a gentle dog. sequebatur
eam, velut mansuetissmus canis. when S. George was put into a frying pan full
of boiling lead, making the sign of the cross, he was therein refreshed, as
if he had been in a bath. coepit in eo quasi in balneo refoueri.

S. Christophers staff being pitched into the ground began to bear leaves,
and 8. M. men presently believed in Christ, says James de voragine. he tells
further, how diverse arrows being shot at S. Christopher did still flote in the
air, and could not come at him: and that one arrow among the rest leaped back
and stroke out King Dagnus his cie. matters very improbable, and to say no
more, not found in any authentical history.

Catherine King Costus his daughter, being but 18. years of age is said to
have been learned in all liberal sciences. in the legend also we read, how
Maxentius the emperor would have forced her to sacrifice to the Gods, and for
that purpose prepared a wheel, which was turned by an Angel with such
violence, that it killed 4000. gentiles. it is said also, that she converted
the Empres, and one of the Emperors chief capteines called Porphyrius. matters
contrary to all stories, and not only not spoken of in histories.

S. Margaret was swallowed of the devil in the figure of a Dragon. but making
the sign of the cross the Dragon burst, and out came S. Margaret safe and
sound, as we read in the legend. it is there said also, that she took the
devil by the hair of the head, and bette him. but how these lies may be
believed, that is the question.

S. Francis, as Bonauenture and Bartholomew de Pisa recount, was diverse times
taken up into the air, called wolves his brethern, and swallows his sisters,
and had the marks of Christ imprinted in his hands, feet, and sides. and
these fables the Romanists believe.

Speculum exemplorum did. 7. c. 41. tells how friar Leo saw two ladders
reaching from the earth to heaven, and that Christ sat at the top of the
one, and threw down all the Friars, that came that way, but that our lady,
that sat at the top of the other, received all that came that way.

Caesarius Hesterbach lib. 7. c. 35. tells, that a nun called Beatrix,
ran away with her lover, and lived certain years in a public bordell. yet
because she served our lady devoutly, it is said, that our lady supplied her
place, and was taken for Beatrix all the time of her absence, and in the end
procured her as good grace in the nunnery, as any of her fellows.

Thus the Papists can confirm any point of their doctirne with leasings.
infinite such like leasings are contained in the legendes.

The miracles reported in the legendes are nothing but miraculous lies.

Alexius staid so long in the church porch, that the image of our lady spoke,
and bad the sexten let him in, as we read Lombard leg. 89.

S. Christina being placed upon a wheel by her own father, and having fire
kindled under her; and oil cast upon it, for her further torment, the legende
says that the flame breaking out burnt 1500. men. there also we read, how
Christ descending took her to himself, and baptized her in the sea, and that
having her tongue cut out, she spoke notwithstanding, and that her breasts being
cut milk issued out for blood. lo I pray you a maid, that gave milk.

When Eustachius a soldier sometimes of Traians followed a heart, it is said,
that the heart standing still Eustachius saw a crucifixe between the hearts
horns, which spoke to him through the hearts mouth, and asked him, why he did
follow that heart. it is reported also in the legend, that being put into a bull
of Brass burning red hot he continued there 3. days without hurt.

S. Brice being accused to be father of a base child, he caused the same child
not being yet 30. days old, to confess, that Brice was not his father. he did
also carry hot coals in his bosom without burning his flesh, or clothes.

Our English Saints also wrought great and strange miracles, if we may believe
Capgraue. S. Aidus espying 8. wolves, that were fore hungered, gave them 8.
lambs of mere compassion. afterward being sorry for the loss of his lambs,
he prayed and had the same 8. lambs safe and sound out of the wolves belly.
when wild beasts were hardly pursued, they came to him, as to a sanctuary.

S. Adrian being called upon by a boy, that was beaten, the masters hand was
staid in the air, and could no more touch him.

S. Dunstane being in his mothers womb, as is said, wrought miracles,
lighting, and putting out all the candles in the church. being a man he took
the Devil by the nose, as he looked in at a window, at the least, as we read
in the legend.

S. Eanswide perceiving a piece of timber to be too short for the work, where
she would employ it, drew it out to a just length by prayer. the same saint
caused also water to run up a mounteine.

S. Goodric with the sign of the cross tamed wolves and serpents, in such
sort that they lay with him by the fire side without offering any hurt.

I cannot stand long to recount many of this kind of lying miracles. neither
shall I greatly need to rehearse more, seeing these do show how much our
adversaries rely upon lies.

Neither do Popes or their agents abstain from lying. In the 3. book of
Gregory's dialogues we read, how a bear was commanded to keep the Hermit
Florences sheep. I doubt whether ever Gregory told any such fable. it was sure
some later Pope.

Innocentius in the Chap. quis nesciat. did. 11. tells us, that none founded
churches in Italy, France, Spain, Afric and Sicily, but those whom Saint
Peter and his successors made priests, and that none taught in those countries
beside S. Peter and such as he sent. a lie directly repugnant to Scriptures,
which testify, that S. Paul preached in those countries being appointed by God
thereto, and not by man; and refuted by diverse ancient histories and fathers,
who write, that diverse others preached there beside S. Peter's priests and
messengers. S. Augustine epist. 162. shows, that the Gospel came into Aphrike
out of other countries, then those that belonged to the church of Rome.

Gregory the 4. c. in praeceptis. did. 12. says, that all bishops causes, and
the discussing of matters of religion belongs to the Sea of Rome, and that
religion took her beginning from thence. a matter apparently false. for
religion began at Jerusalem, and not at Rome, and Councels in ancient time
determined the differents in causes of Religion, and not the bishop of Rome,
who was as well subject to the decision of the general council, as other
bishops.

Anacletus c. in nouo. did. 21. says, that the rest of the Apostles made
Peter their Prince. which is contradicted by the Papists themselves, that
derive Peter's authority from Christ.

Nicolas did. 22. c. omnes, tells us, that Christ gave to Peter the right of
the kingdom both of heduen and earth. but of this earthly kingdom belonging
to Peter, this is the first man that ever told news.

Anacletus did. 22. c. sacrosancta. affirms, that both Peter and Paul were
crowned with martyrdom in one day, and at the some time. but this leasing is
refuted by Prudentius peri stephan. Hymno 12. Arator in act. Apost. lib. 2.
Augustine sermon. 18. de sanctis, and others.

Innocent the 4. c. ad apostolicae. de sent. and re iudicat. affirms, that
Sicily is the special patrimony of Peter. est speciale patrimonium Petri. but
no where do were read, where either Christ gave, or Peter claimed this
patrimony.

Clement the fifth c. Romani. Clem. de iureiurando. most boldly and impudently
writes, that Emperors having the crown set upon their heads swear fealty to
the Pope. a matter certes, which Bellarmine the Popes proctor would blush to
affirm. for albeit he would willingly gratify the Pope whith any thing, yet
dare he not say, that the Roman Empire is holden in fee of the Pope. and thus
the Popes run on headlong heaping privileges on Rome, and building the tower
of Babel by lies.

The same is also practiced by Bellarmine, as I have showed in diverse
discourses written against him; by Baromus, as my special exceptions taken to
his volumes fraught with lies and fables, do declare; by Parsons and Kellison
as by my answers to their books it may appear.

Turrecremata lib. 3. sum. c. 9. affirms, that Helena and 3000. Jews were
converted to Christian religion in a council at Rome under Siluester: but
other more true stories report, that she was alwares a Christian, and help to
convert her son Constantine.

Lib. 2. sum. c. 300. he says, that Paul did some things, which he afterward
retracted. quaedam fecit, quae postea reuocauit.

The Emperor Henry the fourth by the Romanists is most unjustly standred, as if
he had prostituted his own wife to his son, and done other such like
abominable acts. matters merely devised by the Popes agents.

Fridericke the 2. was a most noble Prince and greatly praised by the Cardinal
of Cusa, Aegidius Romanus, and others. yet was he most unjustly reviled and
standred by Gregory the 9. Innocent the 4. and their agents, as it does appear
by the testimony of Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.

Capgraue tells, how a hundred and fifty of Joseph of Arimathaea his company
sailed out of France into great Britany upon Iosephes shirt: a small barge
certes for so many passengers.

Antoninus hist. part. 3. reports, how an innumerable troop of the order of
Dominske were seen in heaven covered under the blessed virgins gown.

Stapleton in his prompruarie dominica 2. aduentus brocheth us a barrel of
lies. first he says, that Sebastian a certain musician was put in prison for
demanding liberty of conscience, by the last Queen; and that one Gifford was
imprisoned by her likewise, for the same cause after he had enterteined the
Queen very bountifully at his house; and that Shelley was committed for
presenting a request in the behalf of the papists. matters merely imagined
and devised by lying companions; and foolishly reported by him. the two first
we cannot learn ever to have been committed. the third was imprisoned for
plain treason.

The Papists accused the people of Zuricke for teaching, that the virgin Mary
had more sons then one, and that James died for them, as we may read in
Sleidan lib. hist. 4. and Bellarmine lib. 4. de iustific. c. 1. says, we
little regard good works, and lib. 2. de amiss. great. c. 1. he accuses the
Albrgians, as they are called, and Calvin for holding the error of the
Manichecs; which they always renounced and detested. In his bo^ke de
Matrimonio c. 2. he blusheth not to charge them, whom he calls Lutherans, and
Caluinists with holding, that matrimony is not of God. a point expressly denied
by them.

Finally it is an easy matter to show, that the foundation of Popery is laid
upon lies, and that the charge, which Papists give upon their adversaries, is
ordinarily enforced by most wicked imputations and standers.

CHAP. XLIIII. That the cause of Popery is maintained by fire and sword.
MVch are simple people abused by calumniations devised against good men, and
hardly are Christians able to discern falsehood from truth, and to judge what
is truly alleged, what falsely, until such time as matters be duly examined.
yet neither can truth be utterly suppressed, nor do lies pass always for
good payment. Those therefore, whom they cannot abuse with lies, and false
allegations, the Pope and his accomplices seek cruelly to destroy with fire and
sword.

The holy Ghost Apocalypse. 17. shows us, that the purple whore should be
drunk with the blood of the saints. and Apocalyp. 13. that the 2. beast should
kill such, as would not worship the image of the beast, that is, that the Pope
should persecute to the death such as would not submit themselves to the
kingdom of Antichrist, in which the image of the Roman Empire was after a sort
revived. and this we see verified by experience in the cruel government of
the Popes of Rome and their adherents.

Their laws against all such as dissent from them in opinion concerning the
sacraments are most rigorous. they are degraded, and delivered over to the
secular power to be burned, as it appears by the law ad abolendam. de
haereticis. nay they punish such as are suspected, if they cannot clear
themselves, with no less rigor then the rest. all that communicate with them,
receive them, or succor them, are in great danger. such as give them counsel
are reputed infamous, as is determined c. si aduersus. de haereticis. the goods
of heretics are adjudged confiscate. neither are they punished only while they
live, but also after their death, being deprived of the communion of
Christians, and of burial. Alexander the 4. c. quicunque haereticos. de
haereticis in 6. excommunicateth, and depriueth of Christian burial all such,
as go about to bury heretics, or their favorers. neither do they admit the
repentance of such as are adjudged relapsed, but deliver them over to be burnt
by their executioners, as we may read in the chapter super co. de haereticis.
in 6.

The spanish inquisition is yet more rigorous, then the former laws of Popes.
for upon any wicked or lewd fellows accusation an honest man may be attached,
imprisoned, tortured, and, if he acquit himself not the better, either
famished in prison, or burnt most cruelly.

And by these laws we find, that infinite Christians have been done to death
in Spain, Italy, France, Flanders, England, Scotland, Germany and other
Christian countries. Metera^^ in his history of the troubles of the low
countries reports, that fifty thousand persons were executed by the acts of
judges and inquisitors in the low countries, during the reign of Charles the
fifth. In England during the times of Queen Mary, they spared neither old nor
yongue, noble nor base, learned nor unlearned. nor did they respect eithe sex
of women, or the simplicity of the common sort.

Pius quintus testifies, that Philip the 2. spared not his own and only
son Charles, being accused by the inquisitors. in the days of Gregory the
13. a gentleman of Valedolid in Spain cut wood, and set fire to burn two of
his own daughters condemned for the Gospel, in that country called heresy.
and if king Henry the 8. had lived longer, it is thought the Papists would have
persuaded him not to have spared his Queen. so cruel was the Popish faction in
prosecuting the innocent. nay if either Queen Mary had longer lived, or Popery
longer reigned in England, this bloody crew had caused the daughter to
disenterre her own father, and to burn his bones, as some have reported.

Sometime without form of law they murder infinite numbers of innocent persons,
for the least suspicion of doctrine contrary to the opinions of the church of
Rome. for this cause Innocent the 3. and his successors proclaimed open war
against the Albigians and Valdensians, and ceased not until he had destroyed
all, that durst manifestly oppose themselves unto their heresy and tyranny.

In Bohemia they had not the like success, their armies being often
overthrown by the poor people of the country, which defended their lives
against their cruelty. but never did they cease to persecute that nation.

Paul the 3. sent great forces into Germany, seeking by the arms of Charles
the fifth, to reestablish his antichristian kingdom in that country. the same
Pope stirred up rebels both in England and Ireland against Henry the 8. that
had shaken off his heavy yoke.

Pius the fifth in his Bull commanded Queen Elizabeth's subjects to rebel
against her, and raised many troubles both in England and Ireland, seeking to
overthrow the state, if he could. the same man not prevailing by intestine
sedition, sought to set both French and Spanish upon the English, as we may
read in his life written by Hicrome Catena.

In the times of Gregory the 13. that bloody massacre, that for ever shall
make Papists insamous, was committed in France. Natalis Comes histor. lib. 23.
testifies, that sixty thousand persons were massaacred, at that time.
Circiter sexaginta hominum millia, says he, varijs in locis per illud tempus
trucidata suisse dicta sunt in Gallia. and so extreme was their cruelty, that
like bloody wolves, they neither spared sex, nor age, nor quality. vel
puberes, vel impuberes, says he, trucidati sunt, neque vllius sexits, vel
aetatis, vel dignitatis habita est ratio.

Anno 1588. they brought upon England great forces, with fire and sword,
seeking the utter subversion of this kingdom. but the Lord from heaven blew
upon his enemies, and dispersed them.

In France they conspired against the king, and bound themselves by oath to
exclude the house of Bourbon from the right of the crown, and to root out all
that should speak against the Pope, and his erroneous doctrine, and for that
cause raised great tumults and stirs, as we may read in the memorials of the
league.

The like course for many years have they taken in the Low countries, where
the strength of Italy and Spain has been consumed, and a way made for the
good success of the common enemy of Christendom the Turk.

Finally the Popes and their emissaries the Iebusites do delight in nothing
more then in tumults, wars, seditions, massacring, and shedding of the blood
of innocent Christians. The massacre of Paris is painted in the Popes palace,
as a matter, wherein he takes chief delight.

The Iebusites, albeit once banished out of France, cease not to sound the
alarm against such, as are opposite to their faction.

Andreas Fabritius in praefat. in harmon. August. confess. set out 1576.
speaking to the Emperor exhorts him to gird his sowrd upon his thigh, and to
subdue heretics, the most pernicious enemies of Christians. accingatur gladio
suo super femur potentissimus imperator, haereticos, and christiani nominis
pernitiosissimos hosts sub iugum mittat. Pius Quintus, as we may read in his
life, exhorted his Italian troops, that went into France against them of the
religion, to kill all, and to take none alive. Posseuinus also a cholerike
Iebusite in a treatise entitled il soldato Christiano, speaking unto the same
soldiers assirmeth, that it is their duty to kill al professing our religion,
or otherwise, that they shall betray their faith, and lose all hope of
salvation.

In England of late, perceiving themselves to be too weak to prevail by plain
force, certain undermining Papists set on and resolved by fiery Iebusites and
murdrous Massepriests, conceived such a treason, as cannot be sampled by any
former precedent, nor found described in any old or new history. their
intention was at one instant with fire and gunpowder to consume the King, the
Queen, the Prince, the Prelates of the Church, the Nobles, Knights, and
Burgesses of the realm, the Judges and all that attended the honorable court
of Parliament. nay not content herewith they had a further practice to destroy
the Kings royal lignage, to massacre all the professors of religion throughout
the kingdom, and to deliver their country as a pray into the hands of
Strangers. The principal actors were Thomas Percy, Catesby and Fauxe: the
principal counselors Garnet, Hall, Baldwin, and diverse other of the damned
crew of Iebusites; their aiders the damned crew of reconciled recusants.

Can we then think these men to belong to Christ's flock, that use this
woluish cruelty? long diuersasunt carnisicina and pietas, says Lactantius,
nec potest aut veritas cum vi, aut institia cum crudelitate coniungi. that is,
piety and butcherly cruelty are two diverse things, and neither can truth with
force, nor justice be coupled with cruelty. Matthew Paris shows, that in the
times of Innocent the third, Christians were accused by a writing sent from
heaven for showing no pity upon widows and orphans, and showing less mercy,
then did the pagans. viduae and orphani ad vos clamant quotidie, says that
writing, quibus nullam facitis miscricordiam. pagani habent misericordiam, at
vos non habetis. but much more reason have we to use these words to the modern
Iebusites and their accomplices. for they are more merciless then Turks. the
Turks suffer Christians to enjoy their religion, and these do not. therefore
the Italians, as Natalis Comes in his history testifies, say, it is better to
live under the Turk, then under the Spaniards and Popes inquisitors. and for
this cause the kingdom of Hungary, and principality of Transiluania has
chosen rather to seek for succor at the hands of Turks, then to endure the
cruel and treacherous executions of the Pope, and his bloody inquisitors. up
then o Lord and scatter these thy bloody enemies, that seek to scatter and
massacre the sheep of thy pasture, and let not those prevail any further,
that make wars against the Lamb, and all that follow him, and constantly
profess his truth these wolves have conspired and sworn the destruction of
the professors of religion. At Bayon anno 1585. a league was concluded betwixt
France, Spain and other Princes. the articles were these, as is evident by the
French histories. The Spanish king shall war upon the king of Navarre. the
dukes of Ferraria and Sauoy with the aid of German horsemen shall translate the
wars into France. the Germans shall hinder all succor to come to them of the
religion. the Cantons of Suizzerland, that adhere to the Pope, shall oppress
the other Cantons. Monks shall give their names for soldiers. and all shall
endeavor to kill the Lutherans. so you see, that the final end of their
designs is murder and cruelty. their means, fire, sword and gunpowder their
contentment wast and desolation.

What reason then have Christians to slugge and sleep when danger is so near
them? do they think, that papists want gun powder, or poison, or that they
will not hurt if they recover strength? as well they may think, that wolves will
cease from cruelty, and Serpents cast away their poison, and tyrants prove
gentle foster fathers, and Turks turn Christians.

Nay such Princes as are not Papists, are not much to trust them, if they
satisfy not the Popes will in all things. Gregory the 7. killed and empoisoned
all, that were opposite to his deseings. he excommunicated the emperor Henry
the fourth, because he would not suffer him quietly to sell ecclesiastical
prelacies. his successors made wars upon Henry the sift, Fridericke the 1.
Philip, Otho and Fridericke the 2. for that they could not be suffered to
dispose of the lands of the Empire. Lewis of Bauier was persecuted for no
other cause, then for that he would not receive his crown at the Popes hands.
for this cause also Harold King of England became enemy of the Clergy, because
he took the crown, before it was delivered by Popish prelates. Philip the
fair King of France was persecuted by Boniface the 8. for that he would not
acknowledge himself to be the Popes subject. and yet did they not know any
other religion, then that, which the Pope then professed.

Finally Henry the 3. of France, albeit superstitiously addicted to popery, yet
could he not escape the butcherly hands of the popish leaguers, that suborned a
Dominican Friar to kill him, for that he would not at their appointment make
wars upon his subjects.

To conclude therefore this point, there is no way of security for Christians
against the Popes cruelty and his adherents practices, then manfully to resist
their usurpations, warily to take heed of their mines and gunpowder, and never
to trust their sweet words and guilefull promises. with clemency they are not
to be mitigated; but with resolution and justice they may easily be subdued.

CHAP. XLV. That the practices, and treaties of Popes and their accomplices with
Christians, are not to be trusted.
THe Prophet describing a wicked man says, he laid hands on such as were at
peace with him, and broke his covenant. Among heathen people the Thracians were
very infamous for breaking their oaths and promises. (...), was in times past
a common proverb. but neither among heathen people, nor among such as profess
to know God, do we read of any more foedifragous or periurious sect, then the
Popes of Rome and their accomplices.

Others percase break both oaths and promises. but no man in time past ever
taught, that faith and oaths given to others ought to be broken, as do the
Romanistes. in the conuenticle of Constance they not only made void the
Emperors charter of faseconduct given to John Husse, but also by public act
determined, that says was not to be holden with heretics.

They absolve subjects from their oaths of allegiance, which as Sigebert in
his Chronicle says, sauoureth of heresy. Pius quintus not only absolved the
late Queens subjects from their allegiance, but also denounced them
excommunicate, that continued firm in their allegiance.

Julius the second went one point further, and disputed, that the church was
not bound with oaths, as Guicciardine in his history reports. now every man
knows, that by the church he understood the Pope.

With this wicked doctrine their execrable practice very well accords.
Gregory the 7. by a public sentence of a synod was declared perjured.

Paschal the 2. confirmed certain covenants betwixt himself and the Emperor
by solemn chartres, seals and oaths: literis, sigillis, inramentis, says Otho
Frising^nsis lib. 7. but immediately he brake all.

Fridericke the 2. as Matthew Paris testifies, accused Gregory the 9. for
teaching persidiousnesse and perjury. quod persidiam and periurium doceret. and
yet his disciples hold, that the Pope, when he teaches, cannot err in matters
of faith.

Gregory the 12. as Theodoricke a Niem tract. vnionis 6. c. 29. writes, was
charged to be a public forsworn person, and by him called periurus publicus.
lib. 3. de schism. c. 3. he says, he deceived the world with his oaths and
vows. votis and iuramentis suis decepit mundum. likewise he says tract. 6. c.
39. vnionis. that Innocentius would not admit the union of the Papacy, albeit
he had before vowed, and sworn to do it. Charles the French King charge
both him and Peter de Luna with breaking their oaths, as Theodoric a Niem
writes tract. nemoris vnionis lib. 6. c. 14.

The Bohemians for this persidious dealing of the Popes accomplices would not
come to the council of Basil without good pledges.

Alexander the 6. was more perfidious, then any Carthagigian, as in his life
Onuphrius testifies. perfidia plus quam punica.

When Julius the third was in petition, he swore both to the French and
Spanish, as is testified in Pelegrino Inglese, but performed neither to the one
nor to the other.

The Mass Priests of Trent promised safeconduct to all that would come to
Trent. but contrary to the same, Vergerius and others were excluded out of the
synod, and diverse doctors coming out of Germany, could not be heard to
dispute, and hardly escaped with their lives out of the place.

Charles the 9. of France, anno 1572. with monstrous oaths and solemn
promises, drew the Queen of Navarre, the admiral and many other noblemen and
gentlemen unto Paris. but it cost them full dear, and lost them all their
best men. for there that noble Queen was poisoned, there the king of Navarre
was taken prisoner, and the rest trecherously murdered. and so far was the
Pope from condemning this fact, that he caused the same to be set out in tables
in his palace among the triumphant acts of Popes.

In France and Flandres upon surrenders of towns seldom did our adversaries
regard either oath, or promise. diverse edicts have been published by the
French king for the pacification of troubles, but they proved nothing, but
traps and engines to take men, that meant simply and plainly. the capitulation
with them of Sancerre, was megerly performed. The duke of Alua and his
accomplices contrary to promise murdered the garrison of Arlem, Narden, Zutphen,
and diverse other towns.

Of late we thought our selves secure, having peace with all the world. but
even then we were nearest danger, and could not have escaped it, if God had not
discovered the mine, the powder, the train, and the whole pack of traitors.

In the year 1588. while the agents of Spain and England were treating of
peace, the enemies came upon us, hoping suddenly to ouer-whelme us with wars
being taken unprovided.

No treaty could be more solemnly agreed upon, or confirmed, then the
pacification of Gant, after the surprise of Antwerp. yet was neither promise
nor oath kept therein; but rather under confidence of these promises and
oaths, many poor people were surprised.

First then we say, that our hope is, that God will destroy them that speak
lies, and not hold them guiltless, that shall swear falsely, dishonoring his
holy name. this we are assured, that he abhors the bloody and deceitful man.

Secondly, we may rightly conclude, that such as look for performance of
oaths and promises at the hands of the Pope and his accomplices, further then
necessity and profit urges them; are very ignorant of their doctrine and
practices. we may say also, that they are very weak and simple. for once any
plain dealing man may be abused. but to offend diverse times in one fault, and
oftentimes to run into the same trap, argues great weakness, negligence
and wilfulness.

Finally albeit princes, that live under the Popes laws were willing to keep
touch, and to perform promises; yet we must remember, how easily the Pope
dispenses with oaths, and how necessary it is for them to break all
couena^ts, if the Pope once declare the contrary party to be an heretic, or
schismatike. In the Clementine Romam. de iureiurando. the Popes forbid all
princes vnionem, parentelam, confoederationem, that is, peace, contracting of
alliance, and confederation with such, as are their enemies. and if any
contract be made, then must the same be dissolved upon pain of
excommunication, when the Pope pleases. so all the assurance, that Christians
can have of amity with the Popes vassals, depends on the Popes pleasure, and
his pleasure is founded upon his profit, and necessity: and our security
stands in watching their mines and gunpowder treasons. God grant therefore
all Christians grace to beware, that they be not entrapped with false and
perfidious promises; nor undermined with their subtilties, nor blown up with
treason: and give our adversaries that light of reason, that they may see, that
oaths made by the name of God in just and honest causes, are not to be
dissolved either by the Pope or any other, nor their treasons to be warranted
by any Popish faculty.

CHAP. XLVI. That the chief founders and mainteiners of Popery have been
commonly noted for wicked and profane men.
Faithful Christians and the citizens of the city of God, as the Apostle
teaches us Ephesians. 2. are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. but our Savior Christ
was an high priest, most holy, innocent, and vndersiled. and his Apostles and
Prophets were holy men, and endued with special graces fit for that function.
let us then see what manner of men the first authors and principal vpholders
of Popery have been, that by the different qualities of the one and the other,
we may the better esteem of true religion, and more perfectly learn to hate
the superstition, heresy, tyranny, and all the abominations of the Popes of
Rome and their wicked faction.

The mystery of iniquity began to work in the Apostles time, as S. Paul
testifies. for then false teachers began to spread their poison, and after
the departure of the Apostles, ravening wolves entered into the Church not
sparing the stock. by little and little also heathenish and Jewish ceremonies
began to be received in diverse places, and as S. Augustine says, the world
grew full of presumptions. but Antichrist began not to show himself openly
before the times of Phocas the emperor, who at the ernest solicitatio^ of
Platina in Bonifacio 3.
Boniface the third granted, that the church of Rome should be called and
accounted the head of other Churches. so then the principal agent in the
erection of the papacy was Phocas, a barbarous Thracian by nation, and a common
soldier, by tumult advanced to the empire, and one that began his reign with
the slaughter of his master, of the Empress, and their children.

The next was Irene a proud insolent and cruel woman, that among others,
murdered her own son. for unto her time the worship of God continued in the
church of Rome without any notable corruption. but she with the help of Adrian
Bishop of Rome, and other superstitious persons first brought in the idolatrous
worship of images and Saints.

Gregory the 7. was the first, that by force dissolved Priests marriages, and
exalted the miter of the Pope above the crowns of emperors and kings, taking
upon him first to depose them from their seats. but among all the Popes you
shall not find any more abominable. Beno testifies he was a necromancer, a
murderer, an empoysoner, and a sacrilegious and impious person. the synod of
Brixina condemned him for diverse abominable crimes. Matthew Paris in Willelmo
conquastore writes, that being ready to depart this life, he confessed, that
by the Devils persuasion he had provoked the wrath of God against mankind. he
threw the sacrament into the fire, because he could obtain no succh answer of
it, as he desired, and lived scandalously with Mathilda. a fit fellow therefore
he was to advance the whorish, sacrilegious and murdrous religion of the later
Rome, that is so much degenerated from the former.

Paschall the 2. that achieved that, which Gregory the. 7. and others his
predicessors had begun, was a perjured person, and a firebrand of sedition and
trouble. he set the son against the father, and the subjects against their
princes. having prevailed against the Emperor he would not suffer his body to
be buried. and having gotten into his hands the body of Clement the Antipope
he caused the same to be burned.

Alexander the 3. a great patron of the Popes authority betrayed the emperor
Friderike Barbarossa to the sultan, sending his lively portrait unto him, and
persuading him to destroy him. he trod most proudly upon the Emperors neck,
and abused words of scripture most impiouslie to his purpuse.

Innocent the third, that first established auricular confession, and
transubstantiation, two principal bulwarks of the Popes kingdom, and was a
principal doer in the decretales, raised bloody wars against the Christians
in France, that would not allow his authority, caused the bones of Almericus to
be burned, for that he had preached against the worship of Images, and showed
himself a bloody wolf and a deuourer of Christ's flock, and an impure fellow.

Thomas Cantipratensis a Dominican Friar reports, that this Innocent after
his death appeared to S. Luitgard, all burning in flames.

Honorius the third, that first authorized the idolatrous worship of the
Masse-cake, as appears by the chapter sane cum olim. de celebrat. missar. was
proud, cruel, vicious, and superstitious. he forbad honest marriage to Priests,
and maintained the filthy religion of Monks and Friars. Dominike and Francis,
and the locusts, that came out of the bottomless pit of hell were first
allowed by him. his malice and anger were showed upon the Scots, that had
killed Adam Bishop of Catnesse. for he caused 400. to be hanged, among which
many innocents were comprehended, and caused their children to be gelded, that
he might extinguish their race.

But one of the principal builders of this Romish Babylon was Gregory the 9.
for he gathered the decretales of Popes together, and gave then ferce of law,
as appears by his preface before the decretales. some say, he was the cousin
of Innocent the third. but his manners do declare him rather to have been his
son. he excommunicated the Emperor Friderike, that warred upon the Saracens,
and stopped the good success, and the course of the victories of the
Christians against them. secretly he murdered the Emperors ambassadors,
published lying decretales against him, as we may read in Matthew Paris.
finally, to enrich his nephews, or rather his bastards, he set all Italy on a
flame.

Boniface the eight, Clement the sift, and John the 22. who made up the body of
the canon law, which is the strength and sinews of Popery, did not degenerate
from their predecessors. of Boniface the eight it is said, that he entered like
a soxe, reigned like a lion, died like a dog. he caused his predecessor
Celestine to renounce the papacy, and afterward imprisoned and murdered him.
his own friends confess, that he sought to subdue the world rather by force
of arms, then by religion. his unspeakable pride, taking upon him both as Pope
and Emperor, and challenging power to translate kingdoms from one to another,
of his own friends could not be dissembled. he that continues the history of
Vrspergensis, writes, that Clement the 5. was a notorious fornicator. hic, vt
habet Chronicon Hermanni, publicue suit Fornicator. Villani also in his
chronicle testifies, that he was a filthy fellow. for the wickedness and
abominable life of John the 22. Petrarch made the sonnet Fiammadal ciel:
wherein he beseeches God, that slames from heaven might stream down and
consume the court of Rome. It grieved him not a little, that the Pope did keep
his sister, having with a great price bought her of her brother Gerard.

John the 23. by whose authority the council of Constance was assembled, was
convinced to be an incestuous person, a Sodomite, and a most abominable
atheist, denying the immortality of the soul, as appears by the acts of that
council, and the appendix. and yet this is the synod, that condemned the
doctrine of M. Wicklesse, and established the communion under one kind, and
the subsistence of accidents without substance, and diverse other points of
Popery.

The council of Florence, wherein the Popes supremacy, purgatory, and diverse
points of popish doctrine concerning the sacrments were confirmed, had his
strength from Eugenius the fourth, that by the council of Basil was condemned
as an heretic, and by the citizens of Rome driven out of the city as a
public enemy. he was the cause of the perjury of Ladislaus, that broke with
the Turk, and of the defait and slaughter of the Christians at Varna.

The three principal authors of the wicked decrees, and anathematismes of the
conuenticle of Trent, were Paul the third, Inlius the third, and Pius the
fourth: whereof the first was a parricide, a lechour, a necromancer and an
empoysoner, as is testified by Vergerius, Sleidan and other. Julius the third
was a sensual epicure, and a filthy sodomite, as is testified in a certain
preface before the story of Iouius, and declared by certain rymes and verses
made upon him, and Innocentius de Monte, a boy made Cardinal by him. Pius the
fourth, as the common report went, died betwixt two concubines, and was
infamous for lechery and villainy, and odious to the Romans for his vices.

To speak generally of later popes the only founders and belmelters of Popish
religion, we find, that they have been the greatest scandales of Christian
religion, and the principal authors of the calamities of Christendom. Bernard
in sermon. 1. in conuers. S. Pauli complains, that iniquity taking his
beginning from the Popes of his time, was spread out over the world. egressa est
iniquitas, says he, a senioribus iudicibus vicarijs tuis, qui videntur regere
populum tuum. Petrarke in his epistles without title, says, the court of Rome
was not a city, but a house full of devils, and wicked spirits, and a sink of
vice and shame. non ciuitas, sed lemurum, and laruarum domus, and vt breuiter
dicam, scelerum and dedecorum omnium sentina. John of Sarisbury in Polycrat.
lib. 6. c. 24. says, that Popes do therefore die the faster, least they
should corrupt the whole church. ideo mea opinione papae frequentius moriuntur,
ne totam corrumpant ecclesiam. Warnerus in Martino 2. Adriano 3. and Stephano,
cries out, heu, heu, quomodo obscuratum est aurum! alas, alas, how is the
gold obscured! he compleineth also of the scandales, that happened in the
papacy, and of their emulations, sects, and contentions, and says, that truth
failed among the children of men. Theodoric a Niem de schism. lib. 3. c. 42.
says, that so much iniquity was gone from the Popes, that the catholic faith
was darkened thereby, and religion suffered shipwreck, and all virtues were
departed from all sorts of men, vt catholica fides obnubiletur, and omnis
religio naufragium patiatur, virtutes ab omnibus recesserint. Platina in Sergio
3. says, that Popes getting their places by bribery neglected Gods worship,
and persecuted their enemies like most cruel tyrants, that afterward they
might with more security satisfy their lusts, when there was none to control
them. Ioannes Marius de schism. part. 3. c. 5. testifies, that all the evils
of christendom have proceeded from the malice, ambition, and avarice of wicked
Popes. a malitia, ambitione, and auaritia sceleratorum paparum omnia mala in
mundo proueniunt. Robert Grosted, as Matthew Paris testifies in Henrico 3. did
bitterly inueigh against the covetousness, usury; simony, rapines, excess and
luxuriousness of the court of Rome. neither does Budaeus de Ass, or Valla
contra Donationem Constantini, say less against the Popes, then he.

Next to the Popes the Cardinals, Mass Priests, Monks and Friars, and of late
years the Dominicans, Franciscans and Iebusites are the chief aduancers,
teachers, and defenders of Romish heresies. of which if we say little, men may
suppose, there is no more to be said; if we say what they deserve, and is in
authentical books reported of them, it would exceed the proportion of this
short Survey. only thus much we say of many things, that may be said. Brigit
in her revelations testifies, that Cardinals are excessive in pride,
covetousness, and al delights of the flesh, 4. Brig. 49. cardinales, extenti
and effusi sunt ad omnem superbiam, cupiditatem and delectamentum carnis.
Pelaguis lib. 2. de planct. eccles. art. 16. says, they are increased in
riches, but much diminished in piety. aucta est possessio, diminuta religio.

The same man lib. 2. de planct. leccles. art. 20. says, the prelates of the
church have declared their sins like Sodom. Peccatum suum, sicut Sodoma
praedicauerunt. Mantuan Alphonsi lib. 6. says, that the priests hate their
flocks, and care not to feed them, but to poll them and mock them.

Pastores, says he, odere pecus, nec pascere curant,

Sed tondere greges, pecorique illudere tonso.

Catherine of Siena c. 125. says, that religious men pretend angels lives, but
for the most part are worse then devils. Religiosi collocati sunt in religione
velut angeli, sed quam plurimi sunt daemonibus deteriores.

What the Iebusites are, I report me to the French carechisme of Jesuits set
out by a Papist, and a learned man; and to the discourses of the secular
priests against them. they show they are covetous, false, proud, cruel,
malicious, and devils incarnate. for the rest, I refer them over to the 2.
book 2. chap. of my answer to Rob. Parsons his Warn-word, a man, in whom most
of the capital vices of the Iebusites may be specified.

The chief mainteiners of Popery in our times, if we speak of lay men, were
Charles the 9. of France, Henry the 3. his brother, Philip the 2. of Spain,
the duke of Alua, the duke of Guise, and his brethren, the earl of
Westmerland, the head of the rebellion in the North. but if we seek all
histories, we shall hardly find worse men. Charles the 9. was a notorious
sweater, a perfidious and licentious prince. Henry the 3. was superstitious and
altogether given to carnal delights. What Philip the 2. was, his wives, and
son, and the innocents done to death by him for religion will speak one day.
the Duke of Guise and Alita were cruel and bloody men, perfidious, and wicked
atheists. the first more given to pleasure, the second to avarice. Charles of
westmerland was a rebel to his prince, and a man consumed with his own
delights and pleasures.

Is it not then a matter ridiculous, that Mass Priests should so excessiuely
commend this religion, that had such founders and favorers, as these are, and
which, as we see, was invented and confirmed by wicked men, and vpholden by
fraud and force?

CHAP. XLVII. That Popery in many points is more absurd and abominable, then
the doctrine of Mahomet.
THe impieties and abominations of Turkish religion are so many, that hardly
can we recount them, and so odious and horrible, that no Christian can take
pleasure to hear them. and yet if we please to look into the secret mysteries
of Popery, and to examine all the odious and abominable doctrines of the Romish
synagogue, we may well make question, whether of the two religions deserves
more to be abhorred and hated. for first the Turks do speak well of the law
and the Prophets, and handle books of scriptures with great reverence. Antonie
Geoffrey in his 2. book of Turkish ceremonies reports, how the Turks
account the gospels among holy scriptures. inter sacras literas habent nostra
euangelia, says he. but the Papists speak evil of scriptures, and call them
sometimes a dead and killing letter, sometimes a matter of strife, sometime a
nose of wax. they do also handle them very rudely, and without respect.

Lastly they will not have them to be authentical in respect of us, without
the Popes consignation and testimony.

The Turks never burned their Alchoran, or the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles upon pretense of false translations. but the Papists have often times
burned holy scripturs, as appears by the ecclesiastical histories of France,
England, Germany and other places.

Postell in his history of Turks shows, how they teach that perfection is
contained in the gospel. and Gifford lib. Caluinoturcis. 3. c. 9. confesses,
that they believe all religion to be therein contained. but Papists do rather
hope to find perfection in the rules of Monks and Friars, then in the
gospel, and therefore account rather the state of Monks to be a state of
perfection, then the lives of Christians after the rule of the Gospel. the
Mass Priests of Trent do make traditions equal to scriptures, and commonly
they deny scriptures to be a perfect rule of life and doctrine.

The doctors of Turkish religion were never so simple, as to think the
traditions of their church to be equal to the Alchoran of Mahomet. But the
Mass Priests of Trent will have traditions not written, and holy scriptures to
be received with equal affection.

Such as blaspheme Christ, are punished by the Turks most severely. but
Papists tear him in pieces with their blasphemies, and such are thought to be
most clear of heresy, which swear most wickedly, and blasphemously.

Auerroes of all religions accompteth Popery to be most absurd, for that
Papists worship a piece of a Masse-cake for their God, and yet presently
devour him, and swallow him down into their bellies.

No Turks ever allowed the eating of man's flesh, or believed, that it were
possible for a man to swallow down a whole and perfect man without hurt, or
diminution, or brusing of his body. but Papists make their followers eaters of
man's flesh, and say, that every one eating the sacrament does eat up Christ's
body whole and entire, and yet believe that they neither break his flesh, nor
digest it.

Every Mohammedan, albeit he believes not Christ to be God, yet would be
ashamed to say, that dogs and hogs and other brute beasts may eat Christ's
body. but the Papists, albeit according to the Christian faith they profess
Christ to be true God, yet they teach, that dogs and hogs do eat his body,
as often as they eat consecrated hosts.

The Turkish Priests believe, that Christ was true man, and that his body is
visible and palpable. but the Mass Priests give him a body in the sacrament,
that is neither visible, nor palpable, nor in any respect like to our bodies.

The Turks do teach, that after this life some are placed in paradise, some
damned to hell, as Postell writes in his history of Turks: a third place they
know not, nor do they believe, that their Calipha or high Priest is able to
deliver souls out of the nether part of the earth by his indulgences. but the
Papists believe a third place beside heaven, and the place of the damned, and
suppose that the Pope is sovereign lord of purgatory, and can deliver souls
thence by his indulgences.

Among the Turks we do not read of any, that ever doubted of the immortality
of the soul, as Menauinus de relig. Turc. testifies. but among the Papists
many doubt of it. for else why should Leo the x. lateran. council. sess. 8.
forbid men to dispute against the immortality of the soul? some deny it, as
did John the 23. as is testified in the appendix to the council of Constance,
and many other atheistical Papists, who have nothing of religion, but an
outward bare profession.

Turks do believe, that God has a body. yet do they not suffer any image or
similitude of God to be made. but Papists albeit they profess God to be a
spirit, yet most absurdlie they do make diverse corporeal Images of God.

The law of God prohibiting the making and worship of graven images and other
likenesses, is diligently observed of Turks. Georgeuitz in his book de
moribus Turcarum says, he never saw any images in the temples of Turks. with
him also in effect concurreth Zigabenus in elencho Ismaelit. and shows, that
such as worship images by the Turks are called idolaters. but Papists fill all the corners of their churches full of images, and idolatrously do they worship
them. nay because they perceive their practice to be contrariant to the law of
God, therefore in their brief catechismes they raze out the commandment
against images.

Mahomet never called himself God, but the Prophet of god only. neither did
his followers ever give him the title or honor of God. nay some of them
believe, that Cosdroes was vanquished by the romans, because he called himself
God. but Papists call the Pope God, as we read in Baldus in c. vlt. cod. sent.
rescind. and the Pope calls himself God after a cunning sort c. satis. did.
96.

The Turks are not so absurd, as to believe, that their Calipha, Mufti, or
high Priest cannot err, because he succeeds Mahomet, and sits in his
chair. but the simple Papists most absurdly think, that their Pope, albeit he
be ignorant and foolish, yet cannot err, as long as he teaches out of the
papal chair. In all the histories of Turks we cannot find, where any
Ianizars or Turkish Friars thought it lawful, or attempted to blow up the
Turks palace, or parliament house. but Thomas Percy, Catesby and their
consorts attempted and thought it lawful to blow up the parliament house, the
king and principal men of England. the Papists therefore pass Turks in
barbarous and perfidious cruelty.

We do not read, that any Calipha of the Turks did skin any of his Priests.
but John the 22. as Platina records, did pull the skin from the Bishop of
Cahors. happy had he been, if his body had been invisible and impalpable, as
the Papists make Christ's imaginary body in the sacrament.

Mahomet, as Zigabenus in Saracenicis tells us, wrote only 113. fables. but
the Papists in their legends, and breuiaries, and Caesar Fabulonius, I would
say Baronius, have written more then x. M. fables, and commend to their
followers most fabulous fooleries.

Among the Turks the Priests may not beg. but the Iebusites and other
mendicant Friars count beggary a piece of perfection. and much it were to be
wished, that they did only beg. for oftentimes they either take by force, or
steal most cunningly.

Septemcastrensis de relig. Turc. c. 14. testifies that the Turks in their
fasts abstain from all meat and drink. does it not then appear, that they
fast better then Papists, that drink wine and eat all dainty fishes and
banketting meats, upon their fasting days.

The Turks do not believe their religion to be true, or their Alcoran to
bescripture, because their Calipha does tell them; but because they take it, to
have come from God. but the Papists neither believe scriptures, nor the
articles of faith, unless the Pope does particularly tell them, that the
scriptures came from God, and that their Christian faith is Apostolical and
most true.

The Turks believe not, that any can be justified by extreme unction, or
eating red-herrings and salt-fish. but the Papists both teach it, and believe
it, and burn all that shall hold, believe or teach the contrary.

The Turks albeit servile in their manner of life, yet neither kiss the feet
of their Calipha, nor heave him up to be adored by his followers are not then
the papists in this point more slavish and miserable, then the Mahometans?

Finally Mahomet never taught his followers to kill Kings excommunicated by the
chief Priest of Turks, or to rebel or take arms against the Sultan or
Emperor of Saracens, as often as their chief priest should command them. nor did
he teach his followers, that the Calipha of Turks could dispense with the law
of God, or assoile subjects from their oaths made to princes. but the Popes
bastardly children the Iebusites do give all this power to their holy father,
and he is nothing nice in taking it upon him. and so far have they proceeded
in this damnable doctrine, that no prince can stand assured of his life, that
has any of this generation about him. this doctrine cost Henry the third of
France, and the prince of Orange their lives, and put both Henry the 8. of
England, and his daughter Elizabeth, and Henry the 4. of France to their
plunges, and brought them into great danger. And of late time the King, the
Queen, their children, the Nobles, and prelates of England and the Commons
assembled in parliament were deseined to the slaughter, and had been
destroyed, if God had not discovered the treachery.

Were Christians then so patient, as to tolerate heresy; yet it argues great
stupidity, if they should endure a religion more absurd, foolish, and
abominable then Mahometrie.

CHAP. XLVIII. That Christians are less oppressed under the Turk, then under
the Pope.
HOw great miseries they endure, that live under the Turks government, those
can best relate, that have travailed Turkey, and have experience of their laws
and customs. we doubt not but they are many and extreme, considering the
rigor of the Turkish tyranny. yet if we will believe those, that are as well
acquainted with the government of the Pope and his vassals, as with the
government of the Turk, we may assure our selves, that it is less grievous
for Christians to live under the Turk, then under the Pope, or his vassals.
and this also may be proved by assured demonstrations.

For first the Turk forces none to embrace his religion, nor punishes any
for professing other religions. but the Pope and his faction in France,
Flanders and other countries uses all manner of enforcement to draw men to
Popish religion, and punishes with all severity such, as be contrary to him.

Secondly Mahomet commanded his disciples to be reconciled to Christians, if
they desired it, as Zigabenus says in Saracenicis. (...). but the Papists
admit no leagues, or treaty, or pacification with the true professors of
religion, but seek their destruction, whenever they can prevail against
them.

Thirdly Turks have no inquisitors, nor rackes or torments for such, as hold
Christian religion, but suffer them quietly, if they be not tumultuous and
troublesome to the state. but the Pope and his accomplices search out poor
Christians by their inquisitors, that have as good sent, as blood hounds, and
suffer them not to hide themselves either in woods, holes or deserts. and such
as they find they rack and torment, and some they poison, some they famish,
some they burn, by all means purposing to destroy the race of their
adversaries.

Fourthly Turks do not use to massacre Christians, or to murder them without
sentence of Law, and lawful proceeding. but the barbarous and bloody
executioners of the Pope in France at diverse times have massacred many
thousands of harmless and disarmed Christians, killing them neither by
lawful war, nor by any form of justice.

5. Commonly the Turks having vanquished Christians, do spare such as yield,
and take them captives, and seldom is it seen, that they kill women and
children. but the Papists in France massacred men, women, and children, and
like fierce woolues have sought the blood of all manner of Christians opposite
to them.

6. In the Turks dominions Christians are burdened with tribute, but paying
the same they are quit. but that is nothing to the oppressions of Christians
under the Pope, and his vassals. for there they pay both to the Prince and to
the Pope. and neither are they free alive or dead from payments to
Mass Priests. but if any Christian differ from them in matters of faith, no
tribute can acquit him so, but his goods are confiscate, and his person
seized. and this is evident both by the chap. vergentis. de haereticis. and by
their common practice.

7. The Turks deal not so perfidiously with Christians, as do the Papists.
they empoison not men by treachery, nor commonly break solemn oaths and
promises. but the Popes and their accomplices teach their followers to keep no
faith with such Christians, as they call heretics. nay whether they be
excommunicate or no they respect not, but murder all that are opposite to them,
if they can, as appeared by their late bloody practice against the King and
parliament.

Lastly the Papists do prohibit burial to Christians, as appears by the
chapter sicut. de baereticis. they judge them also being dead, and dig them
out of their graves, and burn their bodies. and so they dealt with Wickleffe,
Bucer and Phagius in England, and with Almaricus and others in other places.
but this inhumanity the Turks will be ashamed to practice against their
greatest enemies.

What Christian then, that is not past all feeling, will not abhor this
inhumanity, and more then Turkish cruelty of papists that neither dead nor
alive can endure true Christians?

CHAP. XLIX. That the ambition, covetousness, contention, and practice of
Popes is the principal cause of the decay of the Christian empire, and a great
occasion of the good success of the Turks.
AS the strength of the Roman empire was the bulwark, that kept off the Turk,
and other barbarous nations, from the invasion of Christendom, and the most
potent means, to unite Christians in the common defense of Catholic religion,
and to defend those countries, that professed it; so it is apparent, that
those, that have weakened the Emperors, and caused dinision among Christian
princes, have also given way to the conquests of Turks, and decayed the
strength of Christians. but no man needs to doubt, but that the Popes above
al men in the world have through their ambition, contention, and tumultuous
practices both ruinated the Empire, and set Christians at contention among
themselves.

For first the spirit of God Apocalyp. 13. shows, that antichrist figured by
a lamberising out of the earth and speaking like a dragon, should succeed the
Emperor, and after a sort repair the empire figured by the beast like a
leopard, that rose out of the sea. S. John says, he did all the first beast
could do. he also caused the earth to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed. all which is perfectly fulfilled in the Pope. for he
possesses Rome, and although he calls himself the successor of Peter; yet
takes he upon him to manage both the swords. he also healed the wound that
Rome received by the decay of the Empire, making all Christians to worship the
Roman See, and calling his followers Roman catholics.

Further the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. declares, that one thing did withhold the
coming of Antichrist, which through the working of the mystery of iniquity was
then approaching; and that Ambrose, Hierome, and other fathers do interpret of
the Roman empire. so we see still an opposition betwixt the Roman Empire, and
the kingdom of Antichrist, and that the decay of the one, should be the rising
of the other.

Thirdly we see by practice, that the Popes by all means have gone about to
divide, and to weaken the Roman Empire. for first under color of the
contention about the worship of Images they caused Rome and Italy to rebel
against the Emperors of the East, as we may read in the histories concerning
Leo Isauricus, and diverse that succeeded him. next they brought the Gauls into
Italy, and diminished the empire, dividing as much, as in them lay, the West
from the East, and confirming the right of Charles the great, and his
successors, but always keeping Rome, and a good part of Italy to themselves.
Afterward having prevailed against the Eastern Emperors, they set upon the
Emperors of the West, and by setting the subjects against their kings, and the
sons against the fathers by their anathematismes and excommunications, they
have brought the Emperors to that pass, that they receive their crowns from
the Pope, and are not able to defend themselves and their subjects from the
common enemy without the aid of other Christian princes. further, if at any
time the Emperors warred aganst the Saracens and Turks abroad; then did the
Popes by all means endeavor to take from them and their agents their towns and
castles at home. they did also withdraw their supplies, and employ those, that
had vowed to serve against the Saracens, to serve against the Emperor, as
Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3. does testify. Alexander the third sent the sultan
Fridericke Barbarossaes portrayt, then serving against the Saracens, persuading
him to kill him, if he would settle his affairs. Gregory the 9. invaded the
emperors dominions in Italy, and drew Fridericke the 2. out of Asia to defend
his own possessions at home, when he was almost in possession of the victory
abroad. Lastly it is publicly known, that they have set French and Spanish
together about the quarrel of the kingdom of Naples. Innocent the third by
his excommunication of king John set both his subjects, and the French against
him, and was the cause of the loss of Normandy to the English. Julian the
Cardinal set the Germans against the Bohemians. Paul the third was the
principal motive of the wars of Charles the sift against the Germans. and to
shut up this discourse in few words, not only Nicholas Machiauel in his
Florentine history affirms, but also all histories testify, that the Popes
of Rome have been the principal causes of all the wars and stirs of
Europe, that have been for this 4. or 5. hundred years last past. they are the
causes of the massacres of France, of the troubles of the low countries, of the
late rebellions in England, Scotland, and Ireland, of the contentions betwixt
French and Spanish in Italy, of the persecutions in Germany, and Spain, and
other countries.

Fourthly the Popes of Rome by devising and confirming many orders of Monks
and friars, by admitting such swarms of idle lozels into orders, and
mainteining them by chanting of Masses for souls, forcing them to forswear
marriage, have not only caused many unnatural murders, but also hindered the
propagation and increase of men. they have also withdrawn men from defense of
the commonwealth, and placed them in dens of licentious idleness, and laid
the charge of the common defense upon few.

Fifthly exempting both the goods and the persons of religious men and clerks
from common charges of the commonwealth, they have weakened the states of
princes, and laid all the burden upon the weakest part.

Finally by their idolatries they have displeased God, and by their periuries
have made good the lewd cause of the Turks. Therefore we are not to marvel,
if the Christians have not prospered in their expeditions into the holy land.
for what success could Christians look for, considering the notorious abuses
committed in the army by worshipping idols, blaspheming Gods holy name,
violating Christ's institution of the Eucharist by celebration of profane
masses? Could Ladislaus king of Poland, and his army prevail against the
Turks, having begun the war contrary to articles of peace solemnly sworn?
but let us maintain the religion of Christ, and not of antichrist, and let us
abolish the idolatrous worship of images, and the invocation of saints, and let
us abandon the damned Mass, and serve God as he has appointed, and finally
let us not violate our promises and oaths, nor abuse gods holy name; and then,
no doubt, but we shall prosper in all our enterprises against the Turk, or
other enemies of the Church. for hitherto not the Turks forces, but the
multitude of the sins, idolatries, blasphemies and other abuses of
Christians, have made them fly before their enemies, and overthrown their
armies.

CHAP. L. That the modern church of Rome is much degenerated from the faith
and manners of the ancient Romans.
THe Church of Rome, when Paul wrote unto it, excelled in all piety and
virtue, and was famous throughout the world. but as al things else, so both
faith and virtue through tract of time fainted, and in the end began to fail
in that city. of late time we find, that neither that zeal in matters of
religion, nor that integrity and honesty of manners which was in the ancient
Romans, does continue in their posterity. Adrian the 6. in his instructions
given to his legate, that was sent into Germany, confesses freely, that many
and grievous offenses for many years have been committed at Rome, and from
the top of the Popes crown passed down to the inferior governors of the
church, and that no man did his duty, but that all went astray, and none was
void of faults. Plurimis nunc annis, says he, grauiter, multisque modis
peccatum est Romae, and inde a Pontificio culmine, malum hoc, atque lues ad
inferiores omnes ecclesiarum prafectos defluxit. neminem enim esse, qui suum
faciat munus, aberrasse omnes, and ne vnum quidem ex omni numero vacare culpa.

Duarenus in praefat. in lib. de eccles. minist. and benefic. confesfeth, that
the manners of such, as were called churchmen, were decayed, and that the
later constitutions of Popes were worse, then the first. illud, says he,
fateri velinuiti cogimur, mores hominum ecclesiae titulo insignitorum ita
paulatim degenerasse, vt posteriores constitutiones Pontificumfere anterioribus
cedant.

Guicciardine lib. hist. 2. shows, how the authority of Christian religion
grew every day less and less, by reason, that in the affairs of the church
men were altogether departed from ancient customs. Le cose della chiesa, says
he, allontanatesi totalmente dalli antichi costumi faceuano ogni di minore
l'authorita della Christiana religione.

Machiauel in his Florentine history directed to Clement the 7. confesses,
that by reason of the mutation, that had happened in Christian religion, great
scandales and discords had grown in the world.

Many of the chief rulers of the church, says Picus Mirandula in orat. ad
Leon. x. after whose example others ought to conform themselves, have either
little or no religion, no order in their living, no shame nor modesty. apud
plerosque religionis nostra primores, ad quorum exemplum componi and formari
plebs ignara debuisset, aut nullus, aut certe exiguus deicultus, nulla been
viuendi ratio, atque institutio, nullus pudor, nulla modestia.

Platina in Gregor. 4. wishes, that Jews Pius in his time had been alive. so
much did the church stand in need of his laws.

Res and pietatemiampridem perdidimus, says Auentinus lib. 3. annal. Boiorum.
virtuti nullus est honos. inuicem inuidere, fraudare, fallere, longinqua
consuetudo est. that is, we have long since lost our substance, and piety.
there is no honor given to virtue. we have used to envy one another, and to
practice fraud, and deceit a long time together.

Primitiui Theologi, says Petrus de Aliaco lib. de reformat. eccles. ecclesiam
aedificauerunt, quam nunc quidam Baritatores destruxerunt. the Divines of the
Primitive Church, built the church: but now certain later barators have
destroyed it.

And that this is true, it may be proved by diverse particulars. in time past
the bishops of Rome suffered for true religion. now they cut the throats of all
such as profess truth.

The ancient bishops of Rome fed Christ's flock, and were subject to Christian
Emperors. now the Popes kill Christ's lambs, and set their feet upon the
necks of emperors.

In the primitive church holy scriptures were read in the church, and taken
only for the word of God. but now in the Romish church lying legends, and
fables are read in the church, and lying and uncertain traditions are made
equal to scriptures.

In time past it was accounted folly, to read scriptures in tongues unknown,
and the Apostle shows, that it is unprofitable to pray in a strange language.
but now the Romanists both read scriptures, and pray in languages not
understood of the multitude. and yet defend it as well done.

In ancient time no man ever believed, either that the scriptures were made to
us authentical by the Popes determination, or that the Popes determination in
matters of faith was certain. now all is turned vpside down. scriptures are
made uncertain and obscure, and the Popes determination is made most liquide
and certain.

The ancient bishops of the church preached diligently, lived uprightly, dealt
with their people mercifully. now the Popish bishops preach not, nor lead
their lives according to their profession, but contrariwise live scandalously,
and are the only bouchers to murder all, that shall either reprehend the abuses
of the church, or their corruptions in manners. and the powdermen and
undermining Papists follow their steps.

Ancient Christians suffered most cruel torments and death, because they would
not worship images. now the Romanists put all to death, that will not worship
images.

The ancient Romans according to S. Paul's doctrine believed not to be
instified by the works of Gods law. the late Romanistes hope to be justified
by the works of the Popes Laws.

They looked for no peace by their own satisfaction, but by the redemption
wrought by Christ Jesus. these modern fellows believe, that they can satisfy
for their own sins, and trust in the redemption procured them by the Popes
indulgences.

The Romans, unto whom S. Paul wrote, were obedient to Kings. these loose the
bonds between kings, and their subjects, and stir up traitors to blow up
their princes.

They diligently observed Christ's institution in administering the sacraments,
and neither spit in the faces of Christians baptized, nor stole away the cup
from the communicants. the modern Romish priests spit on those, whom they
baptize, and refuse to administer the cup to others then themselves.

Finally they are digressed from the ancient Romans in all those particulars
both concerning faith and manners, wherein I have showed, that they differ from
ancient Catholics, and have devised mere novelties,

CHAP. LI. That the Romish Church, that now is, was invisible in old time.
MVch do our adversaries boast of the visibility of the Romish church,
supposing, because the scriptures speak much of the glory of the kingdom of
Jesus Christ, that all that honor belongs to the church of Rome of late times.
but while they mistake things spiritual for things corporal and external,
and suppose things untrue, all this their boast and glory will turn to their
great prejudice and shame. for first the beauty of the church consists rather
in inward virtues, then in outward shows and apparel. Secondly, be it, that
the church is always seen and apparent to the true members of the church; yet
the modern Romish church, and the glory thereof was never seen either of the
Apostles or ancient fathers of the Church, or of ancient Christians.

For what, I pray you, is the church of Rome, but a multitude of people
professing the modern says of the Romish synagogue, and communicating with
the same in sacraments, and subiecting themselves to the Popes holiness? this
is confirmed by the testimony of Bellarmine in his book de ecclesia, and of
Canisius in his catechism c. de fide and symbolo, and I hope will not be
denied by any Papist. but such a church shall never be showed in ancient time.
and that we shall prove by invincible reasons. for first we find not, during
the time of the Apostles, any such head of the church as the Pope, nor any such
sholders, as the Cardinals, nor any such rotten members, as the chantery
priests singing Masses for souls departed, as Monks living in herds like
swine, as friars begging for fashion sake, and yet abounding in all things
necessary.

2. The Pope with his triple crown, two swords, crossed pantofle, and his
guard of Suizars, and purple Cardinals following him, began only of late time
to be visible. if such a sight had appeared in the time of the ancient fathers,
they would have woondred at it, as a thing most monstrous, and unbeseeming him,
that pretends to be the successor of Peter.

3. While S. Peter lived, no man ever saw a church persecuting of Christ's
disciples, and delivering them over to have their throats cut by the secular
power. nor did either the bishops of Rome, or the ancient fathers for more then
a thousand years after Christ, imprison, torment, or kill such Christians, as
were not of their faction and opinion.

4. The ancient church of Christ did neither excommunicate kings, nor assoile
their subjects from their obedience, commanding them upon pain of
excommunication to rise up in arms against them, and to depose them. the
Romish church therefore, which does all these things, was not then visible.
neither can any Mass Priest show us where in old time miners and powder-men
sought to blow up the principal men of the state.

5. So long as the primitive church continued in the doctrine and steps of
the Apostles and ancient fathers, the same was ruled by the holy Scriptures,
and canons of councels, and then the decretales of Gregory the 9. Boniface the
8. Clement the 5. John the 22. and other later Popes were not in the world. who
can then say, that the Roman church ordered by these decretales was then visible?

6. The moderno Romish church, beside the two Sacraments instituted by Christ,
believe other 5. Sacraments, and hope as well to be saved by greasing, when
they lie a dying, as by Baptism, and the Lords Supper. but such a church was
altogether invisible both in the Apostles time, and long after.

7. Now Papists believe, that Christians receiving the Sacrament, swallow
down Christ's body into their stomach: nay they teach that dogs, hogs, and
brute beasts, eating consecrated hosts, do also devour Christ's body. but
such a company of Canibals, and blasphemers against Christian religion were
never taken for Christ's church, for more then a thousand years after Christ.

8. The Roman church commands Christians to keep the feast days of monks
and friars, and other saints, to hear Mass, upon ember days in Lent, and
fridaies to abstain from flesh, to go to auricular confession at the least
once a year, and not to celebrate marriage upon certain days. but if all the
monks and friars in the world were set to seek such a church, and if the
Mass Priests of the Romish. church were joined with them; yet could they not
find such a church for a thousand years after Christ.

9. In the Romish missals the priest prays, that God would be pleased to
accept of the body and blood of Christ, and that for the merits of the blessed
virgin, of Cosmas and Damianus and other saints. but where such a wicked and
blasphemous company, as make not only saints, but also the idolatrous
Mass Priests mediators for the body and blood of Christ, have been reputed
the church of Christ, and was visible before these wicked missals were framed,
we find not in any ancient record.

10. The Romish church worshippeth the cross and the images of the Trinity
with Latria, or divine worship. but such a church for a thousand years was
never visible in the world.

11. In the missals, breuiaries and other rituall books of the Romish church
we find diverse prayers and confessions to Angels, to the virgin Mary, and
other saints, nay to the cross and the image given to Veronica. and these
prayers are both practiced and defended by the church of Rome. but if all the
Popes lanterne-bearers, and disciples were set to seek for such a church in
the time of the ancient fathers, they should but lose their labor, and spend
their wits in vain.

12. The Apostles canons, as is said, do excommunicate such, as do not
communicate being present at the celebration of the Eucharist. we may not
therefore think, that the Romish synagogue was visible in those times, seeing
they think it sufficient for their disciples, to be present at the Mass,
although they receive nothing.

13. In the primitive church no man ever heard, that Christians gaped and gazed
on the priest administering the Lords supper, or that they received the one
kind, and not the other. the Popish church therefore in those times was
invisible.

14. In those times also neither was the Eucharist celebrated, nor the
Scriptures read in tongues not understood of the multitude. nor did the people
pray in strange toongs, which they understood not. the missificall congregation
therefore of papists, which pray, not knowing what they say, and being present
at the reading of Scriptures, and celebration of Sacraments in strange tongues,
understand nothing, was not yet crept out of Cacus his den, nor apparent in
the world.

15. The modern Papists believe, that such as in this life satisfy not for
their sins committed after Baptism, are to satisfy for the same in
Purgatory. They believe also, that the Pope by his indulgences is able to
redeem souls out of Purgatory, and to remit all the temporal pains due for
sins. but such a church as this, was never to be seen for a thousand years
after Christ.

To abridge this discourse, it were an easy matter, by diverse other points of
faith, and diverse other customs in administering the Sacraments, and diverse
other forms of government all newly invented, practiced and maintained by the
synagogue of Rome, to declare and prove, that the same is a new model of a
church never seen, nor known to antiquity. but by these few particulars the
same does most clearly appear already.

If the Papists then seek to bring us back to the forms of the ancient
church; then must they abandon the Pope and his adherents, embracing the
modern faith and doctrine of sacraments lately broched by the idle schoolmen,
and confirmed in the late conuenticle of Trent, and adhere to the church of
England, which as it professes the Apostles doctrine published by ancient
councels of the church, so it renounceth all heresies and nouclties brought in
by Papists and other heretics. and as it renounceth their false doctrine, so
it detesteth their treacherous practices.

CHAP. LII. That the marks of the church, and motives to the modern Romish
faith alleged by Papists, may as well be alleged by heathen men and Turks,
as by them.
ALL this notwithstanding, the Papists challenge to themselves the name, title,
and authority of the church, and bring forth a whole squadron of motives to
draw simple souls to like of their sect, and to entangle them with their
errors. Bellarmine de notis eccles. c. 3. says, that the proper marks of the
church are these: the name of Catholics, antiquity, continuance,
universality, succession of Bishops, consent in doctrine, miracles, prophecies,
temporal felicity, and such like. others bring unity, universality, holiness
of life, and such like. Bristow in his Motives stands upon the names of
Catholics and Heretics, miracles, visions, scriptures, traditions, fathers,
martyrs, going out, rising afterward, succession, immutability, unity, judges
infallible, obedient subjects, visibility, and other marks of like nature. But
as well may the Turks and idolatrous heathen nations allege these marks and
motives, as the Papists: and some of them do better agree to Turks, and
idolatrous Paynims, then to idolatrous and heretical Papists.

For as Papists call themselves Catholics, and give the name of heretics to
others; so do the Turks call themselves Musulman, or true believers, and
heathen idolaters called themselves Pious worshippers of the gods. and in
regard of themselves both Turks and Paynims take Christians to be impious
persons, and heretics. the Turks call Papists idolaters, and the heathen in
time past called Christians Atheists.

As for antiquity, it agrees far better to Paynims and Turks, then to
Papists. for heathen idolatry was long before the doctrine of Popery, and the
Alcoran is more ancient then the Popes decretales, that being published by
Mahomet within 630. years after Christ, these being commended, and confirmed
by Gregory the 9. who entered an. D. 1227.

3. Idolatry, as it began soon after the flood, so it has ever since
continued. the blasphemous religion of Turks har^ continued ever since the
time of Mahomet. but Popery never received a perfect form, before the
conuenticle of Trent, and in most places now is decayed.

4. The heathen idolaters allege for themselves amplitude and universality, as
well as the Papists: and so may the Turks also. for in time past all nations
worshipped idols, faue the Jews: and in our times far more nations are
deluded by Mahomet and his priests, then by the Pope and his Mass Priests, the
Popes doctrine being confined within a few nations of Europe, Mahometisme
poslessing the greatest part of Asia, and Afrike, and no small parts of Europe.

5. The Turks ever since Mahomet have had a succession of Caliphaes and
priests, and among the heathen there never wanted a descent of sacrificing
idolaters. but the Papists cannot derive their succession from the Apostles
eitheir in doctrine or descent of Popes. for neither is their doctrine
apostolical, nor are the Popes the Apostles successors. beside that, they are
uncertain, both who were true Popes, and which succeeded after Peter, and
diverse bishops and Popes of Rome.

6. The Paynims with one consent in time past worshipped idols, neither did
any one among them call the matter in question. the Turks are so resolute in
religion, that they will have no disputing against any point of their doctrine.
but Popish schoolmen call all points of their religion in question. neither
do they so well agree in any article, but there be some, that hold singular
opinions. the Scotists differ from the Thomistes, and diverse opinions are
holden by the canonists contrary to the schoolmen. of late in England the
Iebusites and secular priests did contend about diverse questions, and now the
difference is rather stopped, then ended.

7. In the Alchoran the Turks pretend, that Mahomet did diverse miracles. we
read also, that the gentiles tell of diverse woonders done by their gods, and
their sooth-saiers and Priests. Nauius, as Liuy tells us, cut a whetstone in
sunder with a razor. the papists therefore have no reason to stand so much upon
miracles.

8. Mahomet also is said to have foretold things to come, and the gentiles
allege innumerable oracles of their gods concerning future matters, which as
they say were verified by the events. if you compare the prophecies of the
legendary saints, there is no reason why they should be preferred before the
other.

9. In temporal matters both Turks and heathen emperors have had far better
success then the Papists. the Roman Emperors being pagans ruled the world, and
now the Empire of Turks is more large, then that of the Pope; nay of late time
the Popes have made few attempts against the Turks, that have prospered. if
then we judge of matters according to outward success; then are the Papists
utterly overthrown.

9. The Turks and Paynims have been better united among themselves, then the
Popes of Rome and their adherents. In the Romish church we read of 27. or more
schisms. but neither have the idolatrous priests, nor the Caliphaes and
priests of the Turks been so divided.

10. Neither if we look among the Emperors of Rome, or the Turkish priests,
shall we find more perjured, luxurious and abominable persons, then John the
12. Landus, Sergius the third, Gregory the 7. Sixtus the fourth, Alexander the
sixth, Paul the second and third, and the bougerly Monks and Mass Priests.
holiness therefore can no more be a mark of the Romish church, then of the
Turks and Paynims, and their congregations. nay among the Turks and Paynims
we never read any such bloody execution, as was intended by the popish faction
in England against the king, and his house, and the whole state.

11. The Paynims and Turks being judges, the Papists will be taken for
heretics, as well as others are condemned for heretics by the Papists.

12. It is before showed, that Turks do as well esteem of scriptures as
Papists, and no less do value their traditions, then they. The heathen also
with great solemnity looked into their oracles, and books of Sibylles, and had
them in more reverence, then the Papists have their legendes and decretales.

13. The Turks no less esteem their Saints and martyrs, then the Papists
esteem such as died in the Popes quarrel. heathen men also stood always
much upon their forefathers, and had more reason to brag of old customs, then
the Papists, whose fashions for the most part have but a late beginning.

14. The Papists, we know, are a sect going out of Christ's church, and rising
long after Christ's time, having not perfited the confused Babell until the
times of the conuenticle of Trent. but the heathen idolaters do fetch their
pedigree from men, that lived before Moses his law, and the Turks pretend
great antiquity, and auerre, that the idolatrous papists are gone out of the
church of God, and not they.

15. The mutabilitie of Popery is easily proved by their change of Laws,
alteration of gouemement, variety of old and new missals, breuiaries and other
rituall books, by the difference betwixt the doctrine of schoolmen, and
canonists, and faith of the fathers, by their mutable rites, Saints, Saints
days, and calendars. but the heathen allege, that they and their ancesters
have always persisted in the worship of their gods. and the Turks do firmly
observe their Alchoran without addition or detraction.

16. Where the Papists talk of their infallible judges, the heathen idolaters
and Turks have cause to laugh at them. for who is so deuoid of sense, to
suppose, that a Pope, that is ignorant of matters of faith, learning, and
virtue, is a judge of the mysteries of Christian religion, and of matters of
learning? do blind men judge of colors, or dease men of sounds? the Turks
assure themselves, that Mahomet is a far better judge, then the Pope, and the
old Romans doubted not, but that their Augures, and Priests knew more in
religion, then the later Popes.

Finally while the Papists leave the doctrine of faith consonant to holy
scriptures, and the administration of sacraments and worship of God according
to Christ's institution, and other proper marks of the church, standing wholly
upon the luster of the world, and outward marks and signs of their Satanicall
Synagogue; they allege nothing, which the very heathen idolaters and Turks,
cannot bring with better reason, then they.

CHAP. LIII. That true Papists cannot be true, nor loyal subjects.
AMong other marks of the Romish church and motives to Popery Bristow
alleges this for one, that it makes obedient subjects. but if we look
either into the practices, or laws of the Romish church, we shall rather find
this allegation to be a mark of the whorish impudence of that strumpet, that
has abused the world with her false doctrines and abominations, then obedience
of subjects to be a mark of the Romish church.

For first, who I pray you were they, that divided Italy from the eastern
Empire, and caused the Italians to withdraw their obedience, and to sease on
the Emperors revenues? were they not the Popes of Rome, and their accomplices,
who upon pretense of the Emperors dislike of the worship of images, caused the
Emperors subjects to rebel, and began to advance the authority, credit and
state of the Pope? Again, who called in the French against the Greeks and
Lombards, but the Popes of Rome? Thirdly, who caused the sons of Henry the 4.
and Frederick the 2. and of Lewis the piteous, to rebel against their
parents, but the Pope and Popish prelates? Fourthly, who stirred up the
subjects of Henry the 4. and 5. of Frederick the 1. and 2. of Lewis of Bauier,
of Philip, Otho, and other Emperors, to take arms against their sovereign
Lords, but the Popes of Rome and their agents? Finally who oppugned king John
of England, and fought against the Emperors formerly named? were they not all
Papists, and the Popes vassals, and the former Emperors and kings subjects? it
cannot be denied. For by the Popes excommunications, they were deterred from
their obedience and duty; and honoring antichrist for Christ's vicar, at his
commandment they oppugned their lawful princes.

To come nearer to our selves and our times, we sinde that the rebels of
Yorkshire and Lincolneshire in king Henry the 8. his days, were papists. for
their ensigns were chalices and masse-cakes, and the five wounds, and their
principal stirrers were monks and mass priests, and their leaders men
superstitiously affected. likewise the rebels in Devonshire and Cornwall in
king Edwards days, were men wholly addicted to Popery. they would have their
Masses and their dirges, their crosses and their banners, their greasings and
their Popish trinkets and ceremonies; or else they would have their heads
broken.

Against Queen Elizabeth our late dread sovereign, upon the roaring of the
Popes bull, the Northren rebels anno 1569. fell into arms. both leaders and
followers were the Popes dear children. this was also the motive of all the
troubles and insurrections in Ireland.

His Majesty also, that now reigns, has not found any so troublesome,
disloyal and treacherous, as his subjects popishly affected. the Earl of Goury
had brought too much popish leuaine out of Italy to be a good subject. Watson
and Clarke, that conspired the destruction of the king and state, were
Mass Priests. Brook, Marcham, and Copley their adherents were Masse-louers.
Faux and the late powdermen were zealous Papists.

Henry the 3. of France, was oppugned by no other then the popish leaguers. the
duke of Guise and his house were therein principal agents, and all the rest
were affected and devoted to the Popes service. the Dominican friar, that most
shamefully murdered his liege sovereign Lord, was the Popes vassal, and set on
by the Iebusites. the same faction stood in arms against king Henry the 4. now
reigning, and not being able to resist by force, by treason sought to destroy
him. John Chastel a scholar of the Iebusites, and Ghineard a Iebusite were
therefore executed. so also was Peter Barriere, that incited by Iebusites and
Masse-priestes came with a full resolution to take away his Sovereigns life.

Parsons, Campian, and other Mass Priests and Iebusites, were sent into
England by the Pope for no other cause, then to make a side for the execution
of the Popes bull, as appears by the Popes faculty granted to Campian and
Parsons.

Neither were Parry, Savage, Ocollen, York, Lopez, Squire and others, that
have been executed for attempting either by the sword, or by poison to take
away the late Queens life, set on by others, then the Pope and his bloody
faction. God grant that his royal Majesty may escape their treacherous plots,
whose heads, no doubt, are as busy plotting against him, as they ever were
against his predecessor. and that he need not to doubt of it, they declared
the same evidently in the treacherous plot of Brook, Watson, Clerk executed
for the same at Winchester. but most clearly was the same resolved by the
practice of Catesby, Percy and Fauxe, and their intended rebellion and fiery
treason.

It may be the Pope and his faction will deny, that they are the authors of
these stirs, rebellions and treasons. but the Popes bulls, their own
hand-writings, their confessions, their evident acts of treason, the deposition
of witnesses, and the defenses made by diverse Papists, who maintain these
rebellions and treasons, shall always plainly convince them. Sanders in his
book de visibili Monarchia does maintain the rebellion in the North against
Queen Elizabeth, and both he and Bristow and others do number those rebels
among Popish martyrs. Thomas Becket, that stirred up foreign enemies against
his prince and country, and stood against his Prince, is worshipped by the
popish faction for a great saint. James Clement that killed Henry the third of
France was highly praised by Sixtus Quintus in his consistory. and all the
seditious mass priests, that came into England to stir rebellion are by
little and little put into the catalogue of Martyrs, as dying for Popish
religion, or rather for practicing treason.

Neither do these acts of rebellion and treason proceed from sodeine motions,
but rather from the laws and rules of Popery. for first they hold, that the
Pope is above the King, and has power to depose him and to give away his
kingdom. if then the Pope do depose the king, and give away his Kingdom, all
his Popish subjects must forsake him.

Secondly they teach that if the Pope do command the subjects to take arms
against the King, that they are bound to rebel against him, and to lay hands
upon him, if they can, upon pain of damnation; and this is meritorious in the
opinion of the Pope. if then rebels be good subjects, then these fellows may
be reputed good subjects.

Thirdly Cardinal Como in his letters written to Parry in the Popes name
shows, that it is meritorious to kill a king excommunicat; and so was both he
and James Clement persuaded by the Iebusites and Mass Priests. and may a man,
trow you, believe them to be good subjects, that think it lawful to kill
their leege-Lords upon the Popes warrant?

Lastly they hold, that every king, that is by the Pope excommunicat and
declared a tyrant, ipso facto is deposed, and may be slain by any man. for so
Emanuell Sa the Iebusite does determine in his aphorisms. some say further,
that an heretical king ipso facto loses his kingdom, and those, that are not
so forward, affirm notwithstanding, that the Pope may assoile subjects from
their obedience, and dispense with oaths. but all such deserve the title of
rebels and traitors, and those kings stand in great danger, that trust such
trustlesse and pretended subjects.

But it may be said, that all Papists in England are not of this opinion. I
grant it may be so de facto. but if they be true Papists, and truly devoted to
their holy father; then must they obey the Popes bulls and acknowledge his
doctrine. and this the Mass Priests and Iebusites, that lurk in diverse places
of England attending their pray, both know and practice. for, as traitors, they
teach conditional obedience until the Popes further pleasure be known, they
interteine intelligence with foreign enemies, they receive their authority
from the Pope, they depend upon him and not upon the king, they are governed by
the Popes laws, and not by the kings laws. Finally the 5. of November last
the Iebusites, Mass Priests, and their adherents of the popish faction in
England, determined to destroy the King and state, and to make a general
insurrection and massacre throughout the whole kingdom; and had done their
uttermost, if God had not prevented their malicious dessines and purposes.

They may also allege in excuse of papists, that to kings, that be of their
own religion, they are most obedient, and devoutly affected. but first this
obedience and devotion is conditional and temporary, that is, if, and so long,
as the Pope commands not the contrary.

For if the Pope excommunicate the King of Spain, called by them the Catholic
King, he is in no better terms then others.

The Emperors that were excommunicat by the Pope within these 3. or 4. hundred
years were of the Popes religion. yet did it not avail them. Henry the third
of France was superstitiously addicted to Popery; yet was he murdered by a
Dominican Friar. and Henry the fourth being reconciled to the Pope and
scornefully whipped in the person of his ambassador, escaped not the blow of
John Chastel.

Secondly, kings professing Popish religion are not obeyed in ecclesiastical
matters. For as Bellarmine teaches, they are no governors of the Church.
others say they have no power to make laws concerning ecclesiastical causes.
so it appears they lose half their authority.

Thirdly, Bellarmine and others exempt the persons of the Clergy from the
jurisdiction of temporal Lords. does it not then appear, that popish kings
are Commanders but of one half of their subjects?

Lastly, they do exempt the goods of the clergy from the disposition of the
Prince. so we may see, that the King loses half his revenues, where popish
religion bears swaie.

To conclude therefore it is apparent by the premises, that all true Papists
professing and practicing the Popes doctrine, are utter enemies, and in heart
evil affected to Kings professing a contrary religion, and depend on strange
and foreign Princes, rather then upon their own Kings. well they may
temporize having dispensations for it: but if opportunity be offered to the
Pope and his faction, to show their malice; we may assure our selves, we shall
find them like our English powder-men, that is traitors and enemies of the
prince and state. and Kings professing Popery are but the Popes vassals, and
underlings, and during the Popes good will and pleasure. further they have but
half their kingly authority, and rule but half their subjects, and lose half
their revenues. which whosoever either teaches or allows, he may say and
swear obedience in temporal matters, as long as he list: but wise men will
never hold him for other, then a temporary, and undutiful subject.

CHAP. LIIII. That such Papists, as positiuely hold all the heretical and
false doctrines of the modern church of Rome, cannot possibly be saved.
THere are many false prophets gone out into the world, says S. John 1. epist.
4. speaking of his times. and Reuelat. 9. he tells us, that in the later
times of the church, a star shall fall from heaven, and that he, that is
signified by that star, shall open the bottomless pit, out of the smoke
whereof shall come locustes, that have hair like women, teeth like lions,
habergeons of iron, and tails like scorpions. we may not therefore think, but
that now also false prophets are stirring abroad, and that swarms of locustes
are flying in every kingdom, seeking by glozing pretense to deceive the
simple, by viperous calumniations to bite true teachers, with arms to oppugn
princes, and with the poison and relics of their herolies to sting and hurt
all that shall profess the truth.

The Iebusites and their consorts the friars and Mass Priests pretend the
saving of men's souls, but they are false teachers, and the very locustes
mentioned by S. John, and sent forth by the Pope designed by the star
Apocalypse. 9. let all Papists therefore beware, how they listen to their
heriticall and damnable doctrine, which who so believes and follows
positiuely, cannot be saned.

The word of God is true. If any man, says John Ren. 14. worship the beast and
his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God: afterward he says, he shall be
tormented in fire and brimstome before the holy Angels and before the Lamb.
but whosoever is reconciled to the Pope, and submits himself to the laws
and kingdom of antichrist, does worship the beast and his image. whosoever
openly professes Popery, receives the Popes mark in his forehead. whosoever
yields to the practice of Romish religion, receives his mark in his hand.
let Papists therefore stand upon their guard, and look well to their
consciences. for albeit Sanders and Bellarmine with all their skill have
endeavored to prove, that the Pope is not antichrist, yet all Bellarmines
wrangling discourse is refuted in my fifth book, de Pontif. Romans and Sanders
his demonstrations stand also dissolved by M. Whitakers of pious memory.
beside that, neither they nor any of their consorts can assign any other
state, unto whom these prophesies may so well agree, as to the Pope, and his
kingdom. if then our reasons cannot resolve them, yet the perplexity of our
adversities in this controversy may help to inform them and persuade them,
that the beast there spoken of, is the Pope, and that his image is the Romish
government, whereby the old empire of Rome is in a certain sort represented
and restored.

Furthermore Apocalypse. 22. we find, that dogs, enchanters, whoremongers,
murderers, idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies, shall be excluded
out of the kingdom of heaven. but like to dogs the Pope and his adherents
refuse Gods word preached unto them, and tear them in pieces, that seek to
feed them with the bread of life. diverse of the Popes have been great
Magicians, Necromancers, and Enchanters, as Benet the 9. Gregory the 6. and 7.
Syluester the 2. Paul the 3. and many of their followers follow also but too
much this damnable practice. the Mass Priests like cunning enchanters, suppose
that bread and wine is turned into flesh and blood in their magical Masses,
they permit public stews, keep concubines, and to monks, friars, and
mass priests forbid lawful marriage. they have murdered and massacred millions
of Christians, to erect and uphold their antichristian kingdom. the 5. of
November last, they attempted a treason never before heard of, minding to
murder the King, his Lords, and the Commons assembled in parliament, and to
massacre all opposite to them throughout the realm. they erect idols in
churches, and every corner of their streets, and in high ways, giving
latriam and divine honor to the cross, and to the images of the Trinity, and
calling the Sacrament their Lord and God, and making vows, prayers,
confessions to saints, and burning incense to images, and saying Mass in the
honor of saints and angels. finally they do not only forge standers against
M. Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and other true teachers, but also against us all,
as if we taught, that God is the author of sin, and that Christ despaired,
that there is no hell but horror of conscience, and such like abominable
doctrines, which we expressly detest. they give out also, that we condemn good
works, and teach rebellion, and their hearers delight to hear these lies.

S. Paul having rehearsed diverse works of the flesh, Gal. 5. and namely,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, and
diverse others of that nature, and among the rest, heresy, seditions, he
concludes, that those that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God. but never was any sect more subject to these works of the flesh, then the
Papists. their idolatries, heresies, rebellions, murders, and witchcraft, I
have before noted. adultery and fornication they account to be small sins, c.
at si clerici. de indicijs. their unnatural lusts are testified in diverse
records and books. their clergy cannot choose but be unclean, when they
resuse marriage, and forswear it. their massacres and murders, and rebellions
are recorded in many histories. and the memory thereof will now be recorded in
acts of parliament. that they allow public stews, themselves deny not. and
do they think, that wallowing like swine in their fleshly works, they shall
be saved?

Athanasius in the end of his Creed says, it is not possible a man should be
saved unless he believe the catholic faith. but this catholic faith the
Papists believe not entirely, for neither do they give to Christ humane flesh,
nor make him a perfect man, thrusting his body into a small piece of bread, or
rather into the accidents of bread, where it is neither seen nor felt, as
other men's bodies are. further they do not believe his ascension, or that he
shall come from heaven to judge quick and dead, as is contained in that
Creedo, making their followers believe, that his body is upon every altar, and
not being able to deny, that he shall come out of the pixe, seeing they teach
he is there.

Our Savior Christ Matthew 15. teaches us, that such worship God in vain, as
teach for doctrines men's precepts. but the doctrine of Popery, as it adds to
ancient Catholic religion, is nothing but a mass of humane inventions,
devises, and precepts: their decretales are the Popes devises: their forms of
worship contained in the missals and breuiaries are merely humane.

From man's devise proceeded the popish worship of Angels, Saints, Images. the
most part of the resolutions of cases of consciences is grounded on the Popes
laws, finally the turnings, skippings, heauings, greasings, spittings, and
other ceremonies of Mass Priests and their followers proceed from man's
invention. Popery therefore by Christ's rule is nothing but weariness and
vexation of men's souls, while they seek to serve God by those means.

By the chapter si Papa. did. 40. we learn, that the Pope may be remiss and
negligent in his office, and silent in teaching, and lead innumerable people
with him into hell. but if the Papists are to adhere to the Pope, and to follow
him; how can they escape when he leads them into hell, that they run not
headlong into hell themselves also? If then they will not believe scriptures,
nor fathers; yet their own decrees may teach them, that following the Pope
innumerable Papists run hedlong into hell.

Besides the testimonies of scriptures and fathers and the confession of
Boniface in the chapter si Papa. did. 40. diverse reasons teach us, that the
Papists holding firmly and positiuely the erroneous doctrine of the modern
church of Rome, cannot be saved. for first no man can come unto the father but
by Christ Jesus, as he testifies of himself John 14: he shows also, that he
is the way the truth and the life. the Apostle 1. Tim. 2. teaches us, that
there is no mediator betwixt God and man, but the man Christ Jesus. but the
Papists as they pretend, come to God not only by Christ, but also by the Virgin
Mary, by Angels and Saints. they seek out also new ways, and content not
themselves with such, as Christ taught us. finally they believe, that the Pope
by his indulgences, and every Mass Priest by his Masses is able to redeem
men's souls.

Secondly he that builds his faith upon other foundation then the doctrine of
the Apostles and Prophets, does build upon sand, and not upon a firm
foundation. but the Papists build their faith upon the Popes decretales, upon
unwritten and uncertain traditions, upon the doctrine of the Romish church,
upon miracles and prophesies reported in the Romish legends, and such like
fables. do they not then build upon rumous foundations?

Thirdly the papists hope to be justified by the law, and to be saved by their
works. But the Apostle Romans 3. teaches us, that man is justified without the
works of the law, and Romans 6. that eternal life is the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Fourthly the law of God pronounces him accursed, that abides not in all the
words of the law to do them. and a plain matter it is, that no man can be
saved, that wilfully breaks Gods law and never soroweth, nor craves pardon
for his transgression. but the Papists teach doctrine contrary to Gods law,
and enforce their followers to break it, and that in diverse points. God
commands us to have no other gods but him. but they honor the Sacrament, and
the images of the Trinity, and cross with divine worship. they do also impart
Gods worship to the virgin Marie and to saints. he forbids the taking of
Gods holy name in vain. the Popes of Rome do dispense with oaths, and
enforce men oftentimes to break them. God commands us to honor our parents.
the Pope sets the children against their parents. finally, they allow
public stews, and set up shops of usury, and massacre innocent Christians,
directly against Gods commandment, and that without all remorse of conscience,
or feeling of their sins.

Fifthly, papists hope to obtain remishon of sins by their own
satisfactions, by indulgences, by the pains of Purgatory, by masses, by
auricular confess. on, and popish absolution of Masse-priestes, and diverse
humane devises. but relying upon these broken reeds, there is no hope for them
to be saved for without the only sacrifice of Christ Jesus applied to us by
true faith, there is no hope of remission of sins.

Sixthly, without true faith it is not possible to please God. but their
perverse doctrine of faith, and the innumerable heresies of papists do declare,
that they have no true faith.

Seventhly, the Prophet David Psalm. 15. demanding who shall rest upon Gods holy
mountain, answers among other things, he that slandreth not with his tongue,
nor does evil to his neighbor. but the Papists, as is formerly showed, have no
other means to uphold their ruinous state, but by lies and slanders, treasons,
rebellions, murders, and massacres of innocent Christians.

Finally, it is not possible, they should be saved, that are ignorant of the
means of their salvation, and hold heresies repugnant to the apostles doctrine
of the law, of the gospel, of repentance from dead works, and other articles
of the faith. but the Papists believe, that Christ is only the meritorious
cause of their salvation, as if he had merited only, that they might sause
themselves, they teach also, that men are justified formally by their own
works, and that their supposed sacraments, and their pilgrimages, and voluntary
obseruances of the precepts of the Romish church, and works performed according
to the Popes decretales, and conuenticle of Trent, do justify. Lastly they
teach and believe doctrine contrary to the law, to the gospel, to the Apostles
doctrine of repentance and good works. are they not then in miserable case?

Now if any man ask, what is then become of all those, that either now die, or
in time past are dead in places where Popery is, or has been professed? I
answer: that of those, that held the foundation, and lived well, we hope well.
but we deny that such as lived before the conuenticle of Trent held Popery
positiuely. we hope also, that many there are among the papists now, which
conform themselves to them in outward ceremonies, and yet believe not the
errors of Popery positiuely, but hold themselves to the old Apostolic says.
and of these men's salvation we have no cause to despair. God grant that the
rest also may revoke their errors, see their deformities, return with a
sincere heart to Gods true church, and so be saved.

CHAP. LV. A brief recapitulation of the principal points of the former
discourse, and an exhortation both to Papists and true Christians.
THus we see, and I pray God all Christians may diligently consider, what is
meant by popish religion. briefly, it is a collection of diverse corruptions and
errors maintained by the Pope and his adherents, either contrary, or above the
Apostles doctrine. this religion we have showed to have been built upon weak,
uncertain and salse foundations; and auerre, that it is contrary to the
doctrine of Gods law, and of true faith and justification through Christ. the
same also teaches erroneously of the Gospel, and diminishes the merits of
Christ our mediator and redeemer.

Further, it has corrupted the doctrine of the sacraments, and brought in many
old and new heresies. it is compacted of diverse impieties, blasphemies and
idolatries, and never came from Jerusalem. it was never taught by the Prophets
or Apostles, nor professed by ancient Christian Kings.

It is not that religion, to which the ancient Britans and English were
converted, nor does it deserve to be called Catholic, or ancient. it is found
to be repugnant to ancient councels, and to the faith of the ancient fathers.

It is a religion diverse from that of the ancient Martyrs of Christ Jesus. A
religion devised by man, and not derived out of holy scriptures. A religion
whose founders and defenders do wickedly wrest and abuse scriprures, fathers
and other writers. A religion consisting of heathenish and Jewish obseruances.
A religion full of contradictions and contrarieties. A religion steined with
many fooleries and absurdities. A religion keeping Christians in ignorance of
true piety, and loosing the reins to all voluptuousness and disorder. A
religion deuoid of good works and piety. A religion that makes a base account
of Gods people, and teaches doctrines of Devils. A religion of whose grounds
and doctrines the professors thereof have no assurance. A religion repugnant to
laws of nations, of kindred, alliance and common civility. A religion
prejudicial to the authority of Kings, and dangerous in regard of their states
and persons. A religion that lays grievous burdens on men's consciences, and
eats up Christians through manifold exactions. A religion without true
bishops and priests, and wholly maintained by false allegations, forgeries,
calumniations, lies, fire and sword, perjury and breach of covenant. A religion
whose chief founders and mainteiners have been commonly noted for wicked and
profane men. A religion more absurd in diverse points, and that oppresses
Christians more grievously, then Mahometry. A religion by whose practice the
empire of Christians is decayed, and the power of the Turk enlarged. A
religion professed by degenerated Romans, neither for faith, nor life
comparable to their ancesters, and by a church, that was never visible until
of late time, nor can show better marks, or bring better motives to induce men
to embrace her doctrine, then the Turks and Paynims. To conclude, a religion,
whose professors can neither be esteemed true subjects, nor true Christians,
nor justly pretend either assurance, or hope of their salvation.

I do therefore exhort all true Christians, as they desire either that the
true faith of Christ Jesus may be publicly received, or that doctrines
contrary to piety, Christian charity, policy, reason and common humanity may be
suppressed, to beware of the leuain of Popery, and to concur with those,
which both teach and set forward the true Catholic faith according to the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, and which seek to resist all
corruptions, false doctrines, sects and heresies, and to root up the seeds of
all treachery and rebellion.

On the other side I beseech all Papists, to cast away all prejudice and
passion, and diligently to consider of the premises: that as they profess
themselves true subjects, and well affected to Catholic, and the ancient
religion of the church of Christ; so they may abhor their former treasons and
rebellious, detest the mass priests and powder-men their consorts, reject all
heresies, errors, and false doctrines masked with glorious titles of
universality and antiquity, and set forth by the Pope and his accomplices,
teaching a late particular faith, and finally endeavor to be gathered together
into that society, whereof Christ is the head, and without which there is no
salvation.

The God of all truth confirm and establish all true Christians in truth, and
discover all trecheries and errors, that such as now are disloially minded, and
wander astray, may acknowledge their former disloialties and errors, and
embrace the true Catholic faith, and that such as stand may be confirmed in
the truth, that so both they and we jointly may live loyally under our Princes,
and truly serve one true and everliving God, and glorify his holy name
through Christ our Lord, to whom together with the Father and the holy Ghost,
three persons and one God, we render all praise and honor now and for ever.

A brief note of the contents of every Chapter of the former discourse.
Chap. 1. What is meant by Popery or popish religion in this whole treatise.
Chap. 2. Of the grounds and foundations of popish religion. Chap. 3. Of the
wicked doctrine of Papists concerning the law of God, and the performance
thereof. Chap. 4. Of the damnable doctrine of Papists concerning faith and
justification. Chap. 5. What Papists do mean speaking of the Gospel. Chap. 6.
Of the impious doctrine of Papists concerning Christ our Savior. Chap. 7. The
strange contradictory and false opinions of Papists concerning the Sacraments.
Chap. 8. That Popery is a mixture of old and new heresies. Chap. 9. A catalogue
of diverse notorious impieties and blasphemies contained not only in popish
books, but also in the corpse of popish religion. Chap. 10. That Popery is a
sink of heathenish idolatry. Chap. 11. That popish religion never came from
Jerusalem. Chap. 12. That Popish religion was never taught either by the old
Prophets, or by the apostles of Christ Jesus. Chap. 13. That Popery was either
condemned or not know ^s by kings professing Christian religion in old time.
Chap. 14. That the ancient Britanes and English were not first converted to
popish religion. Chap. 15. That popish religion is most falsely termed catholic
religion; and papists, Catholics. Chap. 16. That popish religion is not the
ancient religion of the primitive church. Chap. 17. That Popery is repugnant to
ancient Councels. Chap. 18. That popery is not the faith of the ancient fathers
of the church. Chap. 19. That popish religion was never testified by the blood
of Christian martyrs. Chap. 20. That popery is a mere humane denise, and not
in any sort to be deduced or proved out of holy scriptures. Chap. 21. That
popish religion in diverse points is directly contrary to holy scriptures.
Chap. 22. That the founders and desenders of popery do most wickedly abuse
holy scriptures. Chap. 23. That the Pope and the principal proctors of his
cause are great forgers and falsifiers of fathers, profane writers, and of
public records. Chap. 24. That Popery stands much upon heathenish
obseruances and customs. Chap. 25. That popery borrows also diverse fashions
from the Jews. Chap. 26. That popish religion is full of contradictions and
contrary opinions. Chap. 27. That popery is a most absurd and foolish religion.
Chap. 28. That popery keeps Christians in blindness, and ignorance of God,
and godliness. Chap. 29. That popish religion gives the reins to
licentiousness of life, and leads Christians the broad way to destruction.
Chap. 30. That popish religion brings forth such bitter fruits, that the
professors thereof have no reason to boast of their works. Chap. 31. That in
popery a base account is made of princes and all laymen. Chap. 32. That popery
is a doctrine of devils. Chap. 33. That Papists can have no assurance of the
truth of their religion. Chap. 34. That popery is repugnant to the laws of
nations. Chap. 35. That popery dissolueth the bonds of kindred all (...) and
civility. Chap. 36. That popish religion either disannulleth, or greatly
preiudiceth the authority of kings and princes. Chap. 37. That Kings professing
popish religion are either no kings, or but half kings. Chap. 38. That kings
live not in any security of their lines, where popery is professed by their
subjects. Chap. 39. That Popish religion lays grievous burdens on men's
consciences. Chap. 40. That popish religion is very grievous in regard of the
popes and the Mass Priests manfolde taxes and exactions. Chap. 41. That the
popish church has no true bishops, nor priests. Chap. 42. That popery cannot
be maintained without forgerie and falsehood. Chap. 43. That popery cannot be
well vpholden without calummations and lies. Chap. 44. That the cause of popery
is not maintained without fire and sword. Chap. 45. That the practices, and
treaties of popes, and their accomplices with Christians are not to be trusted.
Chap. 46. That the chief founders, and mainteiners of popery have been
commonly noted for wicked, and profane men. Chap. 47. That popery in many
points is more absurd and abominable, then the doctrine of Mahomet. Chap. 48.
That christians are less oppressed under the Turk, then under the Pope. Chap.
49. That the ambition, covetousness, contention and practice of popes is the
principal cause of the decay of the Christian empire, and a great occasion of
the good success of the Turks. Chap. 50. That the moderns church of Rome is
much degenerated from the faith, and manners of the ancient Romans. Chap. 51.
That the Romish church, that now is, was invisible in old time. Chap. 52. That
the marks of the church, and motives to the modern Romish faith alleged by
Papists, may as well be all dged by Turks and infidels. Chap. 53. That true
Papists cannot be true, nor loiall subjects. Chap. 54. That such Papists, as
positiuely hold all the heretical and false doctrines of the mederne church
of Rome, cannot possibly be saved. Chap. 55. A brief recapitulation of the
principal points of the former discourse, and art exhortation both to Papists
and true Christians.

