THE LOOKING-GLASS of SCHISM: Wherein by a brief and true Narration of the
execrable Murders, done by Enoch ap Evan, a downright Separatist, on the
bodies of his Mother and Brother, with the cause mooving him thereunto, The
disobedience of that Sect, against Royal Majesty, and the Laws of our CHURCH
is plainly set forth.

By PETER STUDLEY, Master of Arts, and Minister of GODS WORD, in SHREVVSBVRY.

PRO. 30.12. There is a Generation, that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
is not washed from their filthiness.

Habent Artificium, quo prius persuadent quam doceant, veritas autem docendo
suadet, non suadendo docet.

Tertul. adversus Valentinian. Lib. 1. LONDON, Printed by R. B. for THOMAS
ALCHORNE, and are to be sold at the sign of the green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard. 1634.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE occasion of this Relation touching the Barbarous and inhumane cruelty of
Enoch ap Evan, arises not from any inclination in my own disposition, to be
pragmatical and busy in matters of writing; but from the serious apprehension
of disloyalty, which some eminent persons in our State have made, touching the
contempt of our Laws, testified by the stealing away of his putrified corpse;
who by sentence of righteous and prudent Judgment, was deemed to hang forth in
the air to the open view of all men for exemplary punishment of his bloody
facts: Till the consumption of his flesh, his nerves, and ligaments, had
dissolved the composition and structure of his bones, parted them asunder, made
them fall to the earth, and by Vltimate Resolution return ad materiam primam,
their first matter whereof they were framed. And moreover, the false and
dishonest reports touching this Malefactor, scattered abroad by many, whose
profession of Religious purity, should have yielded better fruits, have pressed
me on to this suddenness of writing.

And for the matter it self here delivered, I do assure thee in the word of a
Minister, thou have a relation of such substantial Truth, as I will maintain
against any person living upon the face of the earth. I have not delivered one
word in this ensuing Treatise, which may justly offend any good Christian or
honest minded man: and therefore if any shall be displeased toward me, it is
from an offense taken by himself, not given by me, for GOD the searcher of my
heart is my witness, together with the integrity of mine own conscience,
that I have proposed to my self herein, as the object and level of all my
aims, The glory of his most sacred Name, the Honor of our King in the
vindication of his innocent Laws, and the desire of our Churches tranquillity
and peace, now torn into pieces by wilful Schism, Proud Faction, and
Peremptory Disobedience to Prudent and Peaceable government. I deliver only
in this Tract, my own observations in matters of fact, and the dangers I
conceive which may accrue to our Church and State, unless some wholesome and
speedy course of wise and religious policy shall be maturely applied for the
cure, or correction of such insolent persons as trouble the peace of our Sion
And for the event hereof, I refer it, as becomes me in duty, to the Royal
wisdom of sacred Majesty in our King, and the vigilant care of those prudent,
Governors, to whose godly oversight these matters are committed; Ne quid
Ecclesia Detrimenti capiat, That our Church sustain no eclipse of her glory,
but graciously display the beams of peace and splendor. For obloquie and
traducement, wherein I know beforehand I shall have a large share from the
malign disposition of Schismatic persons: let me anticipate and prevent
them, by telling them, that as Angry Curres will bark and snarle at peaceable
passengers, so men of factious disposition, will speak evil, when they are
not thereto provoked. And for my own part I am resolved, that the ^ongue of a
Puritan is no Slan^er, since it spares no ranks or degrees of men, who run
not with them in their exorbitant and delinquent courses of pride and vanity.
I wish to all those men, on whom this small Treatise may seem to reflect, as
much good in all the parts of goodness^ as they themselves, with more perverted
judgments, and worse composed affections, do wish unto themselves. And so GOD
bless them, by bending them (...) peace and unity: And multip^^ on this
Church and Kingdom (...) his favors and Graces.

Shrewsbury, this fourth (...) November, 1633. Thine in the LORD, PETER STUDLEY

Recensui tractatum hunc, cui titulus Schismatis speculum, in quo nihil reperio
quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

THOMAS WEEKS, Episcopo Land. Cap.domest.

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.
THE Looking-glass OF SCHISM.
IT is a Prophecy of GOD'S Spirit 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.
that in the last days Perilous times shall come: for men shall be lovers of
themselves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
Unthankful, Unholy, without natural affection; Truce Breakers, etc. And our
LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, that Oracle of wisdom, and divine wisdom it
self has foretold us: Matthew. 34.12.
That because iniquity shall abound the love of many shall wax cold To wit,
cold in Piety toward GOD, gracious obedience toward our Superiors, and it
office of Humanity, Charity and mercy toward all other persons. For this
Inundation and overflowing stream o^ Iniquity, being slily insinuated into
men's understandings t^ poison their Judgments with Soule-confounding errors:
and of his strong suggestions darted into their wills to irritate the Native
malice, and to excite them to furious attempts: we cannot expect any better
event in the lives and actions of wicked men, left by the wrath o^ GOD under
the power of their own corruption and Satan's rage; then, that by Infidelity,
Impiety, Atheism, Apostasy, and all other wickedness, they should revolt
finally from GOD, and give heed as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy ^.1.
To seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils. For as Satan himself by pride
and infidelity, fell from that Angelical perfection of his created nature, and
is become of an Angel of light, a spirit of darkness: So, by stirring up in
the hearts of unmortified persons, a spiritual pride in an high conceit of
their gifts; the assurance of their election, their illumination, conversion,
and the imaginary sense of their adoption; he so transports them beyond the
bounds of Christian humility, that they utterly reject that rule of the
Apostle, Romans 12.3.
(...), to be wise unto sobriety: And it a strong conceit of their own
spiritual understanding, by the immediate presence of GOD's Spirit which they
conceit to be in them, they take upon them to gloss and expound the sacred
Scriptures agreeable to their own deluded fancies Which attempt of theirs
transcending their understandings and no way sorting with their vocation of
life being lay and secular persons, must need produce both heresies in
judgment, and schismatic divisions in practice in the visible Churches of
the Gospel. For as the wisdom of GOD in the old Testament prescribed the rule
of his will unto his people for their direction, saying, Malack. 3.7.
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, for He is the Messenger of the LORD of Hoasts: So has the divine and
constant wisdom of the same our GOD, declared the Canon of His will in the New
Testament to continue in the Church to the dissolution of this World. Ephesians.
4.11.12.
CHRIST gave some to be Prophets, some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of CHRIST; till we all come in the unity
of the faith and the knowledge of the SON of GOD, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Now these holy Arts and
Ordinations of GOD's wisdom and love unto His people, are the Constant rules
of direction and order to be observed and obeyed by all His faithful children,
whiles here they remain in their militant condition.

2 And though secular persons are both warranted and directed by our LORD and
SAVIOR for their preservation in faith and obedience Mat. 7.15.
To beware of false prophets which come unto them in sheepe^ clothing, but
inwardly, they are Ravening Wolves: And are also commanded in the practice of
holy and gracious vigilancie over their own souls, 1 Ioh. 4.1.
To try the spirits of men whether they be of God or no: yet this warrant,
direction, command, are not so vast and universal, but that they are limited
and confined within their own proper bounds: Not giving liberty unto 2 Pet.
3.16.
Unlearned and unstable persons to wrest the sacred Scriptures to their own
destruction: Nor to judge and censure their Teacher either in his doctrine or
spirit; if his upright and sound judgment accord not with their light and
seduced fancies, or his Method of preaching arride not their vain and
selfe-pleasing Humor. And further, if any branch of doctrine shall be
publicly delivered by any Minister of the Gospel, not exactly consonant with
the Canon of the Scriptures, the analogy of the Christian faith, and the
orthodox doctrine and judgment of the Ancient and Modern Church: Lay persons
are not presently to presume of themselves, that they are so qualified with
judgment, or armed with power as to reprove their pastors; because as the
Apostle has told us, 1 Cor. 14.32.
The spirits of the Prophets are subject unto the Prophets. All that any
Lay-person can or ought to do in matter of his own private judgment, is no
more but to submit himself to that rule of the HOLY GHOST, 1. These. 5.22.
(...), Try all things, and hold that which is good. And to this trial and
retaining of sound doctrines, they are for action and practice of life to add
that of another Apostle, Jude 20.
By building up themselves in their most holy faith and praying in the HOLY
GHOST, keep themselves in the love of GOD, looking for the mercies of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST unto eternal life. They may indeed, if erroneous doctrines be
taught in public congregations, dangerous to the souls of GOD's people; give
notice thereof by way of information to their and our Superiors the Bishops:
who for the maturitie of their judgment, the gravitie of their persons, and
the weight of their authority; are able to rebuke, reprove, exhort, convince
of error any unsound doctrine repugnant to the sacred Scriptures. And when by
weight of Argument, and pregnant conviction of error, any doctrine taught
shall deservedly be reproved; if the teacher thereof shall obstinately persist
in his error, and refuse to be reformed by the wisdom and authority of his
Governor; the sentence of suspension, excommunication, or deprivation is
justly to proceed against him.

3 This course of Ecclesiastical discipline, being for substance Sacred, for
antiquity Venerable, and for form and process therein so exact, that man's
wit cannot reprove it; they that prefer their own private spirits and
opinions before this prudent judgment and practice of the Church, as
fantastic separatists do, plainly discover themselves to have their part in
that description, which by the spirit of prophecy is given of all such; 2 Pet.
2.18.
Presumptuous they are, selfe-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of
Dignities.

With this kind of high and overweening spirits; our English Church has of
late years been much pestered and disquieted: so that many godly Ministers of
rich talents, worthy endowments, and able gifts, have not received that sweet
comfort to their souls, which from the profitable and painful execution of so
sacred a calling, is by command of GOD'S Spirit due unto them. For the Apostle
has strictly charged all Christians, Hebr. 23.18.
To obey them that have the rule over them, and to submit themselves unto them,
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they
may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you: Yet
notwithstanding the weight of this charge, such is the insolent pride and
contumacie of spirit in this kind of men, strongly conceited of the spiritual
favor of GOD unchangeably settled on their particular persons: that unless
both the observance, and which is more, the obsequiousness of the Minister
both in doctrine and practice, be accommodated to give them content, and
flatter their fancies; they will malign his person, traduce his name, and
scorn and vilify him with all baseness of contempt: yea, although his life
be most conscionably led in the fear of GOD, and his outward conversements
with men adorned and made graceful, with all Humanity, Humility, and
Integrity.

4 In the rank and number of these bold and busy Scripturists, we are to
range one ENOCH ap EVAN, a fellow of very mean quality and small
understanding, as able only to read English and no more; yet of high thoughts
touching his own personal worth in spiritual abilities. For so cunningly and
yet powerfully had Satan insinuated himself by spiritual illusions into his
understanding, for opinion, and into his heart, for affection and inclination
to his own dull and extravagant conceits: that he became presumptuously bold
to dislike not only the Gestures and rites prescribed by the Governors of our
Church, for conservation of uniformitie, peace, and unity among GOD'S people,
and ratified by Regal and Legal Authority: But he proceeded so far, as to
reprove the form of words used by the Minister in the delivery of the sacred
Communion into the hands of God's people: For whereas the wisdom of our Church
prescribes the form of words thus, The Body of our LORD JESUS CHRIST which was
given for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life: The pride
and ignorance of this fellow no^ able to conceive the strength and
significancie of these words; would have them to be new molded, corrected, and
framed thus. The Body of our LORD JESUS CHRIST which was given for thee, build
thee up in thy body and in thy soul unto everlasting life. These forms of
words though they seem to differ in the letter and sound; yet they fully
accord in sense and signification; yet these verbal differences in the
pronunciation, not signification of the words, wrought such effects in the
heart of this seduced man, that he strongly conceited in his vain thoughts,
and could never be reformed and rectified by advice; that the gesture of
kneeling in the act of receiving, was a Posture of body not only idolatrous,
but absolutely rendered us incapable of that spiritual Nourishment, which from
the sacred Body and Blood of our LORD, did diffuse and stream it self into all
the faculties o^^ our souls, and all the parts o^^ our bodies. For in the site
o^^ gesture of kneeling, said th^^ ENOCH, the legs are cast behind the rest of
the body, and receive not that influence o^^ Nourishment spiritual, at leas^
in proportion and measure o^^ attraction, as the rest of the body does. This is
a conceit (...) sublimate, fine, and subtle, that it rightly falls under those
elegant expressions which God Spirit has made touching that Grand Impostour
the Devil for his wiles and sleights attermed 2 Cor. 211.
(...), subtle devise to entangle men's thoughts And Revel. 3.24.
(...), depthes or profundities. For these conceits are so subtle, deep, and
profound, that Hales, Aquinas, or Scotus, could never in their curious and
deep speculations, rise to the height, or fathom the bottom of them. The
gestures which this vain, light, and seduced man, conceited to himself as
most convenient in that sacred act of GOD'S worship; were either standing and
bowing, or sitting and bowing of the body. For the gesture of standing he
alleged (full wisely I warrant you) the words of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS
CHRIST, Rev. 3.20.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open
the door, I will come in unto him, and sup with him, and he with me. For the
gesture of sitting, he had no Scripture at all to allege, nor any other
warrant or argument, but the apprehension of his own dull and depraved
imagination. In these strange opinions of his, 2 These. 2.10.
we may behold the powerful Working of Satan with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness. For the postures of standing, of sitting, o^ kneeling, being
all natural and bodily actions; without the addition of bowing, which is^
mental and spiritual action and has relation to some other nature, either in
the Creator, or in the creatures to whom it is directed; are i^ themselves, as
they are action bodily and natural, neither good, nor evil at all: And do^
only partake of goodness, or illness, as the motion of bowing with intention
of Adoration is added unto them. And yet this Dolt not versed in the Principles
of Catechism touching worship given to creatures by bowing of the body: would
presume to talk, to censure, and peremptorily to judge of things he understood
not, and therein resist his wise, learned, and religious Superiors. But Pride
and Ignorance are these men's cognizance.

5 Now touching this ENOCH, that I may give you the true and just measure of
him, for person and quality. Know, Good Reader, that he was the son of one
EDWARD ap EVAN, a country Farmer of the Parish of Clunne, in the County of
Salop, and Diocese of Hereford; a man, who by a long course of industrious
painfulnesse in the execution of his vocation, and frugality of disposition in
the government of his family, and management of his affairs; had acquired
unto himself a competent estate of livelihood, for his own support, and the
preferment of his children: so that he passed in the reputation of all his
neighborhood among the number of rich men; living in peaceable manner in the
course of his life, and good estimation among men of his rank. This EDWARD, as
he told me himself, had two sons, and five daughters. His two sons, Enoch aged
34. and John aged 31. he detained in his own family with himself, and
educated them in the practice of Husbandry, to execute his affairs, and to be
a comfort and support unto him in his elder years. John the younger brother,
was of persontall, strong, and proper; of quality affable and sweet natured, of
countenance, comely; most dutifully obedient to his Parents, careful of their
welfare and thriving, and never known in one and thirty years, to have given
any froward, stubborn, or undutifull reply in words to his father or mother:
though his father was of condition austere, and held a severe hand of
government and command over him. Enoch was a fellow of a middle stature, of
complexion swarthy, under the predominance of the humor of melancholy; of
Countenance nothing alluring and lovely, but sour and dejected.

6 In this family of Edward ap Evan, some sense of religion joined with the
domesticke worship of GOD, had for some years made entrance, and received
entertainment. For they had (as Enoch told me) prayers twice every day; not
such as were conceived in their own hearts, by the private motions of the
Spirit, (the reigning practice of this age,) but more commendable and regular;
being orderly read out of the Service Book of our English Church by Enoch one
day, by John another, in a constant course of well-ordered discipline; at which
all persons in the family were required to be present. This taste of religion
stirred up in Enoch a desire of further proficiencie in the knowledge of GOD'S
will; so that he bought him a Bible, which he seldom omitted to carry about
with him in his pocket: in so much that at the plough in the field, and in the
barn when he threshed his fathers corn, he borrowed some time from his
present employments, to cast his eye on this Sacred Book; so sharp and
insatiable was his thirsty desire of holy reading. This practice of his grew
in short time to a great forwardness in the profession of Piety to the eye of
the world: and an itching desire to be accounted more zealous than his
neighbors, so cunningly wrought it self into his affections, that his
practice therein contained not it self within the sober limits of prudent
moderation. For he was not contented to stint and confine his solemn and
public worship of GOD to the LORD'S day, (...). Rev. 1.10
commonly called Sunday: which together with those few other Holy Days
appointed by the wisdom of our Church, might have satisfied a wise man and^
sound Christian: but he busily harkened after weeke-day Lectures, and would
oftentimes ride three or four miles to hear sermons, the ordinary practice of
this formal age Having continued this course by the space of two years; (...)
began to distaste some ordinances of our Churches constitution for the
peaceable and uniforme regiment of GOD'S people; he disliked the superiority
and government by Bishops, the gesture of kneeling in the sacred Communion, the
sign of the cross in Baptism, and such like.

7 He would never upon any remonstrance, persuasion, or pregnant conviction of
his errors and folly, be drawn to confess. For though I pressed him often
and seriously therein, and left him destitute of all reply or color thereof:
yet in the impadencie of his spirit, and bold resolution of a stubborn mind,
I could never draw other answer from him, but that b^^ his reading the holy
Scriptures he had apprehended these opinions, his reading being enlightened, and
sanctified unto him by the Spirit of GOD. When I told him that all true
illuminations of GOD'S Spirit in the hearts of his children, did ever hold an
exact consonancie with the letter of the Scriptures, and never varied from
them, according to the words of our Lord, Ioh. 14.26.
When the Comforter, the HOLY GHOST, whom the Father will send in my Name, i^
come, He shall teach you al things, and bring to your remembrance whatsoever I
have said unto your And again, Ioh. 6.39
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think yet have eternal life, and they
art they which testify of me. And further, Esa. 8.20
To the Law and to the Testimonies, if they speak not according to this Word,
it is because there is no light in them. When I pressed those Scriptures unto
him, which plainly demonstrate, that the teaching of GOD'S Word, and of his
Spirit, are one and the same in substance and nature: And when I required him
to produce some place of sacred Writ, whereon he grounded his extravagant
conceits: He answered me, that his judgment and mine might happily differ,
because the true Spirit, and the measure thereof, were not given by GOD to all
alike, but in special manner, measure, and degree, both for the grace of
Illumination and sanctification to GOD'S peculiar ones. And for proof hereof,
he aimed at certain words of o^^ Lord, which he could not remember, till I
perceiving (...) scope, furnished him with the place, and that was, Matthew.
13.11.
It is g^ven to you to know the myster^^ of the kingdom of heaven, b^^ to them
it is not given: for whosoever has, to him shall be given and he shall have
more abundantly, etc. And from these word of our SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, he had
raised (...) himself, a very strong a^^ pleasing imagination, that h^^
himself in special was a person elected of GOD, inspire with His Spirit, and
continually guided and directed by (...) same Spirit. And this con^^ he so
hugged and cherish in himself, that many time when any preacher utted a^^
point of doctrine, which arrided unto him and relished his pallat; he would
seem to those who were near unto him in the Church, to be even wrapped up into
admiration, and transported with spiritual delight: And on the contrary, if
any thing was delivered, which hit not point-blanke with his toyish fancy of
inconformitie, he would visibly discover by his stamping on the ground, by his
inward fretting, and the contracting of his forehead, the impatience and rage
of his fantastic spirit.

8 These things being perceived in him by his mother, who (according to those
reports I have heard of her) was a discreet woman, of very good understanding,
and of a stout spirit; she took occasion gently to reprove these things in
him, and told him man^ times in very loving manne^^ That the end of these
things would be naught! Unto th^^ dislike of his mother, John (...) younger
brother adjoined h^^ endeavor to reclaim Eno^^ from his wild and irregul^^
opinions, and peaceably to^^ him, That he saw no men^^ good, honest, and fair
condi^^ned, as they who were peaceable. Religion, and free from self-(...)
ceited opinions. Which wo^^ of John, as the event declare^^ shortly after cost
him the lo^^ of his head; for though th^^ persuasion was no more but sweet
remonstrance of br^^ therly affection, and ought charity and conscience so
(...) have been taken: yet it so irritated the secret rage of the spirit of
Enoch, that he inwardly boiled with rancorous malice both against his mother
and his brother: and for no other cause contrived the death of his brother
John, but because he would not entertain his opinions, and comply with him in
his schismatical courses. From this time of conference and parley, as Enoch
himself ^old me, he so distasted his brothers resolution in religion, that he
resolved in his desperate and wicked heart to do him a mischief; only his
purpose being yet but new, had not attained to full growth and maturity.

9 Now know here, friendly Reader, that this Enoch and John had continued
bed-fellowes together in their fother house, from their infant years and
weaning from the breasts o^^ their mother, to the one an^^ thirtieth year of
age of th^^ younger of them. And during all this time, as Enoch assured me, and
engaged his truth and salvation upon it, there had never fallen out any verbal
quarrel or dissension between^^ them: no, not so much as the term (Thou) had
ever passed in anger from the one to the other. And being both of them arrived
to years of judgment and experience, able to manage affairs of life for their
own^^ profitable thriving; they wer^^ so well persuaded mutually between
themselves of the integrity and soundness of lov^^ in both their hearts each
unto other; and also of an upright and faithful disposition of mind, free
from guile in their temporal affairs: that they became Copartners in
occupying of ground in their neighborhood: and also in stocks, of cattle and
sheep: yea, their very money which oftentimes breeds jars between brothers
themselves, they kept in one chest together, each having a key to himself, and
they never differed in one penny of account.

10 Yet observe, I pray, in the midst of this sweet harmony of brotherly
accord, the truth of the words of our LORD and SAVIOR, Matt. 10.34.3.
Think not that I am come to send Peace on earth; I came not to send Peace,
but a sword: for I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in Law against her mother in Law,
and a man's foes shall be they of his own household. For Enoch now puffed up
with an high conceit of his spiritual estate, his inspirations from GOD, and
his unchangeable assurance of his own stablishment in the favor of GOD:
imagined himself warranted by these words of our LORD, not only to hate, but
to persecute to blood and death, whosoever should oppose, contradict, or refuse
to concur with him in not admitting his inspirations. These illusions of
Satan anciently entertained by the Manichees, Messalians, and of later times by
the Anabaptists, so blinded the eyes of his understanding, and perverted the
quality of his will, that he judged himself called of GOD to vindicate the
cause of GOD, and by effusion of his own brothers blood, as he reported to me,
To draw the children of light out of darkness, and to declare his own Zeal
to the Word of GOD.

11 A controversy therefore happening (undoubtedly the work of Satan) in the
house of Edward ap Evan, upon Sunday the thirtieth day of June last past, 1633.
between Joan the mother, and Enoch her son, whereat John was present,
touching the most convenient gesture in the act of receiving the sacred
Communion, stirred up by Enoch, (as that sect is always prating of such
matters.) Joan the mother, and John her son, according to their unlearned and
plain manner, pleaded for our Church gesture of kneeling in that holy act:
Enoch a fellow of hasty furious, and proud spirit, defended stoutly, according
to his blunt and rude fashion, that to sit and bow the body was the most
Convenient posture. The opposition in opinions grew so sharp between them that
Joan told her son Enoch that he was a very sorry fellow, and desired of the
LORD to Instruct and amend him. John also very mildly, as his manner was,
signified his dislike of Enoch's opinion, and made known his own resolution
to remain constant in his obedience to the King and his Laws. This purpose of
John concurring with his former dislike of Enoch's courses, added new flames
unto his wrath and malice formerly conceived, and now grown inveterate; that
from that very instant of time he waited an opportunity to execute his secret
and malign rage against him, Yet he grew not to a full resolution to murder
John, till the Friday morning after this unfortunate conference between them.
John called up his fathers servant; and they together yoked up their cattle,
and betook themselves to their work in the fields. Enoch later up, waited the
coming of John from the fields; whose custom was, after (...) weariness with
labor, (...) take a small repast of me^^ and drink, and to repose himself in
slumber for an hou^ on the end of the table-boo^^ upon a cushion. This custom^
of John being very well know to Enoch, he sets in a readine^^ a great hatchet,
with an edg^^ very broad and sharp, way^ his time, and finding a calm^^
opportunity free from all like^^ lihood of resistance, John being in a deep
and peaceful slumber; Enoch struck hi^^ with the head of the hatch^^ upon his
bare head: and t^^ wound thereof being not dee^^ by impression, because th^^
fear of a wounded conscience, for so inhumane a purpose, abated the strength
o^^ his arms, and made him with a trembling hand to perpetrate that villainy.
John fell instantly from the board to the floor, astonished with the blow, yet
not so wounded or disabled from rising, but that he scrambled for help to
raise up himself; which Enoch fearing, desperately struck him with a second
blow in the neck with the same hatchet; and the edge thereof being very broad
and sharp, he therewith at one blow more, as he himself told me, separated his
head from his body.

12 Upon this stir and rumbling noise in the house, Joan their mother being
in the next room came presently in, and seeing, to the infinite grief of her
soul, the head and body of her younger son separated one from the other; she
lift up her voice with a shri^^ and sharp sound, and said (...) Enoch in a
passion of terror a^^ grief; O thou Villain, (...) some such like words of
pr^^ voked indignation, (for Enoch) could not remember them What have thou
done? have the killed thy brother? Vp^^ these words, Enoch still en^^ged with
diabolical fury, a^^ having the hatchet in his han^^ struck at her very face
with a^^ his force: And she being a w^^ man of threescore and twel^^ years of
age, put by two (...) three of his blows by claspi^^ and closing with him, and
th^^ by turning away the streng (...) of his violence, and mak^^ way for the
asswaging of (...) fury, had not the Devil himself been outrageous within
him. But she wanting strength, by reason of her great age, to hold conflict and
wrestling with him, and crying for help, and calling to him to remit his rage:
he nothing mollified with her fearful cries, struck her between the left
shoulder and the neck four inches deep into her breast; with which mortal
wound she fell down on the floor ready to expire her soul into the hands of
her Creator. And he not satisfied herewith, ragingly dragged her wounded and
bleeding body to the threshold of the door, and thereon at five strokes more
he divided her head from that breast, and those paps which gave suck unto him.

13 These furious out-rag^^ and crying murders thus pe^^ petrated, he
instantly barre^^ the door where the dead be^^ dies lay; he takes the head^^
wraps them in a course linne^^ cloth, which he drenched^^ water, that their
blood still^^ suing through the veins of the^^ heads freshly bleeding, mig^^ not
so sensibly appear as th^^ row a dry cloth it would ha^^ done. The wet cloth
with t^^ heads he enwrapped in an o^^ russet jerkin, bound and k^^ fast. And
laying this bund^^ on the table-boord, he goes^^ to his chamber, shifts his
bre^^ ches and stockings, which we^^ stained with the aspersion (...) the
blood, comes down aga^^ beats out a large clay-wall (...) the room, and
thereat he (...) sues forth, and makes his escape into the fields. Thinking by
this his practice of breaking the wall, to color and cover his fact, and to
transpose all suspicion thereof from himself, to an opinion that some
passengers that way, or thieves had committed these furious and desperate
murders. In the time of his escape in this manner, a young black horse of the
old man's, by the negligence of a servant boy of the house, got into the room
at the gappe or broken wall where the dead bodies lay: And being found there, a
rumor was scattered over all the country, and entertained of light and
credulous persons, that the Devil in the shape of a black horse, was found in
the room where the headless bodies lay.

14 Enoch having thus escaped into the fields, conveyes the heads secretly
away, and hid them under a heap of loose Fearne, ready cut to be burned.
After this, he walked forward almost a mile, and came to a Kins-mans house of
his, one, Goodman Howells, and enquired for a young man of this house, the
son of this Howells: answer was made him, that if he could stay half an
hour, he might speak with him, for he was gone forth, and would be returned
by that time. Upon this answer, Enoch goes into the house, and waits the
coming of his Cousin: and in the interim, h^^ took a Bible which he saw upon
a shelfe, and sat him down, and read the first chapter of the Prophecy of
Isaiah; and by that time he had read through the whole chapter, the young man
whom he had expected came in: After salutations between them, Enoch desired
him to lend him the book called the Practice of Piety: his Cousin went
instantly to his chamber, and fetched it; and thereupon they two walked forth
into the fields toward Enoch's fathers house. As they passed together (his
Cousin altogether ignorant of his bloody facts:) Enoch, said to his Kinsman, I
must turn aside a little, to see a thing I left in the field. These words were
no sooner uttered by him, but two Mayds of his Fathers family, accompanied with
some of the nearest neighbors having raised the cry, and prosecuting the
pursuit of the Murderer, seized there upon him, apprehended him, and brought
him before the next Justice of the Peace, Sir Robert Howard a Knight of the
Bath, of noble birth, son to the late Right Honorable, the Earl of Suffolk.

15 Enoch, being by this prudent knight examined, touching the unnatural and
barbarous facts objected against him, stoutly, resolutely, undauntedly denied
for a while and impudently, without blush, or change of countenance pleaded
his innocence. But being pressed by that Noble and wise Knight, with such
reasons and arguments, as to his wisdom seemed most strong and pregnant to
convince him: at length, overcome with the horror of his own conscience, and
shame of his impudence, he began to relent, and by impressions of deserved
wrath, from the divine Majesty of God, into his Soul, he became sensible of
what he had done. And thus overcome with the agitations of tormenting panges in
his own bosom, he desired that worthy Knight that he would send for one Mr.
Erasmus Powell, a learned, reverend, and aged Divine, who by the Sacrament of
Baptism brought this Enoch into the visible Church of GOD. M. Powell, being
come, took Enoch apart into another room, from the presence of the Knight and
to him he opened the fact with such circumstances, a were by Questions propose
unto him.

16 The facts thus reveal and confessed by the Malefictour; Sir Robert
commande^ his Clarke to write the M^^timus, and sent him well guarded with the
Constable of the hundred and others into (...) County Jail, held in (...)
Town of Shrewsbury. As (...) Keepers of the prisoner ca^^ onward their way,
they we^^ to pass by Enoch's Father house; and he being desiro^^ to see his
aged Father, requested of his Keepers, to per^^ him to turn into the house but
being come in, his father refused to speak to him, or (...) see him, being
overcome with grief of heart for so great a calamity upon his Family. His
eldest Sister, the Wife of an honest Freeholder, of the Neighborhood, being
come to comfort her Father in this his great consternation and dejection of
Spirit; seeing her Brother enter into the house, she came unto him with tears
in her eyes and face, and sorrow in her heart, and said, Ah Brother Enoch, what
moved you to take away the life of our dear Mother and Brother? He replied
unto her; Peace fool, hold thy Tongue, We live in a false Church, and thou
shall see a change shortly. This passionate discovery of himself being the
maine secret of his wicked heart, and the incentive to all his villainies, I
received from his brother i^ Law the husband of his elde^ sister, who charged
him with these words in my presence and thereby left him destitute of all
reply, by telling him h^ heard them from his own mouth, and that he would
affirm them upon his oath (...) any Court of this Kingdom And here let all
those Person^ who out of a turbulent affect^ on to Nonconformity, have stoutly
argued and pleaded that distemper in this ma^^ brain, and not any Erronio^^
opinions relating to Church matters, brought forth the^^ diabolical Acts of
Matric^^ and fratricide; Let them weight in their retired thoughts th^^ Nature
and tenor of the^^ words, and to what they relate: And let them be also
ashamed and learn to blush, that they have so unjustly, not to say
irreligiously darkened and opposed Truth, to countenance falsehood and their
own faction.

17 This Enoch being brought forward toward the Prison, the day declining, his
Keepers were constrained to take up their lodging in a small village Town five
miles from Shrewsbury called Powlderbach, and there lodged at the house of one
Thomas Turner. After they were entered there, and their Supper prepared and set
on the Table, all the company sat down lovingly together: And Enoch, as most
versed in matters of Devotion, did very orderly both before, and after Supper,
give thanks to GOD for their food. The company being risen from the Table
turned toward the fire, not so much for the comfort and warmth thereof, for
the time was but newly past Midsu^mer as for conference sake. As they sat thus
friendly talking together, Enoch was espied by a servant of the house to six
his eye upon a Spit or Broach which the Maid by negligence had left in one end
o^ the Chimny. The Servant kept his own eye carefull^ upon Enoch, expecting
Th^^ event of his Anger, for he perceived some wrath in his hea^^ discovered in
his countenance by his contracting of his for^ head, and staring with
indignation upon the Constable (...) the hundred, to whom he was by the Justice
committed. And on the sudden up starts Enoch in a desperate rage, and catched
at the Spit, therewith as was conjectured, to have goared the Constable. The
Servant, whose vigilant eye attended the hands of Enoch, stepped suddenly
between him and the Spit, and thereby prevented his bloody purpose. After
this, they brought Enoch to bed, where, after two hours, either sleep, or
silence at least, they of the house who watched and guarded the Prisoner, heard
a most fearful noise in the street, near to the door of the house where
Enoch lay, as if it had been the rattling of the wheels of two or three Carts
furiously driven. In this Town, three watchmen for the hundred sat up in the
street that night on the County watch who were not of Enochs company, but
walked to and fro to take notice if any travelers passed that way. These me^
also heard the noise, and were greatly terrified therewith. With this rattling
and rumbling noise, Enoch then in his bed, being suddenly awaked became
terribly affrighted and greatly distempered with enraged fears and outcryes;
so that he leaped out of his Bed cast off his Shirt, and came down naked out
of the Chamber unto the company, hi^ Watchmen below in the Hall^ and there
cried out with great vehemence and contention o^ voice, many times without
Intermission: o they murder me, they murder me, they murder me. Which terrible
expressions of tormenting fears, confirm that sentence of sacred Scripture
Prove. 18.14.
The Spirit of a man shall sustain his Infirmityes, but a Wounded Spirit who
can bear it. For he whose heart and hands were yet moistened with his Mothers
and Brothers blood, apprehended the least noise sounding in his ears to be the
assaults of Hellish furies seizing upon him. His Keepers being thus disquieted
with him, made haste to be eased of their trouble, attired him in his clothes,
pinnioned his Arms, and toward four of the clock in the morning on Sunday
the seventh of July, they brought him forward to the Goal in Shrewsbury. When
the Keeper of the Prison read his Mittimus, and understood his facts he loaded
him with irons, an^ committed him to the common lodging among malefactors of
his own quality.

18 When the rumor o^ Enoch's murders and imprisonment was divulged abroad;
(...) was wonderful to see how people of all qualities resorted unto him,
questioned with him, and although altogether unable to administer either
counsel or comfort to a ma^^ of his disconsolate condition^ yet many of them
were forward and busy to cloud and darken the truth of that very cause, and
only cause, which he himself constantly alleged of his provocation to these
facts. For diverse who affected not the Ceremonies of our Church, with whom this
County and this Town have of late abounded; could not endure to hear that a
Brother of their society and opinion, should so stain and dishonor the
sanctity of their holy Profession, as to imbrue his accursed hands in her
blood, who had conceived and nourished him in her womb. Hence great care was
taken, and all policies employed, to persuade the Malefactor to assign some
other cause and probable reason of these murders, and not any touch of his
dislike of Church Ceremonies. Many Ministers of our County, and some of our
Town repaired unto him, and every man talked and reasoned with him, as to his
own understanding seemed best pleasing. And he freely confessed to al men,
that upon difference in opinions between him and his brother touching the
Gesture in the Communion, his wrath conceived against him, turned into rage;
and incensed his heart to the murder of him.

19 It came into my heart to go visit this fellow; and being come to the
Prisonhouse. I requested the Gaolour to le^ me have a sight of the Prisone^ in
a private room. He instantly commanded one of his servants to bring him unto
meet Enoch being come, I told him in the presence of the Keeper and his
servant, that I was come to see him, not to satisfy curiosity, nor to urge and
press questions unto him: but with a clear and pure intention, by laying the
judgments of God's wrath before his eyes, to strike his conscience with the
sight and sense of his great wickedness; and afterward to minister those
directions, whereby to bring him to repentance, and the reconciled favor of
GOD. My first question with him was this:

Min. Think thou Enoch, that thy mother who conceived and bred thee in her
womb, with many pangs and throws, did ever harbor in her heart, a thought or
suspicion, that when thou wast arrived to man's estate, and she to her aged
years, thy unnatural rage should draw her blood, and separate her head from
he^ shoulders?


Enoch. To this question of of mine, he made no answer at all, but lifted up
his hands a little, and cast down his head with great confusion and
perturbation of soul.


Min. I said unto him again, Enoch, I am come with purpose of my heart to do
thee good; and if thou will deal truly with me, and with thine own soul,
thou shall find me both able, and desirous to do thee good. He gave me thanks
for my kindness, and was very willing and desirous to entertain my advise.
Hereupon (...) making benefit to my self o^ that readiness I found in him to
hearken unto me, said further:


Min. Enoch, I charge your conscience by that Authority which CHRIST our LORD
has given to me as a Minister of His sacred Gospel, that you do impart unto
me, the true moving cause or causes, which stirred you up to these unnatural
facts: for unless I search your wounds to the bottom, Enoch assure your
self, I shall never be able to apply any solid comforts unto you, but they
will rankle in your soul, and prove incurable.


Enoch. Sir, since you charge and press my conscience herewith, I will as
truly confess to you, as I will do to CHRIST Himself; The True and the only
cause which instigated me to these facts, was my Zeal to the Word of GOD.


Min. I replied, that zeal for GOD's glory, or for His Word, must be qualified
with command from GOD Himself, either by express declaration of His will by
Oracle and lively voice; or else, which is equivalent thereunto, By the full
and undoubted assurance of a divine instinct and motion of GOD's Spirit. But
this latter I told him, under The settled estate of the Church of the New
Testament, was peculiar only in matters of this nature unto the persons of the
Apostles of our LORD, and descended not unto our times. The Apostle Peter Act.
5.5.10.
struck with present death Ananias and Saphira his wife but the power of that
stroke, came directly and immediately from GOD Himself, as a miraculous act of
His wrath against their hypocrisy, and a divine declaration of the truth of
his Apostolical Doctrine and calling. But Enoch, your fact agrees not with
this, but has some correspondence with the passionate, furious, and irregular
zeal of James and John, Luke 9.54.
Who desired our LORD to give them leave to call for fire from heaven to
consume the Samaritans: and were for their unsanctified rage sharply checked by
our LORD and SAVIOR; who intimated unto them, that GOD's Spirit in men is
mild and gentle, according to that perpetual Canon and rule, James 3.17.
The Wisdom that is from above, is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, without
Hypocrisy: But Satan's spirit and motions are raging and furious, exciting to
blood and murder. What say you now Enoch to your own facts, do you like or
dislike them?


Enoch. Sir, I know not whether I have done well or ill.


Min. All facts of this nature are undoubtedly the desperate effects of
Satanical suggestions, covered and colored over with the fair pretense of
zeal flowing from divine inspirations, only to mitigate and allay the
troubles of conscience incident thereunto: What say you to this?


Enoch. I know that Satan has no power to prevail with the true children o^
GOD.


Min. Do you persuade your self to be the true child of GOD, and actually in
the state of grace, having committed these execrable facts? your fact is the
very same with that of Cain, and in one most fearful degree of unnatural
cruelty far surmounts his: and he is branded with the hellish mark 1 John
3.12.
of Satan's prevailing with him. And how you should be free from the prevailing
power of Satan in your heart, and over you, for my part I yet understand not.
For we are ever to judge of the nature, strength, and prevailing of
Temptations, by the real acts which are effected and produced by them. Our
own imaginations, which are liable to error, flattery, and seducement, are no
rule, by which either our own, or other men's judgments are to be guided and
directed.


Enoch. I will not let go my hold of CHRIST, for all this sin of mine.


Min. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST, is indeed the true, the only, the immovable
foundation of the Church and children of GOD: But he is to be apprehended and
applied to the souls of Christian men, by piety, virtue, and the constant
fear of GOD; and not by every idle imagination and fleeting fancy, which
springs up in the minds of carnal men. But tell me, is our LORD CHRIST in
your power to be held or let go^ at your pleasure? His own words are these,
Ioh. 6.44.
No man com^^^^ unto (...) except the Father who has sent me, draw him. But
undoubtedly GOD the Father does draw His children to His SON CHRIST JESUS by
faith: and that faith works in their hearts by love Gal. 5.6.
. But Love and Murder, are qualities of contrary nature each unto other; they
cannot actually subsist and have being in one and the same heart, at one and
the same time. For the repugnancie and contrariety of their natures, does
mainely labor to destroy and extinguish each other. If the true faith cannot
have being without pure Love, its gracious and inseparable companion, by what
gift or grace within you, do you think to lay hold on, and retain our LORD
JESUS CHRIST unto your self.


Enoch. I hope by my repentance to recover my faith again.


Min. Your sect is frequen^ and much in talking of Faith which makes the
Papists in^^ proud scorn to call Protestants Soli-fidians: Tell me, (...) you
can, What is faith, whereof you so much presume?


Enoch. I think faith, is to trust in GOD for salvation.


Min. To trust in GOD for salvation, is one principal act and practice of the
Nature of Faith, as it stands in relation to GOD's mercy, and his promises. But
as Faith is a supernatural Quality wrought into man's soul by GOD's Spirit,
it has many more actions and operations, than only affiance in the Love and
Mercy of GOD. For true Faith purifies the hearts of all those who are endued
therewith. It begets Humility of heart, unity, peace, 1 Ioh. 3.3.
and love with all true believers. Acts 4.32.
But none of all these virtues have any affinity or agreement with your facts
of cruel murder. 1 Pet. 1.22.
For if we search all the volume of the sacred Bible, and examine the ancient
records of Infidels and Heathens; No fact of man in any age may stand parallel
with this of yours. And therefore flatter not your self with a vain opinion
of the truth, or the strength of your faith: for had true faith been of any
virtue and force in any faculty of your soul, either in your understanding to
guide your cogitations, or in your will to rectify your resolutions and
actions; you had never so fearfully and desperately fallen into these barbarous
murders.


Enoch. Do you think then, that there is no means or way left for me to
recover GOD's favor, and the pardon of these great and crying sins?


Min. Yes, upon your deep Humiliation and repentance, undoubtedly GOD will
pardon your facts, stop the cry of blood, and receive you to grace and
mercy. Now the groundwork of repentance for a man in your case, is first to
cast off all flattering and deluding conceit of your imaginary faith. 2. To
labor to be convinced in your soul, that your facts were wrought and acted
by the Immediate presence of Satan within you. 3 To Abhor from the very heart
and soul the things you have done. 4. To power out your soul continually to
God in fervent and secret Prayer, craving of His mercy to pardon your sins,
and to check and restrain the malice, power and prevailing of Satan against
you. 5. To cast away all presumptuous thoughts, which you shall find to spring
up in your own carnal heart, and to be secretly conveyed into your mind by
that infernal spirit. These things if you shall carefully set your self to
perform in singleness of heart: GOD's promise is made and shall never be
annulled: At what time the wicked shall turn from his sins, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
which he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. But tell me,
wherein differed you in opinion from your mother and brother?


Enoch. Touching the Gesture at the Communion, they would kneel, and I would
sit and bow my body.


Min. And did you for this very cause shed their blood?


Enoch. My wrath kindled for that cause only, against my brother, and in that
wrath I slew him.


Min. Many persons in this Town, who have conferred with you, are not of that
opinion, and do report other cause thereof.


Enoch. Sir, I told you I would confess to you, as unto CHRIST Himself: as I
hope to be pardoned of GOD, I and my brother never differed nor disagreed in
all our life, but in that matter only, and in our difference therein I slew
him.


Min. The Gesture of kneeling at the Communion, is commanded by the Authority
of our Sovereign Lord the King, with the assent of all the learned Bishops in
our Land venerable for piety, learning, and virtue; confirmed with the
approbation and public Testimony of both the Universities, and the godly
learned therein: ratified by Act of Parliament: And lastly, obeyed by many
thousands in this Land, who neither want the light of divine truth to direc^^
them, nor the true fear o^ GOD to warrant their practice. And think you of
you^ self, that you are wiser, o^ more righteous than all these.


Enoch. I should not do so and with this answer he ca^ down his countenance,
an^ lifted up his hands.


Min. This spiritual pride^ the fault of all your sect: f^^ no sooner do any
of you begin to look toward Sion, an^ in your own conceits to reli^^ the
things of GOD. but i^^ stantly you so overvalue you^ own small worthes; that
(...) the learning and piety in the Kingdom, is not able to equ^^ your petty
devotions, either for soundness of judgment truth of faith, or uprightness
of walking. No doubt but we should have a jolly Church if you and your
conceited companions had the new-moulding and rectifying of it.


Enoch. I should not think so of my self: And with this short reply he cast
down his countenance again, and lifted up his hands a very little.


Min. How came you at first to entertain these opinions, and to dislike the
gestures of your betters for wisdom, knowledge, virtue, and the true fear of
GOD, and constant integrity in all their ways? Have you got these itching,
toyish, and vain conceits by conference with any Ministers disaffected to
peace and unity? Or were you privately persuaded thereto by some of your a^
quaintance? or have you hea^ any Minister publicly to (...) clare his dislike
of the prese form of government, and ^ this gesture in special? or we^^ you
moved thereunto by (...) example of any whose perse^ you reverence for wisedo^
and piety? or have you by r^^ding any schismatic boo^ received taint and
infect^^ herein?


Enoch. By none of all the means, but by reading GOD's Word.


Min. I never knew any ^^^ of your vulgar educatio^ mean capacity, and small
(...) lent of knowledge, so acute^ to extract an opinion of t^^ nature from
GOD's wo^^ which GOD by His Spirit ^^ver put into His Word: you pass all the
Alcumists that I have ever heard or read of. But this is the effect of
spiritual pride of heart in such men as you are. For when you have been
secretly deluded and seduced Ephesians ^.14.
By the cunning craftiness of such as lie in wait to deceive: and thereby your
judgments depraved with error, heresy, or schisine; you glory therein, and
add contumacie of heart to your opinions; desirous to arrogate unto your
selves the praise of your inventions, and to be thought that by the sharpness
of your own wits, and penetration of your understandings, you have found out
some hidden truths revealed only by GOD to the children of His grace and
election, by sharpening the understandings with His en^ lightning Spirit, to
conceiv^^ and perceive more holy truth^^ than all the godly learned (...) the
Land besides. But take heed of these things, and le^^ my counsel take place
with you; change your opinion^ which have already Inveigle^ and thereby
wounded you^ soul with desperate sins, exposed you to the infamy o^ the
world, given infinite scandal to the Church of GOD and her children, cast you
ou^ of the love and favor of a^^ good men, and will undoubtedly abridge your
days by the stroke of Justice, in the just and exemplary execution o^^ Law.
For Genesis 9.6.
He that shedde^ man's blood, by man shall h^^ blood be shed, for in the Image
of GOD he created him.


Enoch. I do yield my body to the Law which I have offended.


Min. What Law do you think you have violated? whether the Moral Law of GOD
and Nature? or the Humane and Temporal Laws of this Land?


Enoch. I think I have offended against GOD's Law.


Min. Do you but think you have offended GOD? Do you not feel the gripes
and convulsions of a wounded Spirit sensibly impressed into your soul from the
wrath of GOD?


Enoch. I am much troubled in my mind, but I will still hold fast Christ my
Lord and Savior.


Min. A wounded and oppressed conscience never he^^ fast our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
before the burden thereof was removed, and the pangs dulced and assuaged i^ His
blood, applied by faith unto the soul. This must be^ gained by a deep and
seriou^ repentance, the qualities and properties of which repentance are fully
and exactly set forth, 2 Cor. 7.11. Without this repentance and the consequent
virtues thereof, never was the expiating, and purging virtue of our LORD His
blood truly apprehended, and effectually applied to the soul of any Man. But
let me understand from you, that since you are not willing to be thought that
Satan stirred you up to these facts, by what other cause do you think you fell
into them?


Enoch. Surely Sir by sin.


Min. By what sin think you?


Enoch. That do not I know.


Minist. But I know that by you, that you do not, or will not know by your
self: and can readily assign that particular sin by which you fell into
these desperate and raging Murders. Your sin was, as I appeal to your own
conscience for confirmation hereof, your hypocrisy in making a fairer show of
holiness to the eye of the world, than the course of your life in secret did
fully reach unto; for had you been of Nathanaels temper, John ^.47.
A true Israelite in whom there is no guile: Then had your soul received the
blessing of that promise from GOD, P^a. 25.12.14.
What man is he that fears the LORD, him will He teach is the way that he
shall choose: The secrets of the LORD are among them that fear Him, and He will
show them His Covenant. You^ were and are but a Novice in practical
Christianity, and do not understand this hidden Mystery: That unless the
practice of a man's life in sound Piety, upright integrity, and gracious
purity, do not only equal, but far surmount and preponderate the
profession he makes; the root of his imaginary Zeal will prove to be but
rottenness. For know you for your learning, that although it is the hardest
thing in all the world to be a true and sound Christian, by denying and
Renouncing our selves, our Desires, and appetites for CHRIST His glory: Yet it
is the easiest thing in all the world to be a formal Sectary, such as men
commonly call Puritans: for therein is neither marrow, spirit, or power of true
godliness, which is placed in piety, charity, unity. For I can name, if I
were disposed, even in this town of ours, where I live, men of your formalitie
in profession, who eagerly followed Sermons without missing one on a weeke-day,
used family Prayers, kept company and conventicles, with persons of whose true
fear of GOD I am well persuaded: yet many of these unsound and rotten hearted
fellows, have been discovered and known for secret whore-mongers, drunkards,
cheaters, and such as have revolted from the faith of Protestants, wherein they
were baptized; and this truth been known right well to the better sort of
Non-conformists for practice of Religion. They answer for themselves as one of
them this very morning answered me touching your very person, who had never
seen your face; John 2.19.
They went out from us, they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us; But they went out that they might be
made manifest, that they were not at all of us. This answer I willingly admit
on their parts, namely, that men who are endued with true grace and the holy
fear of the LORD, do so cooperate and apply their own desires, actions, and
vigilant care over all their ways, unto GOD's Spirit and grace within them;
that thereby they are established and preserved from desperate impiety, or
final backsliding. But this answer of theirs touches not that purpose for
which it is brought, nor impugneth at all the Argument which I made. For I
intend only to show the truth and no more. But wicked and ungodly men do
frequently delude the eye of the world, with the luster of a fair profession,
till GOD in justice unmask and discover them. With this answer unto him I so
cast him down with an inward sense of his own guile and guilt; that from this
time I was very deeply in his favor, and he professed openly in the
Prisonhouse, that Mr. Studley brought a sound heart to comfort him, and to do
him good. Hereupon, having spent an hour and half in conference with him, I
bade him farewell for that time.


Enoch. Good Sir before you go, I pray you answer mee^ one question more, and
that is this. Do you think that I have no faith in my heart?


Minist. I am in that matter past thinking. For I know right well, true faith,
(such as you flatter your self to be endued with) and effectual conversion to
GOD, are the whole substance of a Christian man's New Birth, by the Spirit of
GOD: and this Regeneration, where it is sound and effectual, sets the soul of
that man free from Satan's prevailing, in such measure and degree, as he has
done in your heart, and in all the powers of your soul. For it is the
testimony of Gods Spirit in His Apostle: ^ John ^.18.
They that are borne of GOD sin not; but he that is begotten of GOD keeps
himself that the wicked one touches him not.


Enoch. Sir, I have heard some Preachers teach that faith once had, can never
be lost.


Min. And by hearing such doctrine preached, your imagination deluded, and
Satanically bewitched, became presumptuous, bold, and desperate, to commit
those unnatural, flagitious, and crying Sins, which by continual clamor
call for vengeance at the hand of GOD's Justice. But better it were that such
doctrines were never preached; unless those just limitations prescribed in
GOD's Word, were both carefully, judiciously, and continually added thereunto.
The method and manner of the delivery of this doctrine by Ministers of your
acquaintance and familiarity, is neither sound, nor true. For such Ministers
suspend and hang the whole matter of a Christian man's preservation in grace, in
faith, in obedience after his Conversion, upon the Mercy, the Will and the Act
of GOD's power: grounding themselves upon these Scriptures, Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of GOD are without repentance. And again, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Ye are kept by the power of GOD through faith unto salvation. And by these
places of holy Scripture and such like, the whole act of a Christians support
in faith and holiness, is transposed and put off from the will and care of man
himself, unto the will, the mercy, the power of GOD. And thus the best of
men, who are naturally prone to selfe-flattery, selfe-pleasing, and spiritual
security; have the edge of gracious care, vigilancie, and circumspection,
blunted and abated. But our LORD Himself, in whose love, mercy, and holy
degrees, our preservation and salvation ^^ firmly established; commands all
His children, Matthew. 26.
To watch and pray that they enter not in^^ temptation: the spirit is ready,
but the flesh is weak. And the Apostle of our LORD, gives a caveat to all the
true and faithful people of the LORD, 1 Cor. 10.12.
saying, Let him that thinks he stands, take bee^ lest he fall. And
further by the same Apostle; Philip. 2.12, 13.
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is GOD that
works in you both to will and ^^ do, of his good pleasure. And the Apostle
Jude has pressed this godly care very home upon the hearts of all true
Christians, saying, Jude 20, 21
verse 20, 21. But ye beloved building up your selves on your most holy faith
and praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Unless then, our
understandings, wills, affections, and all that is in us, do willingly submit
themselves to the gracious motions and operations of GOD's holy Spirit within
us; we shall not only grieve the holy Spirit of GOD, Ephesians. 4.30. 1 Thessalonians.
^.19.
but also we shall quench the lively flame thereof in our hearts and souls. By
all which places of sacred Scriptures so pregnant and convincing, we may
inform our understandings, that in man's preservation in faith and obedience
after effectual conversion, there is a mutual concurrence of two special
agents. The one supreme and principal, and that is GOD our Father, Psalm.
37.23, 24.
our LORD and SAVIOR by His Spirit enlightening, guiding, and supporting: The
other inferior, subordinate, and concurrent with the principal, and that is
man's understanding, will, and all other his faculties and powers, readily
apprehending, sweetly embracing, joyfully concurring with the divine motions
issuing from Gods blessed Spirit, according to that voice of the Church, Draw
me, Cant. 1.4.
we will run after thee. And if this latter, at any time be intermitted,
neglected, or suspended; The actions of GOD's Spirit in men's souls, cannot
possibly yield any spiritual joy, delight and comfort; no nor so much as be
sensibly felt in the soul of any man. But it grows late, I must bid you for
this time farewell.


Enoch. Good Sir, let me see you again as soon as you can: I like well your
speeches, and I hope you are sent of GOD to do me good.


Min. I will GOD-willing see you again the next week; in the mean time know,
there is no coming for you to heaven, but through the suburbs of hell, I mean
a great measure of Humiliation and Repentance.


This being our conference at that time, I left him to his prison, cold irons,
and spiritual meditations: And after this, the first news that I heard
concerning him, was a common report spread in five days space, throughout our
whole Town and Country, that ^ was the man, with whom he had greatest desire
to confer, and to impart himself by revealing and discovering what he
intended to make known. And his reason was, that although many Ministers had
questioned freely with him to search out his opinions and the secrets of his
heart yet none had at that time administered any counsel or directions unto him
but my self: and therefore he conjectured at my intentions by my actions.

20 This purpose of Enoch concerning me, being publicly known by the
generality of report; The Puritans, of whose generation he was, were greatly
displeased herewith: And one of them, no honest man I warrant you, said of me,
He is of a great and ungodly Wit, and comes to this man of purpose to
discredit our party, and will work him to his own will: And godly persons
shall thereby sustain disgrace, by the unnatural cruelty and wickedness of
this bloody man. This report I heard, and digested it with silence and
patience, being by many years residence here inured to their bitterness of
spirit, and frequent railings. But I do hereby challenge all the Puritanes of
this Kingdom of England, to charge if they can my Wit, or my Will with any
piece of ungodliness in the execution of my calling, or the course of my
conversation. For I never thought, nor they shall never prove it, That to
defend the Orthodox doctrine of the Church of England against the Papists, Jude
3.
B^ contending earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints: Or the ancient
discipline of the sam^ Church against the Puritanes, ^^ be any branch of an
ungodly W^^. But on the contrary part, the resolved and constant practice
thereof, in my public Ministry as occasion was incident to be a gracious
inclination to solid piety, and a public declarat on of an honest heart
disposed to peace and unity.

21 On the Monday following being the fifteenth day of July 1633. Two
messengers from Bishops ca^^le, and the Neighbour-^ood there, one of them
Brother in law to Enoch by marriage with his eldest sister; The other a man of
very honest reputation in the place of his dwelling, Mr. William Tanner, were
desired by Enochs father to come unto me, and to crave the continuance of my
charitable pains with his son, and promised me that the old man should be
thankful unto me. I answered them, that as my own charity was my first
Inducement and motive to visit him; so my duty to GOD, and the satisfaction of
mine own conscience was all my expected reward. The brother in law of Enoch,
desired of me, that the next morning he might attend me to the Jail to
confer with him, to counsel and to direct him. The hour eight of the clock
being appointed, we repaired thither, and in the presence of nine persons, of
which one was strongly affected to Non-conformitie, I entered conference or
rather counsel with him and they all, are able to testify how free I was from
any po^tike device of scruing my sel^ into his bosom, to do the Paritans any
disgrace, which was the thing so greatly feared. ^ called for the Bible of the
house, and by many and urgent persuasions, illustrates with pregnant examples,
I labored to bring him to a sight and sense of his great wickedness; thereby
to humble him and by repentance to prepare his soul for comforts.

22 Having finished my exhortation to him, which he seriously promised in the
hearing of that company, to imprint deeply in his remembrance, for the careful
practice thereof, I acquainted him, with a common term which passed for
current, and credible in all the Neighborhood about Bishops-castle, where his
murders were committed; By clear and forcible arguments as the Country
affirmed, convincing him of Lunacie and Distraction, thereby to divert the
facts from all thoughts of Church Ceremonies, or any dislike thereof. And the
relation and clearing of these objections by evident refutation of them, sure I
am, will give our Non-conformists a deep disgust: who labor to this day in
all assemblies and occasions of conference, to fasten madness on their brother
Enoch. But necessary truth conducing to GOD's glory, and His Churches good,
must not be suppressed, to sooth and please selfe-willed Schismatikes. The
Arguments which were related unto me by Mr. William Tanner were four, and
here follow in their order.

1 Enoch came into an Inn, or Alehouse in Bishops-Castle, and found there, the
Oast of the house and a Scrivenour drinking together. He being desired to sit
down with them, carried a while in their company. In this time of his sining
and conference with them; the Scrivenour is reported to draw ^ut of his pocket
certain coppy-books ruled with red Ink, and written with his own hand. These
Books he laid upon the table, and Enoch taking one of them into his hand, and
looking intentively upon the red lines, became, as the report goes, much
troubled in mind. The Scrivenour not perceiving his perturbation, drew also
out of his pocket a Prospective-glasse, through which our sight being directed,
it makes the object on which our eye is fixed much more large and extended,
than the natural and proper magnitude thereof. Upon the sight of these
red-ruled books and glass, Enoch is said to burst out into words of great
terror and trouble in himself, and to say, This man is a Conjurer, and has
sent to Bristow for a man to murder me. This speech say our Puritans about
Bishops-castle, plainly convinces Enoch to be cracked in the brain, and apt
for violent distempers by Lunacie. This is the Argument (Enoch) which your
neighbors make against you: let me have your answer without any untruths,
shifts, or evasions.

Enoch. Sir, these men whom you name, can fully clear me herein, and to their
report I refer my self: yet for your satisfaction, to whom I owe all duty
and respect, I will assure you the clear truth herein. I viewed indeed one of
the Scriveners books, and I supposed, and spoke according to my thoughts, that
those lines were ruled with blood, for I had never seen nor heard of any red
ink in all my lifetime. I think a wiser man than my self may commit a
greater mistake and error, without any distemper or crack in his
understanding. As for the Glass, or Bristoll, or murdering of me, GOD is my
witness I never made any mention of them: Neither did I term the man a
Conjurer, nor had any imagination thereof. But it is the practice of the world,
when a man is in misery, to load him with false accusations, whereof since I
came into this Prison, I have had much experience by manifold slanders of
whoredom and other vices invented against me.

2 The second Argument is this. Enoch a year before the death of his mother,
is reported to ask her this question upon a Sunday, after they were returned
from Clunne Church Mother, did not you hear ^ shrill and loud voice speak^
unto me this morning in the Church? His mother is reported to reply unto him,
yes, ^ heard the Ministers voice speaking to thee, and to me, and to all the
Congregation: other voice I heard not, nor thy self neither. He is reported to
ask her again, Did you not hear a voice call unto me by name, and say, Enoch
prepare? She^ is said to answer him, Hold thy peace thou fool, I heard no such
voice, nor thou neither. This is alleged against you, now answer for your
self in truth and uprightness. For weakness of brain, is no cause of shame
or reproach to your person.

Enoch. They talk much of the Devil and my self; but if they invent and
devise such lies against me in matters whereof I am no way guilty, let the
authors and contrivers thereof, take heed lest that lying spirit hold not as
much interest, and take as strong possession of their souls, as he has done
in mine, according to their opinion and conceit. For certainly this report,
newly raised, touching my questions with my mother, is such a cunning lie, tha^
I cannot understand the aim, or search the depth of it. For by these words,
Enoch prepare, I conceive their meaning to be, as though Satan had cast some
thoughts into my heart touching the killing of my mother and brother, a whole
year before I committed those execrable facts: But I have told you Sir, and
do further assure you of the truth therein, that my resolution to slay my
brother, was not fully ten days old before I brought it into execution. And if
my mother were now living, who is temporally perished by my enraged heart and
accursed hand, she could and would clear my reports, and denial of any such
questions moved unto her. I assure you therefore on my faith and truth, I never
used any such words unto her, nor never received any such idle thought into my
own heart, as to imagine a voice to call to me by name in the open Church, in
the time of Divine Service, as people call it.

3 The third Argument. Enoch is certainly tainted in his brain with some
weakness, caused by the reigning power of melancholy, apt to dispose and
incline any man to frenzy and distemper: or else by some other noxious and
malignant humor producing the like effects: And this is most certain and
beyond exception: for he has oftentimes assayed by purging and phleboromie, to
mitigate and correct the strength of these humors, causing malady and
distemper in his mind. This objection I received from a very learned Doctor in
Divinity, and a professor of the faculty and practice of Physic, of great
reputation for his Science therein. And this he told me was the common
received opinion among Gentlemen of worth who neither wanted understanding to
judge of these matters, nor were rashly credulous in believing flying rumors.
Now know you Enoch this objection presses hard upon you, let me therefore
have your just and true answer hereunto: For distempers arising from the ill
constitution of our bodies, are no reproach to our persons, but matters of pity
and commiseration.

Enoch. Sir, I will fully satisfy your desire, and give you the truth herein:
I was in May two years past, let blood and purged for a swelling in one of my
feet, the remotest part from my head; and was at that time, neither affected
with lightness in my brain, nor any other sickness in my heart: That
swelling in my foot hindered me at that time from going to Newport, I being then
a Traine-souldier of the Band of Captain Scriven an Esquire of worth and
learning well known over all our County, and commanded there to appear to show
my Armor, and to train with my fellows of the same band. And at that time my
brother John supplied my room by substitution and request from me unto him. At
this answer of his, two of his sisters were in place in the Prison house,
together with their husbands, and they all with unanimous consent affirmed, and
confirmed, that Enoch had never been accustomed to physic, but that he was
all his lifetime of sound constitution, strong, active, nothing crazie, or
subject to distemper in his brain, by any fits of rage and frenzy. And in
confirmation hereof, the forenamed Master Scriven, a prudent, judicious, and
learned Gentleman, came to the place of my dwelling, and desired me, that for
as much as Enoch his soldier, late of his Train band, had acknowledged unto
him in the Prisonhouse, that he had received both comfort and directions from
me. I would continue my ^^ve and pains with him: I promised the wordly
Gentleman to gratify his desires, and to take all opportunities to see him.
And I asked of him, Sir, did you ever hear of any distemper by lunacie or
frantic moods in Enoch your soldier? He answered me, I have never heard of
any thing in him, but very religious and well, before this vast trial for his
sins befell him.

4 The fourth Argument, is this. Enoch was seen to stand naked in a river up
to his breast, lading water up in his hands, and casting it on his head and
face, and continued a good while in this river. At that time a Gentleman of
that neighbor hood, one Master Powel, is said to ride by the river, and seeing
Enoch naked therein, casting water on his face, called to him, Enoch, what
do thou there? Enoch is reported to answer this Gentleman to his question, I
am washing away my sins. Mr. Powel is said to reply, That Is not water to wash
away sins, counseled him to go forth of the river, to put on his clothes, and
repair home. This report goes so current over all this County and country,
that he who shall on Enochs behalf deny credence thereunto, is taken for an
impudent person, past honesty, or conscience: for so generally had this lying
rumor spread it self, and prevailed for truth, that persons of eminent rank,
and very wise withal, were wonderfully taken therewith. And the conclusion
was, Enoch is a fellow of frequent distempers, and surely the instigation to
those murders was the rage of his affections caused by the weakness and (...) of
his brain, and not any reference to matters of religion. Now Enoch let me have
your answer to this in sincerity, without any dissimulation, or mincing of the
matter: for as I told you before, infirmities in soul or in body, do serve to
move compassion in good men toward persons affected therewith, but are no
disgrace at all to their persons.

Enoch. This argument is vast in show, but thin and light in the substance
thereof, and therefore is soon answered. I am desirous, Sir, to give you the
truth herein clear, free, and full, abstracted from all guile or
dissimulation. I refer my self to Mr. Powel his ingenuous confirmation of
what I shall say, whose wisdom and integriti^^ I know very well, will readily
give testimony with me in this matter. I had occasion to go to the river
bank, to gather a burden of rods: And having gathered those rods, and bound
them up, I stood on the bank of the river, and held my hat before my face,
while I made a short prayer unto GOD. As I stood thus praying with my face
covered, Master Powel and his wife, and manservant rode by on the other side
of the river. And he seeing and knowing me very well, called unto me and said,
Enoch, what art thou doing? art thou praying? I hearing his voice, plucked my
hat from before my face, and said unto him, I hope Mr. Powel it is no offense
to make a little prayer to GOD. He answered me again, No, no Enoch, no
offense at all, and there with he rode away laughing to himself. This is all
I do assure you Sir, that Mr. Powel saw in me both for the place, and for the
matter. And with this answer of Enoch, I satisfied a grave and prudent knight,
Sir Andrew Corbet, and diverse worthy Gentlemen, who by the generality of the
fame, though most false, had given credence thereunto. And this, and the rest
of his answers to the former inventions, serve to clear Enoch from suspicion
of madness: and do settle the bloody facts of outrageous murders upon the
true cause formerly assigned.

23. These particulars, God is my witness, I received from his own mouth; in
relation and expression whereof, varies nothing from the truth of the Prisoners
confession, I have taken liberty to my self to ^^mine own form of speech.
And I further received the ratified truth of al these parti^^lars, by the
attestation of those near friends of his, who could not possibly have bin
ignorant of these matters, if in whole ^^ part they had bin true. And far
better it had been both for the malefactor, and more also to the comfort of his
friends, ^^ these unnatural, and more tha^ barbarous and inhumane facts had
issued from distemper in his brain, imposed on him by the hand of GOD, than to
proceed from the instigation of desperate rage, cast into his soul by
satanical illusion, and bearing relation to the highest strain of self
pleasing purity in matters of religion; for there is no man so devoid of
reason, but he will freely grant and confess, that it had been a fairer
answer, for Enoch to have made to my Brethren of the Ministry, and to my
self, if truth might have justified it, that under the violent invasion of
some reigning and unresistable passion, to which he had been formerly
accustomed, he committed these facts, then to cast them upon prepensed
cogitation, deliberate malice, resolved purpose, watching opportunity for the
execution thereof. And all these to spring and arise from the inward boiling ^^
wrath in his rancorous heart conceived only in matters ^^ Church-ceremonies.
And he^ though I name facts in the Dual number, I desire all Re^ders to know
and to take ^^tice thereof, that the death of brother only was by recognition
contrived in his hear^ without any intention harm at all to the person his
mother: though filial lo^^ and reverence naturally ^^^ from him unto her, was
whe^^ly dried up, and extinct in ^^^ soul. For I asked him the question,
whether he intend the same death to his mother by contrivance and plot, wh^^
he resolvedly purposed to the person of his brother? He answered me, and I
conceive he gave me the truth therein, that all his wrath, as far as malice
and rage were adjoined thereto, was levelly and solely directed to the person
of his brother, without any reference at that time to his mother; for had she
not come into the room when the rage was upon him, he had not gone forth to
seek for her: But the unhappily rushing hastily upon him, before his fury was
rebated, his distemper allayed, and his affections better composed with the eye
of reason, to look into what he had done; he struck at her, and slew her, as
is formerly related.

24 Upon the fifteenth day of July I had occasion to rid^ from Shrewsbury to
Eccleshall, to see the most Reverend Father in GOD, the Lord Bisho^ of our
Diocese, newly place^ in government over us, and to make my self known un^^
his Lordship. And at that time the infamous rumors of these accursed and
loud-crying murders, were quick and fresh in all men's mouths. His Lordship
asked me thereof in the presence of an eminent Knight of our County, Sir Richard
Newport, whether such a murdere^ were now in our Jail, and whether I had seen
him and conferred with him? To whom I related what passages in these matters
were the known unto me. And being further required by his Lordship to lay down
in writing under mine own hand, and subscription of my name, the truth of such
particulars as I had received from the Prisoner his own mouth; I truly and
faithfully performed the same, and left in writing with his Lordship according
to his appointment.

25 After my return from this most Reverend Father, the next time that I
vifited Enoch, I found that some persons affected to Nonconformity, had been
tampering with him, and had very politikely brought him from his former
confessions to me, of the only cause moving him to these murders: persuading
him, that it would be infinitely to his own discredit, and to the reproach of
the professors of the Gospel, wh^^ truly affected religion, if such a bloody
crime could truly be charged upon him in reference to his dislike of Church
ceremonies. The inconstant heart o^ this light fellow, more sensible of
personal infamy, than of the fear of GOD by confirmation^ of truth, began to
shift and shrink away from his former reports. And yet for all their
persuasions and workings therein, such was the overruling hand of GOD's power
and providence over him, that still he persisted in affirming that never any
cause of variance fell between him and his brother in all their lifetime, but
only difference in opinion touching the Gesture at the Communion: yet he began
to wave the matter, and to qualify the rigor and acrimony of his former
terms, not yielding that he slew his brother only because of his kneeling.
And with this answer, being a senseless mitigation of his former true report,
and containing in it Contradictionem in adjecto, as Logitians speak, a
contradiction in the report it self, he greatly pleased both his blinded
self, and deluded perswaders. And herein they who are commonly called
Puritanes, much insulted and gloried in this subtle piece of their own
dishonest policy, that they had foiled Mr. Studley, the known Antipuritane of
the County. But now to check this masterpiece of their subtle art, by making
sensible and palpable the error and absurdity contained therein; I will
propose to their second thoughts, and more p^^dent considerations, these ^^^^
friendly and familiar Arg^ments: By the light and conviction whereof,
undoubtedly they will become sensible o^ their own foolish error, a^^ let go
their hold.

26 First, the Apostle ha^ told us of Enoch's elder brother called Cain, in
these word^ 1 John 3.12.
(...). Cain was (...) that wicked one, and slew (...) brother: And wherefore
sle^^ he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brothers good. Here
the conj^ction (...), is causall, as the lea^ned know, and referres us to the
sole, and total cause, and not in part assigns the cause why Cain slew his
brother. Because Abel was a righteous man, and the LORD approved his sacrifice;
and Cain a wicked man, and the LORD rejected his sacrifice; therefore, and
only therefore, the wicked man slew the righteous. And if they please to
examine deliberately, every small circumstance of this matter recorded in the
fourth of Genesis, they shall find that Cains d jection of countenance, and his
inward wrath toward his brother, arose from this cause, and Only this cause,
that the LORD approved of the faithful sacrifice of Abel, and contemned his
own hypocritical offering. So that if any man shall pretend another cause over
and besides this, which moved and inflamed Cains wrath to the murder of his
brother Abel; he shall thereby wilfully deceive his own soul, although the
word Only, be not found in the whole contexture of that historical Narration. A
better conclusion therefore naturally flowing from the words of the Apostle,
because expressly contained in the words, is this: As Cain murdring of his
brother was from the instinct of the Devil in his wicked heart, only because
the LORD approved his sacrifice: So the murdering of John ap Evan by Enoch his
elder brother proceeded from the same satanical instinct, and impression of
rage into his wicked heart, only because he kneeled at the sacred Communion.
And this is all that politic se^^ has got by denying this word, Only, in the
cause of this late murder. And then by true consequence it may be justly
concluded, that Satan has instigated a Nonconformist, to as unnatural and
bloody a fact as ever was committed.

27 My second Argument is this: Enoch ap Evan slayes his brother, either for
this cause only, that John would kneel at the Communion, or for some other
cause. But for other cause or causes, he never pleaded any for himself, but
totally excluded all other causes: Therefore he included this Cause, and this
Only, that because John kneeled at the receiving of the sacred Communion,
Enoch his desperately enraged brother slew him. This Argument is
syllogisticall, the true process ^^rationall Induction; and the force thereof,
is so clear, conclusive, and binding, that whether his Non-conformed Brethren
will accept or reject the word Only, the strength (...) the thing affirmed
remains pregnant, dilucidate, and (...) vincible.

28 Thus leaving the true and only cause of these flagitious murders fully
assoiled from all pretense of colorable opposition: I proceed to lay open unto
you, what I observed in the inward disposition of the mind of this man. He was
an high-minded fellow in spiritual matters, and (...) strongly opinioned of
his own particular Election, Adoption and radication in grace: The whatsoever
advice I gave him from time to time (for I was eighteen times with him)
pressing him to Humiliation, Repentance, Faith, Tears, Prayer, Confession, and
the like spiritual Actions: He seemed very thankfully to accept from me, and
in token of his gratitude, he ordinarily used to kiss my hand, and told me,
upon all visitations of him, that he spent his whole time in the exercise of
these gracious virtues. But they who lived in the house with him, and
diligently noted the whole tenor of his life and actions after his
imprisonment, could not discover any Symptoms or consequents of the practice
of these pretended virtues: for neither was his countenance dejected, his
complexion impaired, or his meals in quantity abated: He fed as plentifully,
drank as liberally, discoursed as freely, as any person did, who dieted at the
same table with him, paid the same rates of weekly charge, though there
detained, not as malefactors, but prisoners for debt. He was frequent and much
in poring on the Bible, and still he told me, that he used the help of
reading, to quicken his spiritual meditations, and to sharpen his practice of
repentance, of faith, and prayer. But I rejoyne^d unto him, that folitarinesse
and retired privacie, voided of all other employments, were the best means of
quickening devotion, by putting his soul into Soliloquie with GOD. Reading, I
told him, for a man in his case, was not so proper, and fit for his soul, as
spiritual ejaculations of his heart unto GOD in fervent devotion, of sighs,
of prayers, of confession. For his reading not only stirred up in him many
By-thoughts, begetting questions impertinent to his present condition and
state; but also made him incline unto, and arrogate too much to his own
private opinions, the desperate supplanters of his miserable soul. The best
course I affirmed for a man in his case to take, was to renounce his own
judgment, will, and affections, which had already enthralled him to Satan,
and to apply himself to the duties enjoined him by GOD's Ministers: and for
questions emergent which might concern him, to take directions therein from
them, whose knowledge was more ripe, judgments more exact, as confirmed by
experience of GOD's love and favor, and their hearts better composed to piety,
charity, and unity, than his own wild and perturbed affections were. Yet
notwithstanding all my love, and care, and pains taken to do him good, he
would still run his own courses, and follow the ways of his own heart: By
which he lay still exposed to the cunning stratagems of Satan, b^^ politic
supplanter. For in the arrogant pride of his over warning spirit, he judged his
own ignorant and ungoverned heart as well able by learned and judicious
counsel to prescribe unto himself, as all the grave, pious, and learned
Ministers in this Land could have done: such was the force of spiritual
delusions, wherewith Satan had blinded, and detained him captive.

29 He was never observed in more than six weeks imprisonment, to shed one
tear in testimony of sorrow for his crying sins, or to note the presence of
GOD's Spirit within him: No, not although two of his sisters joining in prayer
with me upon their knees, plentifully powered them forth in his behalf.
Indeed, I do freely and ingenuously make known to the World, that his
complexion was not apt for tears: but the present distress of his soul under
the fearful expectation of GOD's confounding wrath justly provoked, might
either have terrified, or mollified him to some signs of humiliation and
sorrow.

30 When he was brought before the Reverend and Honorable Judges, no
consternation of soul appeared in him, either from the sense of his own
wickedness, or from the Gravitie of their Persons, justly made terrible to
malefactors by the weight of their authority: But where grace sanctifies not
to the Intenerating of the heart, there pride will puff up and be displayed in
the countenance. For as the Scriptures report 1 Samuel 15.32.
of Agag, King of the Amalekites, that being a captive prisoner, and called to
appear before King Saul, his Lord by conquest, that he came Delicately before
him, and said in his heart, Surely, the bitterness of death is past: So this
Prisoner, the day before the coming in of the Judges, called for a Harbor to
trim him, as if this malefactor had a desire in his heart, that some
elegancie of aspect darting from his countenance might appear unto them when
he came before them. This I observed, disliked, and to his face in the
presence of many persons, reproved in him, and told him that a face more horrid
and over-growne with hair, better beseemed the horror of his facts. The
evidence of his murders, so often published to the world, by his free and
voluntary confession, might have prevented the formal process of Law, by Jury,
conviction and casting, and have put him into the power of the Judge for
Sentence of death from his own acknowledgement, and expression of his guilt:
But for more strength of justice and regularitie of proceeding, the Jury, as I
heard, found him guilty, and made him liable to Sentence of death: which
Sentence, after it was pronounced against him, the place where, and the manner
of his execution for the consequents thereof, by hanging in a frame of iron,
being not expressed unto him: he was no more altered in his countenance, or
changed in his behavior, than if no terrible voice of death had been uttered
unto him. On Saturday the seventeenth of August, 1633, after he was adjudged to
death, I came to him in the afternone, partly to observe his behavior and
deportment after the horror of Judgment passed on him; but principally by
counsel accommodate to his present condition, to prepare him for a penite^tial
dissolution. And having shut up my self and him into a private room, and by
directions and prayer to GOD for him, prepared him for death in the best manner
I was able; I desired him with pressing persuasions to reveal unto me the
person, or persons by whose politic seducements he was drawn to those
opinions, so desperate and raging in their furious cruelty. For at the
discovery of this I had long aimed, but could never with arguments or
entreaties obtain at his hands. And I am of opinion from his resolution of
contumacie in the concealment hereof, that for the security of that party by
whom he was inveigled and deceived therein, he had either by secret compact, or
by an act of his own desperate will, imposed on himself an oath of secrecy:
for he answered me that day, as he had often done before, and continued in
that obstinacy to his death, that not from man, but from GOD he had received
those conceits; which I knew to be as false, as I know it to be true that mine
own soul is living within me. For how could it possibly happen, that an
unlearned Rusticke shall fall so directly upon the Controversies of our Church
in Discipline and Ceremonies, without a schismatical guide to inform and
persuade him, and thereby to ruin and undo him. And to the soul of that
Minister or Lay person I speak, who is yet living, and conscious to himself,
that by his persuasions or directions, this man became seduced in opinion, and
thereby ensnared by Satan thus to scandalize the Church of GOD, and hazard the
state of his own soul for ever: let him repent of his wickedness, and reform
his own judgment therein: lest the justice of GOD for his close hypocrifie,
leave him under the reign of his own carnal will utterly devoid of His
gracious Spirit. For it is no new or unknown thing in this Kingdom, for
Ministers of that stamp to lay violent hands upon their own persons, and in
the agony of their souls, by torment of wounded consciences to fore-doe
themselves. For not above two years ago, both in the Imperial City of London,
and in other parts of this Kingdom, diverse of that sect have shortened their
own days, oppressed with the vexation of confounded spirits: which justifies
that old prover be, Omne quod rutilat non est aurum: Every thing that glitters
is not gold.

31 For it is well known in this County of ours, that a Minister of that sect,
neglecting the duties of so sacred a calling, and for his opinions sake,
applying himself to a secular vocation in teaching a Grammar school; did in
the day time, as he walked in the school in a passion of secret distemper in
his heart, Deprive himself of his Virility: violating thereby the works of
GOD and Nature: and Origen-like castrated himself, though not for the kingdom
of heaven. Which shows that Gods Spirit is not always present in those men's
hearts to guide them, who violate their loyalty to their Prince, by renting the
unity of the Churches peace. This man being two years before this fact of his,
convented before a grave and learned Official in the Diocese of Hereford for
his Nonconformity: the reverend Gentleman, as he told me himself, offered him
all the courtesy and kindness that might be; hoping by moderation of
proceeding, and wise persuasions, to correct his errors, reform his
judgment, rectify his irregularities, and win him to obedience. But the
frowardness of this man, fast bound to his own fancies, neglected and
slighted the Gentleman's kindness. So that after much parley, and many
passages, and cross bouts of opposition between them; the learned and prudent
Gentleman finding him rather obstinate in his will, by being strongly conceited
of his own opinions, than judiciously grounded with weight of arguments to
support his vain cause, asked him this plain and familiar question; What if
your Governors should require you to sit or stand in the act of receiving the
Communion, would you then do? He replied peremptorily, Then would I kneel.
Which answer plainly imports that not tenderness of conscience, as many
pretend; but pride and stubbornness of will in refusing subjection to their
Superiors, is the true and the only cause of their disobedience to the
Majesty of our King, the anointed of the LORD, and to the equity of his
laws; and is also that pernicious foment and oil of self-will, which
nourishes the flame of Schism and faction, and maintains the breach of our
peace and unity of heart.

32 There was also a Layman in Tewxbury, in the County of Gloucester, who was a
strict, austere, and rigid Puritan, of a Mechanical vocation: and this man
being chosen fourteen years before his death Churchwarden of his Parish, did
then in his first time of office, take down a cross of stone, built in the
Churchyard of that Parish; and which had continued there, time out of mind.
And this he did of a proud contempt of all ancient Monuments of that nature.
The stones of the said cross he placed loose under the Church-wall, where
they continued by the space of fourteen years free from injury or rapine: for
it seems the people of the Neighborhood made conscience of sacrilege. It
pleased GOD, that the two next children which his wife brought into the world,
proved dease, lame, and deformed by monstrosity of body: as by good report I
have been told, and so continue to this very day. The father of these children
never once suspecting that the hand of Divine correction was laid upon his
family, for his own disobedience to his Prince and Governors, or for his
violation and defacing of the ancient Monuments of other men's devotion,
persists still in his former opinions of schismatic disobedience, without any
correction, or reformation of himself. For it may be he had either by himself
observed, or by relation from others had heard it confirmed, that the children
of other men had miscarried in their understandings, their senses and bodily
shapes, and were exposed to the world for Ludibria Naturae, as well as his. And
attributing these things to secondary canses, and errors in natural
operations frequent in the world, he never looked up to the hard of Heaven; but
still pleased himself in his irregular courses. And being fourteen years
after his first election, chosen again Churchwarden of the same Parish, he
took the stones of the former defaced and demolished cross, which lay look
under the Church-wall, and by cementing them together, and hewing a hollow
gutter in them, converts them to a swine trough for his own use. But the first
meat which his swine di^eate out of that stone trough, drove them instantly
into raging madness, whereof they dyed. This man now seeing what had befallen
unto him in his swine, which in his children he slightly passed over; he began
to reflect upon his former and later facts, and discovering by the terrible
testimonies of Gods wrath, the naughtiness of his own wicked heart, in so
contemptuously abusing things once dedicated to conserve the memorial of our
LORD His Passion for our redemption: overcome with the gripes, pangs and
tormenting terrors of a wounded soul, he leap't into a draw-well in the court
of his neighbor, and was taken up brui^ed and drowned. By reason of this
exemplary vengeance (...): That whereas this sect of men, is uncharitably (...)
of the piety of former ages, in charging Idolatry and superstition upon them: I
would be a testimony of more wisdom and moderation in them, to suspend all
censure of their intentions and real expressions of devotion, and let them
stand or fall to their own Lord, their Creator, their Father. since these men
themselves in pleading the justification of their known and convinced errors,
desire the same liberty to be granted to themselves. But let us return to
Enoch, from this short digression.

33 Upon Sunday morning following immediately the day of Enoch his
condemnation, the Hangman being in the Prisonhouse, was seen of five
prisoners condemned to dye at that Assizes. And one of these persons condemned
for the murder of a maid, whom he had devirginated and defloured; said to the
rest of his fellows in Enoch's presence, I could find in my heart to break
yonder knaves pate, but that it is a sin, and I have enough of that upon me
already: To whom Enoch replied, It is no finne to kill death, and had I known
that knave to be the Hangman, I would have beaten out his brains, if I could
have come at him. These words of his, begat over all the Prisonhouse
(consisting of many persons) great exclamations against Enoch his wickedness,
being himself a condemned person, and should have employed his thoughts upon
better matters. The next day in the morning, as soon as I was come to the
prisonhouse to see this condemned malefactor, and to know how he stood
prepared for death: Three persons severally one from another, gave me notice of
Enoch his words uttered the day before in the hearing of many^^ appointed his
overseer to bring him unto me in a private room; who being come, and nothing
dejected in mind, or countenance, but rather inwardly jocund in his own
soul; I said unto him, Did you Enoch utter such words concerning the Hangman,
as diverse persons do both testify against you, and are also greatly displeased
with your desperate and furious outrage? He replied unto me, I spoke indeed
those words in jest. In jest, quoth I unto him? are you, being a condemned
person by judicial sentence, a fit person to utter jests? do you not know that
no Kingdom of the world can possibly subsist in Justice and Honor, without
the service of such persons as shall be assigned to execute those laws upon the
persons of malefactors; if Law condemn by just and upright sentence, the
wicked facts and persons of such men, as by violating equity, disturb the
peace and welfare of Kingdoms and Governments; are those Laws of any force
without the ministry and service of such men, as shall put them in execution?
Surely, Enoch, the eye of your heart and judgment, is not yet open to see your
abominable villainies which do yet rage and swell within you: nor is your
mind, with the illumination whereof you have so much in secret pleased your
self, guided by GOD's Spirit. For had these gifts of GOD taken place in your
soul, as you have still pretended, the person of the Hangman would have been
rather pleasing than offensive unto you, as being the instrument of GOD's
mercy, to let out your soul surcharged by gripes of your conscience with
fearful tremblings, into the glorious presence and welcome imbracements of
CHRIST your SAVIOR. But look to your self, I admonish you, for your time of
life is short: flatter not your self in thinking to escape the stroke and
infliction of Temporal Vengeance due unto you. If you die in these desperate
and unchristian moods, it is more than greatly to be feared, for it is evident
and apparent, that your own personal election, whereof you have so much
talked, was but a presumptuous error, and a graceless opinion, by Satanicall
delusion.

34 Now touching this fellow and his opinions, he was charged to hold some
points of Anabaptists and Enthusiastes: matters I dare be bold to say, because
I know it right well, far beyond the reach of his apprehension, for excepting
only his distlike of our Church-ceremonies, and his proud opinion of his own
spiritual estate in the favor of GOD, he was a most ignorant m^^ in all parts
of knowledge belonging to religion. The matters of Opinion, wherewith he was
suspected, were principally these: First, that the soul of a regenerate man,
is perfectly pure and clean within him, by virtue of his New Birth, and
consents not, either in the understanding by approbation, or in the will by
election and inclination to any act of sin: But that it is only the body and
flesh, which remaining unsanctified and naturally defiled, sollicites, urges,
provokes unto all evil, and executes all acts thereof in the elect of GOD,
after their conversion and regeneration. This opinion is a monster in nature,
not only divorcing the soul and body each from other it the time of this
life: but also attributing unto the body without all motion, influence, or
concomitancie of the soul, the producing of actions and operations real and
sinful. This Enoch, though of mean apprehension in philosophical matters,
understood right well; and his opinion herein, was only this and no more: That
for as much as sanctification, which is very rightly and aptly termed Inherent
Righteousness, by repairing the decays of original grace in our souls, and
re-inducing the Image of GOD into us, is not perfect in this life: therefore in
all real acts of sindone by a child of GOD in state of grace, there is a
consent to that act, both in the understanding and the will, the most ^oble and
principal faculties of our souls; for without assent of these, no act is ever
produced; but it is such a consent, as carries not with full sway and violence,
either of these powers within us, pleasingly with strong delight and
approbation to prosecute those actions: but rather by infirmity under the
strength of temptation, they themselves are seduced to assent and execute
things evil, and are thereby for the present supplanted. And of this his
opinion he was desirous to make illustration in his own person: affirming,
that his regenerate soul, in the very time and act of these murders, stirred
up some reluctancie within him, and suspended his fullness of consent in the
perpetration thereof. His opinion I allow as a (...) orthodox and sound, and
confirmed by the experience of all good men in the world: But for his (...) or
illustration thereof in his own person, it is Heterodox, unsound, and of all
good men to be abhorred. For an act of wrath, resolving it self into malice,
contrived in the mind for the execution, and terminated in blood and murder,
cannot possibly be admitted to participate of infirmity. His Second opinion
charged upon him, was this. That CHRIST our LORD, is not now in heaven in that
body, which by sanctified conception and incarnation He took of the substance
of the holy and blessed Virgin; and in which He conversed among the Jews. His
answer to this was, that he was mistaken by certain persons, as unlearned as
himself, who busily and frequently proposed questions unto him, and were not
able rightly to conceive his answers, nor the nature of their own questions
proposed unto him: For both he, and they wanting the true apprehension of so
high and sacred a Mystery, as is the Nature and Quality of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST His glorified Body, took liberty unto themselves to talk at randon of
high and mysterious secrets, and thereby lost themselves in their vain
janglings. His faith and judgment was very right in this point, according to
the small measure of his understanding: But he wanted apt terms to explicate
his conceit in so deep a matter. When therefore I acquainted him with some
terms frequent in the Fathers and Schoolmen, in the enodation of an Article
of our Faith so abstruse and difficult, and transcending the sphere of vulgar
apprehensions: telling him, that the Body of our Lord was passive, mortal,
liable to violence in the state of His Humiliation: Impassive, immortal,
glorious, and exempt from infirmities and injuries in the condition of his
exaltation; he freely assented, submitted himself, and confirmed that to be
his meaning, that our LORD His blessed and glorious Body, was changed only in
quality, not in substance: But that for want of Theological terms, he was
not able to unfold himself. And then the Conclusion touching his opinions, is
this, he was neither Anabaptist, Enthusiast, or of any other odd sect
whatsoever, but only a silly, Ignorant, and downright English Puritan.

35 On Tuesday the twentieth of August, this Malefactor, the stain of Nature,
and reproach of mankind, was carried on horseback from Shrewsbury thirteen
miles to the place of his execution. When he was come to Bishops-castle Town,
he desired in his Inn to receive the holy Communion of the most sacred Body
and Blood of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; which I had refused to administer unto him,
because he would not take it in the decent and Reverent gesture of kneeling.
The Minister of that Town, a learned Gentleman, refused likewise to give it
unto him, unless he would receive it in obedience to his Superiors, and
kneel down Reverently in that holy Action. A while he continued obstinate,
but overcome at last by persuasions, he yielded as he said, to gratify the
desires of a Gentleman there present. Thus the man, who in the furious zeal of
an enraged heart, drew that blood, that bred and nourished him, coming to the
point of his death, shrunk in his courage, or rather his contumacie; and
either to please men, or to procure favor in the mitigation of execution of
Judgment upon him, fell from the ground of his unhallowed profession. Which
convincingly proves that obstinate Hypocrisy producing disloyalty in contempt
of Authority, is built upon a weak, a slippery, an unstable foundation.

36 This Malefactor, being now come to the place, where the Gibbet was erected
for his exemplary punishment: He kneeled down and made a short prayer to GOD.
And having finished his devotions, and being commanded to ascend the steps of
the ladder; as soon as the Executioner had put the rope over his head into his
neck, he was instantly so surprised with the fear of approaching death, that
in all the parts of his body he trembled with great perturbation and anguish
of Spirit. And when he was ready to be turned off, he cried twice with a
loud voice, God be merciful to me a great Sinner. And then being cast off
and strangled to death, to the great Agony and regreet of his friends and
kindred the beholders thereof, testified by three shrill ^kreekes and cries, he
was trussed up into a frame of Iron brought thither for that purpose: And his
body though deprived of sense to feel it, the truth of that Judgment
denounced in the Scriptures, Prove. 30.17.
The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. For
as well the Father was mocked as the Mother despised, when his bloody heart and
hand robbed the Husband of his Wife, and deprived the Father of both his
Sons. When he had hanged forth waving in the air, more then a fortnight,
and less then three weeks, some Brethren of his own disposition and faction,
who are restless in wilfulness (that I may not say wickedness) contrived a
device by rearing up a ladder in the night, a work of darkness, to saw off
that part of the Gibbet where his body hanged, and took it away even then,
when the smell and stench thereof was so unsavory and noisome, as hardly able
to be endured; unless they were provided with strong Antidotes to correct
the loathsome savor of his putrified carcass: but it was a mess good enough
for such contemners of royal Majesty and the wholesome laws of the best
governed Republicke upon the face of the earth.

37 And now in few words to touch the fact of those Persons, who by graceless
disloyalty have opposed the practice of Law and Justice: did they not know that
the body of every Malefactor, after legal conviction and judicial
condemnation, is wholly at the dispose of the King as a part of His Royal
Prerogative, by virtue of the violation of His Laws; Romans 13, 1, 2, 3, 4.
The right of the King Himself therein, which He has received from Gods
sacred Ordinance, is by delegation of subordinate power transmitted to the
Persons of the Judges: and they by pronunciation of Just and legal sentence,
are to command the execution of what the letter of the Law has given in
charge. Out of which just and formal gradation descending, I draw this
consequence and regular deduction ascending. He that resists or nullifies the
sentence of the law pronounced by the Judge, opposes therein the Natural law
of humane equity familiarly known to all men, and dishonoreth the Person of
the Judge from whom that sentence proceeded. The dishonor of the Judge, being
the Deputy substitute of the King, falls directly on the royalty of His most
sacred Person. The dishonor of the Kings Person being the vicegerent of the
LORD of Hosts, rests not there, but ascends to the contempt of the Divine
Majesty of God Himself, whose constitution it is, Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image of God made he
man. Did not then the stealers away of the putrified corpse of this Malefactor,
know these things before hand? To charge them with Ignorance of such things,
which the Dictates of natural reason has imprinted upon the table of every
Man's heart, is to make them brutish and to range them with beasts: To say they
knew these things, and yet against their own knowledge and conscience, they
contemned all peaceable obedience thereunto, is to make them peremptory and
Rebellious against both Divine Majesty in the nature of God, and Humane
Majesty in the person of the King. Thus I have put them upon (...), a logical
form of reasoning, so called (...) of catching the delinquent on both sides.
Let them now take whether part they will, either to be concluded bruit beasts
in the shapes of men, by their stupid ignorance; or saucy Rebels under the
visour of Puritanisme. And full time it is to subdue their insolent contempt of
all Laws Ecclesiastical and temporal, and to keep them in order. For when
the constitutions of the Church are proudly violated, and the Laws of the
Commonwealth contemptuously vilified, yea even, the ever blessed and pure
Ordinances of God Himself rejected to satisfy Arrogant self will: what
obligations or bonds are existent in nature, able to repress the disorders of
unruly persons? And thus I have done with the county Prisoner.

38 And now to vent my own hearts grief for many years suppressed and stifled
in my troubled bosom, and a little to enlarge my self, and to make known the
quality of that people with whom I live: Know good Reader, that this Town of
Shrewsbury the place of my birth and residence is greatly troubled with a sect
of Men and Women, with whom I have had much intercourse of conversement, not by
way of intimate familiarity approving their ways, but of vexation and trouble
of mind, that I could not in thirteen years painful Ministry among them,
reclaim them from their wandering fancies, and reduce them to obedience of
supreme Majesty, in the persons of two most illustrious and Royal Kings the
Father and the Son. But the more I labored therein, as their consciences can
and do witness unto them, the more I incurred thereby their secret hate and
detraction of my person, with detriment and loss to my temporal estate.

39 They had about fourteen years ago a learned and Reverend Preacher, Mr.
Bright
who by the practice of two and twenty years Ministry among them, with diverse
conferences and persuasions to loyalty and obedience, could never work any
thing upon their perverse and peevish dispositions. When he grew aged and
decayed in his strength, these persons laid their counsels, purses, and powers
together, and provided them of a Lecturer, who concurred in opinion, practice,
and faction with them. The man being come among them, settled in his place, and
supported with countenance, favor, feasts and liberal contributions, by
underhand collections in all the Parishes of our Town; entered upon his
Ministry, and mightily labored with his best abilities to encourage them to
constancy in their supposed zealous, but in truth in their erroneous,
schismatic, and disloyal courses. These things being wisely observed, and
the portion of his gifts and Talent noted by that Reverend Gentleman not long
before his death: He being invited to the house of a Gentleman of our Town,
and entering conference of these things at the table, brake a witty jest upon
their Lecturer, and as it were Prophetically signified the truth of this event
of his factious courses, saying, Genes. 21.4.
The lean Kine will eat up the fat. For indeed, in the issue it so fell out
in our Town; A lean, factious, and schismatic Ministry obscured the light
of better parts in men of the same calling: and to strengthen a party, and to
countenance disorder, with Thewda^ boasting himself Act. 5.36, 37.
to be some body, and with Judas of Galilee, he drew away much people after
him. But as they perished in their Tumultuous uproares, so this practice little
inferior in action and working, in a few years dissolved of it self, and
only the ruins thereof remains yet among us. The Reverend man lying on his
deathbed; The Magistrates of our Town repaired to visit him in his sickness:
To whom he gave in strict charge, that, as they Tendered the glory of God,
their own loyalty to their Liege and Sovereign, whose Ministers they wereby
deputation of dignity and authority, peace and welfare of their Corporation:
they would carefully resist the purpose of many, who labored to obtrude upon
the Town to succeed in his place a Non-conformed Minister. And he told them
further, what he himself had noted in his wife observations: to wit, that
where any of this sect of disloyal and factious Ministers entered, and were
entertained by any people, there in very short time, they proved Incendiaries:
and by means of their own personal disobedience to the prudent and pious
Laws of our Church, that Corporation, Town, Parish, or Village, became rent
into faction, and cleaving unto parts by violation of unity and Christian peace.

40 This Reverend man being laid in his sepulcher in peace and honor, one Mr.
Brown, a learned and godly Minister, of exemplary virtue, and pious
conversation, was elected to succeed him; and this man exercising his labors
among them by the space of thirteen years, was so rudely and unchristianly
handled in their insolent contempt of his talent and pains; that by an
invective and bitter Libell, consisting of fourteen leaves in quarto cast into
his garden; they disquieted his painful and peaceable soul, and shortened
the date of his troublesome Pilgrimage. They are a generation of men strongly
addicted, to hear no other Ministers, but those of their own character and
print; and such men, though of lightest talents and meanest parts, they extol
and advance up to the clouds in raptures of admiration; run after them from
place to place to be partakers of their sanctified gifts and holy exhortations:
In the mean time neglecting the Ministry of those learned and godly men, whom
their own judgments, though depraved with error and sinister surmises; and
their consciences, though misguided by self will, cannot choose, but prefer by
many degrees before their own bosom Darlings. But humility and patience must
be the guides of godly Christian men, submitting themselves to the holy
pleasure of GOD's Divine will; who in these crosses of disgrace and contempt
from others, exercises thereby, their piety, wisdom, constancy in bearing
with the rods of his fatherly correction, whereby he conformes them in holy
sufferings to the person of our Lord and Savior CHRIST JESUS that Son of His
love. Romans 8.29.
And His holy decrees being made known to His Church, must poize and hold in
even temper of prudent moderation and godly subjection unto them, the souls of
all His children to whom He has made known, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
That the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall heap unto themselves teachers having itching ears; and
they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto
fables. For among the great fables of the world which attempt to defile the
sacred purity of the Gospel, this of Non-conformitie holds a choice and
principal place. For though the object of its proud, ambitious and peremptory
discontent, use the varnish and pretense of harmless Ceremonies to raise up
their cavils, and perpetuate their secret railings: yet the train of
consequences depending on these lighter matters, will be found not to
terminate in Ceremonies; but to aim at such substantials, alterations in
Church and State, as would willingly subjugate the Royal Diadem and Scepter of
Princely Power, to the subordinate rule and direction of their Presbyterian
consistory.

41 Unto this Town of ours, diverse Gentlemen from many parts of this Kingdom,
and Widows also, have within these twelve last years resorted: Resolving
here to plant themselves for fixed habitation, and expecting to enjoy with
impunity the vain toys and schismatic conceits they brought hither with
them. But my trust is, under GOD, and the sacred and Royal Majesty of our
King, that our Reverend Bishop will either in short time reform their
irregularities, or cause them to return to the places of their former abode.
Hither also have flocked Mechanical fellows of many Artifices and
Professions, Masons, Carpenters, Brick-layers, Corsers, Weavers, Stone-gravers,
and what not? And being in their persons of worthless quality, and receiving
countenance from men of better rank; they have pestered our Town with
disobedience and schism, and for their low condition and obscurity of living,
have escaped presentment, and passed unregarded. Pardon my zeal, good Reader:
a surcharged heart speaking nothing but known and justifiable truth, may
justly obtain liberty to unburden it self. Now these persons of the better
and inferior rank, grow presently into strict and inviolable leagues of
mutual amity, as if long continuance of time, experience and proof of their
Christian virtues, had incorporated and united them together in reciprocal
society. For it is the nature of Schism and all unwarranted courses, ever to
show it self active in malignitie, and by examples and encouragements from one
to another in short time to disdain to submit themselves to the commands of
their Superiors; lest thereby they dishonor their fantastical profession, by
shrinking from the hold of their Christian liberty, and abridging themselves
of their selfe-pleasing fantasies. They assemble, and feast, and pray, and
discourse, and perhaps take liberty also to complain and lament each unto
other, that the Relics of Rome continue still among us to adulterate the
sacred purity of our Gospel of Peace. But blessed be the Name of the LORD
our GOD, and thanks be given to the excellent Majesty and Piety of our King,
who resolving in his royal heart, Quoad brachii humaeni virtutem, to conserve
the purity of the glory of CHRIST in supporting the free passage of His
blessed Gospel, does also design in His Princely thoughts and intentions to
reduce His wandering subjects to uniformity of obedience.

42 A Letter was written by a Non-conformed Minister, to that late reverend,
worthy, and learned Prelate Bishop Jewel, who, if the judgment of Master
Hooker, ratified with the approbation of that most Illustrious, Memorable, and
Learned King James Hooker Eccl. polit^e page 68. Preface before Jewels works.
may be received, was one of the most accomplished Divines that Christendom
has yielded for some hundreds of years. In this Letter the judgment of that
gracious man was desired touching our Ceremonies, and specially the government
of our Church by Bishops. Who weighing in his prudent and peaceful thoughts,
the slight Arguments sent unto him, wherewith the impregnable fort of our
discipline was attempted for battery and subversion: replied thus, as he is
cited by Doctor Whitgift in his Reply, Answer to a libell entitled, An
adnotion, etc.
As for these reasons, in my judgment they are not made to build up, and they
are too weak to pull down. Stultitia nata est in cord pueri, and Virga
disciplinae fugabit illam, Pro. 22.15.
Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction will
drive it from him. It is but wantonness, correction will help it. Thus far
Bishop Jewel. Now the weight of this man's authority, furnished as he was with
infinite variety of reading in the writings of the Church, Ancient and Modern,
is more to be esteemed, than the up-start conceits of many hundreds of those
light and vain Novellers, the wanton perturbers of our Christian peace. And
till this correcting rod of Humane power qualified and ratified by divine
authority, and given by GOD into the Princely hand of His Vicegerents, be
either inflicted, or at least lifted up and shaked (though shaking without
striking will do little good:) these men are so settled upon the Lees and
dregs of their pleasing errors, that like Moab, Ier. 48.11.
for want of emptying from vessel to vessel, they will still retain their
old sent within them.

43 I publicly told them five Months ago, namely in July last past 1633 in a
Preface to my Catechism Lecture in a very great assembly; that it was to be
feared that they who obeyed not the Laws of the King, did curse his sacred
Person in their hearts, contrary to that rule. Eccle. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts, and curse not the Rich in thy
bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter. These words of mine stirred up such a Tempest in
the unruly, tumultuous and stormy affections, that many of them rashly rowed,
but have failed therein, that they would never hear me again, because I
employed good Talents and parts to the disgrace of Gods children. But now let
them give me leave, since time has allaied their passions, and rendered them
more capable of wholesome advice, to tell them without fear or flattery, that I
conceive the Spiritual meaning of these words in this sense. He that obeyes
not the Law, which is by command of Princely power and Justice impsed on him;
Curses that law which he refuses to obey, for between obedience and cursing
there is no medium or mean in the sense of Gods Spirit. For every act of
murmuring and repining against the supposed iniquity of any law, coupled with
contempt of the same law by disobedience thereunto, is an act of the heart and
Spirit of that man cursing the (...), to which he refuses to yield true and
faithful subjection. Now this inward curse lighting on the law which is
disobeyed, reflects or rather falls directly on the Majesty of the King, from
whose sacred Authority as he is the immediate Vicegerent of God, that law
receives either Constitution or Ratification and Command for obedience. This
sense I obtrude not on these Persons, as arrogating to my self infallibility
of judgment in the meaning of Gods Spirit; But I refer it to the grave and
deliberat judgment of those prudent and learned Persons, who fit at the Helm
of government in our Church, and are more profound in knowledge, and fully able
to resolve and clear this doubt; for as then, so now I deliver only my
opinion and no more. But yet let me further tell them, that since they like not
to be told that their thoughts and hearts do Curse Christian Kings whose laws
check and countermaund their novell fancies: what will they say to that place
of sacred Scriptures Job 34.18.
Is it fit to say to a King thou art wicked, etc. If the laws, whose rigor,
life, and authority, flow immediately from Kings and Princes in their
Dominions, be in their Nature wicked as they are Laws, certainly the Princes
themselves who enact or authorize those laws, in the censure and judgment of
those men who vilify the same laws by refusing to obey them, cannot be good.
So that let them turn themselves which way they will, they are taken in a
snare woven from the clear sense of the sacred Scripture. For either they
curse the King in his laws, or they judge not his Person to be righteous from
whom unjust and unrighteous laws do proceed, and are imposed by command. For
they cannot possibly affirm the King to be righteous, nor his laws to be
righteous, when they refuse to give obedience both to the one and to the other.
I know they will reply, that they love and honor the King, but that they like
not his laws. And I answer them again, it is impossible to love and honor
the King, and to dislike his laws: for the laws are the Spirit and life of
the King as he is Supreme head over his people, securing the royalty of his
Princely State, and sweetly attracting his subjects to cheerful obedience. For
therefore do the subjects honor, reverence, and love the person of the King,
because of the righteousness and equity of his laws, whereby they are governed
in tranquillity and peace. And on the contrary, no man living in the world,
does naturally, freely, sweetly love the person of a Tyrant, because he rules
by the rage of his affections, and the strong hand of power; and not by the
peaceable rule of Justice, and approved laws. So that the true and cordial
love of subjects to their King, arises in them, not only from relation of
superiority in his person, and inferiority in theirs; but much more fervently
and firmly from his pious care in constituting good laws for the regiment of
his people in honor, wealth, peace and liberty, free from the vassallage of
oppressing subjection.

44 Under the light and law of nature, the very Heathens illuminated and endued
with some acts of inspiration from GOD, to quicken the principles of native
light in their own souls; have with more veneration and reverence honored
their Kings, than Christians have done the known Vicegerents of GOD under the
Law of Grace, after the clear declaration of GOD's will pressing and
commanding obedience unto them. For Elihu a young man, could say to Job and his
friends, Job 36.7.
He withdrawes not his eyes from the righteous, but with Kings are they on the
Throne, yea he does establish them for ever, and they are exalted. And herewith
accords the wise, and as I may truly, say the holy sentences uttered by those
men, who being destitute of the Divine and supernatural light of Christian
faith, have showed to the world the light and the extent of Natures love in
their understandings. Homerus I liad.
(...). The minds of Kings are great in understanding, their honor is from
God, and they are beloved of Him, and directed. What other sense can these
words import, recorded both in sacred Scriptures, and by Heathen Writers, than
that GOD has stamped the character of His Divine Majesty both on their
persons for Authority, and on their hearts for Government and direction? For
undoubtedly this sense is confirmed by other places in the sacred Scriptures.
As, Pro. 23.^^.
The heart of the King is in the hand of GOD as the Rivers of waters, he
turns it whither soever he will. And again, Pro. 16.10.
A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth transgresses not in
Judgment. And this sacred Truth is approved by the consenting judgment of the
ancient and godly learned. Justin. Martyr.
(...). I have given unto you Princes mine own Honor, mine ordinance, and my
calling, requiring you to Judge my people, as if I myself did judge them. And
for the preventing of disobedience against the sacred Persons of Kings, and
their Laws, all sorts, ranks, and degrees of men in the visible Church of
GOD, and out of the pale thereof, are commanded, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no power but of
GOD. And those words are expounded by an ancient, very learned, and godly
Father of the Greek Church, after this manner. Chr. soft. in loc.
(...), etc. The Apostle demonstrating that these things are commanded to all
men, unto Priests and Monks, and not unto Secular Laymen only, he makes it
manifest from the preface, saying, Let every soul be subject to the
supereminent powers, yea, though he be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet,
or whosoever he be; for this subjection does not subvert piety. And again,
the rule of GOD's Spirit in Scriptures commands us, Pro. 2^.21.
My son sear thou the LORD, and the King, and meddle not with them who are
given to changes.

45 How comes it then to pass, seeing these things are so manifest in the
sacred Scriptures; that so many Ministers in our Church, by faction and
schism, do rend in pieces that blessed peace and unity, which they are
everywhere in the holy Scriptures Ephesians. 4.3^. Phil. 2.2, 30
commanded to preserve and support? The true cause hereof I take to be this;
The poverty of the inseriour sort of our English Clergy. And this answer I
gave to the Lord Bishop of our Diocese proposing this very question unto me
at the table of a worthy Knight of our County, Sir William Owen.
my Noble and very Honored friend. For in this age of ours the practice of
many Ministers, exactly correspondeth with that of certain Priests and
Prophets in the Church of Israel. Micha. 3.11.
The Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof Divine for money; yet
they will lean upon the LORD and say, Is not the LORD among us? no evil shall
come upon us. For these Non-conformists, as they are the movers of this
faction, and violation of our peace, raise to themselves (as far as I am able
to conceive, and I think all wise men of this Land concur with me herein,)
an underhand maintenance by private Benevolences of seduced friends, after this
manner by certain gradations of Art and policy.

1 First, they insinuate into the peoples hearts, a sly opinion which must not
be contradicted, to wit, that many things are amiss in our Church government;
which only Gods faithful servants enlightened with His Spirit, have found out,
discovered, and made known to the world; and because they cannot obtain a
reformation, as the pious zeal of their hearts desires, they are forced to
groan under the heavy burden of Antichristian servitude. Now the Mobile
Vulgus hearing these deplorable complaints uttered with the gravity of well
composed countenances, and expressed in an accent of sensible lamentation, by
such men who are spiritually gifted and qualified for prayer and other holy
offices: presently they are so soft and flexible to receive any impression;
that they even of their own accord, without any further motives, hasten to
this conclusion of their own wise making, Surely these are good men, and by
their prayers and Ministry doubtless salvation is brought unto them, and all
other blessings upon their families. And if these good Christians, the
entertainers of these holy men, shall take some liberty to themselves to love
the world and worldly things under the names of frugality, good husbandry, and
provident circumspection in all their affairs; and also shall now and then
stretch their consciences for the enlargement of their temporal estate,
whereby they are made capable of dignities and precedencies in the
Commonwealth: yet for all this, they know their zeal is pleasing unto the
LORD their good GOD, Because their houses and their bowels are open, and not
straightened against His Saints. For our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST has
assured them, Matthew. 10.41.
He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward; and he that receives a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive a righteous man's reward. And thus the common people to
countenance an artificial vantie masked with sincerity, are willing and
forward to delude their own souls.

2 Having thus laid their groundwork, by traducing the Church Government, with
intimation of their own piety, in that they cannot apply themselves to submit
to the practice of it: then they raise the goodly structure of their Babylonian
Tower, and effectuate thereby their designed projects; for then they are
presently admitted into Christian families among the richer sort of people; who
out of a spiritual ambition, which their wealth has begotten in them, are
strongly addicted to please themselves, and to be voyced abroad for religious
persons in giving entertainment to godly Ministers. Hence grows a familiarity
in the LORD between these Ministers and their kind friends: so that after
supper, wherein the blessings of GOD have been plentifully received by eating
of the fat, and drinking of the sweet; they go to a solemn prayer and
thankesgiving for the blessings they have presently received. But in this
Prayer, the King, the Queen, and the regal offspring are very rarely, or to
speak more home to their practice, are never mentioned: though thereby,
through their omission of so gracious a duty, they contemn and violate an
express precept of the new Testament: 1 Timothy 2.1.2.
I exhort that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions and giving of
thanks be made for all men; for Kings and for all that are in authority, that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And under
a tyrannical State by conquest and severity of usage, GOD's people are
commanded: Ier. 29.7.
Seek the peace of the City, whither I have caused you to be carried away
captives, and pray unto the LORD for it, for in the peace thereof ye shall have
peace. If this be the revealed will of the LORD, that neither tyranny,
captivity, vassallage, or oppression, ought to interrupt the gracious and
charitable current of our devotions to GOD; but that we are expressly commanded
by our LORD and SAVIOR: Love your enemies, Matthew. 5.44.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which desitefully use you, and persecute you: What can these Ministers think of
themselves, who living under the peaceful Regiment of a pious Prince,
graciously affected to advance the glory of our LORD, in propagating the luster
and power of his sacred Gospel: but that they themselves are lively described
by the ancient Pagans? For Diogenes could say of the flatterer, Diogenes.
(...). Speeches uttered to the pleasing of men, are an hunnied halter, where
with by adulation the flatterer strangleth his flattred friend. And another
Philosopher says of such, (...). It is better to fall among Ravens, than among
flatterers, for those devour only carcases, these eat up living men. For in
the prayers which these Non-conformed Ministers do make, they never fail to
mention their own friends and good benefactours: But zealous raptures are cast
up to heaven, craving of the LORD in His love and mercy Job 29.4.
That He would shine upon their Tabernacles: and power out Rivers of Oil and
Butter upon them. And though this kind of Ministers have no better abilities,
than other men have in prayer and spiritual devotions, who dare not for fear
of dishonouring GOD, and defiling their own consciences with hypocrisy and
adulation, intrude and creep into their neighbors houses, to eat up their
family provision, and to lighten their purses: yet by this their fawning upon
good Christian people, they knit up the knot of firm binding and religious
familiarity. And these Ministers grow hereby in the houses of strangers to
exercise masterly authority over the children and servants: And happy is the
master, but especially the mistress when she sees it so. And unless these
men far remote in place of Habitation from them, will deigne many times in
the year to ride twenty, thirty, forty miles to come and visit their
friends newly found, and preach unto them, and pray with them. These vain,
ignorant, and selfe-pleasing Laickes, think themselves scarce blessed of GOD,
by the neglect of their Pious, and their new friends spiritually qualified with
fervor of devotion.

3 These Ministers make their friends to know, that they could be content for
their sakes and to do them spiritual good, to enter upon a Lecture, and preach
unto them; but for Pastoral charge clogged with Incumbencie and residence,
which may hinder their vagaries, and restrain them from traveling to visit
their profitable friends, whereby they are in danger to lose their
acquaintance, and abridge the liberal benevolences of their good Benefactors:
and which may also tie their strict and reserved consciences to perform all
ministerial acts, furnished out with Romish Ceremonies, as they term them: o
this their tender hearts and queasie stomachs cannot endure: even as the Fox
in the Fable cares not for grapes, because they hang out of his reach. For if
many excellent men of worth and parts, living in the Universities, the
Fountains of Divine and Human literature, are rarely called forth for their
merit, to enjoy and execute Spiritual Livings abroad in the country, but are
suffered to their grief Consenescere in studiis, to wax old, and spend the
strength of their days in their private studies; unless they will travel
abroad, make a noise in the world, and comply with the Gentry by servile
adulation: What may we think of these seeming Saints, who are of the meanest
gifts for the most part in our kingdom? Surely unless these men work by
policy, fawn, flatter, apply to their good friends and spiritual Zelots:
they are like many times to go to their beds after light suppers. And although
they have often read; yet they have not learned the contentation of the holy
Apostle, ^hil. 4.12.
I can be full, and I can be hungry. For of all things in this world, hunger
and fasting least consorts with these men's dispositions; who are present at,
and partakers of more good feasts and plentiful feedings, than any kind of
men in this Land besides. And how many of them, I wonder can say with blessed
Paul, Act. 20.33.
I have coveted no man's gold, nor silver, nor apparel. And further to the
never dying memory of his hearts integrity, 2 Cor. 4.4.
We have renounced the hidden things of dishonestie, not Walking in
craftiness, not handling the Word of GOD deceitfully, but by manifestation of
Truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of GOD. And
he leaves not there, but unto all people, with whom he had familiarly
conversed, and by plantation of Churches among them, had begot their souls to
GOD, he gives testimony of the soundness of his own heart free from the
close vice of fraudulent adulation, saying, 1 These. 2.5.
Neither at any time used we flattering words as a cloak of covetousness.
GOD is witness. And to set forth the true object of all his aims, and
travels, he tells his spiritual sons, 2 Cor. 12.14.
I seek not yours, but you. In the practice of these rules I suppose, and that
without error of judgment, or breach of charity, the conscience of the
sincerest Non-conformed Minister in this Kingdom, is not able to justify
himself, nor to say from an upright and sound heart, 1 Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self. And if the rich Gentry, and other wealthy persons
in this Kingdom, will please to make proof hereof, let them restrain for a
year their familiarities and bounties from this craving, or having generation;
and thereby this matter will grow out to an experienced issue; and then this
new suspicion, will demonstrate it self, either for an invented accusation, or
a true and real affirmation.

46 Yet touching the hearts and consciences of these men in their pleasing and
profitabse courses; I will not take upon me to judge, or censure, or so much as
to deliver my opinion what I think: but because it is the Royal Prerogative
of God, as to be the Lord and Creator, so also to be the searcher, and the
censurer of their hearts; I will leave them in his Divine hand of Sovereign
power to know them exactly and to judge them justly. Only this I will say on
the behalf of this Church and Kingdom, so lightly esteemed of these men and
their friends, for piety or sincerity, that this land, blessed be God
therefore, is plentifully stored with many Christian men (no Nation of the
Earth comparable for number or worth) richly furnished with the knowledge of
Gods will, with Piety, Virtue, and the true fear of God, and abundantly
accomplished with all good and profitable literature: not puffed up with the wind
of ambition, not addicted to concur with the stream and sway of the times,
as these men scornefully phrase it: but ballased with pure conscience for the
sound and true worship of God, and with desire to consecrate themselves to his
holy service: and these do not stumble at those Niceties, which these
Irregularians cast into the heads of lay people, nor under any pretense of
Idolatry or superstition in Ceremonies, divide themselves from the unity of
that gracious Church their Mother, in whose womb they were conceived, borne,
and Baptized. Whose persons, worths and abilities, being cast in equal
balance of comparison man for man with the adverse party: I easily conjecture,
and I know the adversaries themselves will readily yield it, will preponderate
the levity of these singular and self pleasing separatists. And though they
will plead for themselves, that not learning and worth, but Integrity of life
is that rule whereby we ought to judge of the gifts of saving grace in any kind
of men, according to those words of our Lord, Matthew. 11.25.
I thank thee o Father Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Yet if
these words of our Lord shall be applied to the matter we have now in hand,
and made a general and sacred Canon whereby to guide our judgments, in this
point, they will infer (...), a paradox most unseasonable, absurd, and more
then Brutish it self, to wit. That the Lord in his Wisdom or Justice, has
made a perpetual Divorce between learned knowledge and true Piety, and that
unlearned ignorance is the ready way to the attainment of his saving graces,
both of the true knowledge of his will and of sanctification by his Spirit.
Which position so wild and desperate, how far it differs from that Popish
Tenent that ignorance is the mother of devotion, let the Learned judge. But
where there is an equal portion (to say no more) of Piety toward God, of
integrity toward all men, in the hearts of Learned men, as well as of the
unlearned: To exclude the Learned from the found Iugment of divine truth, and
to appropriate the same to men of meaner qualities and abilities, is to invert
the order of divine wisdom and providence: then should the profane and
secular Learning of Moses, who was Learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, Act. 7.22.
and was mighty in words and deeds, have been a Bar and impeachment unto
him, from attaining the favor of GOD. Then should the learning of Paul, Act.
22.3.
who was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, a learned Doctor of the Law, have
prevented both his eternal election with GOD, his designation to the Gospel,
Act. 9.15.
and his Temporal vocation for plantation thereof. Then should the learned
knowledge and secular Arts of the holy Saints, Fathers in the Primitive Church,
Just in Martyr, Basil the great, Chrysostom, Hierom, Ambrose, Augustine, with
the rest of their venerable contemporaries and successors, have been a
hinderance and let to their true piety, wherewith the Church of GOD knows
right well their holy hearts were graciously and richly endowed. But every
vain toy and flattering delusion, wherewith this Sect of men are apt to please
themselves, and delight their friends, must not pass for current Truth in the
approbation of GOD's true Saints and servants, the Orthodoxe Church of CHRIST
here on earth.

47 Now for the reforming of these men's judgments and practice, though many
learned Treatises, and laborious Volumes have been judiciously written from
time to time: which might convince their understandings of error, and justly
check their consciences for their underhand practices, and Schismatic
courses: yet that Godly Reformation, which was and is desired, has not so
prosperously succeeded: Because, as far as my poor understanding is able to
conceive, the chief thing was, and is yet wanting, which might have effected
and established our peace; and that is, A legal provision of encouraging
maintenance for an able Ministry. For, as long as men of worth for quality, as
all Ministers ought to be, are forced to grapple with poverty, which begets
contempt of their persons, and disesteeme of their Ministry: So long the
nature of poverty, wherewith they are sensibly pinched, is ever active in
devising shifts to succor and to relieve it self. Now, what shifts can the
wit of any man living excogitate, whereby to releeve himself, which may carry
countenance of Piety and sincere dealing? But by insinuation to creep into the
favor and esteem of great men, and the richer sort who are able to succor
and support them: And by obsequious flattery to instill into their hearts an
ill opinion of the present Government under which we live; and to which
conceit, because it tends to Innovation, and singularity, most men's hearts are
prone and inclined; according to that of the Comaedian: Obsequium amicos,
veritas odium parit.

Now this obsequiousness, whereby friendship is prepared, must of necessity
deflect from the ways and rules of Truth, or it will never take hold and
politikely succeed. For, to apply it to the purpose we have now in hand: If
all the Nobility, Gentry, and Rich-men of England, were fully persuaded, both
in judgment and conscience; that the Discipline of our English Church is
exactly consonant with the Word of GOD, and needs neither subversion,
correction, or alteration, as both justly and judiciously they ought to be so
persuaded: Then any Minister of able gifts, in the knowledge of GOD's Word,
adorned with virtue and sanctity of life, would serve their turn, either for
their Parish Minister, or Family Chaplain without that solicitous distinction
of person, and person, for opinions sake in matter of Ceremony, which rules too
much in this divided Church. For where no variety or differences of opinion
have liberty to work upon men's understandings, consciences, and affections, by
reason of that general unity, which ought to be among us Churchmen, both in
judgment of our peaceable discipline, and uniformity of practice in our
submission thereunto: There every wise and charitable hearted Gentleman, must
needs be free from faction and part-taking; and thereby the peace of our Church
graciously composed. So that this Nonconformity in the first brochers thereof,
was but a trick of politic wit, by casting differences of opinion among Gods
people, to make way for themselves, to raise a party of private friendship, and
thereby to draw unto them, such competency of maintenance to their estates, and
credit to their persons, as might both releeve their poverty, and inhance their
spirits to a selfe-good opinion of their own inventions; by engrossing many
men's good opinions of their Piety, their virtue, their averseness from Popery.
And if all the policy of this wise, learned and religious Kingdom, shall
wrack and teynter it self, totally to suppress and supplant these courses;
it will never be able, in my poor opinion, to effect their just and righteous
designs, till a proportionable maintenance, setting Ministers free from a
servile dependence and engagement to their people, do sweetly invite and induce
them to obedience. For, as long as any sap or moisture of discontent, by
poverty remains in the root of Nonconformity, it will regerminate, bud-forth
again, and creep into corners; although the strong arm of Regal power and
sound Justice, guided by sanctified policy, suppress the raging flames, and
restrain the open walking thereof.

48 I have many times in my private meditations of these matters, admired how
it has come to pass, that those prudent and well-intended Laws, which were
in the Reign of King Henry the eight, first projected: And afterward, in the
reign of his religious and wise Son King Edward the sixth, more largely
extracted out of the Copies of the Canon Law, by 32. persons consisting of the
Honorable Nobility, Reverend Bishops, Learned Divines, Wise Civilians, and
Prudent Gentlemen; and were also confirmed Regio Diplomate, by Regal grant of
power from both those Kings; and wanting nothing but Promulgation, prevented by
the immature death of that holy, wise, and learned young Prince, King Edward
the 6. How these Laws, could never since that time obtain their intended
strength. For, had those Laws been established, either by Parlamentary
authority then; or since by the Royal Prerogative of any of our Kings and
Queens, from whom all authority, Jurisdiction and power, is derived into
Church and Commonwealth, I will make bold to deliver my opinion, and that is
this: There had not been, I suppose, at this day, Printed, 157^.
one Puritan, Non-conformed Minister in this Illustrious Church and Kingdom.
For, in those Laws there is provision made for convenient maintenance of
Ministers in all the Cities, great Towns and Corporations of England, which
are the Seminaries and principal places, where schism is bred and nourished,
conformable to the custom of the City of London, by a rate and taxa upon
their house and shops. In Titulo de Decimis, capite 14. the Law runs thus:
Magnam indignitatem habet a tenuibus and Laboriosis Agricolis, decimas annuas
Ecclesiarum ministris suppeditari; Mercatores autem opibus affluentes, and
viros Scientiarum, and artificiorum copiis abundantes, nihil ferme ad
ministrorum necessitates confer, praesertim cum illis ministrorum officio non
minus opus sit quam colonis. Quapropter, ut ex pari labor, par consequatur
merees, constituimus, ut Mercatores, pannorum confectores, and artifices
reliqui cujuscunque generis, ac omnes qui scientia, vel peritia, qualecunque
lucrum percipiunt, hoc modo decimas persolvant: Pro Domibus nimirum atque
terris quibus utuntur, and illarum ratione decimas praediales non solvunt,
quolibet anno dabunt annuae pensionis decimam partem.

It is a great indignity that poor and laborious country Farmers, do pay
their Tithes to the Ministers of their Churches: But that Merchants flowing in
riches, and men of Sciences and Trades, abounding with wealth, should impart in
a manner nothing to the necessities of their Ministers; especially since these
rich men stand in no less need of the Ministers labors, then the Country men
do. Wherefore, that from equal labor a like reward may accrue, we ordain,
that Merchants, Clothiers, and all other Artificers, of what kind soever, and
all others, who by any science or skill do gain profit to themselves, shall
pay Tithes after this manner: To wit, they shall pay the tenth part of yearly
pension, for their houses and grounds which they hold and use, and by reason
thereof pay no praediall Tithes. Thus far the Law Now for prevention of
cavil, which vvranglers are apt to foyst into all necessary offices, and in
this particular to say, that this Law was intended only for the City of London,
and is there in force and practice: The very front and Title of the Law it
self wipes away and dissolves this plea and objection, saying unto us:
Solvendas esse decimas personales juxta consuetudine^ Vrbis London. Tithes
personal are to be paid, according to the custom of the City of London. So
that the practice of that Imperial City is made the Line and Rule to all
other Cities, and great Towns of this Kingdom for payment of personal Tithes.
If this Law had been in force from the times of K. Edward the sixth (which is
now marked with a mark prefixed in the margin of all such statutes as are
either expired by time, reversed, or were never ratified, in the last
impression of our Common statutes at large) although the maintenance of
Ministers, by the profits of their Cures, had not amounted to any great value,
nor made their persons living in Cities and Corporations to abound with Riches:
yet it had preserved them from that Relation, Dependence and Subjection, under
the richer sort of Men, which (every where) in this Land they are constrained
to give: and by means thereof, Schism and breach of Unity, is fostered and
dilated. It had also preserved the purity of the Gospel from being corrupted
with that base flattery, and more than servile accommodation; which neither
beseemes the Majesty of GOD's Word, nor the integrity of so sacred a calling.
For riches, as all men see, and know, do raise up the hearts of men to high
thoughts, of some worth and excellency in themselves, and to swell, and look
big on their Inferiors, and to expect all reverence and observance from
them: So that if Ministers shall attempt by the power of GOD's Word to prick
this bladder; to take down the extuberancy, and to let out the swelling air
of pride and vainglory: They will be sure to cast frowns upon him, and by
curteling his means of liveli-hood, which are only arbitrary contributions,
no known or set rates, depending on the pleasure, by pleasing or displeasing
of their great Masters, they will make him feel whom he has offended. How is
it likely then, or indeed possible, that the dispensers of GOD's Word, should
either purely utter the mysteries of his Kingdom, or with undaunted courage,
maintain the honor of their Prince, and the equity of those just and
righteous Laws under which we live: If every high spirit inflate with his
riches, from whom their maintenance is raised, shall have power to crush them,
and trample them under foot. The want of set maintenance then for the Clergy,
by established legal rates in all Cities and Corporations in this Kingdom,
may justly be termed that Struma a disease called the Kings evil, and that
Morbus Regius that spreading and infecting jaundise, occasioning, or rather
causing disobedience to Sovereign Majesty, and is no way curable but by the
hand of royalty.

49. And here my zeal for GODS glory, the loyalty of my heart to my Prince,
and my desire of the Churches peace, calls upon me to tell these Non conformed
great ones, both of this town and county, and of this whole Kingdom in
general, who to please themselves do countenance this modern invention of
Non-subjection to lawful Authority, and thereby encourage poor Ministers to
disobey their Prince by resisting his laws: That it is a very great
presumption, and intoller^^le in a state of peaceable reg^^ent, for the
subjects to (...) a course of contra^ety (...) opposition to the Laws (...)
^^^sonall practice of the Prince himself, in matters conversant about the
exercise of Religion, and not of the essence and substance thereof. And though
confcience for obeying GODs Commands is pretended herein, yet that pretense
having been judiciously and religiously examined, and for the levity, and
indeed nullity thereof, refuted and rejected, not by strong hand of Authority
as is secretly whispered, but by invincible reasons of sacred Theology not
liable to contradiction: Then, for Lay-Gentlemen, who are neither versed in
these matters, nor interessed therein by any calling from GOD, to persist in
obstinacy of depraved opinions, and secretly to countenance, back, and
support others therein: How this can be free from a touch of secret Disloyalty
to the sacred Majesty of Regal power, let the wise and learned in our
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws, judge and determine. And though the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, hold their Lands and Revenewes for
support of their greatness, either by inheritance and succession from their
Ancestors, or by purchase of their own: yet since I am sure, they enjoy no
personal dignities, honors or powers, whereby they are ennobled in themselves;
but such as they received, either by the munificent bounty of the King
conferred upon them, or by the gift of former Princes to their Progenitors is
derived unto them; and because it is the splendor of honor, more then the
possession of riches, which attracteth reverence and love unto their persons,
and makes them potent in command: This should put them in mind, to look back
to the Fountain, from whence the eminency thereof has originally flowed unto
them: and also to moove them to direct the stream and current of their
Inferior power in a loiall and dutiful subordination, to run through the
same Channel, with the royal and superior power of their Prince, into all
the parts of our Church and Kingdom, for peaceable subjection to the equity of
his laws. For, since our Savior has told us, Mat. 12.25.
Every Kingdom divided against it self, shall be brought to desolation. How
ought the hearts of all Gods people of all Ranks and conditions, to be
affected with gracious fear, what may be the issue and event of this division
and schism, which like a Gangraine lately crept into the heart of the Church in
some of her ambitious and discontented Members, diffuseth daily the poison and
contagion thereof through all the sound parts of this Kingdom, and thereby
corrupts them and brings them to unsoundnesse. The Nature of schism is active,
and working, as all men see, and secretly seduceth the good and harmless
people of this land, by corrupt opinions, garnished over with the outside of
sanctity, to incline to its side, and to strengthen a party. And if the
infectious spreading thereof, be not maturely prevented by the vigilant care of
Princely power, governed by sanctified providence; or cured by wholesome
Anti-dotes of wise proceeding by legal courses in recovering them from danger,
and restoring them to their former soundness of regular obedience and
subjection. It is to be feared, the subverting Anarchy and confusion, mentioned
by Sophocles a Pagan, will break in upon us (...). In English thus:

There is no greater evil, then disobedience against Princely power; for this
subverts Cities, and lays waste the Families of men. And all men may see, that
can or will judiciously observe the course of things, that this sort of men
affecting disloyalty, by favoring Nonconformity, are a people who greatly
flatter and delude themselves in their erroneous ways, and mainly labor by
underhand practices of secret persuasions, to dilate and enlarge the
approbation of their own vanities. For, they extol, advance, and thereby
ensnare the hearts of credulous persons, by praising them for pious, virtuous,
holy, and good men, when once they perceive in them any inclination to adhere
to their faction: But for others, whom they discover to be averse from their
conceits, and to oppose their exorbitant fooleries, they traduce them with
obloquie, and load them with defamation; secretly whispering against them, that
they are dissolute, profane, boone-companions, utterly destitute of the power
of godliness. If any Gentleman in the Country, affect this fine toy of
irregularity, all his Tenants must run with him in the same Maze, and
Labyrinth of conceited nicities; or when their Leases expire, be pinched with
an oppressing Fine, which shall exact the blood and marrow of his former
acquired estate; or by the strong faith, and abundant charity of his good
Landlord, be cast out of his ancient tenement, not without reproachful
terms of dishonesty and profaneness. If rich Tradesmen in Cities and
Corporations, incline that way, then all mechanical and inferior Persons, who
have any relation to them, and dependence on them, must comply with them in
their vain opinions, or the stream of their favors will run another way.
So that poor men are often forced to increase the number of disloyal people
against their Prince and his peaceable regiment, or else endanger their
livelihood in displeasing those great ones, by whom they are set on work for
the earning of their maintenance and support of their Families. And though in
Cities and Corporations, the richer sort of men, are contentedly pleased for
their own advancement in dignities, precedencie of place, and credit to their
posterity: to make benefit to themselves of the Liberties, Privileges,
Graunts, Charters, Compositions, which ancient Kings of this Land, in their
Royal bounty have conferred on those places: yet, when they have obtained what
they ambitiously aspire after, they care nothing at all to make their souls
sensible of those duties of gracious obedience to their Sovereigne Liege Lord,
which those their dignities, do both Naturally and by the Justice of Humane
equity, require at their hands. Which, to speak in the fairest terms that I
am able, is an high degree of unmannerlinesse, and disloyal ingratitude. For,
I appeal to the judgment of every man in this Land, who is Master of his own
wits, whether it be fit for Subjects to enjoy such preferments, and personal
dignities as they eagerly thirst after; and the places of their abode, by
Offices, do confer upon them; and yet shall make no conscience of hearty
subjection to the Princely Majesty or their King, from whose Royal power, and
benign liberality those things are derived. Is it fit or reasonable, that
dignit^ and loyalty in the persons o^ Subjects should be divorcee^ each from
other, and not unite themselves in gracious and peaceable Harmony? Or, is it a
thing possible for such men to plead their loyalty, and pretend themselves to
be good subjects to their King, and yet countenance faction and disorder,
against the Tranquillity of his State and Royalty? Let other men think as they
please, and in the pride and insolency of their stubborn spirits, dispense
with their own Consciences, by wilfully affected ignorance and
selfe-adulation: I know, right-well, what GOD's Word requires at the hands of
all men, for the settled peace and unity of Christian Nations. And as I know
it, so I will roundly tell them: That he is neither good Christian to
Godward, nor good Subject to his Prince, that to please the peremptory
surlinesse of his own self-will, shall rent theunitie of a settled government,
and thereby divide a Kingdom into confusion and disorders.

50 And though these men, who both secretly with all their might, and openly as
far as they dare, oppose the worthy persons of Governors, and the integrity
of their proceedings; do inwardly fret and vex at their gracious designs,
because they control their ambitious aims, and towering aspires: yet all men
of wisdom know, that never shall the Royalty of the Prince be secured, nor
the state of the Kingdom once be established in peace and honor; till that
Paxitie of Ministers, which is so vehemently desired, be rejected with scorn,
and the Obtruders thereof taught more wisdom, and Better Manners, then to
disturb the Peace of a glorious Church, for the erecting of an Idol of their
own Imagination. For, if this matter should be ripped up from the original
foundation, and first stone of this building, attempted to be laid in this
Kingdom, by the policy of Master Cartwright and his adherents, suborned and
instigated thereunto, by some persons of power in their times, but now extinct
by death: What issue would our prudent meditations produce herein; but that the
LORD our GOD, highly displeased with so disordered a Platform of
Churchpolitie, as was by him projected and tendered, to Princely hands and view;
Blasted it with his wrath, in the first motions, springing, and infancy
thereof, by directing the heart of that late gracious Queen, ELIZABETH, a
Princess of holy memory, to discountenance and reject it. And since that time,
it never could attain the favor of that late Sacred, Wise, and Learned
Prince, KING JAMES, whose high Prudence, and profound Learning, better knew the
nature and operation of all Ingredients, which perfect Church Government, then
all the Puritanes of this Kingdom, of Amsterdam and New England could teach
him. And what was master Cartwright himself, that his words, worth, or
authority, should dissolve, subvert, and annihilate, a prudent, an honorable,
and long-setled Government? And in place thereof, substitute a Novell plot of
his own Invention, or drawn forth unto him by foreign Divines, living under
the practice of Aristocraticall, or Democraticall regiment, in their Civil
state; and no way accommodate to the luster and eminency of Monarchical power
and polity? Was he for Wisdom, Learning, Piety, so transcendent and
incomparable; that all the Piety, Wisdom and Learning in this Land, could not
parallel, match, or surmount him? Surely, they that shall discreetly, with
impartiality, indifferency, and uncorrupted judgments, read over the
polemicall writings of Doctor White-gift and him; shall perceive a plain, and
sensible difference, both in the spirits of the men themselves, and also in the
quality of their Writings. For, in Doctor Whitegift, there shines forth a sweet
moderation of Spirit, with weight of Arguments, and copy of Authorities,
couched in a clear, facile, and gentle style, no way tainted, or touched with
bitterness of spirit; but with gracious mildness, digesting all Reproaches
and Indignities cast forth against him: In Mr. Cartwright, a high, furious and
reproachful humor, venting his own authorities, depraving Scriptures for his
own purpose, stuffing his Margin with Quotations nothing pertinent to the
matter in hand; and using a Style so forced, with Scommes, Taunts, and salt
scurrilities against his Superiors in Authority, as a gracious heart would
loath to read them. And yet the Disciples of this choleric, proud, and
overweening spirit, desire to appropriate all sanctity, ingrosse all wisdom
and piety, and impale it within the verge and circumference of their own
In-conformity. But let them delude and flatter themselves in their Toyish
Imaginations as long as they will, and persist to affront Authority, in the
person of their Prince, and the command of his Laws: It is my hope and
confidence, (and I trust all good men concur with me therein:) That as the
Lord in mercy and holy love unto his Church among us, has given Pure Wisdom
to his Anointed Vicegerent, to discover these obliquities and Impostures; and
also Royal courage to attempt the reformation and suppression thereof: So, he
will also strengthen and uphold his Princely Arm in his proceedings therein,
till he have brought the same to a gracious and to a glorious perfection. And
then will this Church and Kingdom know, both in the general body thereof, and
also more specially in these Non-conformists theselves, both Ecclesiastical
and Secular, when their eyes are opened to behold their own errors; That they
have been long deteyned, and deluded in adoring vain fantasies, not worth the
regarding. And then they will also bless and magnify the LORD'S great
mercies, and return the Tribute of thankful and of loyal hearts to their
gracious Sovereigne, by whose pious care so laudable and glorious a work has
been prospered and achieved. For, though now, errors in their souls, do
dim, darken, and even blind the eye of their Judgments, and not suffer them
with the clear light of sanctified Reason to behold this wholesome and
profitable truth shine forth unto them: Namely, That Unity and Peace, between
the Prince and his People, and with all the People mutually among themselves,
are the true and proper glory of Earthly Kingdoms, typically figuring the
celestial Unity in blessedness and glory in the Triumphant Church of GOD: And
that Schism and Division of any people into variety of opinions and
affections, is the bane and subversion of the Tranquillity of a Church and
Nation, resembling the confusions and perturbations of satan's infernal
regiment: Then will they clearly see, to the infinite joy and comfort of their
own souls, that this disobedience to Royal Majesty, and prudent laws, for
things of indifferent nature, is no more but a selfe-pleasing fantafie, which
every good man, may very well spare, and yet remain a faithful son to GOD
his Father, a sound member of that particular Church wherein he was baptized,
and a loyal and obedient subject to the Majesty of that gracious Prince, in
whose Dition and Principality he first drew his native breath and being. And if
these men will but entertain that one rule of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS
CHRIST: Matthew. 11.28.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest for
your soul: And by this rule will strive to take down the height of their own
elate and haughty spirits, and humble themselves to submit to the wisdom of
their King and State; and to suspect their own wisdoms, as every wise man
ought to do; surely then, the things proposed unto them for obedience, and the
settling of uniformitie over the body of this Church and Kingdom; will shortly
be universally admitted, and pleasingly entertained. And when they have cast
away that prejudicate and troublesome opinion which they have of the persons of
the Bishops, who for their wisdom, piety, gravity, sincerity, deserve all due
respect of veneration to be given unto them: Then the blessed experience of
the manifold commodities which accompany peace and unity, will not only prove
an inward comfort to their souls; but will also make them to be greatly
offended with themselves for their obstinate contumacie against their lawful
Superiors: when they shall call to mind how long they have deprived themselves
of so great a blessing, as is Unity of Heart, Mind, and Judgment, by
dividing themselves from the obedience of their spiritual Mother, the Orthodox
and pure Church of GOD in this Kingdom. For in all humane matters (and these
of ceremonies are no other) all sound knowledge and judgment is attained by
experience; which though it be said to be the Mistress of fools, by showing
unto them, and imprinting on their hearts their manifold errors; yet she is no
foolish mistress, but the best informer and reformer of our understandings and
wills, by which it pleases GOD to reduce from wandering, His straying sheep,
and graciously confine them within His own fold: witness the wanton
Prodigal, who running riot from his father, and from the true principles of
knowledge in his own soul, never returned again to GOD, or to himself, till
sensible experience of his own vanity had pinched him, and made him (as the
Scriptures report) (...), Luke. 15.17.
to come home to himself by the gracious view of his errors, directed
thereunto by the Spirit of God. And these Non-conformists, whether Churchmen
or Laymen, they are no other but Wanton and Prodigal fugitives, and
Run-awayes, from their spiritual Father the LORD, who requires of us and them,
1 Pet. 2.14.
To submit our selves to every ordinance of men, for the LORD'S sake: And
fugitives also they are from their Politic Father the King, by rejecting his
Authority given him by GOD. And till some few gentle stripes with the Rod of
Princely power, prove unto them as the famine did to the Prodigal, open their
eyes, and give them sensible impression and experience of their sullen Pride
and Vanity; they will never return soundly to their GOD, to their Prince, to
themselves; but they will riotize in selfe-opinions and deluded imaginations,
to the hazard and endangering of their own souls, by incurring the wrath of
God. And for mine own part, I am persuaded, that if all the Non-conformed
Ministers in this Church, were divided into four equal parts, three of them
have never read any controversies of our Church Discipline; but perhaps some of
the railing Libels of Master Cartwright and his companions, a part by
themselves, which pass underhand from man to man amongst them; without the
learned Antidots of contrary writings to expel the malign poison and
infection thereof: But these men look only upon the practice of the times, and
seeing, that to incline to this faction, is a fair way of thriving, both in
reputation of credit with this sort of people, and also in means of livelihood
by private and underhand Benevolences, Gratuities, Contributions; they are
thereby enticed on to these disloyal and factious courses; which in multitudes
of Laypersons of several ranks and degrees is grown to a great height of
strength and power. And yet neither their multitudes, nor their power so great,
but that wise men may discover in them, that they are not persons of any
courage, to hold out opposition against Authority, to the incurring of danger,
either to their persons, or to their estates: which cowardice of Spirit in
persons, otherwise of so high, insolent, and daring spirits as they are;
plainly convinces the truth of the overruling hand of GOD'S power in all men's
hearts; and also pleads and acts in their own bosoms the Justice and
Equity of the Kings cause now taken in hand; by impressions of sensible fear,
making them to tremble at the mention of Humane Authority, as it is the
execution of divine power for Temporal government. For were their persons as
clear and innocent as they pretend, by ostentation of the uprightness of
their consciences in the cause of GOD; or their judgments right and sound, in
that they hold with dissent from their wise superiors; or their cause it
self, a matter of importance, wherein the Honor or Dishonor of GOD stands
Interessed and Engaged: surely then the LORD would fortify and add spiritual
vigor to their masculine and high spirits; and not suffer them to shrink
under the practice of Humane power, urged for their correction and amendment.
And let me further certify this irregular generation, that if their fancies
had been of GOD, and decreed for His fetled ordinance: It had not received such
a wound, as of late it has done by the hand of Princely power, which already
has made their building to nod and totter, and incline to subversion. For the
Argument of Gamaliel uttered by the present inspiration of GOD'S Spirit, is
invincible: Act. 5.39
Man's power cannot overthrow that which is of GOD: which impregnable and sacred
Truth I will demonstrate in this syllogisticall process.

Whatsoever is of GOD decreed for continuance and propagation, Major.
can neither be dissolved by Humane power, nor weakened and abated.

This Novell Toy of resisting authority, Minor.
is by Humane power weakened and abated, and draws on to dissolution.

Therefore it is not of GOD by ordinance for Propagation. Conclusio.


The whole force of this Argument so clear and conclusive, is drawn from the
practice of GOD Himself in the Primitive infancy of the Christian Church:
when the Roman Tyrants mighty in power and extention of authority over most
parts of the habitable earth, raged against the glory of our LORD JESUS CHRIST
in the luster of His Gospel, and vowed the extinction of His Name and memory:
but the more their fury increased and insulted over the poor sheep of CHRIST,
daily dragged unto slaughter by Martyrdom; the more they found to the check of
their infidel pride and immanity, that Sanguis Martyrum erat semen Ecclesiae,
The blood of Martyrs was the springing seed of the Church, both for the
increase of the number of professors, and dilatation of the glory and power of
our SAVIOR. If any shall reply unto me, that Humane power may for a time
suppress the outward growth and spreading of this disobedience to our King and
his Laws: yet for as much as they are godly forsooth, and do it for
conscience sake, their practice will still retain spiritual heat and vigorous
warmth in the root and secret heart thereof; and thereby sprout out again, and
declare it self to be of the LORD'S plantation. To these men I reply no more
but thus; That I wish all such persons to suspend their own rash and sinister
persuasions for a time, and to expect the event of the LORD'S will therein,
which in doubtful cases, is never known but by the sensible and apparent
manifestation thereof.

51 Now for this fiery fancy, and exquisite fascination of our Nonconformity,
I will freely and openly deliver my opinion thereof, and that is this: That
when she was in her greatest ruff and glory, decked with all the plumes of her
pride and best acceptance which ever she had in this Kingdom: I conceive of
her, that then, even then she was no more but meretrix cerussata, a whited,
painted, and artificially colored strumpet, exposing her self to her most
profitable wooers, and entertainers: But now that by time and age, she is
become Rugosa and cadaverosa, wrinckled and decayed, she goes on, I hope, to
her grave with infamy and dishonor. The reason of my opinion is this; I
suppose that if her stoutest champions, who have long with the secret increase
of their private estates supported her glory, could now come off fairly from
her, without detriment to their livelihood and eclipse of the brightness of
their former reputation for Piety and Sincerity: That then not one of them,
would either depart this Land, or endure to be silenced and restrained from
preaching: but being shut up in a strait, by reflecting on their own hearts,
and calling to mind, what high and transcendent praises they have in corners
given to this their fancy, the engine and instrument of all their delusions,
and the artificial and fine-wrought key, whereby they have opened the Closets
and Cabinets of their dear and private friends: if now they should shrink from
it, they overthrow for ever the reputation of their integrity. And therefore
having within their own bosoms, a troublesome conflict between their hearts,
puffed up with the remembrance of their late glory and dear esteem among
their friends; and their consciences now secretly prompting them, that the
grounds of their Schism, were things light, trivial, and of no moment: The
pride of their hearts, bears down with strong power, the plea of their
consciences, and makes them resolve rather to endure a silencing, with hope to
retain the underhand benevolences of their tender hearted friends, than to
supplant the pleasing contentments they have received to themselves, in
appropriating to themselves the words of GOD's Spirit, Prove. 12.26.
The righteous man is more excellent than his neighbor. But let such men call
to mind the judgments of GOD's wrath against that slothful person, Matt.
25.30.
Who wrapped up his Talent in a Napkin and hid it in the earth. For if Saint
Paul could say in the case of planting of Churches, 1 Cor. 9.16.
Necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. I
cannot yet understand, nor themselves neither, of any dispensation, or
relaxation that Ministers have in these days, to sit idle at home in vain
speculations, and to neglect the Watering of those Churches, and feeding of
those flocks, which by other men's labors have been prepared and made ready
to their Ministry. Yet this liberty to please themselves by voluntary or
imposed silence, and the Justice and Aequitie thereof on their parts in
submitting to so sharp a censure, is still by them constantly assevered. And
thereby they strive to uphold the good conceits which their friends have of the
purity of their consciences, and of the Iniquity, Idolatry, and Profaneness
of those Antichristian Ceremonies which are urged against them, for better
terms or Titles, they know right well, they never afford them. And this is the
true cause why I was so bold and plain with them, as to term their practice
of Nonconformity, by the odious name of a Painted Strumpet: because a learned
Philosopher describing the Arts and subtilties of such wanton and unclean
persons, says of them; (...). As Strumpets wish all sorts of happiness may
befail their lovers, except understanding and wisdom (to discover their own
wickedness) so do flatterers wish unto all those persons with whom they
converse and are entertained. And even so this sect of men, wish to their
profitable friends, all other kinds of happiness, riches, honors, dignities,
affluence of all worldly contents answerable to the desires of their own
hearts: But that their understandings should be enlightened to discover their
own former errors, and to find out the frauds and alluring enticements
wherewith they use to ensnare them, and tie them fast to themselves: This part
of divine wisdom they never wish unto them, but mainely labor to hold them
back from attaining thereunto; for if once this bright ray and beam of divine
truth glance into their souls, and be received by them with pause,
deliberation, and more prudent inspection into their former courses, than
formerly they have used; then these men know right well Actum est de illis,
their Acts are discovered, and their Play is exploded. For now silencing from
the execution of so sacred a vocation, is become in this age for temporal
emoluments, far more profitable to this kind of men, than the godly labors
of religious Ministers in the constant employment of their talents proves unto
them: So miserably are Gods people led blindfolded into spiritual captivity.
But if the bosoms of these men were transparent, and the close-wrought veyle
wherein all their policies are enwrapped, were Translucent, and thereby their
sleights exposed to the view of all men, I make no question but that the
leprosy of corruption would be sensibly discovered to have maculated their
hearts and consciences. For it is not possible that Gods Spirit should err in
describing the Acts and Qualities of seducers: I beseech you Brethren, mark
them which cause divisions among you, and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
that ye have learned, and avoid them: for they that are such serve not the
LORD JESUS, but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple. And these men in Saint Paul's time in the Church of
Rome, were reputed as sincere, up right, holy, and spiritually qualified with
gifts of divine grace, as are our Non-conformists in the Church of England. And
certainly unless this work of the Kings most excellent Majesty, and his
pious and prudent Bishops were directed by GOD Himself in their hearts, it
could never have received so great approbation in the hearts of most men, and
they wise, religious, and virtuous, as of late it has done in this Land: for
not only many thousands, who had a kind of charitable opinion of these men,
though they did not familiarly converse with them, entertain them in their
houses, or comply with them in their co^ceits; begin now much to distaste them,
and greatly desire the suppression of them: But which is more, even their own
friends also, who were wholly theirs, begin to faint in their courage, and in
some degrees to distaste those courses, if they could handsomely shake them
off, and yet preserve the reputation of their former zeal. For this is the
maine block, which most of them stumble at; namely, Not fear of dishonouring
GOD, nor hurting the purity of their own consciences, if they should shake
hands, and bid farewell to their niceties and follies: But how to keep up
their credits in the hearts of those men, who being honest, virtuous, and
worthy of good respect, they have much vilified and dis-esteemed in matters of
religion, in comparison with themselves. But this is a needless and
superfluous care; for I am of opinion that all honest hearted Christians, both
Ministers and Lay People, who zealously desire the peace and flourish of our
Church and Kingdom, will readily give them the righthand of unfeigned
fellowship, receive them into their bosoms with alacrity and joy for their
return to the obedience of their spiritual Mother the Church, and never twit,
nor upbraid them with their former toyish errors. And here let me put you my
Brethren of Shrewsbury in mind, which you ought to take in good part, and
thankfully at my hands, from the sense and experience thereof in your own
bosoms: That I have observed in diverse of your persons, that your zeal and
fervor in your once approved cause, does begin to slake and remit of those
intensive degree; which it formerly had in you: So that there is nothing
wanting unto you, but the application and pressing of authority unto your
wavering minds, which are easily taken off from your former course. And I am
persuaded upon very pregnant grounds, that there are of you who begin to
smell out, either the fraud, or Art, or what other term is apt for that fine
piece of policy, wherein you have been long enwrapped by error of your
judgments, to your cost and expenses: And which has made many Gentlemen of
this Kingdom to say in the words of our LORD, though in a contrary sense: Zelus
Domus tuae exedit me, Ioh. 2.17.
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. And many of your well-willers, as
your selves know very well, being but half brothers and percell gilt, are
content to sooth and flatter you in your opinions, but they will look well
enough to their purses, and have care of the maine; as though they had learned
that axiom in Philosophy, Noli perdere substantiam propter accidens, Destroy
not thy substance for an accident: to wit, a Toy. My hope is therefore, (...)
with GOD, that our Prudent Governor lately placed over us, Bishop Wright.
in whose Person, wisdom and courage conjoined with gracious Affability and
mildness of spirit do strive for precedencie; will execute that Authority
wherewith the sacred Majesty of our King has entrusted him; and by correcting
your insolences, which are nothing else but selfe-pleasing vanities, and the
proper effects of pride and weakness of judgment, will reduce you to
obedience of righteous Laws, and keep you in order: for until the rod of
power and discipline be imposed gently for your correction; your affections
will stray from that regularity of obedience, which Gods sacred Word, and the
obligation of your own consciences, borne under the Law of natural alleagiance
to the Majesty of your Prince, require at your hands. For it is an ancient and
profitable saying, and which holy David found true in spiritual matters: Psalm.
119.67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I have kept thy Commandments:
(...) Corrections whether Divine or Humane, do instruct the children of GOD,
which I hope you are, to wiser and more obedient intentions and actions.

52 And here I am forced much against my will, to Apologize for mine own
integrity and innocence in a particular matter, which lately fell out among
us, in which I have been by many of this factious Brotherhood most impudently
abused. The matter would be very long to relate it with all circumstances
incident thereunto: take it therefore thus, with all the brevity I am able. The
most Reverend Father in God, the L. Bishop of our Diocese, preached a Sermon
in our Town upon Sunday the 8. day of Sept. last past, two days before his
Visitation. He took for his Theme or Text the words of the Apostle, Fear GOD,
and honor the King. 1 Pet. 2.17.
This portion of Scripture he made choice of, as being most fit and apt for the
place where it was delivered: because of the pronenesse of many of our people
to disloyalty, by factious schism, and disobedience to our Churches Laws.
Upon this Text he discoursed with soundness of learning, gravity of speech,
and gracious charity, endeavoring rather to win our people, by mildness of
Christian love, than by force of his own Authority, and execution of coercive
power to constrain them to obedience, by casting off their singularity of
opinions, and irregular follies. Upon the next Friday following, a country
Minister sixteen miles from Shrewsbury, who had appeared on Tuesday at the
Visitation, and was detained among his friends, as he calls them, was
requested to bestow a Sermon among them. This man being wholly ignorant of the
L. Bishops Text, whereon he had discoursed the Sunday before; chose for his
subject, the words of our Lord, Mat. 10.28. fear not them which kill the body,
etc. These words bearing no contrariety with the Bishops Theme, because GOD's
sacred Word has no repugnancie, or contradiction in it; He handled with such
boldness of courage, freedom of speech, and pressing persuasions to
constancy in the faith; as if the suppressing of Nonconformity now graciously
intended by the Royal wisdom of our King, and the zealous endeavors of our
Superior Clergy, could not take effect in this Illustrious Church, without
derogation to the glory of our LORD and SAVIOR, and the impeachment of the
free passage of our blessed Gospel. This Sermon was generally disliked, rather
for the manner of uttering it, than for any erroneous doctrine therein
delivered: for excepting only the light brotherhood of Nonconformity, and
their fautours and abettors, who applaud every thing concurrent with their
fancies and humors: All the wiser sort of the Congregation, who heard their
Lord Bishops Sermon on Sunday before, judged him a very bold spirited man, in
laboring to possess the hearts of the people secretly, with a fear of popery
returning upon this Kingdom. The rumor of this Sermon being quick in all
men's mouths, and the subject of most men's discourse, came to me by report of
persons wise, learned, and credible. Among many who disliked it, a learned
Gentleman, a Minister of GOD's Word, and Fellow of Queens College in
Cambridge, told me it was A most factious Sermon, mainely opposing the
Government of our Church, and such as deserved to be severely censured: Which
censure, our most Reverend Diocesan according to his wisdom and authority has
already inflicted. Upon the Sunday following, being the fifteenth day of the
same month, after the reading of the second Lesson, I read forth of a paper
certain Injunctions given me in charge to be published, concerning the
Adorning of our Church in sundry particulars, and the observation of the Kings
Majesty's express command touching Preachers: When I came to that Article
concerning the duties of Ministers, I told that great Congregation that I had
been credibly informed that a very factious Sermon had been preached on
Friday before in the hearing of them: And I told them also; that these courses
which many of them fostered in their bosoms with pleasing contentment, would
shortly come to be better looked into, and the connivence which they had
formerly long enjoyed, would by more care of prudent vigilance, be forthwith
corrected. Upon these words of mine, some false-hearted fellow of that proud
and lying generation sends word by writing, or message to this Preacher, into
the country, that Mr. Studley had charged him with preaching false doctrine.
The Minister being netled with this report, with all have repaires to our
Town: where he and many of his schismatical friends and good Benefactours,
draw forth a certificate in writing, subscribed with many hands, in
confirmation of a most lewd and false report: and he being strengthened,
Brachio carnali, omits the duty of a man trucly fearing GOD: for in all haste
he posts to the Lord Bishop, and preferred his clamorous writing, but never
vouchsafed to confer with me, who could have resolved him the truth, pacified
his rage, and prevented an inconvenience which afterward fell upon him. And
here I must for the clearing of mine own name, traduced for a persecutour in
opposing the cause of Nonconformity, infert a letter of a sharp contents
written by me to the said Preacher, expostulating with him the injustice and
wrongs I have received from him.

53 Mr. F. my love remembered unto you, as unknown unto me: I understand that
you have preferred a Petition or Certificate to the most Reverend Father in GOD
the Lord Bishop of our Diocese, against me: wherein assuredly the fury of your
will overran the gravity of your wit. In that your inconsiderate Petition, you
accuse me most falsely, to have traduced you for preaching false doctrine to our
people. But by such intemperate boldness of writing, you have showed neither
wisdom, nor honesty, nor charity. Not wisdom, in taking on trust, without
examination, a report so weighty: Not honesty, in your contempt of my person,
whom you ought of duty to have privately consulted, not charity, which is never
suspicious of evil, before it be convinced by evidence of fact. But he that
expects from Sectaries and Schismatikes, any of these virtues, will fall short
of his expectation. For your opposing of me, and my actions, know you Sir, I
regard not such lightheaded and furious companions. I have made your betters
desist from contending with me, and may hap so to do with you, if you persist
in your folly. My integrity in my place, I praise GOD for it, was well known
many years, before your heady and rash youth by Nonconformity and flatteries
crept in among us. But you, and such as you are, have by your Pharisaicall and
sly infinuations into the hearts of ignorant and unstablished people, rent in
pieces the unity of a famous Town, and exposed our people to faction and
dissension. The words I uttered against your Sermon, not your person (for I
named you not) were these, and only these, I was informed that you had preached
a very factious Sermon; And he, who gave other report of my words, was an
egregious Knave; so tell him from me, you have it under my hand: For both your
Text, and the clamorous vehemency of your iterations and repetitions confirm
this report. Your behavior therein was very sly and cunning, and full of
reservednesse; yet not so covered with Art and subtilty, but that your more
judicious Auditors discovered, that the aim and level of your intentions,
was to insinuate into the hearts of our people, a perplexing fear that the
wild Boar of Rome was ready to make a violent Incursion into our Church and
State; and by her Idolatries and superstitions eradicate the sacred purity of
our Gospel implanted among us. Hence grow' your important pressings and
persuasions to constancy in the Faith, even to death by Apology and
Martyrdom: wherein some of your own friends have wished, that the salt of
discretion and prudent moderation, had allayed your violence, and seasoned your
thoughts to a better conceit of that gracious Prince and Government, under
which we live in peace and spiritual liberty. The name of Puritan, you told
them, was a royal badge, and and thereby you intended to confirm depraved
judgments in error and contumacie against Authority, and that wholesome
reformation, that is now aimed at. Surely these intemperat flashes issuing from
your unbridled spirit, and uttered in such a time when reformation of Schism,
not change of our Orthodox faith is intended; do plainly convince you in the
judgment of wise men, to be a man of a disloyal heart, and unquiet head. Your
bold intrusion into other men's charge, being neither warranted by the Laws of
GOD or man, can receive no blessing from GOD. For what inducement have you to
vent your wares among us, who neither desire your aid, nor need your help. Keep
at home, I advise you, and labor in that place of charge where the LORD has
disposed of you; that shall bring more comfort to your conscience, more peace
to your calling, more credit to your person. Your Sect is very forward in
running uncalled, and thrusting your selves upon people unknown unto you, and
should for ever rest unknown, were it not, that as the Apostle tells us, Jude
16. You have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage. Certainly GOD's
Spirit has given a most clear and exact description of all such wily and
seducing spirits, Romans 16.17, 18. It is the work of GOD's mercy and love unto
his Church, in laying open the spiritual sleights (I dare not say impostures)
wherewith your Sect has so long deluded the people, and by the wisdom and
authority of our King and State to correct and reform them. Your opposition to
the Authority of our Lord Bishop was so peremptory and insolent by your pride
and contempt of your Superiors, as is not to be endured in a peaceable
Government. For you were in place, both in the Church, when his Lordship gave
his charge, and also in the Chamber at the sign of the red Lion in our Town,
and heard his Lordship make known to us of the Clergy his Majesty's Royal
care, and his gracious intentions he had entertained in his heart, both to
countenance and to advance the welfare of his Ministers: But first he would be
assured of their ready subjection to his just and royal commands. Yet within
three days after this charge sounded in your ears, you most contemptuously
violated his Majesty's Injunctions, and being not admitted into Saint Alkmunds
Church to vent your schismatic conceits, you put your self into an exempt
and peculiar Jurisdiction, and there you were as safe, in your opinion, as
policy could make you. Assuredly Mr. F. these factious courses are
unsanctified by GOD, and the issue and event of them, being done in public
affront to the sacred authority and command of your Prince, the LORD's
anointed; will prove dangerous, if not desperate unto you; for the strong arm
of Justice, will crush thousands of such poor worms as we are. I my self
have known within these twenty years last past. Plus minus, many men of
excellent wits, great and piercing understandings, prompt and eloquent in their
deliveries, of illustrious note and rank in the Commonwealth: yet by opposing
the designs and commands of Royal Majesty have ruined their estates and
fatally ended their days in ignominy and misery. For the eminency of Princes
being by Substitution and Vicegerencie from GOD, the lively Image of Divine
Majesty for temporal regiment; is by GOD's ordinance, made so sacred and
inviolable, both from the intemperate rage of our tongues, and the rancour of
our naturally seditious, and rebellious hearts: That never any man, obliged to
loyalty, made head against them either openly or secretly, but the Angel of
the LORD's wrath pursued him to shame and destruction. For it is decreed by the
wisdom of GOD, and shall never be reversed, Ezra 7.26. Whosoever will not obey
the Law of GOD and the King, let judgment speedily be executed upon him,
whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or unto confiscation of goods, or
to imprisonment. For your person Mr. F. I protest before GOD the searcher of
all hearts, I wish no otherwise, than to my own soul: But I only aim at the
peace of our Town, which will never be effected, till you, and such as you be
restrained from preaching, and enkindling faction among us. Thus I have
imparted my mind unto you, and for the censure of both our persons, I refer it
to the wisdom and justice of his Lordship, our most Reverend Diocesan: who I
doubt not will correct your insolences, and keep you in order. A copy of this
Letter, I have sent to my L. Bishop to demonstrate how ingenuously I have dealt
with you. GOD bless you and sent you much happiness.

54 This is that Letter Verbatim, without addition, detraction, or mutation of
one syllable, against which such tragical outcries have been raised, by
^icentious detractors of the good names of their neighbors. But my comfort is,
that I fear no man's tongue, or malice in the world, as long as mine own
conscience checkes me not for any wilful violation of my duty to GOD, and to
my Prince; nor act of unrighteousness done to the person of my neighbor. And
when this generation of men, who take too much ungodly liberty unto
themselves, to suspect evil of their neighbors, and upon that susspition, to
raise lying defamations against persons truly religious and virtuous, shall
govern their tongues and hearts with more holy fear of GOD, and gracious
charity toward their peaceable co-habitants: I doubt not, but that the LORD in
mercy and love to our Church and Kingdom, will unite our hearts in the firm
bond of pure religion, and not suffer us to be torn into factions, by dislike
of innocent and harmless Ceremonies. And for the wrongs which they very
foolishly Imagine to have been done to this their Minister, by my Persecuting
him, as they most wickedly phrase it: I refer my self to my hottest and
sharpest adversaries (whose tongues fly at randon without grace, wit, or
honesty to restrain them) to examine, censure, and determine from this
relation, whether I have been Active in doing, or passive in suffering wrongs.
And from the sight of their own error, or rather malicious railing and
traducing of my innocence herein; let them learn to use more Christian
moderation, in reporting of things unknown unto them: And to practice those
gracious virtues of integrity of heart, and truth of speech, which will more
adorn their conversation, and render them more pleasing unto GOD and man, than
all their forward profession of fiery zeal in erroneous devotion. Many good
things in the exercise of family discipline, As Prayers, Instruction of their
children and servants, Singing of Psalms, and such like, I do freely
acknowledge to be in some of these men: But as Solomon speaks of a wise man,
Eccle. 10.1. That a little folly brings disgrace to him that is in reputation
for wisdom: so I say unto these men, That a little dishonestie or injustice
toward their neighbors, which piety and the true fear of GOD should
extinguish in them, does obscure the luster of a glorious profession, and makes
them most justly to be suspected to be but mere Formalists.

Thus having cast my Mite into the Treasury of GOD's Church, by desiring the
holy and blessed peace of our Sion: I will add my continual prayers
thereunto, that our hearts may be firmly knit together in unity and love.

FINIS.

