GODLY Meditations upon the most holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. With
many things apperteininge to the high Reverence of so great a Mystery. In
the end.

De Eucharistia controuersia, admonitio breuis.

LONDON Printed by I. W. and are to be sold at the Exchange by Cuthbert Burby.
1601.

To the virtuous and modest Gentlewoman Mistress ELIZABETH SOVTHWELL, one of the
Maids of Honor attending upon the Queens Majesty.
THat desire you have to serve GOD, in holiness of life, and very towardly
disposition even from tender years so appliable to virtue and learning,
(wherein you may wax old by the grace of God,) have often moved me, to
beseech him, who has began this good in you, to continue the same, even unto
an aged, and happy end. For assuredly our religious duty, and respective
devotion to God, is worth all the worlds dignity beside, nay without this,
all the dignity of this world is nothing worth. Is not god^inesse the flower
of all our actions? Yes verily. Do but try me (says the Lord) if I will not
pour out a blessing? Malach 3.10. has he not said, I will honor them that
honor me. 1. Sam. 2.30. Et diligentes me diligo, and I love them that love me,
Prou. 8.17?

To exercise your deuotionate duty to God, so often, (and therefore often) as
you prepare your self unto the Blessed Sacrament (that high mystery of
humane salvation) I commend unto you, the Meditations hereafter following:
which Meditations, in part gathered out of the ancient Fathers, and some late
reverend writers of this age, as Luc. Penel. and others translated, augmented,
and brought to a method, I offer withal (as a testimony of my duetiefull
regard toward you) unto your sober and gentle pa^ronage, wherein, what is
performed you may happily by obseruinge find. The occasion first moving me
to gather somewhat tending to devotion upon this subject, I mean the use of
the most holy Sacrament was the necessity I found, of some good means, to
stir v^ at times beseminge men's best, and best disposed considerations,
toward the high mystery they had in hand. With discourse of controversy
now a long time, no less learned, then large writing, we have had in our
English tongue* but all this while, we have not much extant appertayning to the
substance of the mystery it self, and our Christian devotion toward the
some.

In the old Law the Levites must first be sanctified, and then they sanctify
the people, the priests prepare themselves. and others: but unto this passover
every one with all prepares himself, for that every one has a soul to save.

God says unto the people of Israel* when your children shall say unto you.
Quae est ista religio, Exodus 12.16. What means this religion o^ what is this
so^empne observation we keep? you shall s^y unto them, this is the Lords
passe-ouer etc. which, as it had a memorial of a great deliverance past, so
was it a most lively type and figure of the true passe-ouer that was to come,
wherein the blood of that most innocent Lamb of God, that took away the
sins of the world, was in love, shed, for the redemption of us all. And
therefore, of all in general may that of Ezechiath, 2. Cron. 30. be well
inferred. The Lord be merciful unto them, that prepare themselves heereunto
etc. And to your self (most virtuous gentlewom^n) I may more properly apply
the same in particular, the Lord evermore be merciful unto you, in preparing
your whole heart to keep this Passe-ouer, unto the Lord your God, who, of his
infinite mercy, grant you a prosperous course of life, for the time present,
and for the time to come, I se everlasting.

Yours in all humble manner Christopher Sutton

A preface to the Christian Reader.
IN perusinge the controversies of these times (good Christian Reader) with a
mind desirous afterward to satisfy the honest Christian, in some questions,
(wherein without question, we are mistaken, and are not according to right,
rightlye understood) in perusinge these controversies, I say (to speak a
plain truth as in the sight of God) I found them ^n both sides so full of
inuectiue discourses, as I was then sorry to read, and am now loath to
mention. But amongst other enteringe into the controversy of the holy
Sacrament, me thought I was entered into a tempestuous Sea of all contention,
for there I saw most unnatural bitterness amongst Christians, scismes in
the church, factions in common wealths, all tossinge, and turmoyling about
this sacred mystery, as is wonderful to consider.

2 I began at first to admire the patience of God, to see this heavenly
league of humane salvation, least unto the world, by him who did redeem the
world, as a seal of mercy, as a pledge of peace and love beetweene God, and
man, to beecome by the contentious humors of many a very subject for all
dissension.

3 At the behouldinge hereof, might not the prophet Jeremy wish, (did he
live) That he had water enough, and that his head were even a fountain of
tears Jeremy: 9: 1? Did the son of God institute this most divine ordinance
to exercise our ouerrunning fant^si^s, an^ not rather to nourish, and grace our
redeemed ^oules?

4 In that allmighty God put emnitie beetweene the seed of the woman and the
seed of the serpent* we may gather, that as the seed of the woman should be
at ^^nitie with the seed of the serpent, so should it be at unity with it
self. We have enemies enough abroad in the world, though Christians be not
at variance with in themselves, and that which is most to be lamented, about
some principal^ points of their Christian profession. But of all other, this
sacred institution of Christ our Savior should be fardest off from the
contentious humore of any, upon pain and peril of beeinge a worthy receiver
of this so holy a mystery any more, and of true obedience to the author
thereof, who left this his ordinance not to raise matter of contention, but
to continue a ioifull remembrance of his love in sufferinge and dieinge for the
sins of the world until his second appearance or coming again in glory.

There is a far better, and safer course then to contend any longer, if men
would at last set them selves on all parts to follow it, which is, to
reverence the son of God in the unsearchable mysteries of his wisdom which
are past finding out; and not to stand weigheinge them in the light scales and
balance of their own reason, to draw a veil over them, or say with the
woman of Samaria Puteus est altus: this well is deep

5 When we have done striuinge, and even wearied our selves in a thousand
difficulties, brought our minds into a labyrinth of doubts; to draw at last
to an issue; the faithful receive the Blessed Sacrament, well, what do they
receive, certainlye Christ Jesus, truly* Reallye, to make farther scruple is
needelesse curiosity, to give lightlye credence, here vnt^ is in part
incredulity. What the ^lementes of bread and wine are in themselves is on^
thing, what they are beeinge now consecrated to so holy a use, and received of
the spiritually minded, as the spiritual food of their souls is an other,
what they are (I say) Christ's own words are sufficient warrant for a
beeleeuing world until the worlds end. Wherefore to be ouerw^^ted in seeking,
or doubting how thi^ should be, is noe way agreeable to that faith and
obedience that beecometh Christians. Rerum absentium (says an ancient Father)
presens est fides, rerum impossibilium possibilis est fides; of things absent
faith is present, of things impossible faith is possible. Panem vides, verbum
audis, cui potius credis sensui vel Christo? thou se^ste the bread, thou
hear the word to which rather do thou give credit whether to thy sense
or to Christ? cur non potius gaudes quam quaeris why do thou not rather
r^i^yce then question?

6 In this case, that of the Blessed virgin spoken of Christ at the marriage at
Cana in Galelee would be remembered. Quodcunque dixerit vobis facite:
whatsoever he shall say unto you do it; when satan said unto Eve, cur
praecepit vobis Deus vt non comederetis why has God commanded you not to
eat? had she aunsweared, Scio quod praecepit, non spectat ad me inuestigare
causam: quare praecepit: I know he has commanded me so, to seek a reason why,
or the cause wherefore, I need not, I ought not, had she not done far
better? some have faith says S. Austen in his 139. S^r. de tempore, which have
not art to defend it or skill to show a reason thereof, he which has, is
not the faithfuller but a little the learneder.

We have many things in Christianity offered unto us as obiectes of our
faith when we most hold captive humane reason. Et Deus erat, et homo erat,
et matererat, et virgo erat. There was a God, and yet a man, a mother and yet a
virgin, that it is so we know it, how, or after what manner this is brought
to pass, know, we cannot. Of those things which may be known, S. Berna^de
speaking of the blessed Sacrament sermon: de coena Domini, Mira sunt says he
quae de Sacramento dicuntur fides est ncessaria, scientia ratioms superuacua,
sc^entia ratione et intellectu colligitur, fides sola authoritate inducitur:
Wonderful things are they which are spoken of the Sacrament, here faith is
necessary, needelesse is the science of reason, this science is gathred by
discourse, and the understanding, faith is brought in by authority only, and
going forward, he adds, haec su^t, quae expetunt simplicem creditorem,
ar^nunt impium di cussorem, credi opo^tet simpliciter, quod inuestigari non
potest vti^iter, nolite quaerere quomodo fiat, nolite quaerere vtrum fiat,
these things require an humble bel^euer, and not an ungodly discusser, that
which curiously may not be sought, may be beeleeued with safety, secke not
how this should be done, doubt whether it be done or not. We have scope
sufficient to exercise our Christian consideration if we call to mind the
ineffable wisdom and love of God, who like a most provident Father was not
only content to provide costly benefits for his children, but has also
found out so beehouefull a mean for their participation of the same as is
this holy mystery.

8 We will not ask our physician how it shall come to pass, that this, or
that potion, should do us good, and should we be more busy when Christ him
self does minister so precious a receite, so heavenly phiscicke for the
health of our souls, God forbid? they were of the Capernaites men without
faith, and love in Christ who in murmuring manner said quomodo potest, how or
which way can he do this, it was a faithful and loving disciple that
answered, Tu Domine habes verba vtae, Lord thou have the words of life.

10 The people as we read in the Gospel who were cured by our Savior, they
came not unto him to know, or enquire by what mean, virtue should proceed
from him, it sufficed them to receive health and therefore without more ado,
they gave glory unto God who had showed such mercy unto men.

11 There is both Docta ign^r^ntia and indocta scien^ia, a learned ignorance,
and an unlearned science, the one, when men keep them selves within the listes
and limits of obedience and faith, the other when they neither respect,
neither harken to the counsel of the holy Ghost, be wise according to
sobriety.

12 Was not the Aposttles O Altitudo? O the deapth, better then the search of
the world in so unsearchable a mystery where he made silence the safest
eloquence?

13 Without all question the church of Rome has erred, in medlinge too much
with this sacred mystery, and troublinge the world with a multitude of
unprofitable and endless disputes about Transubstantiation, and the like, for
which, as for there haulfe communion, let them show there Accepimus a
Domino: as we have received from the Lord, or else we plainlye tell them,
their plea is not sufficient in law, and will not hold for good.

14 Let the world in name of God now judge of both, which give greater
reverence to the most divine institution of the Son of God, whether they who
too busely talk of changinge the substance of the elements into other, or
they, who hear conceive more and with more reverence then words can
mention. They who say (...), this is a great mystery, or they who labor to
search out the power and virtue unsearchable. In a word, they who will needs
set down a manner how Christ is present in the Sacrament, or they who
acknowledge his presence there after a manner explicable. 15 All this while our
due estimation of this so high a mystery is not fully understood (as I
suppose) of many, who refuse our Christian assemblies in times beeseeming. We
honor the passion of Christ our Blessed Savior in this most holy ordinance (I
trust) with as dutiful hearts as any christians in the world. The heat of
some fanciers we wish it were more temporate, and there zeal more according
to knowledge, who ever love to be fishinge in troublesome waters, we confess
that all the devotion a Christian heart can yealde is noe way answearable to
the deapth and dignity hereof.

16 God said unto Moses put off thy shows, for the ground where thou
stand is holy ground, how reverently therefore we esteem of this sacred
institution God knows, and what we houlde let men consider, the state of the
controversy it self is laid down at the end in a breife admonition to the
godly Reader, which admonition (some special reasons moving me thereunto) I
have written in the latin tongue, unto which I refer the learned: but
cheefely I commend unto every honest Christian in general, the tracte it
self, which only tends to devotion. For when we have all done striving
about a hundred difficulties, it must be our devotion to God that must do us
good in an other world.

17 It were to be wished we had less contending in matters of controversy,
which avail little to godliness, and more sincere following the actions of
Christian piety, which are much dec^ied in these sinful times (we see it too
apparantlye before our eyes) that we had less questioning in general, and
in particular, l^sse curious prying into this Sacred mystery, and more
religious preparing our selves to a due and dutiful participation of the same;
we may consider that after all the stir about this controversy, the
devotion of most is but So, So, for the heap of volumes that treat of this
subject how they all in a manner tend only unto matter of contradiction,
wherefore beeseech we God to increase in us reverence more, and more, toward
this most holy ordinance of Christ Jesus his Son, that preparing our selves
dutifully to receive him in the state of grace, we may be received of him into
the state of glory: To sit at his table in his Kingdom, to live with him, and
reign with him.

The Contents of this tracte following.
1 OF the Institution of this most holy Sacrament. 2 The first Meditation
concerning this Institution with the fruits thereof. 3 Of the love of Christ
showed in ordayning this most holy Sacrament. 4 The excellency and
woorthynesse hereof. 5 Of the wonderful things contained in this Sacrament.
6 The manifold effects and fruits of this holy Institution. 7 A Dialogue
between Man, and the Soul. 8 Of the principal causes which may move man to
come to this Sacrament. 9 Of frequenting the most holy Communion. 10 Of the
impedimentes which detain men from coming thereunto. 11 A Dialogue beetweene
the distressed sinner, and faith. 12 A Conference between the soul and faith.
13 Of Removing the dangerous effects which hinder the worthy receiving of
this most holy Sacrament. 14 Of Preparing our selves before we come to this
most holy Sacrament. 15 A Form of confessing our selves. 16 An Exhortation
upon these words: whence comes this that my Lord comes to me. 17 A
Meditation upon the words of the Centurion Math. 8.9 Non sum dignus vt intres
sub ^ectum meum I am not worthy that thou enter under my roof. 18 A
Meditation upon that which follows dic verbum and sanabitur anima mea, but
only say the word and my soul shall live. 19 A Meditation upon these
words of Christ veniam curabo eum, I will come and heal him. 20 A Meditation
upon that which S. Paul teaches 1. Cor: 11. 21 A Meditation of the Prodigal
Son when he was received of his Father. 22 A Meditation for the day we are
to communicate in. 23 A Meditation of the history of Zacheus Luke. 19.2 24 An
Application of this history. 25 A Meditation upon the words of Christ
following Hodie oportet me manner indomo tua This day I must abide in thy
house. 26 A short form of confession to be made in private before the
receiuinge of the Blessed Sacrament. 27 An Admonition mouinge all to reconcile
the^ selves and forgive their enemies before they be partakers of the most
holy Sacrament. 28 A Prayer before the holy Communion. 29 Of the devout man to
who^e Christ in his last supper shows favor. 30 Certain Meditations upon
some special sayings of holy Scipture to be used when you are about to
communicate. 31 Of the reverence and devotion given by the ancient Fathers to
this most holy Sacrament. 32 A Prayer, with thanksgiving after the receiuinge
of the most holy Communion. 33 An other form of thanksgiving. 34 A General
meditation after the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. 35 Considerations to
be remembered of the devout Christian after his receiving. 36 Names of
excellency attributed unto the holy Sacrament. 37 A Short meditation upon the
names of Excellency. 38 Certain meditations upon the passion to be used
after the receiuinge of the holy Communion. 39 A Prayer upon the passion used
by S. Austen. 40 Concerning the spiritual Communicating. 41 That this holy
Sacrament is given to the sick as necessary for the time of any visitation.
4^ What he ought to do who is to communicate. 43 The manner of Communicating
used by a certain virgin. 44 Breife Questions and aunsweares concerning the
Blessed Sacrament. 45 Certain short observations to be remembered before our
access to the Lords supper. 46 A Dialogue beetweene a worldly man and a
spiritual wherein is disputed whether it be better often to communicate or
abstain from the holy Communion, how, and after what manner both may be done.
47 An other Dialogue whereein is touched the Doctrine and benefit of the
Blessed Sacrament.
The end of the Table.
Godly Meditations upon the most holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Of the Institution of this most holy Sacrament.
Amongst other parts of divine worship and religious actions of a Christian
life, which knitte men in love and duty unto God (for who should have the
fruit but he that planted the tree) there is none more solemn, more divine,
then is our reverent access to the most holy Sacrament, where we present our
selves before God, where, we honor him in the mystery of humane redemption,
where by a spiritual union with Christ him self we become partakers of our
greatest good. Fasting humbles, prayer beseeches, repentance bewaileth,
charity works, faith believes; but the holy Sacrament applies al to the
salvation of our souls.

2 If any ask (says an ^uncient Eather) the Jews why they keep there
passover, all that they will aunswear is to relate of a bondage in Egypt, of
Pharoe their oppressor, of a Moses Gods servant their deliverer: But if any
ask me which am a Christian of our heavenly passover, I can show him, not
of Moses a servant, but of Christ Jesus the only son of God; of a more
terrible Pharoe the prince of darkness, of a more woeful bondadge, the
shadow of death, and last of all, of a deliverance indeed, by the blood of
that Immaculate Lamb, once offered for the sins of the world. Heb. 9.28.

2 For our comfortable access to this most holy mystery, we have Christ's
own precept, and his promise, Math. 26.26. Luke. 22.19 His precept, hoc faci^e
do this: His promise, hoc est corpus meum, hic est saenguis me^us, This is my
body, which was given for you, this is my blood, which is shed for you; as if,
hear I offer you the benefit of all my sufferinges, and leave you a pledge at
parting, of my dearest love, Nouum Testamentum, a new Testament, a new league
or covenant, between God, and man, that he will now think upon your sins in
justice no more.

4 S. Austen in his 118. Epistle Ad Ianuarium says, our Savior deferred the
institution of this most divine Sacrament, to the end of his life, as his last
farewell, that the dignity and excellency thereof, might make the more deep
impression in his disciples hearts, increase in them greater love, and
devotion, after his departure from them.

5 In the 14. and 16. of Exodus, God gave the people of Israel for the time of
their abode in the wilderness Manna from heaven, which manna, they gathered
until they came unto the land of promise: in like manner, so long as we
remain in the wilderness of this world; we are gatheringe this our heavenly
mana but when we come unto that promised Chanaan, then need we gather Manna,
no more.

6 Christ our Savior when the time drew near that he should be betrayed
and delivered up unto death, he communeth with his disciples after this manner
Luk: 22.15. I have earnestly desired to eat this passover with you before I
suffer; In consecrating the elements of bread and wine, his prayers went up
to heaven, his benefits remain with his church here on earth, the visible
signs which he took, and gave declare two things, the one that he would
the morrow followinge make himself an oblation for the redemption of many upon
the altar of the Cross, the other that he would become unto the faithful by
this means a divine sustinance for their souls And thus he provides for
himself an altar, for his, a table in both, Gods is the glory, and man's the
benefitte.

The first Meditation of this Blessed Institution.
COnsider how God created the world for man, and man only to worshipe his
Creator: A most excellent part of which worship, is the holy Sacrament.

2 Consider how the Lord Jesus forseeinge the good of his church, and the
affliction of his Apostles, to follow after his passion, decreede to leave
unto them the holy Eucharist, that they might receive help and strength by
virtue thereof.

3 Consider how he now departing from this life unto the Father, did institute
this beloved Sacrament, that he might leave unto us, a liuelye remembrance of
his passion.

4 Consider how this remembrance is had by a spiritual repast, that as
nurrishmentes and the body nurrished become one, so Christ, and the faithful
receivers: And what more heavenly then to become one with the son of God?

5 Consider Christ in his passion as a Testator his inheritance given is
heaven, his legaces are his graces, the executor is the holy Ghost, his
testament or will, promises of life laid down in his word, the seals are
the two Sacraments confirming these promises

The fruit of this Meditation.
The fruit of this Meditation is this: that every one dispose himself with
all devotion to this holy mystery, that he leave all earthly cogitations
beneath, as Abraham in the 22. of Genesis did his servants when he went up to
the mount to do sacrifice unto God.

A Spiritual Soloquie or meditation of the Soul.
O Omnipotent and everlasting God, make me, I beeseech thee, (...) in the
performance of this so high a part of thy most holy worship. I come Lord as
the sick to the Physician of life, as an offender to the fountain of mercy,
as the blind to the light of the eternal sun, as the poor and needy to
the Lord of heaven and earth, therefore O Lord, cure my infermitie, pardon my
offenses, lighten my blindness, enrich my poverty, grant that I may reverence
this heavenly manna with such reverence, and humanity, with such contrition
and devotion, with such purity and faith, with such a purpose and intent, as
is expedient for my salvation, and grant that at last I may beehoulde
perpetuallye thy beloved son with face reueiled, whom now I receive in the
way by faith only: who lives and reigns with thee for ever and ever Amen.

Of the love of Christ showed in ordaining this most holy Sacrament of his last
Sup^per.
FOr that this Sacrament is a Sacrament of love, and left unto us as the love
of our beloved Savior, it is convenient that to put a way the suspicion of
ingratitude it be received and handled with love cheefely, seeinge we can
requite in no other thing the love declared in ordayning this Sacrament so
full of love, then by love, of which love God would that we should dispose,
and so change it into what we see most pleasing to him, whereupon, as Christ
while he gives himself to us for meat, gives us a token of his highest
love, with his grace* with so many merits of his preachings, labores,
fastings, prayers* so we, when we give to God our love, do^ give him all
things which we have most precious, hence it comes that God does more
esteem and that more worthyly too, of this one love the^ of all other things
in the world, neither does he require any other thing of us. When else where
says, Proverb: 23.26: My Son give me thy heart, that is to say the love
which is thine. When Christ our Savior humbled himself to be Baptized of
John the Baptist Math: 3.14: it made John more humble himself to Christ: his
love should wound our hearts, and make us love him who is love it self, and
this love of his is manifest unto us by instituting this holy Sacrament.

When Nathan the Prophet would show King David in the 2 of Samuel 12.3: what
love the poor man bare to that sheep which he nourished in his bosom, he
gave him says he of his own morsels to eat, and of his own cup to drink:
Christ to show his love toward us has given us of his own bread, and of
his own cup, nay he has given his own body as bread, his own blood as
wine for the nurrishment of our souls.

David wondered at the exceeding love of God 1. Samuel: 1.18: saying who am I,
O Lord God that thou have brought me to this? Lord what is earth and ashes
that thou have exalted man to this dignity?

God did highly honor Joshua in that he made the sun to stay until he had
the victory, but what honor had it bin, had he brought it down from heaven
this has he done for us by the son of righteousness who exiled himself
33. years from the throne of glory and became the son of man that we might
be made the sons of God.

The Second Meditation.
COnsider how in this holy mystery thou art bound to love the guifte, with
the giver: If when the people would have made Christ a King John: 6.15: he
had then sought to requite their favor it had not bin so much: but when they
gave him gale to eat, and viniger to drink, then to leave this testimony of
favor and love, it was love without example, had he bestowed this foe great:
gift on the Saints or Angels it had not bin so wonderful, but bestowing it
on poor sinners it was most admirable.

2 Consider how great care our Savior has showed to^wards us in instituting
this sa^crame^t seeing nothing could be given more excellent more dear. When
he loved his which were in the world he loved them unto the end. Io: 13 1.

3 Consider that Saint Chrysostom says our Lord instituted this divine
Sacrament that we might be made one with him, for as much as he is such a
meat as does turn it self into the worthy receiver. So hereby Christ does
draw us unto him with the bonds of love, and does in this gift allure us to
love him, heat does turn the nourishmentes into the body nourished, the same
is done by feruencie of love in faithful receivers.

The fruit of this Meditation.
The fruit of this Meditation is that every one meditate of the love of
Christ, say with the Prophet in the 116. and 11: Quid rependam, what shall I
give unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me? I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

A Spiritual soloquie upon this meditation.
O Swe^te Jesus could it be that such was thy love toward us, that when thou
wast the King of glory and creator of all the world, thou would thy self
be meat for thine own creatures. O Love, thy power is too too great; for I
thought sufficient that which the wise man speaks of thy power: Thy love is
as strong as death. But I see much more may be spoken of it for thy arrows
ouercomming heaven do penetrate the very love of God, where death does not
come nor approach, neither staying thy self here, thou do fix this love
in the heart of man, and not only pluck it away from all things created,
but even from it self.

It was sufficient that thou wast given to us for a Lord and God, in which
thing the Prophet has placed thi^ blessedness: Psalm. 145 ^6 Blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord. But lou^ has drawn thee to t^^^ which the
wisdom of man cannot comprehend, and it remains most true that thou when
thou wast God of all majesty infinite, and immortal were made man, did
die and suffer for us.

When I consider that thou in the selfsame time wherein the streams of thy
tribulations did ouerflowe, wherein thy only thought constrained a blooddie
sweat out of thy body, forgetful of thine own self, and all the torments
which were preparing, wast careful of procuring such a meare for us as might
strengthen us in the state of grace, until we see thee in the state of glory,
O amiable Jesus how truly is it written of thy love in the 8. of the Canticles
and 6 verse. Many waters could not extinguish this love, nor floodes ouerwhelme
it, namely many waters of thy passion, and floodes of thy grief, could not
with houlde thee whereby thou would not provide and impart this singular and
precious gift for us, O sweet Jesus it had been enough to call us brethren
when thou were humbled on earth* but will thou so call us in thy throne in
heaven? Math: 25:50:

The Prophet Elisha in the second of the Kings 2.8. greatly esteemed the cloak
of his Master Eliath, left him at his departure wherewith he divided the
waters of Iordaine and passed over on dry foot; But the Lord and God of
Eliath has left unto thee not any garment but his most sacred body that he
may be a companion with thee in this laboursome pilgrimage, strength in
tribulation, and wholesome food in a spiritual life.

Judge now then how much thou ought to reverence him, and with what ^^dent
af^ectio^ receive him? In the mean time beseech this benefactor that it happen
not unto thee as unto the people of the Jews to whom when our Lord Jesus had
offered himself for their Master and Captain they renouncing his doctrine
and maistership, keep still the covering of their eyes, and which was worse
joined to their blindness the sin of vnthankfullnesse.

The excellency and worthynes of this Sacrament.
MOst high and sumptuous is that preparation which wisdom has ordained,
bounty furnished and Christ himself with his honorable presence beautified.
This preparation is not as that in times passed in the wilderness, or in the
moveable Tabernacle of Moses, or the fixed Temple of Solomon but in a great
chamber, a large upper room, in the most ample church dispersed far and wide
upon the face of the earth, here Christ himself is the giver and the gift,
the feeder and the food.

It is said of Ezechiah in the second of Chronicles 30. that he kept a
passover and such a passover as never was there any the like before; but much
more may be said of Christ's holy supper. Admire not any longer the greatness of
the gift, of the King, Assuerus in the 4. of Hester after he betrothed unto
him Hester in marriage for those guiftes were earthly and could not give life
and spirit, admire rather the precious gift of Christ given unto his church
after he had espoused unto himself the nature of man which gift is heavenly,
and of infinite value, gives life to the^ that worthyly receive it, ma^ny are
the nourrishmentes of the body, but this of the soul does exceed them all*

The third Meditation.
COnsider the great excellency of this holy and heavenly feast where Christ is
received, the memory of his death and passion recounted the mind filled with
grace, and a pledge o^ future glory given unto us.

2 Consider these 5. diffe^rences which are between this feast and the feasts
of the world.

1 These feasts are profane for in them neither is there holy meat, neither
are the ordained for the health of the soul, but this feast is a sanctified
feast, and ordained principally for the health of the soul.

2 In the feasts of the world there is variety, and by how much the more the
variety is the greater, by so much the more is the feast commended: in this
spiritual banquet it is not so, wherein Christ being infinite contains in him
all perfection and can alone satisfy the soul.

3 In the feasts of the world there is little speech had of death, suffering
affliction, and tribulations, rather discourse is had of matters of pleasures:
but in this feast of Christ the memorial o^ his death and passion, his
sufferinges of love for our salvation is remembered.

4 In this banquet the mind is filled with the grace of Christ which brings
salvation and the increase of heavenly guiftes: but in the banquets of the
world, the body is replenished with meats that often bring diseases to the
body and spiritual destruction to the soul.

5 In the feasts of the world for the great excess used in them they open a
way to hell: but this holy feast of Christ s^tteth open unto us the ready way
to heaven.

Farther considerations of this heavenly banquet.
COnsider how well pleasing it is to the Lord Jesus that we do all those things
in this his feast which guestes invited of the prince to some solemn
preparation, are wont to do.

1 First they expect with great desire the hour of this banquet, and give
their diligent attendance that they come in decent and seemly manner, well
adorned.

2 Secondly, they knowing that nothing is more acceptable unto the prince who
inuiteth them, then to feed heartily on the meats prepared, they come with
empty stomachs and a desire to be satisfied.

3 Thirdly, they diligently beware that they neither do or speak any thing
which may be offensive to the person which has called them.

4 Fourthly, they do not by and by depart but stay awhile and enterchaung
familier conference with the prince at one time praising his liberality, at on
other the magnyficencie of the feast.

5 Fifthly, at there departure they yield reverence, and give humble thanks for
the favor vouchsafed them, acknowledging their bounden duty unto so noble a
prince, they offer them selves to be ready at his pleasure, to perform any
service he shall command them.

These properties of good and thankful guestes should much rather be performed
in this heavenly feast whereunto we are called by the son of God himself,
and therefore we should expect, receive with joy: yield thanks for this
heavenly banquet.

The fruits of these considerations.
The fruit of these considerations may be drawn from a meditation the of
greatness, and magnificencie of this so holy a mystery, which greatness may
stir us up to be thankful to so liberal a Lord who calls us to so great
honor, and bestows so many benefits, yet requires so few of us again.

A Spiritual Soloquie.
IT is no meruell O Lord if the bountifulnes of thy holy feast do make us
astonished, for Esaias in the 25. Chap. of hie prophecy forseeing it many ages
before as a picture shadowed ouer-stood amazed thereat, and says to the praise
and glory thereof: the Lord of hosts shall make to al people on this hill a feast
of fatlings. Esa: 25.6: Great shall this feast be O holy prophet, for that not
every one but the Lord of hosts shall ordain it, and that not to certain
men alone, but to all people of the world, neither in every place but on a
hill, lastly it shall be a feast of fatlinges, yea of the most heavenly food
that ever was.

Be glad O holy church for that thou art that holy hill chosen of God for that
heavenly banquet, in thee does stand the table prepared, thy dear children are
like the olive branches in the compass thereof.

Arise O my soul and depart from thy self forthwith out of this dark vallie,
for the lord does expect thee at his feast, not thundering and lightning as he
did to ye children of Israel in the 19 of Exodus, but he inuiteth thee wi^h
loving words Math: 11.2^: come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden
and I will refresh you. We may now go in saftie. That law does not any longer
stand in force, he that touches the hill shall die the death, Exodus: 19.23:
but rather he that comes to the hill and eats of this Sacrament shall live
for ever.

But mark my soul that all cannot ascend to this hill, but only as the kingly
Prophet speaks Psalm: 15.4: the harmless and pure in heart this is the
wedding garment Math: 22.16: wherewith we ought to be decked at Christ's feast,
otherwise we shall hear those terrible words: cast him bound hand foot into
utter darkness.

Woe be to me O Lord, who like the Prodigal son Luke 15.23: by luxurious
living have bewraied and torn the garment of innocence received in holy
baptism woe wretched creature that I am if thou help me not O Lord I dare not
appear at thy holy feast what shall I do? if for my sins I shall be refused
of thee, what shall I do when with shame I am forbidden to come without a
garment? happily I may sow me a garment of leaves as Adam did after he lost
the garment of innocence given him of God, but alas that will little profit
me as it profited Adam when he durst not come into Gods sight with that
garment but hid himself: but if I hide my self shall I not be deprived of thy
heavenly and healthsome feast.

I turn me therefore to thee O Father of mercy, and I confess that I have
offended thee after that manner that I am no more worthy to be called thy
son, but trusting to thy infinite goodness I beseech thee that thou will not
respect my offenses but the greatness of thy mercies. I am not worthy to be
called thy son make me O Lord as thy meanest servant.

Of the wonderful things of this Sacrament.
Wonderful is God in all his works, but in non more to be admired, then in
the reverent Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, wherein the blessed
son of God gives many high mysteries unto his church.

Amongst other names of excellency which the Prophet Esaias att^^buteth to the
second person in Trinity, this is one: his name is wonderful Esa. 9.11. How
truly this is verified in this holy Sacrament may be left unto the
contemplation of faith which is then most strong when reason stands mute.

When as almighty God rained down Manna amongst ye people of Israel the
people being amazed at the sight thereof, said, Manhu: that is, what is this?
and the thing seemed so wonderful that they behoulding it truly admirable
passed over as it were unto us the first word manhu, Lord what is this? what is
this that the son of God should undertake the nature of man and after a
spiritual and heavenly manner be given for meat to a new people, to whom all
things are manifest in truth?

What is this? that he which dwells in heaven, sits amongst the quier of
Angels, would come into the world and after a wonderful and admirable manner
dwell with the sons of men?

What is this? that the Lo^d of majesty who is of the same substance with the
the Father and the holy Ghost, will be made one with man and take up his
mansion with him.

What meat is this which does cleanse our leprosy, comfort the conscience, and
cure our souls?

What is this? what piety is this? what bowels of mercy are these? surely the
gift is worthy of the giver. Solomon brake out into a certain kind of
admiration, speaking of the Arc of covenant in ^he first of Kings 8.27.
Er^one putandum est quod vere Deus habitet super terram s^ ^im caele and
coelicoeloru^ capere non possunt quanto minu^ ^l^nus haec. And is it true in
deed that God will abide o^ earth whom the heavens, no^ ^he heavens of heavens
ca^ ^ot contain, much less thi^ house? O the deapth of the wisdom of the
most high^st? thy judgments are pas^ ^inding out but should we ^roceede to
lift up our eie^ against those glistering^ beams wherewith the shar^pest Eagle
may be dazzled (...) surely: for then there would be no end of admiration*
superfluous were it to wad^ far, we best know God^ mysteries when with all
thankfulness we admire them, and say blessed be God in all his works.

Saint Chrysostom in his 61 Homily to the Preistes of Antioch calls this
Sacrament the miracle of the mysteries of the Christian law, wherein our
Savior imparteth his body and blood thereby to declare the desir^ wherewith he
burns of uniting himself unto us which is proper to them that love ardentl^,
here Sampsous ridle is solued de comede^te exi^uit cibus de forti egressa est
dulcedo, out of the strong come sweetness, what is stronger then the Lion? what
sweeter then honey? Christ is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, honey, the sweetness
of the holy Eucharist.

The fourth Meditation, of the wonderful things of this Sacrament.
LEt us beehoulde with the eyes of our faith one of the greatest works o^ God
under heaven and for this inestimable mystery laud and praise his holy name.

2 Let us with thankful hearts wonder at the love of God, who after he
received us into his family, there placed us, not as servants but as sons,
and that he might show the part of a careful father, does provide a mean to
nourish us, and not content with that, would have his own son to institute
that mean by the spiritual participation of himself.

3 Consider, the divine wisdom of the son of God, who respecting our
weakness has conuaied unto us his body and blood after a divine and
spiritual manner, under the forms of bread and wine.

4 Consider, how by this mystical Communion, occasion is given to exercise our
faith, and to prepare our souls which live by grace, as our bodies do by
food.

5 Consider the high and worthy effect of this heavenly food, which is not so
much changed into the substance of the eater, as it does rather chang us to a
divine essence, the meat being divine does make us also divine, O the
omnipotent wisdom, and power, and love of God?

The Fruit.
The fruit of this meditation is to lift up our selves above our selves, and
bless God for this wonderful benefit, without curious searching, and
needless questioning after the manner how, but to give God thanks and be
ashamed rather at our selves that neither the wonderfullnes of his power, nor
the greatness of his benefits, can make us no more to love him then we do.

The spiritual Soloquie.
O my soul thou art happy which have prepared for thee so wonderful and so
high a repast as there can be found none either in heaven or earth more, for
in it is contained that which the Apostle in the 1: and 3. to the Hebr. calls
the brightness of the glory of God, but hidden, that he might heap on thee the
more benefits, thou know Moses descending from the mount Sinah on which he
had talked with God, the children of Israel could not talk with him for the
brightness of his face, wherefore as the Scripture says he put a covering
before his face: Exodus 34.16: that all might speak with him, in like sort our
heavenly Moses has done, who not content with thy deliverance from the hard
servitude o^ Egypt and spiritual Pharoe, but that thou should not be
terrified with the great brightness of his glory, after an ineffable manner
does come unto thee, and commune with thee. Jacob said, surely God was in this
place and I was not aware of it. Genesis 28:16.

O wonderful love how far have thou gone with my Lord? Just cause have thou O
my soul to rejoice, and in reioicinge to admire the goodness of thy blessed
Savior: cease to measure the greatness of this work by the weakness of thine
own understanding, say rather with the Prophet Psalm 111 Memoriam facit
mirabilium suorum, The merciful Lord has made a memorial of his wonders, he
has given meat to them that fear him.

When the son of God clothed himself with our nature it was a work very
admirable, for therein he assumed humane nature mortal, and passible, but when
the faithful receive the holy Eucharist man does participate a divine nature
immortal, and heavenly: Hence was it said of God, Psalm. 86.9. Tu es magnus
faciens mirabilia, Lord thou art great and doing wonderful things.

The manifold effects and fruits of this holy Sacrament.
We may remember, which we cannot forget, that as man consists of soul and
body, so does he also lead a twofold life, the one temporal, ready to fall
into a thousand dangers and casualties. The other spiritual, subject to as
many and more. The life of the body consists of the union of the Soul with
the body. The life of the soul consists of another union, with grace in
Christ. Both these, as they have their defects and casualties, so have they
also their remedies and sustentations. For the life natural, God has ordained
natural sustenance; for the life supernatural, supernatural nourishment,
which is this most holy Sacrament. But that which at all times is most to be
lamented is, whereas the spiritual life is far more excellent then the
temporal, notwithstanding is more regarded and preferred. For what thing does
not a sick body do, to recover his health, he neglects all charges and
griefs, he esteems nothing of the bitterness of Medecines, he contemns
the sharpness of pains: the most experienced Physicians, the best
preservatives are sought for, and all for bodily health, which endures for a
little time And are we so careful for the health of our Soul? would to God
we were, then would we repair with more devotion* unto this most holy
Sacrament, where our spiritual life is preserved and strengthened.

Three things there are says one, necessary for the life of man, the mother
which brings him forth, the meat which sustaineth him, and the Physician that
cures him when he is sick.

The same three are necessary for the life spiritual. The mother is Baptism,
the meat is the holy Eucharist, the Physician to cure is repentance. Now then,
as the body without meats cannot endure labors and live, no more can the Soul
without this spiritual repast, sustain the labors of this Pilgrimage, the
assaults of her enemies and live. The air being corrupted when we go forth of
doors, we fortefie us with some preservative. This world is corrupted, our
preservative against temptations, is this holy Eucharist.

Men entering a way possessed by the enemy, arm themselves with weapons, get
them good company: seeing we have in all the way of our life many enemies
visible and invisible, shall we not arm our selves, and take unto us Christ
our Captain.

Of the most principal effects of this Sacrament.
THe first is, as we may so speak to Deifie, that is, to make man divine, or
like unto God himself, here in the state of grace, and hereafter in the state
of glory, and for this cause it is instituted in form of nourishments. For as
nourishments and the body nourished, become one so Christ and the faithful
receivers. Other meats receive life of the body, this gives life to the Soul.

2 A second effect is, that with Christ are given us all his merits and
rewards, which he has purchased, here the hiue is given us with the honey.

3 The third effect of this Sacrament, is, that hereby a continual and
constant remembrance of Christ Jesus our Savior is continued, whereby we show
his death until he come, and therefore he says, Math. 26.26. Hoc facite in
mei memoriam, Do this in remembrance of me.

4 The fourth effect is to stir up in us the love of God, and our neighbor.
Of God, who first loved us, of our neighbor, for his sake that said, He that
loves God, should love his neighbor also, 1, Joan. 4. 21.

What should we enter into that sea of the manifold ef^fects of this Sacrament:
If I ^m sick, here I may cure me, if I am whole, here I shall keep me, if
living, here I shall comfort me, if dead in sin here I shall raise me, if I
burn with the love of God* here I may inflame me, if I am cold in devotion,
here I may warm me, if I am blind, here I may enlighten me, if ^potted, here I
may cle^se me. I will not fly as Adam some^time did from the presence o^ ^od,
because here I ca^ coue^ ^ne, nor run away for fear of ^he enemy, for here I
shall find grace to strengthen me.

Cyrill in his 4. book upon John, says, here not only ^eath is put to
flight, but als^ ^pirituall diseases that caus^ ^ath, are expelled, the cruel^
and inordinate love of our members is repressed, and the perturbations of the
mind quieted.

Tho. Aquinas calls this Sacrament a precious banquet, admirable, wholesome, and
full of all sweetness, and to provoke us the more to lou^ it, he adds, Here
sins are cleansed, virtues increased the mind made fertile with all
spiritual graces, and that when Christ saw his Disciples to wax^ sad for his
departure, he left unto them this Sacrament for a singular comfort.

The fruits of this Sacrament.
The fruits hereof may be reduced to these 12. properties: the first is to
quicken, 2. To set at liberty, 3. To inflame, 4. To give patience in trouble,
5. To nourish. 6. To restore, 7. To unite, 8. To communicate, 9. To make whole,
10. To preserve, 11. To strengthen, 12. To conduct through, and therefore this
Sacrament is called Viaticum, the provision for the way, as Elias passed his
journey in the strength of his meat.

It is written of Obededon in the second of Sam. 3. that he and his did
prosper, because he received the Ark of God into his house: how much more
shall this be accomplished in those, who receive Christ Jesus truly into their
souls, the manifold effects whereof by increase of grace, from grace to grace,
the faithful feel and find as much.

The fifth Meditation. Of the fruit and effect of this most holy Sacrament.
COnsider that as the soul newly created of God, so soon as it comes in^o
the body, which descen^ed of Adam, is forthwith contaminated and made per^^aker
of the whole evil and ^isery, wherein he inwrapped mankind by his
transgressio^* So likewise, as soon as the soul receives Christ it i^
forthwith made partaker of his merits and righteousness. And this is one cause
why his Sacrament is called a Communion.

2 Consider that as he brings unto thee the fruit of his life and death, his
re^surrection and ascension: so also he desires to communicate thee unto his
members.

3 Consider that the understanding is so lightened by this holy Sacrament, that
it easily commenth into the knowledge of God, whence those 2. Disciples going
to Emans straight after the receiving of bread, as the Scripture says, their
eyes were opened, and they knew the Lord.

4 Consider that it was not the hem of the garment, for what virtue could there
be in so mean a subject to procure health, but it was the hemme of Christ's
garment. So it is not bread and wine, but this bread, this wine that
sanctifies our souls.

5 Consider how it renews Gods grace, that like as bodily food does renew
that which natural heat had consumed. So this heavenly nourishment,
restores that which the Soul through the heat of evil desires, had lost.

6 Consider it joins us to Christ our head, and to our neighbors, who are
Christ's members, provoking us to love them with true charity: and therefore
this Sacrament is called of the Fathers, the Sacrament of union and love. For
Christ by giving his the same food, unites the^ in one divine essence. S.
Augustine writes that this Sacrament is instituted under the form of bread
and wine. For as bread is made of many grains, and the wine one, of many
grapes, so the faithful by love and unity, are made one in Christ their head
one, by consent and concord amongst themselves.

7 Consider the great peace and tranquillity of the mind, which comes by this
sacrament, yt as the ship was tossed and troubled before, but when Christ came
into it, all was calm: so in this world we are often troubled, but when Christ
comes, all is quiet: he would have his Disciples say unto what house they
entered, Peace be unto this house, Luc. 10.5. How much more may it ^e^ said to
that heart, where this holy mystery is truly and worthily received: Peace be
unto this heart.

The fruit of this Meditation.
The fruit is to desire with our whole hearts to have part in these effects, to
hunger and thirst after righteousness. To remember that of the woman of Sam^ria,
Io^. 4.25. who when she heard Christ spea^ of the waters of life, said Give me
Lord of this water So, O Lord, give us of th^^ food, which may work in our
Souls these so many, and so worthy effects.

The Soloquie.
Do thou desire to know O my soul, with what good things Christ in this holy
mystery hastes unto thee? how he comes laden and enriched with so many
merits and rewards? whatsoe^er he brought into the world* al these he
exhibiteth in this most divine Sacrament. He that ministret^ such food to him
that figh^teth, what does he keep in store for him that overcomes? Surely
in that immortal life, in that land of pro^mise, he will fill thy desires
with all happiness, which in this wilderness gives thee such heavenly Manna.
And what does he so much covet of thee my Soul, by this most noble food,
the^ that he may plentifully reward thee with unspeakable graces. Mark what
he ^ringeth, more I assure thee ^hen thou can wish or desire. Behold, says
he, Apoc. 3.21. I stand at the door and knock, if any hear my voice, and
shall open to me the gate, I will enter in unto him, and suppe with him.

What w^lt thou do O my soul in so great abundance of all good things* do
what thou art able, and do it quickly. Be thou enlarged to receive such
mysteries. Make clean the place of thy heart* Prepare the upper room o^ thy
best, and best disposed devotion. Exclude a mind beating upon vain and idle
cogitations. Exclude an entrance to evil desires, yield acceptable passage to
the bridegroom Christ Jesus, to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

A Dialogue between Man and the Soul.
Man. IT is true my soul, that thi^ heavenly food does bring with it many
great and excellent effects to the living, but tell me, what does it profit
one dead?


Soul Nothing.


Man. Then will not this Sacrament do thee any good if thou be dead.


Soul. But how can I die being immortal*


Man. It is sure thou can not be extinguished with bodily death, like
beasts without reason, but thou may die well enough with spiritual death,
which is a separation of Gods grace from the soul, as the death of the body
consists in the separation of the soul from the body.


Soul. Does the grace of God give life to the soul?


Man. Yea, even as the soul gives life unto the body.


Soul. But who can deprive the soul of grace which is the life thereof?


Man. Sin, As the Prophet Ezechiel says 18.6. That soul that sins that
soul shall die, that is, shall be deprived of grace, and which is more, of
future glo^rie.


So. From whence has sin that power*


Ma. From Gods just decree*


Sou. Well seeing sin is so dangerous I will not continue in the unseemly
actions thereof any more.


Ma. Surely then shall thou be happy in the end, and we shall be blessed
partakers together of Christ's inestimable benefits both in this world, and in
the world to come.


Of the principal cause which may move v^ to come to this holy Sacrament.
THe obedience we all owe unto the author of this sacred ceremony, who in the
ordayning thereof had no other end but the glory of God his father, with man's
true and perfect good, and a consideration of our own weakness, who stand in
need of so many assistant helps, as we do, cannot but move us to use with all
reverence and desire, with all our hearts affection this holy mean of receiving
grace, left unto us by the giver of grace: For we do not celebrate a
remembrance only of some thing past, but we are partakers also of grace
present which grace though not from, yet by the Sacrament. As water from the
fountain by the cunduit pypes is conveyed and derived unto us: That we offer
unto God the sacrifice of laud and praise, give testimony unto men we are
members of that mystical body whereof Christ is the head, show evidently unto
the world, how desirous we are to continue in that holy union with God, and
(...) the only celebration of ^his most holy Sacrament does well declare and
show, and the sundry and manifold effects thereof do give sufficient
testimony in the behalf of the faithful receiver.

The sixth Meditation.
COnsider that the union of the body and soul is near* but the union of
Christ and the faithful nearer; that seperable, this inseparable.

2 Consider that this most divine Sacrament is ordained by Christ our Savior,
as a mean to derive his grace unto us, to preserve us from evil and also
spiritually to sustain and nourish our souls.

3 Consider he has left unto us this meat that by the benefit thereof we
might be transformed into him by living according to his will, which is no
other thing, then God to live in us.

4 Consider how much it concerns us to return unto Christ, to exercise
religi^ous actions of our Christian duty, to offer God the sacrifice of
thanksgiving for the inestimable benefit of our redemption, to observe and
keep with all reverence this high and holy ordinance left unto us.

The Fruit.
THe fruit of this meditation is to apply our dil^^gence in the performing of
this excellent part of God^ ^eruice, to remember that which was said to Moses.
D^ according to the example which I showed thee in the Mount. Exodus 25.6.

The Soloquie.
THou art too loving (O my savior,) it had been sufficient to procure some
remedy for us of thy creatures, and we had taken it in great savor, but it
was not sufficient for thy burning love but thou would be thy self a
remedy for ou^ ^^ul^s, that the saying of the ^iseman, Eccles. 6.4. might ^e
accompli^hed in thee. A ^^ithfull friend is the medi^^ine of life and
immort^litie: that friend more faithful ^hen my blessed Savior that medicine
of more ef^^cacie then this divine Sa^crament? but that thou wol^est that the
effect thereon should in part depend of us that was an argument of love indeed.

If bodily medicines should work according to the in^^ent and desire of the
sick, i^ ^ould be very acceptable and all sick f^lkes would ^hinke
themselves bo^nd to ^he authors thereof, how much more are we behold^^ng to
thee who with so great ^oue have provided for us ^ medicine of such efficacy
and so wholesome that does work more of it self then we can desire.

How much O Lord does the laws of humane Philosophy differ from the lawe^ of
thy love? what philosophy of the world has ever written, or thought, that a
king of all majesty, the infinite sea of all perfectnes would leave himself
for food to so mean a creature? What wisdom of this world had ever been able
to conceive that God the king of all glory, to the intent he might couple and
unite man unto himself, would be willing to become his meat. O my soul stand
amassed at the love of thy Savior! make an end of tears, bewail not any longer
thy own vileness and weakness, for three loving sisters and advocates have
pleaded our cause, and found favor. Mercy has presented our infirmity, and
found grace: wisdom has invented the means to obtain help, love has
constrained Christ to put it in ex^ecution: This is the mean that Jesus by the
benefit of this most powerful Sacrament would unite us unto himself, that we
might be made one with him, and to this end we receive him.

We give thee thanks O heavenly Adam, which have restored that which the
earthly Adam had destroyed. He by his meat caused us to depart from God, and
thou by thy meat to be united to God, I pray thee my loving Jesus that this
union may be firm and sound, that neither life nor death, neither tribu^lation
may separate us from thee. Cause me O Lord that I may be wholly joined to thee,
that I may glory with thy Apostle and say, Galat. 2.21. I live, but now not I,
but Christ lives in me.

Of frequenting the holy Communion.
IT has been showed, that the holy Eu^charist is the sustenance of the soul
as bread and wine are the sustenance of the body, but the soul* being of
far more excellency then the body, it were then most unseemly that the
body which is tran^sitorie should be carefully feed, and the soul which is
according to the image of God should be neglected, and little respected meat
unless it be taken in due season does not profit the receiver, treasure that
is not employed, does turn us to no benefit. The use and frequent use of this
heavenly repast is very godly and Christianlike, we have no more special
means to relieve our infirmities, no more profitable and effectual remedy
and direction to guide us through the way and passage of this wearisome life.

There are (says one) three things amongst the rest, which do always hold
man bound to God: The first i^ the multitude of his benefits for which we
ought to give thanks, the second is the multitude of our sins, for which we
ought to ask mercy. The third is the multitude of miseries and infirmities
for which we are bound to seek a remedy, now for the acknowledgement of our
duty. The blotting out our offenses, the relief of our miseries, there is at
once no more strong and forceable a mean then this most holy sacrament,
wherein we offer praise upon the altar of our hearts, beg remission in his
merits, who died for us, receive strength against all distress of this
troublesome world. Wherefore man which owes so great and many things for
benefits received, which so often labors under the burden of his sins,
whom so many neces^ities do inuiron, what better course then to approach unto
this divine mystery, which is says Saint Bernard, physic to the sick. The
way to the traveler, strength to the weak, joy to the hole, refuge to the
poor, counsel to the rich, help to them that are in danger, the consideration
whereof should somewhat quicken up our slownesse in this case.

It is the manner of merchants to frequent those places where greater hope of
gain grows: the pore are wont to flock thither where larger alms are
given, and should not the Christian repair thither where great and gainful
gifts are distributed, when he finds himself in misery, poor, and
distressed.

The love of God may move and inuit some, the beholding of their own miseries
should urge others, some the conscience of sin should induce, others a desire
of obtaining grace, but the honor we all owe unto God should solicit all
seeing we have not a more high and excellent means of performing the same.

One friend does willingly come unto another: It is a sign of small love to
Christ, when we come so seldom to his holy Passover, as on the contrary his
love is augmented more and more in us, by often communicating. A great and
loving remembrance of his blessed passion, we celebrate in the frequent
participation of this holy mystery, so often says the Apostle, 1. Corinthians.
11.26. And therefore often you show ye Lords death until he come.

Last of all we see in winter when the S^nne is farther off barrenness
follows, in the coldness of our devotion when this mystery is neglected,
what ensues but looseness of life and an unaptness to all piety.

The seventh Meditation.
COnsider that in the Primitive Church which was governed of the Apostles
themselves the Christians often communicated, which did show that great
devotion and feruentnesse of spirit did possess the minds of men: and evident
it is that by how much the more that godly custom did wax more cold by so
much the feruentnesse and holiness of Christian people did wax less and
less.

2 Consider that by often communicating piety and perfection of life is
augme^ted, the Christian man is made more religious, the body made chaste and
obedient to the soul, the soul to God.

3 Consider, that to receive Christ in the sacrament with due preparation, is
no other thing then to worship him with great reverence: he therefore which by
this divine communicating does often receive him, does oftener also praise him
and worship him with divine honor, but he which honors Christ in earth
shall be likewise honored of his heavenly father in heaven. Luc. 9.26

4 Consider seeing this divine sacrament is the meat of the soul, wherewith it
is strengthened and maintained in a spiritual life, it does manifestly follow,
by how much the more often the soul is nourished with this meat, by so much
the perfecter it is made in a life spiritual.

The fruit.
THe fruit of this seventh Mediation is to make a firm purpose of applying our
selves to this frequent and often communicating, to beseech the Lord, that the
soul may never loath this heavenly food, but with an inward affection desire
it, from which affection springs perseverance and a readiness to sanctimony
and holiness of life, a longing to walk before

The Sol^quie.
WHat is this grace O sweet Jesus, which thou do affect me with? for thou not
only vouchsafest to open unto me the precious mine of gold lying in the field
of the holy Church, that is the hidden treasure for which the man that found
it, sold all that he had to buy that field: but also do often inuit me to
dig so precious a treasure that thou may enrich my soul. But that which
draws me into admiration is, that to the purchasing of this field and
digging this treasure as often as I will thou have added so great a commodity
that I need not sell any of my goods much less all that I have.

Lord if to obtain this treasure thou had ordained hard fasts, long
pilgrimages, shedding of blood, and other sharp pennances, all these labors
and afflictions ought worthily to have been suffered to taste even but once thy
sacred body: but O love unhard of that had had rather make the entrance
easy and delectable that I might often return to this mine. O Adam how much
better is the condition of thy posterity, then was thine which is now brought
to pass by the mean of our loving and liberal Jesus: thou were driven out of
paradise, and that thou should not return thither to eat of the tree of
life and live, one of the Cherubines armed with a fiery sword, was set of the
righteous God to keep it: But we thy children living in the Paradise of the
holy Church, are not only not driven away by an Angel with a fiery sword, but
are invited of the Lord of Angels, by the fire of his love to taste often the
fruits of the tree of life, yea to receive him who has given all strength to
the tree of life that gives a blessed and everlasting life: for so he inuiting
us, has promised. He which eats of this bread shall live for ever. Ioh 6.58.

O my soul be somewhat stirred up, and magnify thy God, for he which is
mighty has done great things for thee: do thou not see him that he is
made thy treasure to make thee rich, return often to dig it, it is a
precious treasure, and therefore it will satisfy thy desires, it is infinite,
and therefore will never decay.

Of the impediments which detain men from the blessed Sacrament.
IN the second of Exodus and 6. Pharaoh to withhold the people from doing
sacrifice, causes his Taske-masters to set them about drudgerie. It is the
wiliness of the old serpent to draw us from performing this holy service unto
God, to make the world and the flesh, distract our thoughts and desires so to
keep us from this spiritual part of Gods worship, either by remiss and
careless neglect, or at least by a timorous conceit of our unfitness: this
careless and remiss neglect arises of our many encumbrances and businesses
in the world. We can find time to follow profits and pleasures, but for to
enter into this so serious business of our soul we are not at leisure.

Esau to satisfy his appetite left his patrimony: The Gregesems respecting
their swine neglected Christ's heavenly presence. What great indignity was
offered unto the rich man, Luke 14.16. who prepared a great supper, sent his
servants to call them that were bidden to come in, when ye unthankful guests
returned answer they were otherwise employed, in deed they cared not for
coming.

If fear keep any away because it may seem presumption to approach unto so
holy a place as the altar of the Lord, let it be remembered that Christ calls
all that be weary and heavy laden to refresh them. Mat. 11. and 28.

If sloth and negligence, let a carfulness of our estate to come stir us
up. If the affairs of the world, cast them all a^ide. If any find himself
cold and slow without desire and devotion toward this heavenly meat, he ought
not therefore to abstain from the holy communion, for he shall here find
sensible devotion, when all the powers of the soul and dispersed apetites are
gathered together, when our will and strength is forcibly carried to God and we
maruellously moved to honor the passion of our blessed Savior. The
impediments therefore considered we may endeavor then to avoid them, that so
we may come and offer our souls and bodies a sacrifice to God, that neither
by the subtilnes of Satan, the affairs of this world, the pleasures of the
flesh, we be drawn away from so high and heavenly a repast prepared for us,
as is this great mystery of salvation.

The eight Meditation.
COnsider that the Devil can not endure the use of this profitable sacrament,
for he knows how much it is of force to attain blessedness, from whence he
for his pride fell. And he hates the Sacrament, for in it is represented the
passion, by force whereof he is bound, and thrust from the tyranny which he
would evercise upon mankind.

2 Consider for what causes the devil does labor by d^uers means and arts to
withdraw men from often communicating, whence we may gather how profitable
this holy Sacrament is to the Soul, when it is manifest, it so much
displeases Satan the Capital enemy of our good.

3 Consider that our nature is of it self prone to evil, how the allurements
of the flesh the affairs of the world, are ready to carry us away from Gods
worship, and therefore by so much the more we should shake off all
impediments, and receive this holy Eucharist, whereby we are strengthened to
resist temptations, united unto Christ, armed with his grace, which shall
protect and save us.

4 Consider that whereas this sacrament is numbered amongst the greatest
benefits given to us of God in this life, that we do in nothing more avoid
the tokens of ungratefulness, then by often communicating: for besides that it
is most acceptable unto God, the memory also of Christ is often renewed, which
he also desires to be done* saying: Do this in remembrance of me.

5 Consider how the intermission of this holy institution, does make men in
time less religious, how it proceeds for the most part of want of love. For
it cannot be that one should love Christ, and yet neglect this his holy
ordinance.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this Meditation, is first to beg of the Lord an inward
affection and devotion to this sacrament: next, strength against the
temptations and allurements, which are ready to withdraw us from the same.

The Soloquie.
BEhold now O good Jesus, by how many means my infernal enemy indeuoureth
to draw me away from thy heavenly table: At one time he assayleth me in the
faith of this most holy and hidden Sacrament: at another time he tortureth me
with scruples, very often he strives to pull me back from many humane
respects and that he may effect his purpose, he labors that the world may
wi^hdraw me, by the affairs thereof, and that the flesh should complain, her
repentance and turning unto God is grievous unto her. O my soul, if there were
not an inestimable benefit received by this holy Sacrament, the devil would
not be troublesome unto us; yea, he would rejoice in the time misspent
herein. But the enemy of man is not ignorant of the great good that hereby
comes to a man.

Now behold O Lord the assaults of this adversary of our Souls, I desire no
other thing of thee, then that thy servant I^b desired, and obtained, Job.
19.3. Place me by thee, and let the hand of whomsoever fight against me, stand
on my part O Lord, and I shall be safe. None shall st^y me from frequenting
this heavenly Sacrament, I pray thee therefore my merciful Jesus, that like as
thou have inspired me of thy merciful goodness, that I might beg the taste of
this precious meat, so thou may bestow on me grace to frequent the same
with joyful perseverance. Cause O Lord, that the memory of this holy
Sacrament fall not from me, otherwise I know that my heart will wax faint,
and I shall be constrained to say with the Prophet: my heart is withered within
me, that I forget to eat my bread. Let not the distrust of my own vileness,
deter and fray me from such a heavenly meat, so full of comfort.

A spiritual complaint of the Soul.
WHat shall I do my sweet Jesus, for two most strong Captains do greatly
assault me, that is to say, Fear and Love? Fear obiecteth to my mind, the
highness of this most honorable Sacrament, which does make me draw back my
foot. But love shows me the excellency of that vnion', which this admirable
mystery does procure, makes that with pleasant desire I dare come into thy
sight O what shall I do? if overcome with fear, I depart further from thy
holy table, when thou have said: Unless ye eat of the flesh of the Son of
Man, you shall not have life in you?

If ^ be overcome with Love, shall I be so bold without fear to receive the
Sacrament of so great a Majesty? What then shall I do O my savior? I know
well the one cannot please thee without the other: for feeing thou art our
Father, lou^ is worthily due unto thee, and seeing thou art our Lord, fear and
reverence.

Wherefore I determine to give my dilig^^ce to both, to receive both into my
company. Love shall cause that I come often and willingly. Fear that I come
renerently, and with diligent prepar^tion. And thou my most gentle Redeemer,
seeing thou vouchsafest to inuit me so often to thy sacred feast, bring to
pass that these two Captains may not forsake me. Oh my heavenly Father, for
that thou have bound me with so many benefits unto thee, and tied me with so
great bonds of Love, I beseech thee by the same love, wherewith thou do
always prosecute thy only begotten and beloved son, that thou will not
leave me so bound, but rather draw me to thy son, seeing thou have promised
it to me by the Prophet Osea, when thou say, I will draw them unto me with
chains of love. Remember also (O my blessed Savior) that thou have promised
this drawing, when thou saydst: When I am lifted up from the earth, I will
draw all things unto my self. Now O Lord thou art exalted, it remains that
thou dra^ ^y heart unto thee, and wh^^ ^t cannot find where it may ^est, like
the Dove it may re^urne to the Arc of Saluati^^n. But if thou O Lord, do ^ot
stretch forth thy hand t^ ^raw it unto thee into the Arc, it shall stay
without ^oores, and soon perish in ^he waters.

A Dialogue betwixt the disstressed Sinner and Faith.
Sinner. I Am not worthy to approach unto (...) high a place as the table o^
the Lord, and therefore I come so seldom as I do.


Faith. Did thou do this of true humility, and not of negligence rather, it
were well. But I doubt thou do it of sloth, because thou will not take
pains to repent as thou ought.


Sinner. The very truth is I am afraid.


Faith. Why man, let the love of him that so lovingly calls thee, abandon
fear.


Sinner. But I am sinful in my own conscience.


Faith. Who can say his heart is clean? all have sinned, and al have gone
astray.


Si. But my sins are grievous, and therefore I absent my self?


Fai. Are they grievous? and therefore thou should the rather seek a remedy
where it may be had.


Sinner. But I have not sensible devotion to seek.


Fa. Though we cannot be as strong as Sampson, we must not let all alone,
Christ will accept a good heart.


Sin. But I cannot so well dispose my self yet* by reason of the affairs of
this world?


Faith. Christ wills us to cast our care of earthly things upon him, because
we should cast our care about heavenly.


Sin. But may I be so bold as to come, and be partaker of so holy a mystery.


Fai. Thou may, and therefore prepare a penitent heart, and come in the name
of God.


Another conference between the Soul and Faith.
Soul. SHall I be so bold as to approach to this sacred Ark, and receive the
Lord of glory.


Faith. Why may thou not be so bold?


Soul. For because I am weak, miserable, and ill inclined.


Faith. He is both the Physician and the medicine, he himself has said, The
whole need not the Physician, but the sick.


Soul. If John the Baptist sanctified in his mothers womb, reputed himself
unworthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoos: And S. Peter thinking himself
unworthy of his presence, says: Go from me O Lord, for I am a sinful man, how
shall I, being a miserable sinner, without the danger of eternal punishment,
dare receive unto me so high a mystery?


Fai, If he descended from heaven to save sinners, if he call unto him all that
ate weary and heavy laden, shall he not accept of thee if thou come unto him?


Sou. What shall make me secure of punishment?


Fa Humility and Love. By humility thou shall be exalted, by love thou shall
be rewarded. Come therefore unto him by this holy mean left unto thee.


Sou. But if the Bethshamets in the first of Sam. 6. were so sharply punished
for looking into the Ark, how may I presume to receive the Lord of the arc
himself?


Fai. The Bethshamits were worthily punished, for that they looked into the
Arc of Curiosity, they did not honor and reverence it as they ought.
Wherefore if thou have humility and love, thou need not fear the punishment
of the Bethshamits.


Sou. But I cannot choose but acknowledge with the Centurion, that I am not
worthy to receive Christ under my roof.


Fa. The Lord makes the^ worthy, who acknowledge their own unworthiness.
Wherefore with all humble submission say: O Lord Jesus I come unto thee,
beseeching thee to turn away thine eyes from my sins: if thou will behold
them, behold them Lord not as a judge to punish them, but as a Physician to
cure them. Cause I beseech thee, that my infirmities may happen to thy greater
glory, as the infirmity of him did, that was borne blind, Ioh. the 9.3. Thou
delivering me, by so much the more shall thy glory shine, by how much the more I
am unworthy and miserable.


Of remoouing the dangerous effects which hinder the worthy receiving of this
holy Sacrament.
THere is, says the Wisema^, a word clothed with death, God grant it be not
found in the house of Israel. And there is too says the Apostle, an unworthy
receiving of Christ unto condemnation. 1. Cor. 11.27. And God grant it be not
found amongst the society of christians. That which is to some the savor of
life unto life, and these are the worthy receivers: the same may be unto
others the savor of death unto death, and these are the unworthy.

What is therefore more needful then to remove al dangerous defects, which
may hinder the fruit and efficacy of so high a mystery, to remove, I say,
all sensual desires, faithless cogitations, impenitent affections, and all
other evils whatsoever, which may withdraw the heart of man from God, and
hinder the good of this most excellent medecin of our souls.

The sun to them which are in health, is wholesome, but unto those who are
pained in the head, it falls out to be far otherwise. A potion received in
due season, does help the Patie^t. The showers and dews of heaven, make the
tree well planted to prosper and fructify, but that tree which has some worm
at the root, and does wither upward, does more and more decay by all this
moisture. The soul rooted in faith and charity, is as a good plant, whom this
heavenly dew does nourish. the corrupt heart is that worm which makes the
withered tree to fade away so long, until the master of the vineyard say, Cut
down the unprofitable tree. Now therefore, that the faithful Christian may be
as the tree planted by the waters side, Psalm. 1. which shall bring forth his
fruit in due season, let him in the name of God remove all dangerous defects,
as envy, evil concupiscence, infidelity, and the like, that he eat not of
this bread, and drink not of this cup unworthily.

The ninth Meditation.
Consider that to come unworthily to the holy Eucharist, as without Faith,
without devotion, without repentance, without reverence, is very dangerous.

2 Consider how respective we should be in coming to this holy mystery, how
careful, how religious.

3 Solomon says, when thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently
what is set before thee, Prou. 24.1.

4 Abraham when he was making his offering to God, Genesis 15.11. the fowls came
to hinder Abraham's offering, as wandering thoughts would do ours: Abraham rose
and drove them away.

The fruit.
The fruit of this Meditation is to prepare our selves in the best and most
reverent manner we can, that we eat paenem Domini, contra dominum, the bread
of the Lord against the Lord, as S. Austen speaks, to remove all dangerous
defects, to be sorry for our sins past, and resolve upon amendment, for the
time to come.

The Soloquie.
See thou not my soul that it is thy part to come with all devotion and
atte^tion of mind unto this holy ^acracrame^t* Remember that when God, Exo.
19.1.3. was to talk with Moses upon the mount, how he commanded ye neither
man nor beast should approach to the Mountain, least Moses by the sight of
any creature, should be disturbed: yea, that he should have fitter
opportunity of attention, without distraction, the whole hill was covered with
a great and dark cloud. No otherwise, my soul, do, that no evil affection
come with thee to the holy Altar, which may draw thee from devotion: here God
does expect thee. Consider with thy self that he can never be truly desired
and loved of thee, unless in coming to this sacred table, thou clean forget
all earthly things. Hear what the Kingly Prophet says, Psa. 45.11. My
daughter hearken and consider, incline thine ear. Forget also thine own
people, and thy Fathers house, so shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty,
for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou him. But O Lord, what shall I do to
attain this devotion? for my mind does remain so corrupt, since that
general fall of our first Father Adam that often times against my will, it
wandereth vagarant where it should not, what shall I do when my infernal enemy
either indeuoreth by many earthly occasions to draw me away from this heavenly
table, or to come (which is no less fearful) unworthily unto the same. Thou
see O merciful Jesus, in what state I stand, that is to say, how weak I am
by nature, help I beseech thee, my weakness with thy holy grace, that all
defects removed, I may approach unto thy heavenly table, with heart and soul
prepared.

Of preparing our selves before we come to the most holy Sacrament.
IF in our earthly affairs, we often times forget heavenly, good reason is it
that in our heavenly we should much rather forgette all earthly business
whatsoever, and prepare our selves to this so solemn a ceremonye, which does
consecrate man unto God. Christ sent 2. of his Disciples before to make ready
the upper room, where he would keep his mandy with his Apostles: our faith and
repentance as 2 messengers may prepare before the upper room of our souls. The
Israelites keeping their Passover, put leue^ out of their houses. Christ
washes his Disciples feet, and the Prophet David says, I will wash my hands
in innocence, and so will go to thy Altar. Psa. 26.6. Hester coming to find
grace and favor in the sight of Ahashuerath, first hu^bleth her self by
fasting and prayer. Jacob coming for a blessing, puts on Esaus garment. We
are approaching to the Lords Altar, coming for a blessing, seeking favor,
what should we else but wash our hearts by faith in the blood of the Lamb,
humble our souls: Take unto us the garment of Christ's righteousness.

Again, it behooves every one that will safely come to this table to direct
all his affections and desires to God only. To do nothing, to affect nothing
but Gods pleasure respected and his heavenly grace now offered.

For him which will rightly be partaker of this holy mystery: First, faith is
necessary, whereby he belieueth remission of his sins in Christ's merits.

2 Secondarily repentance is necessary, whereby he acknowledges the greatness
of his sin.

3 Thirdly, charity is required whereby the mind is at peace and quiet with
men, he that dwells in charity (says S. John) dwells in God, and God in
him: dwells in God, what more secure, and God in him, what more sweet?

4 Fourthly, attention must be had, that he be not carried away from
respective devotion, and chiefly from the meditation of Christ's passion, his
resurrection the third day, his descention into hell, his ascension up into
heaven, his glorious sitting at the right hand of God, from whence he shall
come at the end of the world to judge both the quick and dead.

5 Fifthly, fasting is necessary, where by the Prophet David humbled his
soul, Psalm. 35.13. Hester by fasting disposed her self to God, and found
grace in the sight of Assuerus, Hest. 4 16.

The tenth Meditation.
COnsider how busy and careful Martha was, Luke 10.40. to receive Christ
into her house, and therefore much more careful should every one be to
receive him into his heart.

2 Consider, what reverence and devotion is meet by that of the Prophet of
Christ's entrance into heaven: Be ye lifted up ve everlasting gates, and the
king of glory shall come in, Psa. 24.6

3 Consider, that to entertain an earthly prince all things are made decent
and clean.

4 Consider, it was said to him that came unto the marriage feast after an
unseemly manner, friend, how came thou in hither, and have not on a wedding
garment. Mat. 22.12.

5 Consider how the Apostle S. Peter, when Christ would wash his feet, thought
himself vnwor^hy that so great honor should be done unto him said within
himself what am I worm that the Lord of light should do this unto me.

The fruit.
THe fruit of this Meditation: The first is, to prepare us with all humble
reverence, but chiefly to offer unto God the sacrifice of a broken and contrite
heart, that as his body was broken for us, so should our heart be broken.

2 The second is to cry out with the Prophet, Crea in me Domine nouum cor:
Create in me O Lord a new heart.

3 The third is to become surueyours of our selves, and call a little
consistory in our own souls.

A form of confessing our selves before we come to receive the most holy
Sacrament.
O Lord thou art not wont to drive away sinners, but call them, and
conuertest them to thee: Thou art he that have said, Mat. 11.26. Come all that
are weary and heavy laden: It was publicly spoken of thee, that thou did
receive Publicans and sinners, and did tate with them: O my Lord thou art now
at the throne of mercy, and therefore have not changed thy nature, which thou
had sometimes here in the world. Thou calledst them from heaven who^ thou
did call on earth: wherefore comforted with this remembrance of thy love I
come unto thee laden, and laboring and burdened with my sins, I come as
the sick to the Physician, beseeching thee to heal me: As a sinner to the
welspring of righteousness, beseeching thee to justify me, I acknowledge I
acknowledge, my great unworthiness.

If thine own holy Apostle, or as he seemed, prince of the Apostles, could
cry out and say, Go from me O Lord for I am a sinful man: how much more
shall I who am an unhallowed creature and prince of sinners say: I am not
worthy to who^ thou should come, nay, I am not worthy to come to thee, much
less to receive thee.

It was lawful for none to taste of the show bread which was only a shadow of
this profound mystery but only for him who was clean and sanctified, how
shall I eat thereof, who am so far removed from true holiness? It was so
great an offense to touch thy sacred Arc that Vzzah stretching out his hand to
touch it. The 2. of Kings, 6.7. was suddenly stricken, how can I not but fear
and tremble in this case? O Lord as I fear thy greatness. So do I also fear
the multitude of my sins. I am that fool, Psalm. 14 1. that said in his heart
there is no God. I lived so dissolutely as (by my manners I professed as much) I
feared not thy justice, I dreaded not to transgress thy laws, I rendered not
thanks as I ought: What other thing has my life been then a daily war
against thee? What other thing have I done by my sins and careless coming to
this mystery of former times then offered thee open wrong, stricken thy
blessed head with a reed? My sins have been the spear that gored thee, the
thorns that pierced thee: How therefore shall I be so bold as to come unto
thee? Shall I repose thy sacred body in a den of Dragons, a nest of
Scorpions? what other thing is a soul full of sin? wherefore do thou cast
thy childrens bread unto dogs, and thy precious Margarite to swine? How will thou rest with me O my Lord which art the purity of a virgin, the fountain
of all pulchritude? Thy most holy body taken from the cross, was wrapped in
fine linen, laid in a new Sepulcher, wherein never any was laid, but what
part of my soul is clean, what new? How then shall I receive thee O my
Savior and redeemer? I am ashamed so often as I behold my self in such a
state, I blush considering, what I am, and whether I am about to come, my
refuge is to fly unto thy mercy according to which mercy O Lord look upon
me, did the stones cleave asunder when thou sufferedst thy passion and shall
my stony heart be nothing moved for whom thou did suffer? did the earth
move, and shall my earthly mind stand immovable like a dead center? noe noe, I
am moved O my Savior.

Another form of co^^fession.
TAke it not haynously, O my Lord, that being such a one as thou see me to
be, dare presume to come into thy sight? I remember thou wast not offended
with the poor woman which had the issue of blood, Matthew. 9. But did accept
her, saying, be of good comfort daughter, thy faith has made thee whole, I
have a greater issue, and come unto thee to be cured. I call to mind Marie
Magdalene, who washed thy feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair
of her head who had much forgiven her. Behold here lies a sinner which has
more sins, but fewer tears, she was not the first nor the last whom thy
mercy received, receive me O Lord though I have not shed so many tears as
may wash thy feet, yet have thou shead as much blood as can wash my sins O
my Lord thou have not changed thy office and nature though thou seem to be
far away.

I read in the holy Gospel that all that were diseased did resort unto thee,
and that the multitude, Luke 6.19. sought to touch thee for there went virtue
from thee, the leapers came unto thee, and thou streatching forth thy blessed
hand did heal them, thou gave unto the blind their sight, unto the lame
their limbs. Thou did cure the sick, disposses^e the devil, raise the
dead, and can thou not forget to show mercy which art mercy it self? I come
unto thee O my Redeemer, I come unto thee O eternal creator of heaven and
earth beseeching thee, that as the holy king David did accept at his table, and
show favor unto Mesph^bosheth, 2. Sam. 9.11 though of himself deformed, yet
for the love of Jonathan of whom he came willing, thereby to honor the son
for the fathers sake. So may it please thee to admit me, though of my self
most deformed, in the love of him in whom thou art well pleased.

I offer unto thee an humble heart, and had I many hearts, I would offer them
all unto thee, Lord I can be no more without thee, nor live without thee then
can this body of mine remain when life is taken from it. Wherefore necessity
drives me unto thee, and mercy ministers boldness, by how much the more
unworthy I am, by so much the more art thou glorified in showing mercy.

A Meditation upon these words. Whence comes this that my Lord comes unto
me.
HE brings him self that sends not an other, he which has so many spirits
his ministers, comes himself unto his servants, visits the sick, lifts
up, and comfort the fallen, helps the afflicted, refreshes the hungry
with his own body and blood, who abounds with so many, so diverse means, and
medicines, as to whom the fullness of the whole earth does appertain. He
bring^^^ himself unto thee, O (...) soul as a father, when he prosecuteth
thee with love as a brother, when he makes thee by adoption the son of God,
as a fellow when he appoints thee a coheire of his heavenly kingdom, as a
heavenly repast, for thy eternal safety, as an intercessor for the remission
of all thy sins. O the wonderful love of the son of God! vnde ve^it. from
whence comes this that my Lord comes unto me.

A Meditation upon these words of the centurion. Mat. 8.8 Non sum dignus vt
intres sub tectum meum. Lord I am not worthy that thou enter under my roof.
O Lord had thou rather be at an other man's house with dishonor then at
thine own with honor? at least O good Jesus, if thou had no respect of thine
honor if thou castest under foot all praise and renown, if thou take unto
thee every vile sinner, yet have regard to my estate: Lord I confess I am not
worthy thou should come under my roof: Thou know my poverty and need I
have this poor cottage far unmeet to cetertain so great a guest as thou O my
Lord: This body is not compact of gold and silver, but of dust and ashes, and
also subject to infirmities, diseases and death. This soul joined to my body
is far from that holiness it should be endued withal, farte unmeet a place
is it for such a personage, I am altogether confounded, I tremble and shake at
the coming of so great a guest into so poor a house as my self.

Tantum dic verbum and sanabitur anima mea. But only say the word and my
soul shall live.
ANd art thou ignorant O my Lord who thou art, what a one, and how great. Thou
art God omnipotent, thou art Lord of all, thou art the Creator of heaven and
earth, and whatsoever is contained in the vast compass thereof, thou have
raised me up as all other things else of nothing: Thou have clothed me with this
body, and have given me a right and and righteous soul: thou have restored
this soul fallen from the state of innocence. Thou have illuminated it by
grace, and washed it in the sacred Font of baptism, O my Lord thou art he
that rulest and gouernest me, thou would for my sake become man, die for
me, suffer for me the very death of the cross, so much could love and
charity prevail with thee, Lord, thy grace is sufficient, and will thou turn
then into my house to refresh my faint soul, to cure me being weak, and
heal me being sick? will not thy only word suffice where with thou have
cleansed the leapers, dispossessed the Devils, raised the dead, it will suffice
O my Lord, Dic verbum, and sanabitur anima mea, say the word and my soul
shall be healed.

A Meditation upon those words, Veniam and curabo eum I will come and cure
him. Mat 8.7.
IF it please thee so, neither will thou have it otherwise, behold thy
servant? Be it unto me according to thy word. Come down Lord Jesus, or ever
my soul dies. Now a way lies open unto thee my soul, O my soul I will
show the great joy, rejoice and be glad, for thy Creator comes unto thee, thy
Savior comes unto thee, who has fought with thy enemies, sustained wounds,
spent his life for thee: Behold how he desires to enlarge thee with the most
ample gift of his most blessed divinity? Where will thou lay up these things
my soul? How great is he to whom the thrones and dominations serve, on whom
the holy host of heaven do attend?

O my soul admire the wonderful piety, and ineffable dignity wherewith he
hastes to visit thee, and makes speed to come unto thee? But arise, run
forth to meet him, hasten this meeting, rejoice and congratulate for the
coming of such a guest, cry with a devout heart: Lord what is man that thou
art so mind full of him? Psalm 8.2. and say with the same Prophet who am I
that thou have brought me to this? 2. Sam. 7.18.

The Soloquie.
Lord, how much do thou submit thy self while thou do not disdain to
enter into the vile cottage of my soul? It was sufficient for thy love to be
borne for me in a stable? That thou descendest from heaven to rest in the womb
of the blessed virgin was not such a marvel for that it was the womb of a
most pure creature, O holy Elizabeth who being visited and saluted by the
mother of this Lord considering the dignity of this majesty did say whence
comes this unto me, that the mother, of my Lord comes to me? Therefore what
shall I say to whom the Lord himself comes by infinite parts, far above
Marie? he comes unto me not only to visit me, but also to unite me to him,
and enrich me with heavenly gifts. O my soul, I greatly rejoice that thou have
delivered to Jesus of thine own will the government and possession of thy
self? but understand that by this act thou are bound to proclaim open war
to all sins the capital enemies of thy Lord to whom thou art delivered,
neither can thou any more without manifest offense of rebellion give an
entrance of sin into thine house now dedicated unto Christ. O my soul enter
into consideration, see with what bond of relouing Jesus who has loved thee,
first thou art bound; O God, how unlike are thy doings to the actions of the
princes of this world?

King Ezechias. 2. King. 20.13. that he might declare his favor unto the
Ambassadors of the k. of Babel, showed the^ all his riches and treasures, not
giving them any part thereof. Thou do O most gracious Lord not only show us
thy treasures, but freely bestow them upon us, I see not O my soul how thou
art able to recompense so great good will only yield thy self wholly to the love
of thy redeemer, for it cannot be thou should serve two masters: It cannot
be that the Ark of God, and the idol Dagon, 1. Sam. 5.4. should stand in one
temple: If thou prostrate thee to the love of creatures, thou shall undergo a
hard servitude; but if thou follow Christ thou shall find rest and quiet. O my
soul we were created to serve and worship God: what higher part of this
worship then to come and be partakers of his dietie. O my soul be prepared.

A meditation upon that which Saint Paul teaches in the first to the
Corinthians, Chap. 11.
COnsider that the Apostle in the preparation to the most holy Communion,
requires three things: the first is, that the Communicant examine his own
conscience, which is signified in these words, Let a man prove himself, and so
let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. If he find his conscience
defiled with some mortal sin. let him make a most humble and penitent
confession thereof.

2 Secondarily, the Apostle would that the holy Eucharist be received worthily,
otherwise the danger is great: for he which with a corrupt mind and evil
intention, approaches unto the Lords table, eats and drinks his own
judgment.

3 Thirdly* S. Paul would that a difference be made between these holy
Elements, consectated to a most divine use, and the profane repastes of the
body only.

A Meditation upon that of the Prodigal Son, when he was received of his
Father. Luke 15.20.
THese three things which the Apostle requires in this preparation, may be
considered in the receiving of the Prodigal son.

First he feels with grief his own misery, he acknowledges his own
unthriftiness, confesses his sin, whereby inclusiuely he craves pardon,
which done, his father receives him.

2 Secondly, he is clothed with a new garment, which may signify the clothing
of righteousness, which is made white in the blood of the Lamb, Apoc. 7.14.

3 After all he sits down at the table, catcth the fat calfe, or that
blessed sacrifice that was once offered for all, is entertained with mirth and
melody. For is there not joy in the presence of the Angels of God in heaven,
over one sinner that repents? Luc. 15.10.

The Soloquie upon this preparation.
Lord although thy Apostle had never mentioned the purity of conscience, which
is required to this divine sacrament, who would not judge that thou the
fountain of all purity, ought to be received with a pure and clean heart. O
most merciful Lord, how little do thou require of us, to eat of that Lamb
sent of thee from heaven, by whose offering we are delivered from the
servitude of sin.

The Jews to eat their Pascall Lamb, which was but a shadow and figure of
this, ought to provide them a Lamb of a year old, Exo. 12.13. without
blemish, which roasted by fire, should be eaten h^^tily of them with sweet
bread and wild Lettice, with their loins gi^t, their shoes on their feet,
their staves in their hand. O how grievous and troublesome was this burden,
(containing the force of the law.) It was of that sort which S. Peter
witnesses, Neither your Fathers nor you were able to bear. But to the eating
this true lamb, which takes away the sins of the world, thou do require no
other thing in the law of (...), but the purity of conscience, and devotion of
heart. O how true is it my loving Jesus* which thou have said of the law, Math.
11.28. My yoke is sweet, and my burden light, yea truly, so light and
sweet, that if there were not that would imagine a labor in the precept, it
should not deserve the name of a burden or yoke.

O my soul, now thou see to how few things Christ has bound thee, and how
he has given thee abundance of his grace in this life, by the benefit of this
most holy Sacrament, and in the other life eternal. Only take heed to thy
self, that seeing the Lord of his infinite goodness, has given thee so easily
this inestimable commodity, thou do not again relapse into destruction.

Consider earnestly what thou should do, not to receive so gentle a Lord,
which comes to enrich thee with his gifts, were great inhumanity, very
pernicious unto thy self. But to receive him unworthily by the default, were
mere slothfulness, which procures injury to him, and punishment unto thy
self.

Thou shall do well to imitate the example of the poor country man, who
understanding that the King would rest in his house, removed al things which
he thought might offend the Kings eyes, diligently swept all his house, and
although he could not beautify it according to the worthiness of such a
guest, yet he did as much as he was able, to receive him in seemly and
decent manner, he goes to meet the king with all speed, receives him with
great joy, gives him many thanks for this so great favor. If then so many
things are done to an earthly King, what will thou do O my Soul, to the King
of heaven, who comes not to live at thy cost, but to impart his goods unto
thee? Labor therefore in clensing and decking thy self, hang the chamber or
upper room of thy best devotion, with the Tapestrie of holiness, and welcome
him with love, who of Love says, My delight is to be with the sons of men,
Prou. 8.31.

A Meditation for the day we are to Communicate in.
IN what day you communicate, as soon as you awake early in the morning,
think that the Lord does expect you this day at his heavenly table. Think of
putting on the inward ornaments of the Soul, as Faith, Repentance, Devotion,
Charity, Humblenes of mind, and such like.

1 Consider how Christ in his conception, took our nature, and that we in
this spiritual conception of him, should express many divine qualities of his
nature.

2 Consider you are to receive him this day in the state of grace, who shall
one day receive you in the state of glory.

3 Consider that of the first eating it was said, that day thou eatest thou
shall die, but by this eating, that day thou eatest thou shall live, Ioh. 6.

4 Esteem thy self unworthy, and say, Sweet Jesus what love is this thou
pursuest me withal, behold Lord I prepare my self this day to receive thee
into the poor Cottage of an humble heart, but alas. the Wiseman Solomon
himself, when he had in many years, and by much cost built thee a Temple, 1.
Kin. 8. Did notwithstanding marvel that thou the God all Majesty, would
vouchsafe to abide and dwell in it. what shall I say, who have bestowed so
little pains. so small cost, in preparing thee a Temple, I beseech thee to
turn my Soul into a house of prayer, to whippe out all evil affections, that
it may be rightly said to be Domus tuae, Thy house.

4 Make one repentance with Mary Magdalen, one hearty repentance for all that
is past.

A Meditation taken out of the History of Zacheus. Luke 19 2.
ZAcheus desirous to see Jesus, but for that he was of a low stature; he
could not see him for the multitude of people, he went up into a tree where
Christ should pass by.

2 Christ passes by, and casting his merciful eyes on Zacheus, said, Zachee,
make haste to come down, for today I must abide in thine house. He came down
then all rejoicing, and receives him into his house, thinking that he was
greatly rewarded.

3 Thirdly, the Jews when they saw Christ turn into the house of a sinner,
they murmured, which Zacheus perceiving, turning to Christ, said, Behold, half
of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have defrauded any thing from any
man, I restore four fould. But Jesus said unto him, Salvation is come unto thy
house.

The application of this History.
THat thou may be partaker of salvation, which is offered in this sacrament,
it is necessary that thou be desirous to know and taste Christ, which is
contained in this holy mystery. And to know him, it is necessary first, that
thou lift up thy mind on high, and consider the greatness of God, keeping in
the mean while, the ground under thy feet, as Zacheus kept it, when he stood
upon the tree, that is, to procure that our temporal business be then under
us, and not over our head, by distracting us in devotion.

2 We must receive our Lord not with melancholy or anguish of doubts, but as
Zachee did with joy, which springs from a vehement affection toward this
holy Sacrament.

3 Consider that it is not sufficient to receive Christ into our house, and
then to put the hand in the bosom, but we must furnish the sacred Communion
with good works, by releeuing the necessities of our neighbors, after the
example of Zacheus,: and he which does so, shall hear that comfortable voice,
This day salvation is come into thine house.

The fruit.
THe fruit of this Meditation, shall be to desire and ask of God, an affection
to this Sacrament, from which affection springs spiritual consolation,
necessary to the Communion.

The Soloquie.
O My bountiful Jesus, how liberal art thou toward him, who does desire and
seek thee? Zachee was held with desire of thee, but of seeing thee only, and
thou not only did show thy self to him to be seen, but also calledst him,
and inuitedst thy self into his house, on whom to augment thy favor, thou
bestowedst Salvation. Oh how well has the Prophet said of thee, All Nations
seeking thee, shall rejoice and be glad And let them say always which love
thy saving health. The Lord be magnified.

Zachee thou worthily reioycedst, because thou have him in thine house, which
makes al Angels to rejoice. Only rejoice and esteem as nothing, if the Jews
murmur and call thee sinner, since he is at hand for thee, which can defend and
justify thee, join thy self to him, and he will be as a buckler for thee,
and thou shall also understand how sweet the Lord is. O my soul, thou have
also cause of rejoicing, and peradventure greater then Zacheus had, seeing to
thee also this day comes the fountain of all joy and gladness Hear what the
Prophet Zachary says unto thee: Rejoice O daughter Sion, and be glad O
daughter Jerusalem, behold thy righteous King and thy Savior comes unto
thee, nor comes he to exact a tribute, or to command any task, but only for
the cause of saving thee, and defending thee from the rebuke of thine enemies.
Think not that a greater benefit showed to Zacheus then to thee, for while
thou do spiritually receive him under the accidents of bread and wine by
faith, and after a most heavenly manner, he shows that he is come unto thee,
not only to converse with thee, and bestow salvation, as he did to the house
of Zachee, but also to unite him self to thee, that thou may be one
certain thing with him, which is the effect of this heavenly meat.

Who does not see then that this is a far greater benefit? oh my gracious
Lord, seeing thou have vouchsafed to enter this poor house of mine, give me
grace that it happen not to me, as to the ungrateful Jews, who in the day of
Palms, received thee with great joy and triumph into Jerusalem, but a little
after they cried to Pilate, crucify him, crucify him, and casting thy cross
upon thy shoulders, cast thee forth of this city. Let me die O Lord before,
yea, let me die a thousand deaths, then that I cast thee out of me. For that
were to thrust thee out of thine own house.

A Meditation upon those words of Christ, Luke 19.5. Hodie oportet me manner
in Domo tua. To day I must abide in thine house.
WHo am I O most bountiful Jesus, that thou desire to abide with me? who am
I that may deserve to entertain thee the Lord of heavens? What do thou find
in mee', that does so much delight thee, and inuit thee to come under my
roof? art thou ignorant of my most vile beginning? I am not of the number of
that celestial and divine Legion, I am not a Seraphin, not an Archangell, not
an Angel, nor any of the Thrones, or other most sacred Spirits, my being
differs much from the^, freed are they from all admixtion of body, pure, and
innocent, I was born in sin, drawing my beginning from the earth, so mean a
subject, I am not worthy. O my Savior, of thy divine presence, happily thy
delight is to be with the sons of men, true, but I am not Abraham, I am not
Moses, I am not as the blessed virgin, no, I bear not the least similitude of
these blessed Saints in heaven, while they remained in the world, What shall I
say? I am sorry O my Lord, I am no more worthy to receive thee then I am, but
my comfort is, thou tookest mercy on the woman of Canaan, and all distressed
people that came unto thee.

A short form of confession to be made in private, before the receiving of
the blessed Sacrament.
I Miserable sinner, confess and acknowledge with bended heart, and hands
lifted up in the presence of Almighty God, my many and manifold sins, and
that I have transgressed sundry ways against the precepts of the first and
second table, I am sorry from the bottom of my heart, and it greeueth me that I
have so often offended thee, I come unto thee as an humble suitor, to obtain
mercy and pardon for all my offenses, I beseech thee to sanctify me by thy
holy spirit, to strengthen my faith against all assault^, so seal up in me by
this holy mystery, that comfortable hope of the life to come. Direct me, I
beseech thee, now approaching to thy holy table, that I may abide with thee, and
be a fit habitation for thy holy presence, both now and for evermore, when I
consider thou did create me, not being asked, redeem me, not being required,
it turned my tears of sorrow into tears of joy, my tears of fear, into
tears of love. O my Savior show mercy, for with such great sinn^rs as I am,
thou g^ttest greatest honor, as thou did by Mary Magdalen.

An admonition moving all to reconcile themselves, and forgive their enemies,
before they be pertakers of the most holy Sacrament.
WHen thou bring thy gift to he altar. (says Christ our Savior, Matthew
5.25.) and there rememberest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave
thy offering before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. In the 11. also of Saint Mar. and
25. he says unto his Disciples: When you shall stand to pray, forgive, if
you have ought against any man, that your Father which is in heaven may forgive
you your trespasses. By both which testimonies of holy Scripture, we learn, y^
all our oblations and prayers, (otherwise in themselves amongst the best
actions of a Christian life) are in no case acceptable unto God, without our
reconcilement and charity first had with me^. The Wiseman, Eccl. 28.2.3. could
think it unmeet in very reason, to ask mercy, when we our selves deny mercy.
We may remember, that the unthankful debtor that would not remit his f^llow
servant. Mat. 18.30. for his vncompassionate usage of his fellow: found
himself the like measure, that is, judgment without mercy, at his masters
hand.

With what countenance (says one) can we look up to heaven and say, Lord
forgive us our trespasses, and yet revenge with all extreamitie the least
offenses offered unto our selves. Noe, no, he that seeks vengeance, shall
surely find vengeance, Mihi vindictam, ego retribua^ vengeance is mine, says
the Lord, I will revenge. We must let God alone to right our wrongs, unless we
will usurp that poor which is only proper unto hi^, for our selves we should
not forget the Wisemans counsel. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has
done thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven thee when thou prayest: should
a man bear hatred against man and desire forgiveness of the Lord? Peter says
unto Christ, master: how often shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him? until seven times, no Peter (says our Savior) I say not unto
thee, until seven times, but until seventy seven times, that is, quoties
tot^es, how often soever he sin against thee, so often shall thou forgive.

The offering up of sacrifices in the old law was a special part of that
worship the people were wont to perform unto Almighty God as an acceptable
service unto him. But the prophet Esai tells them, Esa. 1.11. all their
offerings were utterly displeasing unto him, for why? they were all set on
cruelty, and revenge, their hands were full of blood and therefore God would
accept of no sacrifice at their hands. Our oblations that are done in love
with God, and man: these ascend like the smoke of Abels sacrifice, and are well
pleasing unto the most highest.

But how should flesh and blood forgive, where wrong and injury has been
offered? that which Adam cannot bea^e, Christ can, that which to nature is so
much against nature, and therefore difficulty, is to grace nothing so, that
which heathen men will so hardly brook, is to Christians who have, or should
have a further perfection, more facile and easy. Wherefore our Savior tells
his disciples* of somewhat more th^n loving them, who love first, Ego dico,
vobis diligite inimicos, I say unto you love your enemies, do good unto them
that hurt you, pray for them that persecute you, we forgive, we love our very
enemies for his sake who has done far more for us. What greater love (says
Saint John) then for one to give his life for his friend? yet greater was
Christ's love who gave his life for us that were his enemies, we have some
reason to help the distressed, to relieve the poor and needy, for the very
beholding of their necessity does often move compassion: but to love our
enemies we have no reason in the world, but only for his sake who has
commanded all those who profess his name, and expect his kingdom saying,
Diligite inimices, love your enemies. We forgive, and why? Christ has forgiven
us, we show mercy, and why? Christ Jesus has showed mercy unto us. Quid
contra nos proximus, says an ancient father, shall we see what our neighbor
has done against us, and shall we not see what Christ has done for us? God
forbid? All that we do, or can forgive are pence only, Christ he forgiues
tallentes, we some few, he ten thousand; we show love, but Christ showed
love in deed, love without example. Were we as ready to remember benefits as
we are injuries, we would be more charitable then we often are.

But being ready to revenge, do we know how soon we may stand in need of
God our selves? no verily? and therefore we had need to show compassion to
others.

When as now Jacob their father was dead, Joseph's brethren thought Joseph would
revenge all the wrong they before unjustly offered their brother they were
deceived, Joseph tells them he meant nothing less. Am not I (says he) under
God? as if he should have said my self am reedie to ask forgiveness of
God and should I not from ^y heart forgive you my brethren? I do, I do.
Wherefore one says, Qualem erga te Deum habere vis, talem te erga proximum
ostendas, as thou would have God be unto thee, so be thou to thy neighbor
that has offended thee.

To move Christians to this love, Christ our Savior goes further and says:
forgive, that you may be children of your father, which is in heaven, for he
causes the Sun to arise on the just, and on the unjust. It was a token that
David was of the stock of Iesse when he would not only not hu^t King Saul
his enemy when he was alive, but would even show mercy unto his offspring
when he was dead; they give testimony that that they are his followers who
prayed for his enemies (father forgive them) who show themselves ready to
remit, and can find in their hearts to forgive offenses offered. S. Am^rose
told a great Emperor of the world how Christians did avenge themselves: our
weapons (says he) are our prayers and our tears: we weep for our persecutors,
we pray for them.

Neither shall our forgiving go away empty for this active mercy showed unto
men, shall be rewarded with passive mercy by him, who has said: Blessed are
the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. Hence it comes to pass, that our
enemies may do us as much good as the best friends we have in the world:
whereas in forgiving them we receive forgiveness of God: but for one drop of
water given, we receive by a gainefull interest a whole ocean sea, for our two
mytes, the whole treasure of the temple. We give and forgive some small
benefits, trespasses, but with God there is no depth of his bounty, no number
of his mercies.

If at any time we are justly moved (as we often are) to use that Quid
rependam, as of the Prophet, Psalm. 116.11. what shall we do unto the Lord for
all the benefits he has done unto us? then most especially approaching to
these holy mystery: which the old Christians in the Primitive Church well
remembering, gave evident testimony at this solemn occasion by their
liberality to the poor, their visiting the sick, and other like works of
m^rcie.

And besides their charitable relief of the needy; it is wonderful to
consider, and it may do a good man's heart good to call to mind the v^iforme
peace, and peaceable union, they retained amongst themselves all assembled in
one communion of Saints, to worship him in earth, with whom they hoped shortly
to rejoice in heaven. They forgot not that charge left by Christ at his
departure from the world: by this shall men know that you are my Disciples
that you love one another, nor that loving entreatie of Abraham had with Lot,
Genesis 13 11. Let there be no strife between thee and me, between thy heardmen
and my heardmen, for we are brethren.

Be of one mind says the Apostle, 2. Corinthians. 13. live in peace, and the God
of love and peace shall be with you: and to the Ephesians he says, let all
bitterness, and anger, and wrath, be put away from you, with all
maliciousness be courteous one to another, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake forgave you. There is but one body, one spirit, on faith,
one baptism, one God which is above all, through all, and in us all.

In this mystery as the faithful find, wrought tranquillity of conscience
within: So also find that the spreading of charity toward men abroad,
which charity thinks no evil, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things.

When as Christ our Savior was now to celebrate his last supper, he washes
himself his disciples feet, wypeth them with a towell, gives a precedent of
humility, and love admits Judas that bare an evil mind toward him to his
owne-dish, gives him a soppe, speaks mildly unto him, which all were tokens
of love: should we not take example by our Lord and master? When may we more
fitly use that hymn of the Angels respecting the common cause of joy: we have
Glory be to God on high, in earth peace, toward men good will: and not good
will in show, but even in singlenes of heart. Wherefore to conclude with that
of the Apostle, Philip. 3.1. If there be any consolation in Christ, any comfort
of love, any fellowship of the spirit, be we of one accord, let the same mind
be in us that was in Christ, who humbled himself: wherefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name above all names, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, Philip. 2.10.

A Prayer before the holy Communion.
O Lord Jesus Christ which art the only Son of God the most high king of
kings, Lord of Lords, the image of the Father, the brightness of eternal
light, whom the Angels do only desire to behold, who after all thy suffering,
praying for thine enemies, now sit at the throne of glory, who am I that
do presume not only to behold thee my God, but also to take and receive thy
body into the lodging of my body, and house of my soul, contaminated sinner.
O miserable that I am, and most unhappy of all men which do this so exceeding
great injury to thee my God and Savior? for when a thousand years of tears
are not sufficient to receive at the least but once worthily this reverent and
most precious Sacrament, so high and divine a mystery, I wretched and unworthy
creature daily offending and adding sin unto sin, unprepared, and of a
heart less contrite and purged, do notwithstanding take upon me often to
receive it. But for because thy mercy is greater by infinite then my misery,
neither has it been heard from the beginning of the world that thou have ever
despised the prayers of the humble, which sauest them that trust in thee, and
which have shed thy precious blood for our salvation, and the salvation of the
world, and for an everlasting pledge of thy love toward us have ordained this
Sacrament, trusting in this thy unspeakable love, I most humbly think of
coming to thy table, of putting out from the house of my soul, the sower
leaven of hatred and evil will toward all, that I may keep this holy
passover with the sweet bread of sincerity and love.

Grant me thy grace, that this holy mystery may turn and become effectual
to the life and salvation of body and soul, that I may firmly abide in thee,
which intend to receive thee into me.

Let my mind be confirmed amongst so great mysteries with thy comfortable
presence, that it may understand thou art present with her, and rejoice
perfectly before thee, the fire which always burns, the brightness which
always shines, sweet Jesus, good Jesus, the bread of life which refreshest us
ever, and yet never decayest, which art always eaten, and remaynest always
whole, inflame and sanctify thy vessel, purge it from malice, fill it with
thy grace, and being filled, preserve it evermore in thy holy love, which
live, and rugnest one God world without end. Amen.

Of the devout man, to whom Christ in his last supper, shows favor.
IMagine thou had been at Jerusalem when this noble Sacrament was instituted
by Christ, that thou had been invited by some of the Apostles to be present,
consider with what joy thy soul had rejoiced at this message, and how hastily
all businesses laid aside thou would have run thither.

Imagine, that as soon as thou had come to the supper the Lord had washed
thy feet, and said with tears falling on them, I do this to wash away many
sins committed against thy Creator, by walking through ungodly ways, I wash
thee also for the labors which thou shall suffer for me in a spiritual li^e.

3 Lastly, imagine how he bids thee sit down at the ^^ble, casting his most
loving eyes upon thee saying, Desiderio desaderau^, with a a (...) I desired to
eat this passover with you. I have prevented thee with great benefits, and
will hereafter enrich thee with greater, only continue in the love of me.
Consider what modesty thou would have used at that holy table, with what
attention thou would have received the words of Jesus.

The fruit of this Meditation.
THe fruit is to give the Lord hearti^ thanks for this inestimable benefit now
ready to be received, to beseech him that he would not suffer thee to die
ungrateful, to call to (...) that Christ kept the best wine until the last,
least this holy repast as sweet remembrance of his love at parting: that this
love of h^s was a motion natural, which motion (say the Philosophers) is most
forceably toward the end.

The Soloquie.
O My soul how lovingly does the Lord knock at thy door with a desire of
entering in, and resting with thee: arise O my soul, and Christ shall give
thee light, not only the shepheardes of Bethleem had cause of joy who found as
it was told the^, but thou have cause of joy too, who shall find the joy of
Isra^l, no marvel though Martha and Mary went forth to meet the Lord, knowing
how he would fill their minds with celestial consolation, go forth O my soul
to meet him that comes unto thee who is the stay, yea the whole stay of all
thy being. The water that is separated from the fountain vanishes, the bough
that is cut from the tree withers, the body from which the soul is gone
dies, depart not therefore O my soul from the soul of thy soul, but embrace
with all gladness. Lord as there is no doubt but that such was the excess of
thy love and favor, whereat even the Angels were amassed: so is it sure that I
was most bound not only to run the way of all thy commandments, but also to
spend my life for the love of thee, Thou have bestowed on me this so excellent
a gift more noble then humane understanding is able to conceive, from whence
springs an obligation which does bind me unto thee. Who does not see that
I shall be most unthankful if I acknowledge not thy singular love, O my heart
open thee and show with what bond of relouing Jesus, loving thee thou art bound.

When you are about to communicate, and are now receiving the most holy
Eucharist meditate upon these sayings of holy scripture.
ECce spous^s venit: Behold the bridegroom comes, go forth to meet him. Mat.
25.6.

2 Ecce ancilla Domini: behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word, Luc. 1.38.

3 Dic verbum and viuet anima: I am unworthy etc. do but say the word and my
soul shall live. Mat. 8.29.

4 Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and
ye k. of glory shall come in. Psalm. 24.7.

5 Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Blessed is the man that puts his
trust in him, Psalm. 34.8. saying:

O good Jesus join me inwardly unto thee, to the glory of thy name, and the
salvation of my soul.

In the time of communicating say.
O Most loving and sweet Jesus, the love, and sweetness of my heart, the life of
my soul, my mellifluous and everlasting good, have mercy upon me, be with me
O Lord now and for ever.

Immediately after say the 103. Psalm. Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that
is within me praise his holy name, praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not
all his benefits, which forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all thy
infirmities which saves thy life from destruction, and (...) thee with mercy
and loving kindness, which satisfies thy mouth with good things, making thee
^ong and lastie as an Eagle. Wherein we acknewledge these six benefits:
first, the forgiveness of our sins: secondly, the healing of our
infirmities: thirdly, our protection from evil: fourthly, our adorning by
grace: fifthly, the receiving of food temporal: sixthly, the effect of that
food which is spiritual.

Of the reverence and devotion given by the ancient Fathers, to this most holy
Sacrament.
WIth what charity of body and purity of mind, ought I to receive that
mystery, where thou O Lord art the feeder, and the food, the giver, and the
gift. Ambrosius, in oratione aut. sac. caen.

Saint Jerome a little before his departure, being about to receive, humbly
kneeling, did communicate with many tears. Eusebius. in vita S. Hieronimi.

It is written of Constantine, no less godly then mighty, an Emperor, that
with great reverence and devotion, before any attempt against his enemy, his
wont was to receive the holy Eucharist. Eusebius. in vita Constantin.

By the force of this Sacrament, the force of the devil is rebated. Ignatius
ad Ephesians.

Saint Cyprian calls this blessed Sacrament, a joyful solemnity. Cypria. de
caena. Dom.

Of the old Christians it was called (...), an assembly of love, Charity it
self.

A prayer of thanksgiving, after the receiving of the most holy Communion.
I Give thee thanks O most loving Jesus Christ, who have vouchsafed to admit
me a sinful creature, to the magni^^cent and quickening feast of thy sacred
table.

Thou would that I should be as the Arc of Covenant, where thou thy self
vouchsafest to abide. Thou would that in this Arc M^nna should be kept,
wherewith thou did feed thy people* until they entered into the Land of
Promise. Cause I beseech thee, that this Manna now received, whereof that was
but a figure, may be preserved in my Soul, that I may feel the effectual
fruit of thy passion, for the remission of my sins, the merit of
righteousness, and reward of everlasting glory. Cause also, that like as in the
Arc the Tables of the Law were kept, so a desire of fulfilling thy will, may
be contained in my Soul. Grant that I may honor, love, and obey thee* that
I be separated from this love, by no allurement whatsoever of my ghostly
enemy. Tarry with me O blessed Jesus, until the evening of my age, and when
the night of death approaches, I will not let thee go till thou have blessed
me, and yielded to this petition of my sobbing soul. O Lord fulfill her
desire, never depart from her.

What blessing shall I give unto thee, O my dear Savior? where shall I begin
to express by love and duty toward thee, which have said, Behold I am with
you even unto the end. My soul desires to be satisfied in the beholding of
thy countenance, even as the Heart longs for the fountains of water. Turn
thee O my soul into thy rest, for the Lord has done well for thee, he has
showed thee maruailous great kindness in the land of the living. F^r this cause
also shall my flesh rest in hope, Bless thou the Lord O my Soul.

Another form of thanksgiving.
OMnipotent and most loving father, I cannot give thee thanks worthy inogh,
according to the desire of my mind, for the treasure of this heavenly food,
which thou have now given me in this heavenly mystery ineffable, that is to
say, the true bread of heaven, that everlasting meat that aabideth for ever,
thy blessed Son our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, in whom I have obtained, by
the gift of this h^ly Communion, a pledge of an inheritance to come. Grant, O
Lord, that I may daily profit in virtue and godliness, that this sacred union
with Christ, may be of such force in me, that rejecting al evil ways, I may
go forward in piety toward God, instruction toward my self, charity
toward my neighbor, to thy good pleasure, through the same our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

The Soloquie.
AWake O my ^oule, and behold the new ^^uor wherewith loving (...) prosecute
thee. Thou have good cause to rejoice that the Lord of Majesty vouchsafes to
come unto thee, to comfort thee. Continue only a good will for all this
bounty. Be not as the nine unthankful Leapers, who forgot their cu^ing. Cast
all thy care upon him, who cares for thee, cease not to magnify him O my
soul, for he that is mighty has magnified thee, and done great things for
thee. Thou know how the son of God loved thee, when departing out of this
world unto the Father, he left so comfortable a remembrance and seal of all
his mercyes. O love without measure, return O my soul unto thy rest, for the
Lord has blessed thee. Return unto thy gracious Savior, of whom thou may
say, Here will I rest, here will I dwell forever.

Can it be O Lord, that thou would follow man with such love, as to unite
thy self unto him? Rejoice O ye sons of Adam, for no longer shall that of
the Prophet be applied against you. My tears have been my meat day and
night, whilst they yet daily said, where is now thy God? Tears are now no
longer your meare, but the gladsome food of Angels, your God is with you even
unto the end. The poor do eat and are satisfied. O Lord grant me the grace
of Devotion and thankfulness, that I may ask it instantly, expect it patiently,
receive it gratefully, conserve it humbly, use it diligently, to the glory and
honor of thy holy and blessed name Amen.

I desire to offer my self, my soul and body, a sacrifice unto thee, nay, I
offer up all my sins, both original and actual, upon the acceptable Altar
of thy mercy, consume them with the sacred fire of thy love, and let this
offering as Abels offering, be well pleasing in thy sight, but to return unto
this heavenly food now offered. Ah hard and perverse heart of mine, how can
thou continue earthly, when as thou art fed with the bread of heaven? When at
length will thou become heavenly? How is it that thou do remain sensual
and alienated from the spirit, which art spiritually conserved? Is it because
thou do consist of earth? O Jesus remember here what thou have else where
said, I come to send a fire, and what is my desire, but that it be kindled:
Let it be kindled in me, that I may be carried upward, and seek the things
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, that though my body converse
here in earth, my affections may be in heaven, that from henceforth not so
much I live, as thy grace may be said to live in me.

The eleventh general Meditation to be used aft^r the receiving of the
blessed Sacrament.
COnsider with what labors and tears Adam, after he was cast out of
Paradise, did eat the bread of carfulness, all the days of his life. But
now man received into the state of grace, is come to feed on the bread of life
it self.

2 Consider that as the Israelites when they had eaten the Pascall Lamb, were
delivered from Pharaoes bondage, made no stay in the darkness of Egypt, but set
forward forth with toward the Land of Promise. So after this our Passover,
wherein a mighty deliverance from the hands of our spiritual Pharo is
signified, were to depart from the works of darkness, to go forward without
delay f^o^ grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, until we come to our
heavenly Canaan.

3 Consider how the wisemen, when they had seen Christ at Bethlem, and there
done their humble reverence, Math. 2.12. they returned not by ambitious and
cruel Herod, nor by troublesome Jerusalem but Per aliam vtam, another way. So
we having visited Christ at our Bethlem, which signifies the house of bread,
and there offered our Souls and bodies a sacrifice unto him, should return
toward our own country, which is above, not by the ambitious and troublesome
desires of this world. but pass along peaceably anew, another way.

4 Consider how just Noah was an hundred years together, laboring to frame
and build an Arc to save him from the flood, and should we not endeavor for the
time to come, to spend it wholly in framing a good conscience before God and
man, which shall one day save us from a flood of miseries?

5 Consider that a Publicane, Luc. 19.3. who before did exact by extremity from
others, but having received Christ into his house, became beneficial unto the
poor, and was ready to make restitution for all the wrong he had offered.

6 Consider the admonition and absolution yt Christ gave unto him that was
lately cured, Ioh. 5.14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more

7 Consider how God does complain by his Prophets against the ingratitude of
his people, and how he accepts those who are thankful unto him.

8 Consider how to make an Apostatie from this calling of grace, were great
indignity offered unto God, and hurt our selves.

The fruit of this Meditation.
The fruit hereof, is first to acknowledge all tha^kfulnes, secondly to apply
our selves wholly for the time to come to serve God in holiness and righteousness
all the days of our life, that we may proceed from grace to grace, until we
come to the state of glory.

The Soloquie.
REmember O my Soul, that thou have been fed with the food of Angels, and
therefore should not now turn to feed on the husks of sensual
affections. Thou know that wise king Solomon, 1. kin. 7.8 would not that his
own wife, who was Pharoes daughter, should dwell in the house where the Ark of God was, for he counted it wickedness, that a woman descending from the stock
of the Gentiles, enemies unto God and his people, should inhabit so holy a
place. How great wickedness th^n should it be, to receive sin, where God
himself, the Lord of the Arc, is conversant? When the God of all power and
majesty, has made thee his handmaid, is it not a sign of singular love and
favor? ought thou not to render him again all service and duty? The
Patriarch Jacob was content to serve 7. years, and after that 7. more, and al
for Rachell, which time notwithstanding seemed short unto Jacob himself, for
the love he bare to Rachel. Much shorter should the time seem to thee, wherein
thou seruest this Lord, all labors may be accounted light for his love, who is
more to be beloved then any earthly creature, by infinite degrees. Thou
should be happy O my Soul, if thou knew what dignity it is to serve so
high a Lord. Call to mind how thou have served in times past this vain world,
whereby thou have been subject to many perturbations, how many bitter crosses
have thou sustained in this service, now by the help of thy heavenly Lord,
whom thou have this day received, thou art able to tread under foot all the
allurements of thy ghostly enemies, and become mistress of thy own passions.
Consider that now to serve God, is to bear rule. Think thou art no longer thy
own, but Gods, to whom thou have consecrated thy self. His will, not thine,
ought ever to be fulfilled, that in all things thou yield humble obedience.
And reply with the Apostle, Quid vis me facere, Act. 9.6 Lord what will thou
that I do.

Considerations to be remembered of the devout Christian after his receiving
the holy Sacrament.
THat thou be no les^e careful now after this heavenly repaste, in the
exercises of devotion, then he was before in preparing himself.

2 That he use much silence, and some solitariness, the same day that he be
primate sibi and Deo, to himself and God.

3 That he retire himself from worldly affairs.

4 That he often determine of his ^uture conversation, to be religious and
fearing God.

5 That he resolve with the P^ophet, Psa 39.1. Dixi custodiam ^ias meas I said
I will take heed unto my ways.

6 That he resign himself wholly to Gods pleasure.

The chiefest Figures of the most holy Sacrament.
THe first Figure of his reverent Sacrament, is men^ioned in Genesis (...)
14.18, when Abraham obtained a noble victory against those Kings there spoken
of, Abraham returning from the victory (says the Scripture) Melchisedech the
King of Salem, for that he was a King of the most high God, offered bread and
wine, and blessed Abraham. But that Melch^sedech was a Figure of Christ, Saint
Paul to the Heb. proves* chap. 7. And that the bread and wine offered of him,
were a figure of the body and blood of Christ, which (he being a King and
priest after the order of Melchisedech, Psa. 109) offered to the most high God,
and afterward left to us his body spiritually under the show of bread, and his
blood under the form of wine, the holy fathers with one consent do teach. But
of this Figure we learn, as in the most holy Sacrament, we fruitfully
receive Christ, and obtain a blessing of him, so it is necessary that first
we prepare a fight against the unruly motions of our mind, and put away our
sins by the works of contrition and confession, as that valiant Abraham cast
out the King his enemies.

2 A figure of this most royal Sacrament was the show bread, which was kept on
the table of proposition in the sight of God, Exo. 25. Leuit. 24. none could
eat of this bread, but those which were clean and sanctified, and therefore it
was caled the holy and sanctified bread, 1. Ki. 21. Math. 12.4. By which is
signified, that if we be fed with the sacred bread of the law of grace,
prefigured by that bread, it is necessary that we be chaste, and that we
have a good conscience.

3 A figure of this divine Sacrament, was the cake baked under the ashes, which
the Angel brought to Elias, by virtue whereof he being strengthened, as the
holy Scripture in the 3. Kin. 10. Cha* does testify, walked 40. days and 40.
nights, even to the mount of God, Horeb, where afterward he saw the Lord. This
figure does signify the power and effecacy, which the holy communion does
yield us, to finish the troublesome peregrinatio^ of this life, even until we
come to the heavenly hill, where we shall see God with incredible pleasure.

1 Now as common bread does procure the preservation of the life temporal, 2.
does augme^t and strengthen it. 3. although often eaten, yet it does not breed
lothsomnes, yea, rather it is an evil sign when bread does not relish to any
one. 4. A feast* without bread, although it abound with most costly dishes, is
imperfect. So this heavenly meat under the form of bread* 1. does preserve a
spiritual life, 2 By conferring grace, which is the life of the soul, it
augmenteth the same, and makes it strong against the devil. 3. This sacred
meat to men spiritually minded, never brings loathsomenesse but it pleases
not the sick, that is for because the natural man perceives not ye things
which are of God. 1. Cor. 2.4.

Let the Christian man have all the goods of this mortal life, if that be
wanting him which is contained in the holy Sacrament lie has nothing* yea
rather he may truly be called miserable. 5. Lastly the bread before it comes
to his perfection it suffers many things; for the grain of corn which is
the matter thereof, is first sown and is covered in the earth, the^ is cut,
bound as a malefactor, imprisoned in the barn, is threshed out, winowed,
grounded in the Mill, is boulted, scorched with fire so that it may very well
agee with this Sacrament, wherein the elements are, not whole, but broken,
powered out wherein also the passion of Christ our Lord his suffering so great
things for us, is represented, before he become this divine food of our
souls.

4 The Pas^all Lamb was a figure of this Sacrament, Exodus 12.3. of which this
was the ceremony. It must be a Lamb without blemish, of a year old, it must
be eaten at Jerusalem roasted, and in haste with wild Lettice, and sweet bread:
those who should eat thereof must have their shoes on their feet, by which
ceremony God signified to the Jews that they were strangers. Saint Chrysostom
in his 83. Homely upon Matthew, applies in this manner that ceremony unto us:
If (says he) the Jews about to go only through Palestina, were fed with a
Lamb after so curious an order, with what vigilancie ought we to be fed in
this Sacrament, with the true immaculate Lamb, which have our journey to
heaven? do eat thereof in his church, heat with charity, going forward to our
land of rest, in 15. of Leuit. God says, you shall eat of the old fruit,
until the new come, so did his people of the old passover, the same day they
were delivered from Egypt had we deliverance from a worser servitude of the
Pascall lamb a bone must not be broken; those parts of this lamb are the
faithful, as if it were from God sacrificate filium, sacrifice my Son, Sinite
hos abine, let these go John 18.

5 A Figure of this, was Manna, given to the people of Israel in the desert,
Exo. 10.15. Saint Paul says that the red Sea was a figure of Baptism, and
Manna of this holy Sacrament, which Manna had these properties.

First although some gathered much, and others less yet there was one
sufficient measure for all, so in this Sacrament of the Lords Supper there is
no less virtue in the lest part thereof then in the whole.

2 Manna might be gathered any day except the Saboth, and when the sun arose
it vanished. So this venerable Sacrament serves us until the everlasting
Saboth of the life to come, and when the Son of glory shall appear, it shall
then cease.

3 Manna did give taste of all kind according unto the will of the eater. This
Manna has sweetness unto the faith of the faithful receyuers so and so
disposed.

4 Many of the Jews were grievously punished, for that they contemned Manna,
saying our soul loathed this light meat. Numb. 21.5. So S* Paul shows 1.
Cor, 1^. and 30. That in his time many were weak and sick among the^, for that
this most divine Sacrament was despised and many unworthily communicated.

6 The sixth Figure was the Arc, for like as the Arc says, Th. Aquinas was
made of Shitim wood, Exodus 25.10. that is to say, of shining and pure cedar: so
was this of the most pure body of the Son of God. Again, the Arc was
gilded within and without, which may resemble the wisdom and love of Christ.
There were 3. things in the ark of special note, The golden pot, the rod of
Aaron, and the two tables of the law.

The golden pot containing Manna may betoken the soul of Christ containing the
fullness of the dietie: The rod of Aaron his priestly power, the two tables,
that he was the eternal lawmaker.

But the holy scripture makes mention of two things principally concerning the
Arc which do maruellously appear in this Sacrament.

The one, that by the befite of the Arc the people were not only preserved.
but much pestered. The other, that God grievously punished those who unworthily
entreated this A^ke, or gave not worthy reverence unto the same: we read
Samuel 1. and 4. when the people of Israel in one war against the Philistines
had lost four thousand men, they procured that the Arc was brought into their
tents, hoping that by the presence thereof to obtain the victory. But the
contrary happened, for the Ark of God was taken by the enemy, and 30000. men
perished of the host of Israel for their perverse* life, and small piety.

The Philistines also which unworthily handled the Ark setting it with their
idolatry so sharply were they punished, but chiefly the men of Ashdod, as that
the holy scripture says, 1. Sam. 5. The hand of God was grievous upon them.

7 A figure of this Sacrament was the meal of Helizeus, 1. King. 4. when the
prophet commanded that certain herbs should be sodde for the children of
the prophets, they tasting them found that they were so bitter, that they cried
to Helizeus, O man of God death is in the pot? Wherefore the holy prophet cast
meal into the pot, wherewith he took away the bitterness: So Christ by meal
or bread of the Sacrament takes away the bitterness of our afflictions, and
causes that they bring us life and not death.

8 A figure of this most holy institution was that great Passover which K.
Hezechiah kept, 2. Chron. 30.17. when he prayed for the people that God would
be merciful unto him, that prepared his heart to seek the Lord God of his
Fathers though he were not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary, when he spoke comfortably unto the Leuits, and the whole multitude
kept the feast with great joy. Our Hezechiah has not only prayed for the
purifying of his people, but has sanctified them, spoken comfortably, kept a
joyful passover, such as never was in Israel.

Names of excellency attributed unto the holy Sacrament, and gathered out of
the writings of ancient Fathers.
O Great Sacrament.
O Inestimable Sacrament.
O Divine Sacrament.
O Most noble Sacrament.
O Pure Mystery.
O Venerable Mystery.
O Eternal Mystery.
O Laudable Mystery.
O mystery of Piety,
O mystery of Peace.
O Holy of holies.
O Blessing.
O Hidden Manna.
A short Meditation upon these names of excellency.
WHat could thou do most merciful Lord for us and our good that thou have
not done? Thou have taken our frail nature upon thee, and given us thy divine,
thou have freely offered unto us the riches of thy mercy, the treasures of thy
grace, the abundance of thy love, by this great inestimable, and most divine
Sacrament, by this blessed, pure, and venerable mystery, the mystery of peace
and piety, the holy of holies, the hidden Manna, whereby it is evident, with
what flames of love thou did burn, whose delight is to show mercy: And
because the fire of this love could no longer be hid, it must needs break out
by this holy mystery left unto us, For which O Lord we give unto thee honor,
praise, power, and dominion, now and for evermore, Amen.

Certain short meditations upon the passion to be used before and after the
receiving of the holy Communion.
O Good and gracious Jesus, thou did eat the Pascall Lamb in Jerusalem, with
thy dear beloved disciples, and arising from supper did gird thy self about
with a towell, and powredst water into a basin, and kneeling upon thy knees,
thou meekely did wash the feet of thy disciples, and wipedst them with a
towell.

O most good and gracious Jesus, thou before thou should suffer, did
bequeath a most excellent good thing unto thy children, leaving for us thy most
sacred body to be our meat, and thy most precious blood to be our drink,
there can no wit nor understanding penetrate and thoroughly see the bottomless
depth of thy charity.

O most good and gracious Jesus, thou coming to the garden of Oliver, begannest
to fear, and to be heavy, whereupon y^ said to thy disciples* My soul is
sorrowful unto death. And then divided and sundred from the^, thou setst thy
self upon thy knees, and falling upon the earth flat on thy face, thou
prayedst unto thy Father, and fully and wholly resignedst and yeeldedst thy
self unto him, saying, Father, thy will be done, and at length through most
painful agony, wherewith thou was grievously oprest and afflicted, thou
sweatest throughout all thy body a bloody sweat.

O good and gracious Jesus, thou kindled and burning with an ineffable desire to
redeem me, wentst to meet thine enemies, and sufferedst Judas the traitor to
kiss thee, thy self to be taken, and to be bound with all confusion and
shame, and most unworthily to be led unto Annas, where thou sufferedst most
meekly to be stricken on thy most innocent face.

O good and gracious Jesus, thou being fast bound like a notorious malefactor,
wast led unto the house of Cayphas the high Priest, where the Jews most
unjustly accused thee, most spitefully struck and buffetted thee, scornefully
wast thou mocked, and blindfolded, being bidden to prophecy who struck thee,
doing to thee innumerable injuries all the night.

O good and gracious Jesus, thou in the morning wast brought before Pilate, and
with most sweet and pleasant cou^tena^ce casting thine eyes down, stoodest
before him in the Judgment hall, and when thou wast most fasly accused of ye
Jews, and many a rebuke and reproach was given thee, thou meekly heldst thy
peace, and made no answer.

O good and gracious Jesus thou was sent from Pilate to Herod: this Herod of a
very curious and vain mind coveting to see some miracle at thy hand, asked and
demanded many things of thee; the Jews cried out against thee, but thou
amongst all these most wisely heldst thy peace: For this cause Herod and all
his despised thee: O how unmeasurable was this humility and obedience* at the
will and pleasure of thine enemies thou wentst forth, thou returnest again,
suffering the^ to do to thee what they would.

O good and gracious Jesus thou in the judgment hall stripped naked, and
without all compassion being bound fast to a pillar, wast most cruelly
scourged, there was thy virginal and tender flesh cut with whips, and torn
with stripes, altogether mangled, and deformed, with black and blew, and many
a wound, so that the streams of thy most precious blood ran down on every
side upon the earth.

O good and gracious Jesus after that sore and sharp scourging of thine, to put
thee to more shame thou waste clothed with a purple red garment, vile and
torn: They also making a crown of thorns painefully pressed the same upon
thy most holy head: and while the sharp thorns pricked grievously, and
wounded sore thine head, thy most pure blood ran down abundantly over all,
thy lovely face and neck, then they putting a reed into thy right hand, and
kneeling down before thee, in scorn saluted thee saying, All hail King of
the Jews.

O good and gracious Jesus, thou wast brought forth by Pilate unto the furious
Jews, to be gazed and looked upon, wearing thy crown of thorns and purple
garment, but they cried out with more cruelnes to have thee crucified.

O good and gracious Jesus, thou wast delivered up unto the will and pleasure of
the Jews, which by and by led thee to be crucified, laying thy heavy cross
upon thy sore and bloody shoulders: thus did thou bear most meekly thine
own cross, whose great weight pained thee full sore, and coming unto the
place of thy suffering, all weary and breathless with pain, for my sake thou
did not refuse to taste wine mingled with gall and mirrhe, which was there
given unto thee. O good and gracious Jesus when thou wast stripped naked the^
were thy sore wounds by the violent plucking of thy clothes renewed, O what a
bitter and cruel pain did thou suffer when thy tender hands and undefiled
feet were with blunt and rough nails fast nailed to the cross, and when the
joints of thy lims were loosed, oh with what love and sweetness of charity
did thou offer thy hands and feet to be bored through? Then out of the
wounds of thy hands and feet as it had bin out of the wels of thy precious
blood plentifully gushed out. O good and gracious Jesus, thou hanging upon ye
cross between two thieves, wast assailed with blasphemies, but thou praiedst
unto thy father the while, saying: Father forgive it them, they wot not what
they do. Then did thou promise Paradise unto the thief: then gave thou
thy dear beloved Mother (who pierced with the sword of sorrow stood by the
cross) unto thy disciple John; and after thou had suffered three long
hours intolerable pains, and thirsted very vehemently, they gave thee eysell
to drink, which when thou had tasted bowing down thy venerable head thou
yeeldedst up thy spirit

O good and gracious Jesus, O good shepherd thus thou bestowedst thy self for
thy sheep: the right side of thy body was opened with a spear, out of which
flowed both water and blood, for us thou would that thy loving and tender
heart should be wounded, for my sake af^terward thy immaculate body was taken
down from the cros^e, Joseph and Nichodemus wound it up in sindon or clean
linen, laid it in a sepulcher. My dear beloved, yea the dear beloved of all
my desires, thou did vouchsafe thus to die and be buried for my sake, which
live and raignest blessed, and glorious, for ever and ever, world without
end, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Son of the living God, most highest God, which for thy exceeding great
charity that thou did bear toward me have vouchsafed to be made man, thou
would for my sake be borne in a stable, and laid in a manger, to be fed
with the little milk of the maiden thy mother, to suffer needines and
poverty, to be sore troubled three and thirty years with manifold labors and
careful pains, thou would for very inward pain and agony be all in a
bloody sweat, and to be apprehended and taken, shamefully be bound,
unworthily to be condemned, unjustly to be stricken with buffettes and blows,
to be clothed in purple by way of mockage, thou would be beaten and torn
most cruelly with stripes, crowned with thorns, ouerl^den with a painful and
heavy cross, be nailed and fastened to the same cross: Thou the clother and
garnisher of the stars hangest all naked, despised, wounded. And with
innumerable sorrows afflicted upon the cross for my sake: Thou sheddest for
me thy most pure and precious blood; all this thou did for me. I embrace in
the arms of my soul thy venerable passion, I forsake and renounce all
sensual pleasure, I resign all, put me wholly into thy hand and pleasure:
thine only will, thine only will be done in me.

O most sweet and merciful Jesus, mortify whatsoever lives sensually in me,
garnish and adorn me with thy merits and virtues, Oh prepare Lord a
delectable and pleasant habitation for thy self in me, renew my spirit, my
soul and my body with thy excellent grace, knit me unto thee most nearly,
change and transform me altogether into thee, that thou may have delight in
me. Hear me graciously O Lord, hear me graciously, not at my will, but at
thy blessed pleasure. O Lord teach me, direct me that I may do nothing,
speak nothing, think nothing desire nothing, but that which may be
acceptable before thee, Amen.

A prayer of S. Augustine, Meditat. 1.7.
WHat have thou committed most sweet child, that ^hou should be so judged?
What have thou offended most loving innocent, that you should be so hardly
entreated? what is thy offense? what is thy fault? What is the cause of thy
death, and occasion of thy condemnation? For I it is that am the wound of thy
sorrow, the cause of thy slauter, I am the desert of thy death, the wickedness
of thy punishment, the stroke of thy passion, the labor of thy torment. O
wonderful manner of correction, and order of unspeakable mystery, the wicked
offends, and the just is punished, the guilty transgresses and the innocent
is beaten, the unjust sins, and the just is condemned, that which the evil
man deserves, the good suffers and what the servant commits, the Lord
discharg^th, what man has offended, God satisfied. Whether O Son of God,
whether has thy humility descended? whether has thy charity burnt? whether
has thy pity proceeded? thy benignity increased? whether has thy love
attained* whether has thy compassion exte^ded? for I have done wickedly, and
thou art punished, I have committed the offense, and thou art chastened, with
revenge I have done the fault, and thou art subjected to torment, I have waxe^
proud, and thou art humbled, I am puffed up, and y^ art diminished, I became
inobedient, and thou paidst the punishment of inobedience, I gave my self to
gluttony, and thou art afflicted with hunger. The tree carried me to unlawful
desire, perfect charity led thee to the tree of the cross, I tasted of the
forbidden fruit, and layedst under the torment, I am delighted with meat, and
thou laborest at the door, I enjoy delicates, and thou art torn in pieces
with nails, I the sweetness of an apple, thou tastedst the bitterness of
gaul. Eve rejoices laughing with me, Mary suffers wayling with thee, Behold
the king of glory, behold my impiety, and thy pity shines, behold my
unrighteousness, and thy righteousness appears. What O my King and my God,
what shall I render thee for all thy benefits which thou have bestowed on me?
for there cannot be found in man's heart, which may worthily be rendered for such
rewards, can the sharpnes of man's wit devise whereto the mercy of God may be
compared. Nor is it the part of the creature to recompense the sufficiency of
the Creator. But there is O Son of God, there is in this so admirable
despensation, to which my weakness may in some things rely. If my mind pricked
with thy visitation crucify her flesh, with the vices and concupiscences
thereof, and this thing when thou have granted, it begins now as it were to
suffer with thee, for that you have vouchsafed to die for my sin. And so by
the victory of the inward man* by thy conduct, it shall be armed to the
outward triumph, for as much as this spiritual persecution overcome, it may
not fear for thy love, to yield it self to the material sword. And so the
smalnesse of my condition, if it please thy goodness, shall be able for her
power, to answer the greatness of the Creator. I pray thee for thy accustomed
mercyes, power into my wounds, that the rankor of my viperous infection cast
forth, may restore me to my woonted health, that tasting the nectar of thy
sweetenes, it may cause me to despise with all my heart, the pleasant
allurements of this world, and to fear no adversity thereof for thy sake, and
mindful of my eternal nobility, I may loathe the winds of this transitory
fear. Let nothing be sweet I pray thee unto me, without thee, nothing please
me, nothing precious, nothing beautiful beside thee. Let all things I beseech
thee be vile unto me, without thee, let them be of no account: that which is
contrary to thee, let it be troublesome unto me, and let thy good will be
my continual desire. Let it grieve me to rejoice without thee, and delight me
to be sorrowful for thee. Let thy name be my comfort, and the memory of
thee my consolation. Let tears be my bread day and night, in searching out
thy judgments. Let thy law be better unto me, then millions of gold and
silver. Let it be delightful unto me, to walk in the way of thy
commandments unto the end.

The twelfth Meditation. Concerning the spiritual communion of Christ.
FOr yt the spiri^uall Communion also is profitable unto souls, it is
necessary that we enter into some consideration of the same, and therein
observe these circumstances.

First what it is, secondly, after what means it may be used, thirdly, what
profit we reap by it, fourthly, how acceptable it is to God. For the first,
we must know that as the Sacramental Communion, has worthily the first
place amongst all the spiritual exercises of a Christian life. So also, the
spiritual Communion has a very godly and divine use. When the devout man
(says Gerson) does every day receive spiritually the body of his Redeemer, so
often does he mystically communicate the mystery of Christ's birth and passion*
is inflamed in his love, and reuolued in his devotion: so when we receive
Christ in affection and desire of mind (which the faithful often should do)
this is called our spiritual Communion.

For the second, what commodity this brings to the Soul, we may gather by
the manifold effects thereof. For as he which moved by the holy Ghost
believes, sorroweth for his sins, and by loving God, desires to be
baptized, does obtain the grace of Baptism, which desire of Baptism is
called by the Divines, Baptisma spiritus, the Baptism of the Spirit, so does
it also happen in this spiritual Communion.

3 The third, how we reap profit by receiving Christ into the holy desires
of our Soul, it may be easily understood by the increase of love, While I was
musing says the Prophet, the fire kindled. The eleuatio^ of the mind unto God,
does take us away from earthly affections, and carry us unto him, on whom our
desires are fixed

4 How acceptable this is unto God, we all know, he that accepted the
intention of Abraham, and said unto Solomon, because this was in thine heart,
does not only accept of our good desires, to embrace him in the arms of our
affection, hut also does reward this desire as the deed done. But we are to
consider, that we must not only stay upon the desire of our will, and receive
Christ spiritually, but we must proceed farther, to receive him together, both
spiritually and sacramentally. For it is not enough to follow Christ in our
intention, but we must also receive him in this holy mystery, wherein we show
reverence unto his blessed institution, and that we are become his Temple, as
the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 6. wherefore that we may be partakers of so great
a blessing, as is our union with Christ, we may not omit this special part of
our Christian duty, which he who will please God, and proceed to the
perfection of a Christian life, must often use, that so he may go forward in
all virtue and holiness of life, yea, even unto the end.

That this holy Sacrament is given to the sick, as necessary for the time of
any visitation.
COnsider, that amongst the effects of this heavenly Sacrament, that to be
chee^ely numbered, that it makes those strong in enduring temptations* which
worthily receive it. Whence it is, that in times past it was given to men in
places of visitation, or danger of death, that they might be constant in the
confession of Christ, and able to withstand the temptations of the devil.

2 Consider that it also profits to attain the health of the body, seeing it
is so available to the salvation of the soul. For if at the only touch of
Christ's garment many received health, what cannot Christ himself do, entering
into the Soul of the sick?

3 Consider that Christ, foreseeing our conflict to come, ordained this most
holy Sacrament, for the spiritual help of our souls, we must think by how
greater necessity we labor, by so much this sacrament does exercise more
effectually his wholesome effects, seeing it is proper unto the Lord to help
more readily, then when greater necessity does require.

4 Consider, that here the distressed either in body or mind, may apply unto
himself in particular, the merits of Christ's passion, and raise up himself by
a comfortable participation of this holy mystery, and say: Thou have good
cause to rejoice O my Soul, that the Lord of majesty comes unto thee, that
he may comfort thee departing this world, and by thy assistant help against
the assaults of Satan, who indeuoureth to draw thee away from the reward of
life, continue only a good will for all, though thou art faint and feeble,
though thy enemies be many and mighty, yet having received divine strength,
thou shall say, I can do all things in him that strengthens me. Cast all thy
hope on Jesus, and thou shall neither be overcome of the^, nor put to shame,
thou know well that the body of a certain dead man was restored to life, 2.
Kin. 13. by the only touch of the body of Elizeus. If the boones of a dead
Prophet had so great virtue, that they restored one from death to life, and the
thieves amazed by the miracle of the thing, durst do no evil, what will not
the living and glorious body of Jesus doe^ entering into thee, I doubt not but
it will exercise greater might in thee, seeing he is God omnipotent, and Lord
of all, and the devil shall be overcome and confounded at his presence. O holy
Daniel, teach me how I ought to give thanks to my loving Lord, who seeing me
in time of need beset with infernal Lions, does send me food not by the
Prophet Abacucke, Daniel. 14. or by any heavenly Angel, but himself comes
to be my food. O Love without measure. Consider O my Soul, this unspeakable
mercy, thou know thou wast loved of him in his greatest extremities, when
he departing out of this life unto the Father, did institute this holy
sacrament for thy welfare. Thou see also he loves thee in thy extremities,
it remains, that crying out with the Prophet David, Psalm. 8. Lord what is man
that thou art so mindful of him, or with the Apostle, Romans 14. If I live, I
live unto the Lord, if I die, I die unto the Lord, to whom be praise and honor
for ever, Amen.

What he ought to do, who is to communicate before he come to the holy table
of the Lord.
HE who will do the thing which he oght concerning this Sacrament, and that
which the dignity of such a mystery does require, must lot out a certain
space of time to himself, wherein he may perform those things which pertain
to the preparation thereof.

And that we may discourse more at large of this matter, and more familiarlie
with them which do often communicate, I say they shall do very well* if as
Moses commanded the people, that three days before they were to receive the
Law, they should prepare themselves. So also they should prepare themselves in
three days, that they may be apt and disposed to receive the Lord, which
brings a Law, not of death, but of life, not of the letter, but of the
spirit, not of fear, but of love

The holy Scriptures do testify, that the maids of the king Assuerus, Hest.
2.12. coming only into his sight but once in six months, prepared the^ with
oil of mirrhe, and other six months with certain sweet odors. If these did
do this that they might find favor with an earthly man, what preparation
shall be required of v^, that we may find favor in the sight of the true God*

One of the cheifest praises of the blessed Virgin Mary, for which the Angel
did commend her, he shew^th, when he s^ith. Thou have ^ound favor with God,
and ought it to seem a hard and troublesome thing unto us to do, for so great
glory and dignity, that which this women has done for such vanity? With
what face I pray, will we refuse labor? yea, although all the powers, and
strength of our souls and bodies were to be imploy^ed that we may come at
least but into the grace and favor of God, specially when we hear that these
miserable maids spent their whole life, that they might come into the favor of
one mortal man. But because this is an hard thing for us to do, at least let
us prepare our selves in those three days whereof I have spoken, doing all that
which in us lies. But if you shall ask me what that is, I say that the first
thing is that thou walk carefully all this time, that with the holy man Job
thou fear all thy works, that thou have diligent regard of thy self, and
thoroughly examine thy conscience, and that thou take heed in all thy
conversation, that thou commit nothing, which may offend the eyes of God,
not only mortally, but negligently, also, as much as thou can. Neither only
ought we to decline from the sins themselves, but also from the occasions of
them, as immoderate laughing, pastimes, and wanton sports, and all vain
conversation, and all those exercises which are seldom done without sin, no
otherwise, says a learned man, then a handsome and adorned woman, when on the
Saboth day she has put on clean apparel, and goes forth abroad, does most
diligently beware that she handle not those things, wherewith she may be
contaminated* So we in this time ought to walk more carefully then at
another, and to be (...) loathed, that we may be worthy to come to receive
the King of Angels, and sit at his Table. Before all things the tongue
must be kept with all diligent care all this time: in the old law, the vessels
without cover were counted unclean. Let regard be had, that the mouth utter no
vain and idle words, much less offensive, that the door may be kept pure and
clean, through which that heavenly food shall enter to our Soul. No less
diligently let the heart be kept pure from all vain, unclean, and unquiet
cogitations. For an unseemly thing is it, that in the place where GOD should
take up his mansion, to leave any thing offensive to his clean and heavenly
sight. And because the place of his abiding is peace, for in peace says the
Psalmist, is his staying. Let us therefore put far from us all unquietness
of mind, and perturbations whatsoever.

The evening being come when as thou should Communicate, early in the morrow
following, very laudable is it either to miss a meal, or else at the least
to be content with a small or light Supper, after which thou may not either
betake thee to pleasurable delights, or be present in the concourse of mam^,
but that thou may be quiet, and more fit to spend a good part of the
night in preparing thy mind for the day following. When thou art laid in thy
bed, before sleep does close thy eyes, persevere and continue in good
thoughts, beseeching God that he deliver thee from all idle fantasies and
illusions of the devil, that thou may the next day go unto the Lords table,
with more purity both of body and Soul. So often as thou awakest in the
night, by and by call to mind the same thoughts in prayer.

Very early in the morning, thy eyes not yet fully opened, think thou art
lying in the arms of Christ crucified, exercise thy mind in the remembrance
of his passion, about which we spend the day following, sometime thinking of
his ineffable Love, sometime of his extreme suffering, in a word, because this
sacrament was instituted in remembrance of his Passion, most profitable and
acceptable unto God, is our devout remembrance of the same, that by this means
we may accomplish also the will of the Testator.

The manner of communicating used by a certain virgin.
In prax. vit. sprit.
BEfore the communion I prepare my self after this manner some two days
before, I examine mine own conscience, I humbly confess me, and am heartily
sorry for my sins: when I may not fast, at the least I eat and drink
sparingly.

2 The next morning I begin sooner then at other times a prayer in my mind,
therein desiring grace of God to be communicate and that he make me such a one
as I ought to be, coming to his holy table, that this most holy Sacrament may
obtain in my heart that fruit which it obtayneth in the hearts of them which
worthily communicate.

3 Then I consider how great a thing it is to be partaker of so holy a
mystery, to receive him whom the Angels adore, the Prophets have desired,
the Apostles loved, the martyrs imitated, and all holy men coueted with
unspeakable desire, to honor, love and unite them unto him by this holy
Sacrament.

4 Moved with this desire, I study to inflame my soul more largely, by
considering Christ's unspeakable love by calling to mind the manifold graces
this sacrament brings with it to the soul of the devout communicant.

5 When I come to communicate I exerecise my heart in these contemplations. 1. I
call to mind my own vileness, 2. I cast my self down at the fe^t of jesus by
humility. 3. I make a short confession of my faith, as I believe that thou art
the very Savior of the world O blessed Son of ^od* which wast crucified for
me, dead and buried, descendedst into h^ll and did rise again. 4. I am sorry
that I come so little prepared as I do, but ever hoping he will accept my
humble intention, I put my trust in his mercy and merits.

6 Sometimes I talk thus with my soul, saying: behold my soul thy Lord and
God, love him whom thou desire with such care, account thy self happy if
thou acknowledge him, love him, desire him to dwell with thee.

7 La^^ly, I lay before him all my sins and infirmities had in the depth of
my heart, and I most fervently desire, that he would pardon them all, and I
purpose earnestly to amend and so with all humble reverence I come to the Lords
table.

My demeanor after the Communion.
AFter the communion I betake me to some secreate place that I may talk only
with my Lord, whom I have by faith received into the house of my soul, and
first I set before God the Father the holy sacrifice of Christ our Lord, and I
set before him whatsoever he has suffered for me, using these or the like
words.

Behold O eternal Father thy son whom of thy infinite love thou have sent
from heaven unto the earth, that he might take flesh of man, be borne in a
stable, fly into Egypt by the persecution of Herod, and should be in great
poverty. Behold O Father, what great things he has done and suffered for
me in the wilderness, in preaching, in fasting, in praying, in iourning, in
persecutions of the Jews, in hearing blasphemies, sustayning injuries, and
reproaches; all which he suffered at the hands of the ungrateful Jews, see
him, betrayed and sold for thirty pence, I offer him to thee O holy Father
bound in the garden, lead away to Annas, beaten and busseted in the house of
Caiphas, accused before Pylate, mocked of Herod, s^ourged and cru^^fied of the
Jews. Behold, O Father his head hanging down, his face pale with death, his
hands and ^eete pearsed through, his most sacred side opened.

Behold the heavens and earth mourning after their manner, the sorrowful
mother, the dear disciples bewayling him, and the ungrateful Jews by so much
the more to wax mad against him: I offer him unto thee anointed with
myrrh, wrapped in clean linen, buried in a new sepulcher. These things
done, I make an end, praising, blessing, and giving thanks to God that he
has loved us, so that he gave his only son for our salvation.

2 Secondly, I turn me unto Christ with alll thankfulness for his benefits*
and I open unto him as unto a most holy physician my infirmities, and all my
faults as to a most gentle Lord, I open unto him all my defectes into which I
am wont to fall, desiring him to minister a remedy that I relapse not so
often, and specially I pray that he would grant me grace to receive him
hereafter worthily.

3 I purpose to amend, wherein I am wont to offend, and namely, I decree to
root out some one sin, in the place whereof, to insert some virtue, whereof
I have need, that I may always go forward from better to better, and I
humbly pray his divine majesty, that he grant me strength to execute that
thing.

4 Last of all, I diligently keep my heart all that day, thinking that the
Lord rests therein as his house, wherefore I give my in (...) that I may use
all modesty, as well in speaking, seeing, and walking, as in all my outward
conversation, often I say with my self: This day O Lord, thou have come* to
me a sinner, this day thou have renewed my heart by thy holy Passion, I pray
thee abide with me, go not from me. And so applying my self unto the prayers
of the day, I use the same prayers with greater devotion then ordinary, I give
thanks for all benefits, especially for those received by this most high and
holy Sacrament.

Certain brief questions and answers concerning the blessed Sacrament.
Question.
FOr what cause do you receive the blessed Sacrament?

Answer.
First that I may observe and dutifully keep Christ's most holy institution.
Secondly, that I may show my self a member of that body whereof he is the head.
Thirdly, that I may receive this sovereign r^past to the health of my sinful
soul.

Question.
What do you receive?

Answer.
The very body and blood of Christ, after a most divine and heavenly manner.

Question.
What profit have you by receiving?

Answer.
Increase of grace, of love with God and man.

Question.
Why do you often communicate?

Answer.
Because my hope is I am one of Gods children, and therefore desire to come
often unto him as to a loving father.

Question.
After what manner come you?

Answer.
By faith and repentance, having a full purpose to serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

These few observations may be observed before our access unto the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper.
YOu must steadfastly believe in Christ crucified.

2 You must humble your self by a serious consideration of your manifold
sins.

3 You must think Christ works in you that which his words do promise.

4 You must prepare your soul to receive the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus.

5 You must meditate of Christ's passion, his resurrection, and your own rising
again to a better life to come.

6 You must give your self both before and after this most holy Sacrament, to
prayer and devotion.

7 You must apply your self to meditation, and open to God the closet of your
heart.

8 You must bear sincere affection and love, both to God and man.

A Dialogue of the most holy Communion, between a worldly man and a spiritual.
Wherein is disputed whether it be better often to communicate or abstain from
the most holy Communion, how and after what manner both may be done, that of
love, and devotion: this of humility, and reverence.

Mundanus: Spiritualis. MVndan. I know not truly what fruit there is by often
communicating, for I see thee continue subject to the same vices, to be often
angry and threaten*


Spirit. But I know certainly that by the benefit of often communicating I
have rooted out some evil manners, and unless I should often communicate
without doubt I should be worse and worse, and happily at this hour I should
burn in hell fire.


Mu. Whence know thou that you should be worser.


Spir. For that I have experience in my self when the time of communicating is
at hand, to bethink my self more and more carefully to abstain, yea from the
least sins. Contrariwise when the time of communicating is farther off, I am
not so collected in mind, I wax also faint in devotion, I am prone to
vanities and trifles, and if no other profit should come unto my soul, that
profit alone ought to be sufficient to move me to frequent this divine
Sacrament.


Mund. But I fear not a little least if I come too often to the Lords table I
make shipwreck both of love and fear, for that is wont to fall out by too
often use and familiarity.


Spirit. Yea rather the contrary does often fall out, for if of the often and
familiar custom and frequentation of the communion any imperfection were
therein covered there were just cause to diminish our love and fear toward
him as it comes to pass in humane things: But that thing is not so: for
when he is a certain infinite sea of all perfection, by how much one uses
this often familiraitie, by so much the more he declares his goodness and
perfections, and causes that love, fear, and reverence toward his divine
majesty, do equally increase.


Mund. Let it be as it is, daily experience teaches that the often use of a
thing although the best does breed contempt and lothsomnes.


Spir. But that is in things temporal, and in sensual pleasures, but in
spiritual delights (as Saint Gregory has well observed) saciety does breed a
desire, for then the goodness of them are made known, and therefore by how
much the more surely they are possessed, by so much the more ardently they are
desired, whence the heavenly wisdom says: They which eat me do still
hunger, and they which drink me do still thirst.


Mund. But Saint Paul says, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks his own damnation, but if thou communicate often, it seems thou
think thy self worthy, and is not this pride? Thou also do unworthily
Communicate.


Spirit. As if to Communicate seldom, does make a man worthy. It is not so.
But hear me, if thou calst him worthy, whose perfection does equal the
worthiness of this Sacrament, the^ no creature, although the holiest, yea, nor
all creatures put together, were worthy of this Sacrament. And if such
worthiness were so necessary, none should communicate, for that none can attain
perfection equal to thi^ sacrament. But neither that any be worthy is it
necessary, that he attain some excellent perfection, or be endued with rare
virtues, for these are acquitted by the rare virtues of this sacrament, and
frequenting thereof. Therefore that a man be worthy according to that of the
Apostle S. Paul, it is enough that he bring that preparation wherewith God is
contented, that is, that first he examine his conscience, be sorry for his
sins committed, humbly confess them with a penitent heart, and with this
preparation to come to the communion is no pride.


Mun. If this be sufficient, wherefore then did certain godly men of reverence
spoke so often of effectual preparing themselves as they have done?


Spirit. These of humility and reverence to this holy mystery have spoken in
deed of solemn preparation, which assuredly is meet, but frequenting of this
holy communion is a most ancient custom, wherewith the church of Christ first
sprange, as S. Luke the Evangelist in the Acts of the Apostles shows.


Mund. But in the Primitive Church the feruentnesse of Christians was great,
which when it is not now in us, it seems more safe to abstain from often
communicating: for if it be otherwise it is in danger that we come not so
disposed to communicate as we ought. The safer way is, rather to be held then
the less safe.


Spir. Yea the self same thing for that so great desire is wanting in us ought
to drive us to frequent this wholesome Sacrament, for by the benefit thereof,
we may both wax hot, and be set on fire. For he which is cold, ought rather
to betake himself to the fire, the^ he which is hot. So often as one humbles
himself before God, and has a good intention there is no danger.


M. I have often heard the Sacraments are instituted of Christ as medecines,
but we use not medecines often.


S. If a man were spiritually sick, but sometimes then the argument were
available, but whereas our nature is weak. For the just falls 7. times a day
(says the Wiseman) our nature therefore often needs help, and so ye use of a
spiritual medicine. Moreover, whereas this sacrament is of force ^o draw away al
these evils both pre^ent and to come from the soul, it is better to prevent
infirmity, then to cure it once contracted. Lastly, there is a great difference
between corporal medecines and this spiritual, for they only put away bodily
diseases, and often with evil humors, take away the good also, but this
brings to the soul, grace, strength, and other heavenly gifts, and therefore
these seldom, this often is to be used. Add yt for the most part bodily
medecins are bitter and loathsome, to the intent that as seldom as may be we use
them. But this sweet and delightful* and therefore God would that it be often
received of us.


Mun. But thou can not deny to abstain from the holy Communion, for
reverence of so great a Sacrament, to be a good act, and agreeable to virtue.


Spi. I deny nor but that it is good to give reverence to it, yet this I say
that to frequent this communion of devotion and desire of uniting himself with
Christ is a better action, for because this springs of love, but that of
fear, and it is manifest to all, that love is better then fear, wherefore it
argues a religious mind to communicate often.


Mun. But I am unworthy so to do.


Spirit. Wherefore.


Mund. Because I fall daily into many sins.


Spir. If sins de^aine thee then should thou never communicate because thou
never ceasest to sin.


Mundan. But communicating seldom I have more time to examine my self.


Spiritual. Thou art deceived, for seeing our nature is prone to evil, by how
much the more grievously sins reign in it, by so much the harder they are to
be begun: for a crooked tree the longer the turning thereof is deferred, by so
much the more hardly, and with greater pain is it made strait.


Mun. I do not well understand what this my error is* for I see daily with mine
eyes those which often communicate, to come coldly and without devotion, and as
it were customarily to the holy table, and no more ado, but they which come
seldom, come with far greater devotion and reverence as seems to me,
wherefore it is better to communicate seldom then often.


Sp. First that is false Mundanus, which thou affirmest, yea rather many of
them which come so seldom, come most coldly without devotion, without feeling
of love, rather indeed of custom and constraint, then of love.


Mund If it be better to communicate often then seldom, how comes it to pass
that this often communicating is not praised of some learned men?


Spirit. I never saw nor heard of any learned man, endued with judgment and
virtue, that reprehended this action, so holy, so profitable, so acceptable
unto God, but that it is dispraised of some carnal men it is no marvel, for
they think others unworthily communicate this Sacrament, for as they live
euilly themselves, so they think that those live evil also, who often
Communicate.


Munda. You say true, I acknowledge that it is more safe, often to strengthen
the soul with this heavenly food, but I do it not, least I give occasion to
the world, of whom those that often Communicate, are had in derision.


Spirit. If in this matter thou will have a regard of the world, then have thou
not only lost thy soul, but also thy wit. Art thou ignorant that it is the
property of the world, to fly from all spiritual things, to favor the
wicked, and speak evil of the good?


Munda. As long as we are in this world* we ought to frame our selves, and
conform our manners to the world.


Spirit. But that is manifest foolish^nesse. If the world be one of thy three
Capital enemies, how may thou apply thee to it, and obey the will thereof,
without manifest and apparent ruin: know thou what it is to abstain from
the sacred Communion, for the obliquies of the world. No other thing then to
be ashamed, and to account it a reproach, if thou art a good Christian, and
endued with virtue, wherefore and worthily too, may Christ be ashamed to
receive thee into heaven.


Mund. If I should often communicate, I must repent often, become a good
example to others, keep me at home. Cast off al recreations, which were to take
away all my liberty from me, and so I should pine away and wax old before my
time,


Spi. Although thou Communicate but once in a year, thou art bound to repent,
to give good example to others, neither art thou ignorant how great a sin it is
to give a scandal to others. And the often communicating, does not take away
recreations, but does allow the^, so they are lawful and honest. In that thou
say thy liberty is taken away, it is not true, for if thou do think any
thing forbidden lawful unto thee not Communicating, thou art deceived, for
whether thou communicate often or seldom, thou art bound to abstain from
sins. He which for recreation offends his creator, loses true liberty, when
he makes himself a servant of sin, yea, he loses true joy, which springs
of a good conscience, and this the foolish world does not understand.


Mund. To ye receiving of this most holy Communion, it is required that a man
be of a quiet mind, which cannot be commonly brought to pass, for the
adversities and perturbations of this world, it is not convenient therefore
often to Communicate.


Spirit. Yea, rather the afflictions of this world, and this wretched place of
exile, ought to drive us to communicate often. For amongst the effects thereof,
this one is mentioned, that it gives strength in adversity, as the Prophet
signifies, when he said. Thou have prepared a Table in my sight against those
that trouble me.


Mun. If I did perceive I were called of God to communicate often, I would
willingly obey,


Spirit. I pray when thou come to thine ordinary prayers thou go to the
Church, do thou perceive thou art called of God?


Mund. No.


Spirit. Why then do thou these things?


Mun. For that they seem to me good things, and are laid down as parts of
Gods worship.


Spirit. But the holy Communion without question is better then all, and more
commended, and is so profitable, as it is called of the Church the pledge of
future glory.


Mund. Howsoever the matter is, to say truth, I dare not come often to this
heavenly table, by reason of my manifold imperfections that I often fall into.


Spirit. It has been answered to this before, either thou desire to be
delivered from these evils, or not, if thou desire to be rid of them, this
most holy sacrament received with due preparation, will minister such strength,
yt thou may by little and little remove them, as it is evident many have
done, who by the use of this spiritual meat, of carnal have been made
spiritual.


Munda. I yield to thy reasons, and would gladly communicate, but I feel no
devotion.


Spir. Perchance thou think thou have no devotion, unless thou shead forth
tears, that is not absolutely necessary, neither in these consists all
devotion. The tears of the heart may suffice. That is sorrow for thy sins
past, and a purpose to prevent those to come. Moreover he is called devout,
which in all things conformeth himself to Gods will, wherefore I would not
that thou should therefore abstain, because tears and sighs are wanting,
for these are not always necessary, God gives them to whom he pleases.


Mund. To say what I think, and that I may confess a truth* thou have plainly
persuaded me that it is better to communicate often, then to abstain, but one
thing yet remains, I am loath to acknowledge my sins,


Spirit. If we acknowledge our sins, God is merciful to forgive us our
sins, be not loath.


Munda. Many businesses do occur, which hinder this so weighty a matter, I
mean the woorks of repentance.


Spiritual, This is the, temptation of the Devil who that he may spoil thee
of the fruit of this divine sacrament, causes that repentance seems
troublesome unto thee, and the whole preparation to the communion. Furthermore,
businesses do not hinder good works, the businesses of greater moment are to
be preferred before the less. There is time to dispatch earthly affairs in
good order. When the Son of God stands and knocks at the door of thy heart,
open unto him, let him not knock in vain. To conclude, remember that the
kingdom of heaven, suffers violence, when we see, we must labor to attain
the same.


Mund It is even so, I must needs confess I am overcome, wherefore my
resolution is, with Gods good grace, to repair often to the blessed Sacrament.


Another Dialogue wherein is discussed the doctrine and benefit of the blessed
Sacrament.
The Speakers. Catechumenus. Doctor. Catechumenus. I Desire to be instructed
in the Doctrine of the holy Sacrament.


D. I confess in regard of the spiritual consolation we reap by this holy
mystery, thou may well desire to be instructed in this doctrine, but for my
part, there is no doctrine wherein I more fear to deliver my mind, then this,
because the more I consider of it, the more I admire the excellency thereof,
which to me is more then words can express.


Catecu. I can be content to submit my self to the judgment of the learned,
without curious questioning.


Doctor. It Is well as thou say, I had rather by far commune with the humble
in this case, then any other. The goodness of God herein, should with reverence
be admired


Catecu. I rest satisfied in this case, but I would learn of you what might
move me to love the Giver of so great a gift.


Doc. The means to love the Author of this gift, is to consider his bounty,
how he does herein offer himself unto us and all the benefits of his
suffering,


Catecumenus. I am moved with incredible joy, to think of the innumerable
benefits, we receive hereby, and it stirs me up to devotion and reverence.


Doct. It may well so do, for what joy is here offered unto the faithful the
faithful shall find, what may they not hope for at his hands who has given
himself unto them, what prouokements to love and hope we have, there need no
long discourse to manifest and show.


Catecum. I acknowledge my self satisfied beseeching God to make me a dutiful
receiver of this most holy mystery.


Lau^ Deo.
PIO LECTORI, DE EVCHARISTIAE CONTROuersi^, contra nonnullas Roberti Bellarmini
rations, Admonitio breuis.
CVm omnis quaestio, in causa fidci, ad Tribunal sacraru^ litterarum stare,
ibique iuducari oporteat, n^nunimir^m videatur, si vt olim Paulus Caesarem, ita
nos forensi quodam mo^do, sacrarum literarum sententiam (salua semper venera^da
patrum authoritate) primo in loco, idque iure optimo appellamus. Quid enim? Cum
in his non solum veritatem ipsam contra omnes ommium machinationes sarte tecte
conseruatam Ecclesiae consensu approbat^m, inueniamus, verumetiam veritatis
inquirendae modum quem, si tanquam Ducem optimum sequamur, errare labi, decipi,
non possimus.

2 Veri^atis autem inquirendae modus per Ieremiam Prophetam sic vide tur
propositus Di^it: dominus, interrogate de semitis antiquis, quae sit via
bonaand ambulate in ea, Ieremiae. 6. verse, 16. Seruator noster in Euangelio
Pha? reseis tentantibus eum. Quid ergo Moses mand^uit libellum repudii?
Respondit, ad duritiem cordis vestr^ scripsit vobis Moysis praeceptum illud, ab
initio autem non fuit sic ex quo liquet, per semitas antiquas ad viam bonam,
per institutionem ab ^^itio primam, ad institutionem veram, interrogantes,
errantes, omnes, posse venire.

3 Cum Deus populo suo Israeletico tabernaculi forma^ disponenda^ proposuerat
respice inquit, and fac secundum exemplar, quod tibi in monte monstratum est,
Exodus 25. verse, 48. Esaias Propheta, vt superstitiosos a pythonibus and mortuis
auerteret, clamat, ad legem and testimonium, Esaia 8. verse. 20. Item Christus
in Euangelio, cu^ vendentes and ementes e templo eiecisset* prophetarum de
templo pr^fere testimonium, Scriptum est, Domus mea est Domus orationis Lucae
decimo nono, verse. 40. Apostolus ad Corintheos Epistola prima Cap. vndecimo,
genuinam dominicae institutionis rationem in hunc modum innuit. Ego accepi a
Domino. Si forte patres in fidei controuersiis haesissent aliqua^do, statim
diuinarum literarum oraculum adeunt, sic Ambrosius, interrogetur scriptura: sic
Augustinus, rogemus Petru^ and Paulu^.

4 Hinc ediscamus veritatis inquirendae modum, patres nempe ad Apostolos*
Apostolos ad Christum, Christum ad Prophetas, Prophetas ad legem, legem, ad
primum exemplar, retrospexisse. De su^ma et salutifera Christi institutione diu
iam, conte^dere Christiani institutione d^^iam contendere Christiani, a
patribus ad Apostolum, ab Apostolo, ad Christum, adeoque ad primum exemplar in
coena sua funebri institutum, manu, manus, ascendatur, Hoc secum fidelis
quispiam serio recolligat eum qui de pane dixit, Hoc est corpus meum, qui de
vino dixit, Hic est sunguis meum, de Ioanne Baptista dixisse hic est Elias.
Habitote foedus meum in carne vestra: Cons^pulti sumus in Baptismo: Multi sumus
vnus panis: vnum corpus, frequens est scripturae phrasis.

6 Adhaec, quia magis videtur ratiom consorium, quam in spirituali ^ibo*
spiritualem sensum admittere. Omnes inquit Apostolus ^andem escam cum edimus
spiritualem. Post caenam, mensura admodum parua, spiritus est qui viuificat.
Progredior, Pia, pia haec ex Christi verbis, de Christi institutione
consideratio, and animarum salutarem alimoniam, and mysterii eminentia^ facile
co^mendat, exornatque

(...)
