The Subjects Thankfulness: OR, God-a-mercie good Scot,
To the tune of, Blew Cap for me.


LOng time has sweet England enjoyed her peace,
under the good government of prudent Kings,
Since Royal Elizabeth that Queen did cease,
those jarres in this nation her fame ever rings,
And in the next after that do her succeed,
as James of the Scots, a good King indeed,
Our gracious King Charles he also begot,
whom God still preserve here and bless that good Scot.
Who causes Proiectors to hang down the head,
they now from their proiects begin to shrink back,
Promooters, Informers, with grief are half dead,
because they are afraid their old trading to lack;
I think they will beyond sea to frolic and play,
after Gile^ mum Parson who led them the way,
If Empson and Dudley have left them by lot
a twist thread is spun, God-a-mercy good Scot.
How hie were they flown on the wings of their hope
whilst they by their proiects increase their bags,
Their Pattens for pins, for Tobacco and soap,
for glasses, for leather, for pipes and for rags;
False Dice and false Cards too, besides a great fine,
they yearly received by inhanching of wine
The ride now is turning, let us drink the other pot
and merrily sing God-amercy good Scot.
To play at bopeepe now our papists do strive
since they were commanded away to begone,
Who late with the devil a bargain did drive
but now to themselves he has left them alone
The peace of this kingdom they sought for to mar
to change our sought plenty to famine and war:
But now it is thought tha'le pay the whole shot
when the reckning is drawn, God-a mercy etc.
Where are these proud Papests that stradle so wide
let them to Rome like Pilgrims range
For such as does think the whole moon to bestride
cannot proceed long ere they meet with a change;
They have tread on our Nobles to trample the^ down
to set up their miters above the Kings Crown,
That e're h^^ was Clarke the Priest has forgot,
but pride will come down, God-a-mercy good Scot,
The second part.
To the same Tune.


But is there no hope now at such a dead lift,
what must they he packing that fain would stay longer
To break up the Parliament is there no shift?
and fill this our Nation with error more stronger,
Nor dare they repose any faith in their Creed,
since there Avi-mary does fail them at need,
The House is acquainted with every fine plot,
their min^^ is blown up, God-a-mercy good Scot.
With Scriptures divine they do play at fast and loose,
to fast a whole fortnight they will make you believe,
And turn holy writ to fat Capon and Goose,
yet make the unlearned fast every Saint Eve,
Their guts is their god, Religion they mock,
to pamper their flesh they would famish the flock,
To preach and to pray they have almost forgot,
which now they will be taught, God-a-mercy good Scot.
Although this fair Island abound with such crimes,
it all by the Parliament yet shall be purged,
So that all good subjects shall see better times,
although that Projectors do fear to be scourged;
Then let us not faint like men without hope,
a halter for Traitors, a fig for the Pope,
Let Spain and the Strumpet of Babylon plot,
yet we shall be safe, God-a-mery good Scot.
Have you no more Books by whole cart loads to burn,
sent over from beyond sea unbound up in haste,
You see that our Nation's not like for to turn,
your English Composers have studied in waste,
The Hangman with burning the last was so heat,
it is doubtful that he a great surfeit did get,
For since he is dead, yet the son he begot,
can work on his trade well, and tie the right knot.
The Miser shall never liberal give to the poor,
and one man all trading no more shall ingrosse,
The City shall cozen the Country no more,
to build up their fortunes on other men's loss,
Oppression shall down while Justice does smile,
fierce Riot and Popery shall banish this I Will,
Religion shall flourish without any spot,
if this come to pass, God-a-mercy good Scot.
FINIS.
Printed in the year, 1640.


