A True Relation Of ENGLANDS Happiness; Under the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.

And the miserable Estate of Papists, under the Popes Tyrany.

By M. S.

Printed. 1629.

TO THE MOST RELIGIOUS AND VIRTUOUS PRINCE KING JAMES, by the grace of God King
of England, Scotland, France and Jreland, Defender of the true, (...), and
Catholic faith.
AS Kings receive their kingdoms and authority from God; so, most gracious
and dread Sovereign, they prosper and flourish most, when they empoloy their
royal authority for the advancement of the true service and honor of God. Of
Hezekiah the holy 2. King. 18.
Scriptures give testimony, That he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that David his father had done, and that he took away the
high places, and brake the graven images, and cut down the groves, and brake
in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made. And again, (...) he claue to
the Lord, and departed not from him, but kept his commandments. Therefore it
follows; So the Lord was with him, and he prospered in all things that he
took in hand. The same we likewise find verified in your (...) predecessor
Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory. At her first coming to the Crown, she
brake down graven and molten Images, she took down high altars, and removed
away all monuments of superstition out of the Church: she feared not the
malignitie of men, but claue to the Lord, resolving to keep his holy
commandments, and to see God worshipped according to the prescript rule of
his sacred word. She was all her life long a harbor to the distressed children
of God, a refuge to the oppressed, a protector of the persecuted for the
testimony of Christ Jesus, and a nursing mother of Gods Church. Therefore God
maruellously (...) her, both against the force of foneine enemies, and also
against the (...) of domestical traitors, and caused her to prosper in all her
affairs. She lived and reigned long and happily, and dying left behind her a
sweet memory of many blessings by her means bestowed upon her people.

Contrariwise, such as either know not, or did not remember from whence they
received their kingly honor, but either neglected the worship of God, or else
for Gods worship established superstition and idolatry in the Church, have
seldom long reigned, or prospered in their kingdoms. Jeroboam forgetting what
great favor God had done him; advancing him from low estate to the kingdom,
and renting it from the house of David, to give it unto him, received a
threatening message from the Lord by the hand of the Prophet Ahijah, 1. King.
14. The same also was shortly after accomplished. For God brought evil upon
the house of Jeroboam, and cut off his posterity, because he did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and erected idolatry at Bethel. Likewise Queen Mary, who
brought this land not only under the command of Spaniards and Italians, but
also under the heavy yoke of Antichrist, burdensome both to men's civil
estates, and also to their consciences, and erected superstition and idolatry,
which before had been banished, and persecuted the Saints of God that would not
bow their knees to Baal, had a short, troublesome and unhappy reign, and left
behind her nothing but hatred for her cruelty, and infamy for her unnatural
dealing with her subjects, and misgouernement.

In both we find that accomplished which the Lord speaks by the Prophet, 1.
Sam. 2. Them (says he) that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me,
shall be despised. For neither will the Lord fail his inheritance, nor Psalm.
94.
has the throne of iniquity fellowship with God. Dagon could not stand before
the Ark of God, nor shall the 1. Sam. 15.
worshippers of Dagon prevail against the servants of God. The which although
both particularly in the diverse government of Queen Elizabeth and Queen
Mary, and also generally by the examples of all, that either favored or
disfauoured true religion, it appears most evidently: yet because Robert
Parsons an Apostate sometime from religion, and now an utter enemy to the
state, and a renegate Englishman for hatred to the truth, and love to Popery,
in a large discourse does endeavor to disgrace the proceedings of Queen
Elizabeth in reformation of religion especially, and to commend the State of
the realm under Queen Mary, and of all Papists under the Romish government, I
have thought good particularly to demonstrat. I have also wiped away both his
malicious imputations, and encountered him in his railing inuectiues, defending
the honor of our dread sovereign, whose memory shall never die in the minds
of her loving subjects, and answering for true religion calumniated by the
slanderous tongues of the supposts and slaves of Antichrist.

This discourse, although not of that perfection that it may seem worthy to be
presented to so great a King, yet for that it contains a defense of your
Majesty's predecessor, which you honor, and of that religion which you
profess; I am bold to consecrate to your Majesty, as the first fruits of my
loyal affection toward you. Therein also your Majesty may see, not only a
precedent to follow, but also a reward proposed to those, that studiously and
courageously seek to advance piety and true religion.

The adversary by all means seeks to suppress truth, and to advance
idolatry and popish errors, misconstruing things well done, imputing crimes to
innocents, excusing offenders, denying things manifest, forging and devising
matters never done, nor imagined. But while he has sought to bring disgrace,
not only upon true religion, but also upon the restorers and defenders
thereof, he has given us just occasion to show that the doctrine, religion and
practice of Papists, is not only repugnant to truth, but also enemy to Princes
and States, grievous to Christians, and profitable to none, but to the slaves
and adherents of Antichrist. Further, I have made it apparent, that the state
of popish Religion is no way to be maintained, but by treachery and massacres,
by lying, railing and forgerie, being hateful both to God and man, and the
cause of many miseries and calamities.

Vouchsafe therefore, most worthy and noble King, to read this discourse
ensuing. It shall declare unto your Majesty plainly, by what means you may
establish your estate. Queen Elizabeth in her latter days was made believe,
that remiss dealing in matters of religion would assure her life, often sought
for by Papists; and her State, that they by all means have sought to
overthrow. But this her remissness gave her enemies opportunity to practice
against her life, and to make a strong party against Religion and the State,
as your (...) very well knows. For the same is lately broken out, to the
hazard of your royal person, and the indangering of the State: and God knows
whether those that have intended mischief against your royal Majesty, that
never offended them, did not work mischief against her, whom they took to be
the obstacle of all their plots and desseines.

Your Majesty, I doubt not, will wisely consider of these plotters, and their
abettors, and all their practices. A King (says Solomon) that sits in the
throne Proverb. 20.
of judgment, chaseth away all evil with his eyes. But his eyes must be in
his head, and he must sit in the throne of judgment, and execute his laws. He
must not suffer them to escape unpunished, that maliciously seek the bringing
in of strangers, and the subversion of Religion and the State. A wise King
Ibidem.
(says a wise King) scatters the wicked, and makes the wheel to turn over
them. Who these plotters are, I have declared in the treatise following. And
that they excuse not themselves by Religion, I have discovered the deformities
of their Religion, as well as their wicked treasons. All which I present to
your Majesty's grave consideration, beseeching him that is King of Kings to
endue you with wisdom and all royal and heroical virtues fit for the
managing of so great kingdoms, that you may both triumph over all your
enemies, and also long sit in the royal seat of these kingdoms, to the honor
of his divine Majesty, and the comfort of all your loving subjects.

Your Majesty's most loyal and loving subject Matthew Sutcliffe.

The Preface to all true Christians, and loyal subjects.
HOw often the Spaniard and Pope, and their agents have attempted by secret
practices to ruinate the Realm of England, I doubt not (my dear countrymen
and friends) but you have heard. The rebellion in the North-part of England,
an. 1569. the pretense of the Duke of Guise, an. 1584. the diverse rebellions
and troubles of Ireland: the practices of Parrie, Patrick Collein, Williams and
York to kill the Queen: of Lopes and Squire to impoyson her: of Babington and
Ballard, and diverse other Mass Priests, and Masselouing Papists to subvert the
State, are yet fresh in memory. And to forbear to speak of such secret
practices, they have (...) by open wars also to prevail against the State.
In the year 1588. they provided against England, not only great landforces,
but also a great fleet, in their own conceit invincible, yet by Gods grace
easily vanquished and dispersed. Likewise anno 1597 and 1598. they made two
attempts, or rather offers, of some enterprise against the State. In the first
one D. Stillington and other Mass Priests English and Spanish miscarried, the
Spanish fleet being wracked on the rocks of their own country, so that they
could not come to sing Mass in England. The other was disappointed by storms
and contrary winds, so that no effect came of it.

The noise of these preparations and menaces coming into England, and being
bruited abroad, partly by letters, and partly by a proud proclamation set
forth in print by the Adelantado of Spain, wherein he plainly discovers,
that he meant no less then to cut all our throats if he could: it is no
marvel if the State, and diverse men well affected to their country, did
prepare themselves to make resistance. Among the rest Sir Francis Hastings, a
man of ancient nobility, and one that has adorned the honor of his
parentage with excellent virtues, and namely with true piety, love of his
country, fortitude and magnanimity, scorning to hear, that so base a rabble
of Marranes and Bisognos as were assembled first at Lisbone, and then at the
Groyne, should either talk or think of the conquest of England, which the
Adelantado in his bragging Rodomonts style did threaten, he armeth himself,
and prepares his friends and countrymen to make resistance. Perceiving also
the security of some, and slacknesse of others, especially such as were
tainted with the pestilent infection of Italian atheism, or Spanish
Marranisme, but commonly titled Cacolike or popish religion; he publishes a
little treatise, called A watchword, giving warning to the secure, and
stirring (...) such as seemed evil affected, to resist manfully, and to
withstand the Spanish incrochments and pretenses.

This book crossing the desseines of Robert Parsons and his consorts, who by
all means sought to set England in combustion, that they might triumph in the
ashes, and sing Mass in the funerals of their native country; we may perceive
by the sequel, that it touched his cause and faction very nearely, and
therefore was taken by him very tenderly. For presently he takes pen in hand,
and writes a most scornful and bitter treatise against her Majesty's
proceedings, against Religion and all that profess it, railing against Sir
Francis and the professors of the truth, and commending in the best sort he
could, both the professed enemies, and the secret underminers of the State.
Wherein, if we would but note the man's singular impudency, or rather his
audacious foolerie, it were argument sufficient to confound all his writings.
For at what time the Spaniard lay with forces at the Groyne, and by a
Proclamation set forth in print, threatened sire and sword against the Realm;
Robert Parsons like a viperous traitor, in his Ward-word talks of nothing but
peace, and would make us believe, that both the Pope and Spaniards are our good
friends. Where Jesuits, and Massepriests, and malcontent Papists were brewing
of sedition, and preparing themselves to join with foreign forces: this good
fellow would make us believe, that traitors are good friends, and that there
was no hurt by them meant to the Queen or State. Finally, this babbling Warder
does address all his discourse to the Lords of the Council, and chief
dealers in matters of State; albeit the same tended wholly to the destruction
of the State.

And yet when I consider the practices of the enemies of the State, I must
confess that he had great reason to enter into this shameless course. For
albeit there was no color of truth in his discourse, yet he supposed, if the
same were showed to her Majesty, that it would make her stay her preparatiues.
He thought also, it would prove a fair pretense to those that were loath to
spend their money, to forbear to make resistance against the enemy. Further,
he saw that the same would bleare men's eyes, while both foreign enemies and
secret traitors sought to cut our throats. And finally, the same being full of
railing, scorning and (...), he doubted not but the same would deter others,
or at least make them slow to take upon them the defense of the common cause.
For what man considering the small encouragement that forward men did find at
the hands of friends, and the rude entertainment they receive at the hands of
enemies, would not leave the (...) of the State to those, that have most
interest in public government?

All this notwithstanding, sir Francis considering the obligation, that
Christians have to maintain sincere religion, and that binds true hearted
subjects to defend their country, has published an Apology, both in defense
of the common cause, and of his own reputation, against the scurrilous and
railing libell, which Parsons calls A warde-word: expecting, no doubt, reward
at the hands of God, rather then man: and respecting rather his own duty, then
the praise of others. But before either the book came forth, or that I knew
the Knights resolution, the impudency of the man so boldly extolling traitors
and foreign enemies, together with his singular arrogance despising his own
nation, and his foolish speaks for the Popes cause stolen out of others, and
put forth as his wont is, in his own name, had extorted from me a reply to his
Wardword. Which certes might have bin well spared, considering the sufficiency
of the Knights apology, if I had seen it before I had ended my reply. For
what is there in the Wardword worthy of answer, seeing the same consists
wholly of lies, and patches, and old ends stolen from others, and often refuted
before? And what answer can be devised so slender, that counteruaileth not such
a hochpotch of words?

To these replies published by us, after long silence we see that Robert
Parsons has purposed to set forth a reioynder. For we have already received
two parts of nine, but so fraught with calumniations and lies, malicious and
scornful terms, odious and filthy reproaches, that it seems he has spent all
his store of poison, and despaireth to perfect the rest.

This book, albeit most contemptible, containing nothing but disgraceful
matter against her Majesty's proceedings, that is lately deceased, and childish
disputes for some few points of popery, yet have I thought good to handle; not
for any worth, that can be in any such pack of pedlary stuff, set to sale by
this petit merchant, but for that just occasion is thereby given unto me, to
insist upon the co^mendatio^ of our late Queen for her heroical virtues and
happy government, by this wicked traitor and unworthy swad wickedly disgraced,
and especially for her singular piety and zeal in restoring religion, and
abolishing Popery. O that she had been so happy to keep out the Ministers of
Antichrist once expulsed, as at the first to expulse them, and put them out of
her kingdom! but what by yielding to entreaty of some about her by this
generation foully abused, and what by tolerating of such as were sent in by
foreign enemies to practice against her life and kingdom, and what drawn
back by those that entertained intelligence with public enemies; she was
(...) to slack execution of laws, if not to suspend them, to her own great
trouble, and to the (...) of Religion and the State, but that God by his
providence supplied the defects of (...). By the (...) Warne-word, I have also
been warned to discourse of the miserable and dangerous estate both of (...)
and their subjects, that live under the thraldom of the Pope: and that both in
regard of matters of State, and of Religion. Finally, albeit Robert Parsons
hitherto has used scurrilous railing for his warrant and protection against
those, that have dealt with him: and like as a fox pursued with hounds with
the filthy stench of his style endeavors to make them give over the chase;
yet I shall so touch him for his impiety, making a jest at Scriptures and
Religion, for his scurrilitie railing without wit or modesty, for his doltish
ignorance committing most gross and childish errors, for his lies and forgerie
using neither respect of truth nor common honesty, that I hope I shall turn
his laughing into another note. If I speak roundly to him and his consorts, yet
I do not, as he does, speak falsely. Sharpnes he ought not to mislike, having
begun this course. Neither can others justly reprove me, considering my
adversaries audacious impudency. Si falsa dicimus (says Hilarie) infamis sit
sermo maledicus. Si vero vniuersa Contra Constant.
haec manifesta esse ostendimus, no^ sumus extra Apostolica^ libertatem and
modestia^. If we tell matters false, then let our sharp speech be infamous. If
all we report be manifestly proved, then are we not out of the limits of
Apostolical liberty and modesty. Howbeit what measure is to be required in
him, that is to encounter a man of such unmeasurable and outrageous behavior?
In the first book the honor of her Majesty late deceassed, and her
proceedings in the alteration of religion is defended. In the second, the
grieuances of Christians under the Popes government, both in matters of
conscience and their temporal estate are plainly discovered. In the last we
are to encounter with the ridiculous manner of Parsons behauior and writing,
(...) he might percase think himself wise therein. God turn all to his
glory, to the manifestation of truth, the detection of errors, and the shame
of the shameless patrons thereof.

The first Book, containing a defense of Queen Elizabeth's most pious and
happy government, impugned in a scurrilous libell, entitled, A warne-word.
The Preface to the first Book.
I Need not, I trust, make any large discourse, in calling to remembrance the
noble and heroical acts of our late Queen, and most gracious Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth of famous and godly memory. For as Jesus the son of Syrach Eccles.
44.
said of famous men of ancient time, so we may say of her, that her name will
live from generation to generation. Her kind love to her subjects, and gracious
favors done both to English and other nations, will never be forgotten. His
Ibidem.
words likewise concerning his famous ancesters, may be well applied unto her.
She was renowned for her power, and was wise in counsel. She ruled her people
by counsel, and by the knowledge of learning fit for them. She was rich and
mighty in power, and lived peaceably at home. Her remembrance therefore is as
the composition of sweet perfume, that is made by the art of the Apothecary,
and is sweet as honey in all mouths, as it is said of Josias. Ibid. cap. 49.
In his steps she insisted, and behaved her self uprightly in the reformation
of the people, and took away al abominatio^s of iniquity. She reformed the
abuses and corruptions of popish religion, which through the working of the
mystery of iniquity, had now won credit in the world, and overthrew the idol
of the Mass, and banished all idolatry out of the Church. She directed her
heart to the Lord, and in the time of the ungodly she established Religion. She
put her trust in the Lord; and after that wicked and ungodly men had brought us
back into Egyptian servitude, she delivered us from the bondage of the wicked
Egyptians, and restored Religion according to the rules of Apostolical
doctrine.

But because as in the time of Josias the Priests of Baal, so in our times
their offspring the Mass Priests cannot brook her reformation, but look
back to the abominations of Egypt and Babylon, I have thought it convenient
not only to declare at large what benefits the people of England now five and
forty years almost enjoyed by her gracious and happy government, but also
to justify the same against the slanderous calumniations and (...) of Robert
Parsons her borne subject, but now a renegate Iebusite, and professed enemy,
who in diverse wicked libels and paltrie pamphlets has endeavored to obscure
her great glory, and to deface her worthy actions.

Wherein, that I may proceed with more perspicuitie, I think it fit to reason
first of matters Ecclesiastical, and afterward of civil and worldly affairs.
In Ecclesiastical affairs, which by her means grew to a better settlement,
we are to consider first what grace it is to have a certainty in religion; and
next, what favor God showed to us, reducing us to the unity of the true
Catholic Church. Thirdly, we will reason of true faith: fourthly, of the
sincere administration of the Sacraments: fifthly, of the true worship of God:
sixthly, of the Scriptures and public prayers in our mother tongue:
seventhly, of freedom we enjoyed by her from persecution, from the Popes
exactions, from his wicked laws and unjust censures, from al heretical and
false doctrine: eighthly, of deliverance from schism, superstition and
idolatry: and finally of good works, and the happiness of those, that not
only are able to (...) which are good works, but also do walk in them
according to their Christian profession, avoiding pretended Popish good-workes,
that are either impious, or else superstitious and unprofitable. Al which
graces this land has long enjoyed by her (...) reformation of religion.

In matters political, we purpose to consider, first, the happy deliverance
of this land out of the hands of the Spaniard, and from all fear of foreign
enemies. Next, her famous victories, both against (...) and traitors at home,
and open enemies abroad, and her glory and reputation with foreign nations.
Thirdly, the restitution of all royal authority and pre-eminence to the
Crown, of which the Pope before that had usurped a great part. Fourthly, the
peaceable estate of this kingdom in the tumults of other nations round about
us: and lastly, the wealth and multitude of her subjects.

CHAP. I. Of certainty in Faith and Religion, and of the (...) we have with
the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Church.
FAith, as says the Apostle, Heb. 11. is the ground of things which are hoped
for, and the evidence of things which are not seen. If then we have true
faith, we are assured of things hoped for, although not seen. When two of the
disciples Luke 24.
of Christ doubted of his resurrection, he said unto them: O fools and slow of
heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! Ideo fideles vocati (...)
( says Chrysostom, Hom. 1. in 1. Tim 4.) vt his quae dicuntur sine (...)
haesitatione credamus. Therefore we are called faithful, that we may believe
without doubting those things which are spoken. So then all Christians that
(...), do certainly believe and are persuaded; and he that doubts, believes
not. Further, the object of faith is most certain. Heaven and earth shall
pass, but my words shall not pass, says our Savior, Matthew. 24. Saint
Augustine does attributs that only to the writers of canonical Scriptures,
that they could not err. Neither (...) I to stand long upon this point, seeing
our (...) also confess, that nothing that is false can be the object of faith.
But our adversaries take away from Christians, all certainty of faith and
religion. For first they teach, that no Christian is to believe that he shall
be saved: and secondly, they make man's faith uncertain concerning the object.
That is taught by the conuenticle of Trent, sess. 6. cap. 16. where it says,
Neque seipsum aliquis etiamsi nihil sibi conscius sit iudicare debet: that is,
neither ought any to judge himself, although he be not conscious to himself
of any thing. And in the same session chap. 9. it determines, that no man by
the certaincie of faith ought to assure himself that he shall be saved. The
second point does follow of the diverse doctrines of Enchirid. c. de Ecclesia.
the Papists. Eckius holds, that the Scriptures are not authentical without
the authority of the Church. And although Bellarmine dare not allow this form
of (...); yet where he defends the determination of the conuenticle of Trent
concerning the old Latin translation, in effect he grants it. For if the
Church only can make Scriptures authentical, then without the Churches
authority they are not authentical. In his book De not is Eccles. c. 2. he
says, the Scriptures depend upon the Church. (...) ( says he) pendent ab
Ecclesia. Stapleton, lib. 9. de princip. doctrinal. cap. 4. says, that it is
necessary that the Churches authority should consigne and declare, which
books are to be received for canonical Scripture. Necessarium est ( says he)
vt Ecclesiae (...) as Scripturarum canonem consignet. And his meaning is, that
no man is to receive any (...) for canonical, but such as the Church from time
to time shall determine to be canonical: and those upon the Churches
determination he will have necessarily received.

Secondly, the (...) of Trent makes Scriptures, Sess 4.
and unwritten traditions of equal value. Bellarmine in his fourth book De
verbo Dei speaks no otherwise of traditions, then as of the infallible
written word of God. Stapleton says, The rule of faith does signify all that
doctrine which is Lib. 7 princ, doct c 1.
delivered and received in the Church: and that very absurdly, as I think no
reasonable man can well deny. For that being granted, the rule and (...) ruled
should be all one. But of that we shall speak otherwhere.

Thirdly they teach, that the determinations of the Church are no less firmly
to be believed, and reverently to be holden, then if they were expressed in
Scriptures. Id quod sancta matter Ecclesia definit, vel acceptat, says Eckius,
Enchir. cap. de Eccles. non est minore firmitate credendum, ac veneratione
tenendum, quam si in diuinis literis sit expressum. And all our adversaries do
believe, that the Popes determinations concerning matters of faith are
infallible, and so to be accounted of.

Finally, in the canon law, c. in canonicis. did. 19. they place the decretals
of Popes in equal rank with canonical Scriptures.

Of these positions it follows, that as long as men believe the Komish
Church, they neither believe truth, nor have any certain faith or religion.
And that is proved by these arguments.

First, he that believes not Gods promises concerning his own salvation, is an
infidel, and has no true faith. But this (...) the case of all Papists. For
not one of them believes that (...) all be saved, nor imagines that God has
said or promised any thing concerning his own salvation.

Secondly, if the Scriptures depend upon the Church, and the Church is a
society of me^: then the Papists believe Scriptures with humane faith, and
depend upon men. But that they do plainly teach.

Thirdly, if the Church ought to consigne canonical Scriptures, and the Pope
ought to rule the Church; (...) if the Pope either determine against canonical
Scriptures, or make fabulous scriptures equal with canonical Scriptures, the
Papists are to believe either doctrine contrary, or diverse from Scriptures: at
the least they are uncertain what they shall believe. But the Pope may both
err in denying Scriptures, and adding to Scriptures. To answer this the
Papists are driven to affirm, that the Pope cannot err in these
determinations. But this shows the (...) of their faith, that depends upon
one little rotten goutie Pope, whose learning is not worth two chips, and whose
piety is less then his learning.

Fourthly, if the Popes consignation be necessary to make Papists believe
Scriptures, then is their faith most uncertain, and rather humane then divine.
Especially considering that of this Popes consignation of Scriptures, there is
not one word in Scriptures. But that is their doctrine.

Fifthly, the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome, being the rule of
faith, the Romish faith must needs prove uncertain and variable. The
consequence of this proposition is proved, for that both schoolmen differ
from schoolmen, and late writers from the ancient, and also Popes from Popes,
as I have showed in my books De pontif. Romans That the rule of faith is as I
have said, it may be auerred by Stapletons words.

Sixthly, if faith be grounded upon traditions, as well as upon Scriptures,
then have the Papists no certain faith. The consequence is plain, for that
diverse ancient traditions are new ceased: and neither Caesar Baronius, nor any
man is able to set down, which are authentical (...), which not.

Finally, if the faith of Papists rest upon the Popes determinations, or else
upon the supposed Catholic Churches decrees; then is their faith a goutie,
frail, and rotten faith, or rather a most doubtful opinion. For neither are
they certain who is lawful Pope, nor that his determinations are infallible,
nor is it an easy matter to know which are the Catholic Churches
determinations, the Papists themselves contending and varying continually about
them.

These arguments do show, that the Papists have either a vain faith, or else
no faith at all. And this Robert Parsons notwithstanding his obstinacy and
perverseness must needs confess. For simple Papists have only these means
whereby to direct themselves: viz. Scriptures, Fathers, or their own Priests.
Scriptures they neither hear read in a tongue known, nor do they much regard
them. The Fathers they understand not. The priests do often tell lies: and too
(...) they dwell from the Pope to know of him ths truth. To omit to talk of
ruder persons, and to talk of spruce Robert Parsons, gladly would I know of
him, how he is assured that the religion he teaches is true. Scriptures he
denies to be the rule of faith, and will not (...) them to be authentical,
without the Popes determination. The Pope is but one man. If then he rely wholly
on the Popes determination, his faith is nothing but a foolish fancy grounded
upon one man. If upon the Church, yet he knows not the Church, but by his
own reason and sense (as I think) he will confess. Rule of faith he
acknowledges Ward-word page 6.
none, but the universal Church: which is not only absurd, but makes much
against him. Absurd it is, for that the Church is ruled, and is not the rule,
no more then the Carpenter is his rule. It makes against him, for that it is
more difficult to know the Catholic Church of all times and places, then
Scriptures, or any proof of faith else. For to know that, it is necessary to
be well seen in the history of all times, Churches and countries. And if he
refer himself to others, and believe humane histories, his faith is still
grounded on men.

This being the case of Papists, and of their agent Robert Parsons; we may
esteem our selves happy, that are delivered from this great uncertainty, and
taught to build our faith upon Christ Jesus, and the doctrine of the Apostles
and Prophets. Other foundation can no man lay beside that 1. Cor. 3.
which is laid, that is Christ Jesus, says the Apostle. And Ephesians. 2. Ye are
built (says he) upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone. We know, that faith comes by hearing,
and hearing Romans 10.
by the word of God. We believe that the Scriptures are a perfect rule, and
therefore rightly called canonical. The Apostle speaking of the rule of faith,
2. Cor. 10. Gal. 6. and Phil. 3. means no other rule but that, which was to
be found in holy Scriptures.

The Fathers also proceeded by the rule of Scriptures, both where they sought
direction for themselves, and also where they brought arguments against
Heretics. Ireney lib. (...). aduers. Haeres. cap. 1. calls the Gospel
delivered in Scriptures the foundation and pillar of our faith. Tertul. writing
against Hermogenes, says, He abode not in the rule of faith. And why? Inter
Scriptur as enim Dei colores suos inuenire no^ potuerat. He could not find his
colors or fancies in Scriptures. Athan. says Orat. 2. contr. Arian. that
Heretics are to be stoned with arguments out of Scriptures. Out of Scriptures
yt Arians in the Council of Nice, and other Heretics in other Synods were
confuted. And generally antiquity does call Scriptures the canon or rule of
faith. Agreeably therefore to Scriptures and Fathers the Church of England in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign acknowledged the canon of Scriptures,
and thence took the articles of our Christian faith. And therefore I call
Scriptures, and that which is necessarily deduced (...) of Scriptures the rule
of faith, not separating the rule from scriptures, as Parsons 1. Encontr. cap.
15. of his Warn-word does cavil, but in the rule comprehending whatsoever is
either expressed in terms, or by necessary consequence deduced out of
scriptures. And this I did to avoid the cauils of the adversary, which
infer, because this word Trinity, or consubstantiall, or baptism of
children is not found in Scriptures, that scriptures are not a solid and
entire rule of faith.

Against this Parsons in his Warn-word 1. Encontr. c. 15. alleges first
certain names of Fathers, then certain words out of Ignatius his Epistle ad
Phil. Irenaeus lib. 3. and 4. aduersus Haeres. Tertullian. de Praescript.
aduersus Haeretic. and Uincentius Lirinensis. But he spends his labor in
vain, and abuses his Reader. For none of these Fathers speak Lib. 3. aduers.
Haeres. cap. 4.
of other matters, then such as are to be proved out of Scriptures, as the
places themselves show. Ireney by Tradition proves God to be the Creator, and
the mystery of Christ his incarnation. But Parsons will not deny this to be
contained in Scriptures. Tertullian. de Praescript. aduers. Haeret. disputes
against the heresies of the Valentinians and Marcionites drawing arguments from
the Apostles preaching and tradition. But that was because they denied and
corrupted Scriptures. For no man can deny, but that their heresies are clearly
convinced by Scriptures. Quod sumus hoc sunt. That we are that they are, says
Tertullian speaking of Scriptures. That is likewise the meaning of Vincentius
Lirinensis de Haeres. cap. 27. for that depost, of which he talks, is nothing
but the Christian faith contained in scriptures. But if Parsons will prove his
rule of faith, he must show a faith grounded upon tradition, that is not
deduced out of Scriptures. Nay, if he will not be contrary to himself, he
must show, that not the Apostles tradition, as he says in his Warn-word 1.
Encoun. cap. 15. but the Catholic church is the rule of faith, as he holds
Ward-word, Encontr. page 6.

He does also object against us diverse alterations of religion Warn-word
Encontr. c. 16.
in England in king Henry the eight his reign, and in king Edwards days: and
then asks by what authority our rule of faith was established. But first he
might as well have spoken of yt alteration made in (...). Mary's days, when
the impieties of Popish religion were established by act of Parliament.
Secondly, the alterations in religion made in England of late time, make no
variation in the rule of faith, that is always one, but in the application and
use of it. Thirdly, albeit by act of Parliament the articles of religion were
confirmed, wherein the canon of scriptures, and the substance of our confession
is set down; yet was that rathe^r a declaration of our acceptance, then a
confirmation of the rule of faith, that in it self is always immovable. Our
rule of faith therefore is certain, albeit not always in one sort approved,
or received by men. But ye rule of Popish faith neither in it self, nor in ye
approbatio^ of Parliaments or Churches is certain, or immovable.

Finally, he asks a question of Sir Francis in his Wardword, p. 5. how he
knows his religion to be true. And says, he has only two means to guide
himself in this case, and that is either Scriptures, or the preaching of our
Ministers. But this question, as I have showed, touches himself, that
builds his faith upon the Pope, nearer then Sir Francis, who groundeth
himself and his faith only upon yt holy Scriptures, and is assured of his
faith, not (...) these two means only, but by diverse others. For beside
Scriptures he has the help of the Sacraments of the Church, of Gods spirit
working within him, of miracles recorded in scriptures, of ancient Fathers, of
the practice of the Church, of the consent of nations, of the confession of the
adversaries, of the suffering of Martyrs, and testimonies of learned men, and
such like arguments. In this question therefore Robert Parsons showed himself
to be a silly Friar, and to have had more malice then might.

In time past also we were, as sheep going astray, and out of the union of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church. Diverse of our ancestors worshipped the cross
and the images of the Trinity with divine worship. Some like brute beasts
fell down before Idols, crept to the cross, and kissed wood and stone. Others
worshipped Angels, the blessed Uirgin and Saints, praying unto them in all
their necessities, trusting in them, saying Masses in their honor, and
offering incense and prayers to their pictures and images. For so they were
taught, or rather mistaught by popish Priests.

The Romish (...) in the very foundations of religion was departed from the
Apostolic and Catholic Church. The schoolmen brought their proofs out of
the Popes Decretals, and Aristotle's Metaphysickes. Est Petri seeds (says
Bellarmine in Praefat. ante lib. de Pont. Rom.) lapis probatus, angularis,
pretiosus, in (...) fundatus. The Sea of Peter, is an approved corner stone,
precious, and laid in the foundation. The same man lib. 2. de Pont. Romans cap.
31. calls the Pope the foundation of the Church. Sanders calls him the
Rock. (...) nunc a Christo (says Stapleton relect. princip. doctr. in Praef.)
eorumue doctrina praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti apud me locu^ (...). That
is: Others now beside Christ, and their doctrine, preaching, and determination
shall be esteemed of me, as a foundation. This he says, where he talks of
the foundation (...) religion and the Church. But the catholic Church had no
foundation beside Christ Jesus, and his holy word and Gospel, taught by the
Prophets and Apostles. The Apostle ( Gal. 1.) denounced him accursed, that
taught any other Gospel, then that, which he had preached. The holy Fathers
proved the faith by holy Scriptures, and not by popish Decretals, and
philosophical Principles.

Concerning Christ's body the Romanists taught, that the same is both in
heaven, and in the Sacrament, albeit we neither could see it there, nor feel
it. But the scriptures teach us, that his body is both palpable and visible,
and is Luke 24. Mar. vlt.
now taken up into heaven. So likewise teach the Fathers: Vigilius in his
fourth book against Eutyches speaking of Christ's body: When it was on earth
(says he) surely it was not in heaven; and now because it is in heaven,
certainly it is not on earth.

They have also brought in new doctrine concerning Purgatory and indulgences,
and which is no more like to the ancient catholic faith, then heresy and
novelty to Christian religion. They teach, that whosoever does not satisfy in
this life for the temporal punishment of mortal sins committed after
baptism, and remitted concerning the guiltiness, must satisfy for the same
in Purgatory, unless it please the Pope by his indulgences to release him. Of
the (...) of souls in Purgatory, and of the nature, quality and effect of
indulgences they talk idly, and unlike to the scholars of Catholics.

The Catholic doctrine concerning the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
supper they have quite changed: in Baptism adding salt, spittle, hallowed
water, (...), blowings, annointings, light, and other strange ceremonies. In
the Lords supper taking away the cup from the communicants, and not delivering,
but hanging up or carrying about the Sacrament, and worshipping it as God: and
finally, believing and holding transubstantiation. They have also devised other
sacraments, and taught that they contain grace and (...).

They were wont to kiss the Popes toe, and to receive his dunghill decretals,
worshipping Antichrist, and intitling him Christ's Uicar.

All which novelties, superstitions and heresies, by her Majesty's godly
reformation are abolished, who has restored the ancient Catholic and
Apostolic faith, which the Popes of Rome for the most part had altered and
suppressed.

She has also by her authority brought us to the unity of the Catholic
faith, and by good laws confirmed true Christian religion. Before our times
there was no settlement in matters of Religion. Durand denies Divinity to be
Scientia: Thomas and Richard Middleton hold that it is. Writing upon the master
of Sentences, the school-me^ strive Did. 1. lib. 1.
about the words vti and frui, dissenting not only from their master, but also
from one another.

They differ also much about the distinction of divine attributes, Vtrum sit
realis, formalis, an rationis tantum. This (says Dionysius a Charterhouse
Monk) is one of the chief difficulties In did. 2. lib. 1 sent.
of Divines, and about it between famous Doctors is great dissension and
contention. Aegidius does lance Thomas, and others run upon both.

Aegidius in lib. 1. sent. did. 2. would have the persons of the Trinity to
be distinguished, by a certain thing in one, that is not in another: but
others condemn him for that opinion.

Writing upon the 3. did. lib. 1. sent. they deny their masters examples, and
one condemns another.

Bonauenture says, that men may attain to the knowledge of the holy Trinity
by natural reason: others say contrary.

The Scotists lib. 1. sent. did. 5. inuey against Henricus de Gandauo, for his
opinion about the eternal generation of the Son of God.

Aegidius holds, that the son of God has power to beget another son: which
displeases Thomas and Bonauenture, and is very strange doctrine.

Thomas Aquinas part. 1. q. 32. art. 4. says, that Doctors may hold contrary
opinions, Circa notiones in diuinis. He teaches also, that the holy Ghost does
more principally proceed from the Father then from the Son: which others
mislike.

If then they agree not about the doctrine of the holy Trinity, it is not like
that in matters wherein they have liberty to dissent, they will better agree.
Scotus holds, that the In 2. (...). did. 1.
soul and an Angel do not differ, as two diverse kinds. Others teach contrary.

Some Doctors hold, that Angels consist of form only, others In 2. sent.
did. 3.
hold contrary. They dissent also about the sin of our first parents.

Pighius in the doctrine of original sin dissenteth from his fellows.
Innocentius in c. maiores de bapt. and eius effect. misliketh the opinion of
the master of the Sentences, that held it to be pronitas ad peccandum, that is,
a pronenesse to sin.

The Thomists to this day could never be reconciled to the Scotists about the
conception of our Lady, these denying she was conceived in sin, the others
affirming it.

Gropper in his exposition of the Creed confesses, that among the Papists
there are two diverse opinions about Christ's descending into hell.

Bellarmine in his books of controversies, does not more violently run upon
us, then upon his own consorts. In every article almost he brings contrary
expositions of Scriptures, and contrary opinions.

In the sacrament of the Lords supper, which is a pledge of love, there are
infinite contradictions among them, as I have showed in my books de Missa,
against Bellarmine. The like contentions I have showed in my Treatises de
Indulgentijs, and de Purgatorio; and shall have occasion more at large to
speak of them hereafter.

We are therefore to thank God, that the doctrine of faith in the Church of
England is settled, and that refusing all novelties we agree therein with the
ancient catholic Church. We acknowledge one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one head of the Church, one canon of Scriptures with the ancient fathers. The
rules of all ancient and lawful general Councels concerning the faith we
admit. We have one uniform order for public prayers, administration of
Sacraments, and Gods service. Neither do we only agree among our selves, but
also with the reformed Churches of France and Germany, and other nations,
especially in matters of faith and salvation. And as for ceremonies and rites,
it cannot be denied, but that all Churches therein have their liberty, as the
diversities of ancient Churches and testimonies of Fathers do teach us.

Most vain therefore and contumelious is that discourse of N. D. in his
Warne-word, 1. encontr. ca. 4, 5, and 6. where he talks of the difference of
soft and rigide Lutherans among themselves; of them from Anabaptists, and from
Zwinglians; of all from the followers of Seruetus and Valentine Gentilis. For
neither do we acknowledge the names of Lutherans, Caluinians, or Zuinglians,
but only call our selves Christians: nor have we to do with the Arians, or
Anabaptists, or Seruetus, or Gentilis, or any heretics. Nay by our Doctors
these fellows have been diligently confuted, and by our governors the
principal of them have been punished. But these, may Parsons reply, have bin
among us. Admit it (...) so: yet do not our adversaries take themselves to be
guilty of Arianisme and Anabaptisme, because there are diverse guilty of
Arianisme and Anabaptisme among them. We say further, that the Churches of
Germany, France and England agree, albeit private men hold private opinions.
Finally, where we talk of the Church of England, what a ridiculous sot was
this, to bring an instance of the Churches of Germany or Suizzerland? nay not
of the Churches, but of private persons, and that in matters, not very
substantial, if we admit their own interpretations?

Having therefore talked his pleasure of Lutherans and Zuinglians, he
descends to speak of rigid and soft Caluinists (as he calls them) in
England. He calls them also Protestants and Puritanes. But neither do we
admit these names of faction, nor is he able to show that publicly any
Christian is tolerated to (...), either in matters of faith, or rites from the
Church of England. But if any there be that mislike our rites; yet is not that
contention about matters of faith, nor can the disorder of private persons
hinder the public union of the Church. Finally, I do not know any man now, but
he is reasonably well satisfied concerning matters of discipline, albeit the
same be with the great grief of Papists, who go about to stir up the coals
of contention, as much as they can, that heretofore have been covered.

CHAP. II. Of the restoring of Christian Religion, and the reduction of the
Church of England to the true faith.
TRue faith in time of Popery was a great stranger in England, most men being
ignorant of all points of christian Religion, the rest holding diverse erroneous
points and heresies. Their ignorance we shall prove by diverse testimonies
hereafter. Their errors and heresies are very apparent, and at large proved in
my late challenge. That which the Apostle calls the doctrine of devils, 1.
Tim. 4. that they embrace for doctrine of faith. For they forbid their Priests,
Monks, Friars, and Nuns to marry, and command the Benedictines and their
Charterhouse Monks at all times to abstain from flesh. They also forbid men
to eat flesh upon all fasting days, fridayes and saterdayes, and in Lent:
dissoluing the commandments of God by their own traditions. The Manicheyes
abstained from eggs as Saint Augustine shows, lib. de haeres. cap. 46. Nec
(...) saltem sumunt, quasi and ipsacum franguntur expirent, nec oporteat vllis
corporibus mortuis vesci. So likewise did Papists Cap. plurimi. did. 82.
at certain times, they call such as allow ye marriage of priests, sectatores
libidinum, and praeceptores vitiorum, that is, followers of lusts, and teachers
of vices: albeit the Apostle affirms marriage (...) be honorable in all sorts
of men. They dissolve such marriages, albeit Christ teach, that man is not to
separate them whom God has joined together. Their Fastes they place in eating
of fish, and not in abstinence from all sustenance, as the ancient Fathers by
their doctrine and practice taught. Some count it as mortal sin to eat
flesh on fridayes, as to kill a man, and that a Priest does sin less in
committing fornication, then in matching himself in honest marriage: and yet
they confess, that fornication is against the law of God, and not the marriages
of priests.

They tolerated common whores, as did Simon Magus and other heretics: and now
in Rome the Pope notwithstanding his pretended holiness, receives a tribute
from them. They do also sell Masses, imposition of hands, benefices, and make
money of their god of the altar, and their religion: which sauoureth of the
heresy of Simon Magus.

-- Venalia nobis (says Mantuan) Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, (...).
That is, churches, priests, altars, sacraments, crowns, fire, incense,
prayers, yea heaven and God himself are set to sale among us. Brigit in her
revelations cap. 232. says, Priests are worse then Judas, for that he sold
Christ for money: but they barter him for all commodities.

As the Basilidians worshipped images, used enchantments, Irenaeus lib. 1.
aduers. haeres. cap. 23.
and superstitious adiurations: so do they, worshipping not only material
images, but also their fantastical imaginations. They also exorcise water and
salt, saying, Exorcizo te creatura aquae, and again, exorcizo te creatura
salis.

With the Heretics called Staurolatrae, they worship the cross, with the
Angelikes they serve and worship Angels, with the Armenians they make the
images of God the Father, and the holy Ghost.

As the Nazarites mingled Jewish ceremonies with christian Religion, so do
Papists, borrowing from them their paschal lamb, their Iubileys, their
priestly apparel, their altars, their Leuiticall rites, and diverse other
Jewish ceremonies.

Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers. (...). cap. 30. says, that Marcion and Saturninus
first taught abstinence from living creatures: from whom the Papists seem to
have borrowed their abstinence from certain meats, as less holy then others.
Our Savior Christ and his Apostles, (as S. Augustine says Epist. 86. ad
Casulanum) never appointed what days we ought to fast, and what not. The
Papists therefore have their fasts from others then from Christ or his Apostles.

From the Manicheys they borrow their communions under one kind, as may be
proved by the Chapt. relatum, and comperimus. did. 2. de consecrat. and by Leo
his fourth Sermon de quadrages.

The Helcesaites make Christ in heaven to differ from Christ on earth, as says
Theodoret haeret. fabul. lib. 2. cap. de Helcesaeis, his words are these.
Christum non vnum dicunt, sed hunc quidem inferne, illum vero superne. So
likewise the Papists teach, that Christ's body in heaven is visible and
palpable, but not as it is in the Sacrament.

With the Pelagians they concur in many points, as I have at large declared
in my late challenge. Hoc Pelagiani audent dicere (says S. Augustine lib. 2.
de bono perseuerantiae c. 5.) hominem iustum in hac vita nullum habere
peccatum. Now how can they clear themselves from this, that hold, that a man
is able to perform the law of God perfectly?

The Apostle Paul denies, that we are justified before God by the works of
the law. The Papists have taught quite contrary. He teaches us not to glory
in our works. They say quite contrary, that men may glory in their works. He
shows that as many as receive the sacrament of the Lords body, are also to
receive the sacrament of his blood. They deny the cup to all the
communicants beside the priest. Our Savior instituting the Sacrament of his
last supper, said, Accipite, manducate: that is, take and eat. These imagine
that he offered his body and blood really and corporally at his last supper,
and that he appointed his body and blood actually to be offered in the Mass,
and not always to be sacramentally and spiritually received of the
communicants.

The Papists teach, that wicked men, reprobates, and devils may have true
faith. But the Apostle teaches that true faith justifies, and that they which
have it, live by faith.

Commonly they hold, that charity is the form of faith. Which if it were
true, then could not faith subsist without charity. But the Apostle teaches
us, that faith, as faith, does make the just to live, and ancient Christians
were always ignorant of these philosophical fancies.

They hold that diverse sins are committed, which are not forbidden by Gods
law. But this shows, that the law of God as they suppose, is not perfect, and
that the laws of man having nothing in them of Gods law, bind the conscience
as well as the law of God.

Finally, the very foundations of popish religion are erroneous, the same being
founded partly upon the decretals of Popes, partly upon the traditions of men,
contained partly in their Missals, breuiaries, (...) other rituall books,
partly in their fabulous legends, and partly in the chest of the Popes breast:
and partly upon the old Latin translation of the Bible, which the Romanists
hold to be authentical: and partly upon the interpretations of the Romish
Church.

But since it pleased God to put into her Majesty's royal heart a resolution
to reform the church, that was so much deformed by the pharisaicall and
superstitious additions of ye Papists, and to restore religion according to ye
doctrine of ye Apostles and Prophets, not only all former heresies and errors
were abolished, but also the true doctrine of faith was restored. The which is
apparent not only by the articles of Religion, which we profess, but also by
our public confessions and apologies, which we have published at diverse times.
And in part it may be proved by the secret confession of our adversaries. For
albeit they would gladly cavil against our confessions; yet they take their
grounds commonly out of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Melancthon and others, not
often meddling with our confessions. Diverse of them also are wont to call us
negative Divines. Which argues, that so much as we hold positiuely, is for the
most part confessed by the adversaries themselves, and that we bring in no new
faith, but that which always has been holden and maintained in the Church of
Christ, desiring only that the positive errors, heresies and superstitions of
Papists may be abolished. Wherefore as Christians in time past extolled
Constantine the great, that gave liberty Eusebius. hist. li. 10. cap. 5.
to al his subjects to profess the Christian religion, that assembled synods
of Bishops, and confirmed their decrees: so ought Eusebius de vita Constant. lib.
3. c, 23.
we to celebrate the memory of our gracious (...), that gave liberty to all
Christians to profess the truth, that caused diverse assemblies of learned men,
and ratified the Christian faith by her authority.

CHAP. III. Of the true and sincere administration of the Sacraments of the
Church restored in England.
OF the holy rites and sacraments of Christian religion we cannot speak
without grief of heart, when we consider how shamefully they were abused,
mangled and corrupted by the synagogue of Antichrist. Where Christ ordained
only two Sacraments, to wit Baptism, where he said, Teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Matthew. 28.
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost: and the sacrament of his body and
blood, where he said, Take, eat, this is my body, and drink ye all of this:
for this is the blood of the new testament; and do this in remembrance of me:
that synagogue has added five other sacraments, giving the same virtue to
their extreme unction, and to marriage and orders concerning justification, that
they give to Baptism and the Lords supper. The master of the Sentences
rehearsing the seven sacraments, Lib. sent. 4. did. 2.
for the Lords supper puts Panis benedictionem, that is, the blessing of the
bread, excluding the cup either from the Lords supper, or from the number of
sacraments. He does also differ from the rest in describing the virtue of the
(...). Alia (...) contra peccatum praebent (says Ibidem.
he) and gratiam adiutricem conferunt, vt baptismus: alia in remedium tantum
sunt, vt coniugium: (...) gratia and virtute (...) fulciunt, vt (...) and ordo:
That is, some of the sacraments yield us a remedy against sin, and withal
bestow on us helpful grace: others are only for remedy, as marriage: others do
strengthen us with grace and virtue, as the eucharist and holy orders. But
Bellarmine lib. 2. de sacrament. c. (...). does show, that the common current
opinion now is otherwise, and that all these sacraments do justify ex opere
operato: that is, by virtue of the work wrought. As if all married men, and
priests of Baal were justified, or as if justification and grace came by
greasing, scraping, crossing and such other ceremonies. But neither are they
able to justify this doctrine, nor to show either institution, or promise of
confirmation, or extreme (...), or certain sign of marriage, or repentance, or
order, or the other two new devised sacraments. Furthermore, marriage,
repentance, and priesthood, were as well used in the time of the law, as in the
Gospel. Now then can these (...) sacraments of the Gospel?

They have also altered, corrupted, and mangled Christ his institution,
concerning the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper. In baptime they
salt and conjure the water in which the party baptized is to be dipped. They
put salt into his mouth, and touch his ears and nosthrils with spittle, which
is often times very noisome. They anoint him also on the head, and give him a
candle in his hand, and embroyle Christ his institution with diverse other
ceremonies. Finally, to make water more effectual, they pour oil into the
(...).

In the sacrament of the Lords supper instituted in bread and wine, they leave
neither the substance of bread nor wine, but say, that the same is
transsubstantiated into Christ's body and blood, and that either his body and
blood, or the accidents of bread and wine subsisting without their substance
make the sacrament. Secondly they hold, that Christ's body and blood are
conjoined without any distance to the accidents of bread and wine, albeit they
are not there either felt or seen. Thirdly, they have turned the sacrament of
our communion with (...), and of our mutual conjunction one with another, into
a private action of one Priest, that eats and drinks all alone
uncharitably, and very directly contrary to Christ his institution, who jointly
said, Accipite and manducate, hoc est corpus meum: and bibite ex hoc omnes:
Take, eat, this is my body: and drink ye all of this: contrary to the
practice of the ancient Church, that never solemnized this action without
distribution of the sacrament: and contrary to the use and reason of the
sacrament. For why should not the faithful be made partakers of that
sacrament, which is a sign of their union both with Christ and among
themselves? Fourthly, Christ and his Apostles administered the cup to as many as
received the holy eucharist. But they by a solemn decree of priests at
Constance, take away the cup from all save the priests that say Mass. Fifthly,
Christ ordained that the sacrament of his body and blood should be distributed
and received in that action: these fellows keep the sacrament in a box, and
carry it about in solemn processions. Sixthly, they worship the sacrament, and
call it their Lord and God, contrary to all rules of Christianity. Seventhly,
Christ appointed a holy sacrament, and gave not his body and blood to be
offered continually in the Mass, as a sacrifice available for quick and
dead, as these good fellows do believe. Finally, the Apostle shows, that as
often as we celebrate this holy action, we show forth the Lords death until his
coming again. But the Papists forbid this action to be celebrated in a vulgar
tongue, which is commonly understood of the people, as much as in them lies
hindering them from showing forth the Lords death: they hold also that he is
already come, and present in the sacrament.

But the Church of England does religiously observe Christ his institution, and
that doctrine which the Apostles have delivered unto us. The same admits no
sacraments but two, that is, Baptism and the Lords supper. In Baptism we
refuse the idle and (...) ceremonies brought in lately by Papists. That which
the Apostle had received of Christ Jesus, and delivered to the Corinthians, 1.
Cor. (...). that we diligently observe, renouncing their novelties, heresies
and blasphemies concerning the gross, carnal and corporal presence, and
eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament, the late
devised transsubstantiation, the blasphemous idol of the Mass, the divine
worship of consecrated hosts, the mangled communion under the form of bread,
their celebration in a tongue not understood of the communicants, and all the
rest of their abuses, which without either authority of scriptures, or
allowance of the most ancient and (...) fathers, they have brought into the
Church.

The sacraments therefore of the new Iestament being pledges of Gods love, and
seals of Gods graces, whereby he works in us, we are not lightly to prize
the true and (...) administration of them according to Christ's holy
institution, nor to esteem this a small benefit, that the doctrine concerning
the holy sacraments being reformed according to the canon of Gods word, both
the superstitious ceremonies in Baptism, and the idolatrous Mass, with all
abuses depending thereon, were abrogated and removed out of the Church, and the
celebration of Christ's holy sacraments conformed according to the prime
institution. Many godly Emperors and Kings have deserved praise in going about
to reform abuses crept into the administration of sacraments before their
time: but none more then our late most gracious Queen, that from extreme
abuses brought all to a most excellent order.

CHAP. IIII. Of the true worship of God established in the Church of England.
HOw the worship of God was corrupted among the Papists before the late
reformation wrought by her Majesty's authority in the Church of England it will
hardly be of posterity believed, but that there are monuments of like
corruptions yet remaining in diverse other countries, and good records and
memorials yet remaining of their notorious abuses in this country. The
faithful (...) nisters that were yet remaining upon the coming in of Queen
Marie, wept to see the desolation of the Church, as Psalm. 137.
the people of God carried into captivity, when they sat by the waters of
Babylon, and remembered Sion. They that now live wonder at the grossness of
popish errors. For first they erred in the rule of Gods worship. In vain
(says our Savior Mat. 15.) do they worship me teaching for doctrines the
precepts of men. The Apostle ( Colos. 2.) does condemn (...), that is,
voluntary, or new devised religion, or as the old Latin interpreter has
translated that word, superstition. For so indeed humane (...) for the service
of God without warrant of Gods word are for the most part to be called and
esteemed. God in express terms refuses such devised services, saying, Who
has required these things at your hands?. But the founders of popish (...), as
if God had appointed us (...) certain rule for these matters, have placed the
perfection of their religion in voluntary vows of (...) from marriage, of
pretended beggerie, and of other Monkish and Friarlike obseruances, and such
like humane traditions. Bellarmine de Monachis cap. 2. says, that Monkish
religion is a state of men tending to Christian perfection by the vows of
poverty, continency, and obedience. But if a man should ask him, who taught
men to aspire to perfection in this race, he will be to seek for an answer.
That God requires or approves such service, it will never be proved. They do
also esteem it a high piece of Gods service, to keep holidayes in honor of
Saints created by the Pope, in (...) upon Saints vigils, in eating stock fish,
coleworts, toadestooles, and such like toys, in praying upon beads, in often
repeating Aue Maria, in worshipping of stones, bones, and rotten rags, they
know not of whom, in humbling themselves before Angels and Saints, and the
Sacrament of the altar, in saying our Ladies Psalter, in ringing bells, in going
barefoote, and woolward, and whipping themselves. By saying over the Rosarie of
our Lady only, they report, that diverse (...) have been wrought. Diverse
thousands of years of indulgences also are granted to the company of the
Rosarie or beads of our Lady, as is recorded in a book entitled Miracoli
della santissima vergine Maria, printed at Venice by Bernard Giunti anno 1587.
Matters which no man would admit, (...) fellows made of wood, coleworts, and
stockfish.

Secondly, they are deceived in the manner of Gods worship: and that in three
sorts. For first their worship is almost wholly external (...) in outward
ceremonies, as namely, in often rehearsal of Credo, or Pater noster, or Aue
Maria, or being present at the Mass, albeit they understand nothing, or
sprinkling themselves with holy water, or often crossing themselves, or going
to Rome, or Jerusalem, or lighting of candles, or ringing, knocking, or
greasing, or such like, But our Savior reprehendeth the^, that come near to
God with their lips, and have their hearts far from him: and shows, that
true worshippers shall worship him in spirit and truth. Next, they offend
grievously in giving too great honor to Angels, Saints, stocks, stones, and
rotten bones. Hierome in his Epistle to Riparius teaches us otherwise. Nos non
(...) Martyrum reliquias etc. We (says he) worship not, or adore, either
relics of Martyrs, or Sun, or Moon, or Angels, or Archangels, or Cherubim,
or Scraphim, or any name, that is named either in this world, or in the world
to come, lest we should serve the creature, rather then-the Creator, which is
blessed for ever. Saint Augustine likewise lib. de ver a relig. cap. 55.
speaking of Angels, Honor amus (...), (says he) charitate non seruitute, nec
eis templa construimus. We honor them with love, and not with service, and
build no temples unto them. Epiphanius haeres. 79. speaking of Angels, says
directly, that he would not have Angels worshipped. But Papists (...) dumb
images, pray before them, burn incense (...) them. They teach also, that
service is due to Saints, and that we are to give latriam, or divine honor to
the cross, to the crucifixe, to the sacrament of the altar, and the images of
the persons of the holy Trinity, which they endeavor to fashion in wood,
metal, and colors. They offend thirdly in the form of their prayers, which
are found in their (...), Breuiaries, and rituall books, and which cannot be
denied to be both false and (...). Gaude Maria virgo (say they) cunctas
haereses sola interemisti in vniuerso mundo: that is, rejoice virgin Marie:
thou alone have killed al haeresies in all the world. What then, I pray you, did
Christ in the mean while? and what did all other Saints? And again: O Maria,
admit preces nostras intra (...) tuae exauditionis, and reporta nobis
antidotum reconciliationis, etc. O Marie, admit our prayers within the holy
place of your hearing, and bring unto us the triacle of reconciliation. And yet
they say, Saints departed do not see, nor know things below, but by seeing them
represented in the face of God, as it were in a glass. On S. In Missali Romans
Andre (...) day they pray in this (...): Sanctify (o Lord) these (...)
dedicated unto thee, and the blessed (...) Saturninus interceding for us, by
the self same being pleased intend us, by our Lord, etc. As if the Lords
body, which is the thing meant by those gifts, needed sanctification, or else
as if it were convenient, that God being reconciled to us by Christ, should no
otherwise intend our prayers, then by the intercession of Saturninus. On S.
Nicholas his day they say thus: Deus qui B. Nicolaum innumeris decorasti
miraculis, tribue quaesumus, vt eius meritis and precibus a Gehennae incendijs
liberemur. That is: O God which have adorned S. Nicholas with innumerable
miracles, grant, we beseech thee, that by his merits and prayers, we may be
delivered from hell fire. Which implies, that not only the miracles reported
in S. Nicholas his legend are true, but also that by his mediation we are
delivered and saved from hell. In the Portesse they pray thus: Tu per Thomae
sanguinem, etc. That is, Thou o Christ, by the blood of Thomas, which for thee
he did spend, make us to climb, whither Thomas did ascend. And again: Opem
nobis o Thoma porrige, etc. That is, yield us your help o Thomas, govern them
that stand, raise them up that lie: our manners, actions, and life correct, and
direct us into the way of peace. Which argues, that Thomas Becket had power
not only to intercede for us, but to govern and rule our actions. Sixtus the
fourth, granted great indulgences to those that said this prayer: Hail Marie
full of grace, the Lord is with thee, (...) art thou amongst women, and blessed
is the fruit of thy womb Jesus Christ, and blessed is Anna thy mother, of
whom thy virgins flesh is proceeded without blot of original sin. And yet it
contains a plain corruption of the words of scripture, and a contradiction
to some of his own decrees. But the greatest fault is this, that it is
repugnant to plain words of (...).

To excuse this great deformity Robert Parsons (...) 2. Entont. c. 6. number. 8.
to bring the best defense he can. First says he, let this whipster tell us,
where we were taught to say, O stock, or O stone help us. As if it were not
absurd to pray before stocks and stones, and to give dumb images the same
honor that is due to the originals. Dr else, as if they committed no fault
because they say not, O stock, or O stone. This exception therefore declares,
that the moule of this old hacksters cap was blockish, and senseless, like as
if it were made of stone.

Secondly he says, that S. Bafil homil. 20. in 40. martyrs, prays to the
same martyrs, that Nazianzen in laudem Cypriani martyris, makes his prayer to
the said Cyprian: and in his oration in praise of Athanasius, to Athanasius, in
his oration in praise of Basil, to S. Basil; that Chrysostom prayed to S.
Peter in a certain sermon of Peter's chain, and that S. Ambrose called on the
same Apostle comment in cap. 22. Luc. and S. Jerome on S. Paula in epitaph.
Paulae. And that S. (...) prayed to S. Cyprian and other Saints, lib. 7. de
baptis. contr. Donatist. cap. 1. But first there is an infinite difference
between the words of the Fathers, and the blasphemous forms of popish prayers.
They by a figure called Prosopopoeia did speak to saints, as (...) do to
heaven, or earth, or cities, or other things, that hear nothing. These pray to
them as if they heard them, saw them, and could help them. Secondly, neither
Ambrose prays to Peter, nor Augustine to Cyprian, and other saints in the
places mentioned. Thirdly, neither can he prove that the sermon made upon the
adoration of S. Peter's chain is authentical, nor that the oratio^s of Basil,
Nazianzene and other fathers, are clear of all corruptions, which differ so
much in diverse editions. Finally, we live by laws, and not by the examples of
three or four fathers, disagreeing from the rest, if so be it were granted
that they called upon saints.

Thirdly he alleges, that in the first prayer to Thomas 2. Encont. (...). 12.
number. 9.
Becket, there is no more blasphemy contained then when the holy prophets did
mention the name, faith and merits of Abraham, Isac and Jacob, and other their
holy fathers. But what if the holy Prophets do not mention the merits of
Abraham, Isac and Jacob, but rather desire God to remember his promise made
unto them? Does it not appear that in speaking of holy Prophets, he lies most
shamefully, and like a false prophet and teacher? Again, he shows himself
both shameless and senseless, that perceives no difference between the
Papists, that pray they may attain heaven by the blood of Thomas Becket; and
the Prophets, that never prayed in that fashion, nor hoped to attain heaven by
the blood of any, but of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus.

Finally he answers, That where Thomas Becket is Ibid. number. 10
prayed unto, to lend his hand for our help, it is meant he shall do it, by his
prayer and intercession. But this answer is as foolish, as the prayer is
blasphemous. For there is great difference between the word help, and this
prayer, Be a means, that we may be helped. Again, albeit the meaning of the
word were so, yet it is a ridiculous thing to pray to any to govern, direct
and help us, that cannot govern, direct nor help us; and far from the
meaning of Papists, who in their Legends tell us, that Saints have appeared,
helped, and healed such, as have called upon them. This excuse therefore will
by no means relieve the adversaries, whose prayers in their Missals, and other
rituall books are repugnant to Christian religion, and the forms and practice
of the ancient Church.

Finally, they erred in the object of their worship, adoring creatures in stead
of the Creator, or at the least advancing creatures unto honor not due unto
them. The law expressly forbids us to worship strange Gods, or to have them.
But the Papists do worship the Sacrament newly made by the priest, and call it
their Lord and God: which is a very strange God, and never known to Christians
for a god. Neither can they pretend, that they give honor to the Sacrament, as
to the body of our (...), while he lived upon earth. For this honor was due by
reason of the hypostaticall union of the two natures in one Christ. But there
is no personal union betwixt Christ and the sacrament. That they call the
Sacrament their Lord and their Maker; it is apparent by the common speech used
by the Papists. Further in the canon of the Mass, the priest looking upon the
Sacrament, says: Domine non sum dignus: Lord, I am not worthy. Innocentius
lib. 4. de'Missa cap. 19. speaking of Transsubstantiatio^ by the priests words,
says, that so daily a creature is made the Creator. Ita ergo quotidie creatura
fit Creator. The author of the book called Stella Clericorum, says, that the
priest is the creator of his Creator. Sacerdos (says he) est creator sui
Creatoris. Qui creauit vos dedit creare se. Qui creauit vos absque vobis
creatur a vobis mediantibus vobis. The like words are found in the worthy book
called Sermones discipuli, ser. 111.

Secondly, the law forbids us to make any similitude, or image of things in
heaven, earth, or under the earth, to bow down to it, or to worship it. But
they make the images of God the Father, and the holy Ghost, and the crucifix,
bow down to them, and worship them: and that according to the doctrine of
Thomas Aquinas, with the same worship that is due unto God. They do also make
the images of Angels and Saints, burn incense unto them, pray before them, and
kiss them.

Thirdly, they confess their sins to Angels and Saints, saying: Confiteor Deo
Omnipotenti, beatae Mariae semper virgini etc. that is, I confess to God
Almighty, to the blessed and always a virgin Mary, to S. Michael the
Archangell, to S. John Baptist, and as it follows in the common confession.
But if they did not believe that Angels and Saints can forgive sins, they
would not so pray unto them.

Fourthly, they make their vows to saints, as appears by the common forms
of vows of such as enter into Religion. Bellarmine also lib. 3. de cult.
sanctor. c. 9. confesses, that vows may be well made to saints. But the
scriptures teach us, that this is an honor due unto God. Pay thy vows to the
most high, says the prophet Psalm. 50. and Deuter. 23. when thou shall vow a
vow to the Lord thy God.

Finally, they pray to the cross, saying: (...) pijs iustitiam, (...) dona
veniam: that is, increase justice in the godly, and grant pardon to sinners:
as if a stock could increase justice, or pardon sinners.

We are therefore herein to acknowledge Gods favor, and continually to praise
him for his goodness, who gave us such a Queen, as with all her heart sought to
pull down the altars and groves of Baal, to root out idolatry and superstition,
and to restore Gods true worship. In the beginning of her reign the holy
scriptures were restored to the people in their mother tongue, and Gods true
worship established in the Church according to that rule. God was served in
spirit and truth, and the service of the Church brought back to the ancient
form of Christ's primitive Church.

CHAP. V. Of the translations of Scriptures into vulgar tongues, and reading
them publicly in tongues understood.
HE that does evil, hates the light. No marvel then, if the Ioh. 3.
Pope and his crew of Mass Priests shun the scriptures, their works and
doctrine being evil, and the scriptures being compared to light, Psalm. 119.
and to a candle shining in a dark place, 2. Pet. 1. they would if they durst,
plainly prohibit scriptures, as appears by the practice of the begging
Friars in the time of William de sanct. amore, who having brought all their
fancies and traditions into one volume, and calling the same the eternal
Gospel; preached, that Doctores Paris. de peric. nouis. temp.
the Gospel of Christ should cease, and that their eternal Gospel should be
preached and received to the end of the world. The Pope also could hardly be
enduced to condemn this blasphemous book of the Friars. In the end, I
confess, he was forced for shame to abolish it; yet he conceived infinite
displeasure against the Doctors of Paris, and favored the Friars as much as he
could. And now, albeit he has not simply prohibited the translation of
scriptures, and reading them in vulgar tongues; yet he has so limited the
same, as in effect they are as good as prohibited. For first he will not
permit, that scriptures translated into vulgar tongues shall be read publicly
in the Church: as both the Trent conuenticle, and the practice of the Romish
Church declares. Secondly, Pope Pius the fourth does simply forbid all
translations Regulae Ind. b. prohib.
of scriptures into vulgar tongues, such only except, as are made by his
adherents and followers; which are not only false and absurd in diverse points,
but also corrupted, with diverse false and wicked annotations, as the Rhemish
annotations upon the new testament being examined do manifestly declare.
Thirdly, we do not find that the Papists are hasty in setting forth
translations of scriptures in vulgar tongues; nor can I learn that the Bible
is (...) translated into the Spanish, Italian and Dutch tongue by them.
Fourthly, they will have no Booke-sellers sell Bibles though translated into
vulgar tongues by them selves without leave. Fifthly, they will not permit any
man to read Bibles so translated by (...) without leave. Sixthly, they grant
leave to none to read scriptures in vulgar tongues, albeit allowed by
themselves, but to such only, as they suppose to be resolved, or rather
drowned in the dregs of Popish errors; and to lay men seldom, or never do
they grant the same. I do not believe that Robert Parsons, albeit well
acquainted in Spain and Italy, can name a doosen lay men of either nation,
that have license to read Scriptures in vulgar tongues; or that had license in
England in Queen Mary's time to read Scriptures translated into their mother
tongue. If he know any suth, he may do well to name them. If he name them not,
his silence will breed suspicion, if it be not taken for a plain confession.
Finally, if any among the Papists be taken with other translations, then such
as themselves allow, or not having himself obtained license according to the
foresaid rule; he is presently taken for suspect of heresy, and severely
punished if he acquit not himself the better So we see, that among them it is
lawful to read all profane books, if they fall not within the compass of
their prohibition, and to tumble over the lying legends of Saints, and the
fabulous book of Conformities of Saint Francis with Christ, and that without
leave. But Scriptures translated into vulgar tongues no man may read without
leave.

Now how centrarie this course is to the word of God, to the practice of Gods
Church, and to all reason, we may easily perceive by these particulars. God
would have the words of the law not only a continual subject of our talk
Deuteronomy. 6.
and meditations, but also to be written at the entrances and doors of our
houses. Our Savior Christ preaching to the Jews willed them to search the
Scriptures. But how can this be done, if Scriptures be not translated into
tongs which we understand, and if no man may read them without leave?

In the primitive Church they were publicly read in the Syrian, Egyptian,
Punicke and other vulgar tongues. By the testimony of Bid hist. Angl. lib. 1.
it appears they were translated into the British tongue, and into other
vulgar tongues, the mysteries of religion being made common to diverse nations
by the meditation of Scriptures. Irenaeus Lib. 2. aduers. haeres. cap. 46
speaking of all the Scriptures, says, They may be heard alike of all. Hierome
in an (...) to Laeta, and in another to Celantia exhorts them to read
Scriptures. But how can they be heard alike, if they may not be translated, nor
read publicly in vulgar (...)? And why should it be more lawful for Laeta and
Celantia to read Scriptures, then for other men and women? In his Commentaries
likewise upon the 86. Psalm, he says, that Scriptures are read to all, that
all may understand. Scriptura populis (...) legitur, vt omnes intelligant. But
how can the common people understand a strange tongue? Chrysostom homil. 9. in
Epist. ad Coloss. teaches, that the Apostle commands lay men to read
scriptures, and that with great diligence.

The Apostle teaches us, that the word of God is the sword of the spirit. And
before I have showed, that it is light. Our Savior says, that the word of God
is food to our soul. Basil. homil. 29. says, That the old and new Testament
are the treasure of the Church. Vetus and nouum Testamentum (says he) the
saurus Ecclesiae. In his Commentaries upon the first Psalm he shows, that
the holy Scriptures are a storehouse for all (...) for man's soul. Chrysostom
Homil. in Psalm. 147. says, the Scriptures are our arms, and munitions in the
spiritual warfare, which we have against the devil. Arma and comeatus eius
belli, quod est inter nos and diabolum, (...) Scripturarum auditio. Does it not
then appear, that the Papists are enemies to Christians, and seek to murder
their souls, that by all means seek to expose them naked unto their enemies
weapons, and would willingly deprive them of medicines, munitions, arms and
food, and leave them in darkness without the comfort of Scriptures? For how
can they use Scriptures, that understand them not? And how can they understand
them, when they are read in toungs unknown? And how can they come to read
them, when there are so many difficulties in obtaining license to have them?

Seeing then at her Majesty's first entrance into her government, we were
freed from the thraldom and flauery of Antichrist, and had the Scriptures in a
tongue understood restored unto us, and read publicly, and privately without
limitation or danger; we are to account the same, as a singular benefit
bestowed upon the people of England. For what can be deemed more beneficial,
then for the hungry to obtain food, for naked soldiers to obtain arms and
provisions, for poor people in want, to be enriched with such a treasure?

But says N. D. Wardw. page 14. If the translator do not put down the words
of Scriptures sincerely, in his vulgar translation, then the simple reader,
that cannot discern, will take man's word for Gods word. Secondly, he says,
that if a false sense should be gathered out of Scripture, then the reader
should suck poison in stead of wholesome meat. But these reasons make no more
against reading Scriptures in vulgar tongues, and translating them into those
tongues, then against reading Scriptures in the Latin, and translating them
into Latin. For as well may the Latin Interpreter err, as he that
translateth scriptures into vulgar tongues: and as well may a man draw a
perverse sense out of the Latin, as out of the English. If then these reasons
conclude not against yt Latin translation, they are too weak to conclude
against vulgar translations. Again, if it be hurtful to follow a corrupt
translation, and to gather a contrary sense out of scriptures; we are not
therefore to cast away scriptures, but rather to seek for the most sincere
translations, and the most true sense and meaning of the holy Ghost revealed in
holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, he alleges these words out of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3. The letter
kills, but the spirit quickneth: against reading of scriptures in vulgar
tongues. But these words do no less touch them that follow the letter in the
Hebrew and Greek, the^ in the vulgar tongs. And yet Robert Parsons will not
deny, but yt it is lawful to read scriptures in Hebrew and Greek: albeit he,
if it were unlawful, would never be guilty of this fault, being most ignorant
of these tongs.

Fourthly, he asks, how unlearned readers will discern things without a
guide. As if laymen, because they have teachers might not also read the books
from whence the principles of Christian doctrine are derived. This therefore
seems to be all one, as if Geometricians, and other teachers of arts should
debar their scholars from reading Euclide and other authors that have
written of arts. Furthermore albeit somethings without teachers cannot of rude
learners be understood; yet all things that pertain to faith and manners, are
plainly set down in scriptures. In ijs quae aperte in scripturis posita sunt,
inueniuntur illa omnia, says S. Augustine lib. 2. de doctr. Chr. c. 9. Quae
continent fidem, moresque vivendi.

Fifthly, he alleges, that the understanding of Scriptures is a particular
gift of God. But that notwithstanding, no man is forbidden to read scriptures
in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin: And yet if Robert Parsons understand them at all,
he understands them better in the vulgar English, then in these tongues.
Furthermore, albeit to understand Scriptures be a peculiar gift of God, yet no
man is therefore to refrain from reading of scriptures, but rather to read
the^ diligently, and to confer with the learned, and to beseech God to give
him grace to understand them. The which is proved by the example of the Eunuch,
Act. 8. who read the scriptures, and threw them not away, albeit he could not
understand all without the help of a teacher.

Sixthly, he uses the examples of Ioane Burcher a pudding Wardw. p. 6.
wife, as some suppose, and qualified like his mother the Blacke-smiths wife,
and of Hacket, William Geffrey, and other heretics. In his Warne-word,
Encontr. 1. cap. 8. he adds, George Paris, John More, certain Anabaptists,
and other heretics, and insinuates that all these fell into heresies by
reading of scriptures in vulgar languages. But his collectio^ is false and
shameless, and derogatorie to scriptures, and contrary both to them and to
fathers. Our Savior speaking of the Sadduceis, Mat. 22. says, they erred, for
that they knew not the scriptures. Erratis nescientes scripturas. The Apostle
talking of reading of scriptures, says, they are profitable to instruct men
unto salvation, and not hurtful, or the cause of any man's destruction. The
ignorance of scriptures (says Chrysostom ho. de Lazaro) has brought forth
heresies. Scripturarum ignoratio haereses (...). And again: Barathrum est
scripturarum ignoratio: that is, the ignorance of scriptures is a bottomless
gulf. Finally, to obscure the glory of this benefit of reading scriptures in
vulgar tongues, in his out-wortie Warne-word Encont. 1. c. 8. he says, that
such as understand Latin, or have license of the Ordinary to read scriptures
in vulgar tongues, have no benefit by this general permission of reading
scriptures: as if every one that understands Latin durst read vulgar
translations without license, or as if the Church received no benefit, unless
every particular member were partaker of that benefit. This therefore is a
most ridiculous conceit, and likely to proceed from such an idle head. Further,
the same might be alleged against Latin translations. And yet Robert Parsons
will not deny but the Church receives benefit by Latin translations, albeit
the Greeks, and such as understand Hebrew, and not Latin, receive no benefit
by the Latin translation.

If then Robert Parsons mean hereafter to bark against the reading of
scriptures, that are commended unto us as light, medicine, food, arms, and
things most necessary; he must allege us better reasons then these, lest he be
taken for an heretical, or rather lunaticall fellow, that spends his wit in
the defense of fond, senseless, and impious positions.

CHAP. VI. Of public Prayers, and administration of Sacraments, and other
parts of the Church liturgy and service in vulgar tongues.
LIke wise the Papists to take from Christians the effect and fruit of their
prayers, set cut most of their prayer books in Latin, and closely forbid the
common service and liturgy of the Church to be said in vulgar languages. In
the 22. session of the Conuenticle of (...), where they anathematise them, that
hold that the Mass should be celebrated in vulgar tongues: their meaning is to
establish the rites of the Romish Church, and the Latin service, and to
prohibit the use of vulgar tongues in public liturgies. And this is also
proved by the practice of the synagogue of Rome, that allows the prayers of
such as pray in Latin, albeit like Parrots they understand not what they
prattle: and by the testimony of (...), Bellarmine, and others writing upon
that argument.

But this practice is most barbarous, fruitless, and contrary to the custom
of Christ his Church in ancient time. Sinesciero virtutem vocis, says the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. ero ei cui loquor, barbarus, and quiloquitur mihi
barbarus: that is, If I understand not the meaning of the words I utter, I
shall be to him to whom I speak, barbarous, and he that speaks shall be
barbarous unto me. And again: If I pray in a strange tongue, my spirit
prays, but mine understanding is without fruit. And a little after: I will
pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also. I will sing
with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also. Else when thou
blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned say, Amen, to thy blessing, when he knows not what thou say?
These words are most direct against the Latin service of the Papists, showing
first that the priest speaking in Latin, when the people understands
nothing, takes a barbarous course. Secondly, that songs and prayers without
understanding profit nothing. And lastly, that it is ridiculous for the people
to say Amen to the priest, when they understand not his prayer or blessing.

Ut quid loquatur, says S. Ambrose in 1. Cor. 14. quem nemo intelligit? Why
should he speak, whom no man can understand? And again: What profit can he
reap, that understands not what he speaks? And afterward: An unlearned man
(says he) hearing but not understanding, knows not the end of the prayer,
nor answers Amen, that is true, that the blessing may be confirmed. And
finally: Si ad edificandam Ecclesiam conuenistis ea dici debent, quae
intelligant audientes: that is, if ye be come together to edify the church,
then must such things be spoken as the hearers understand.

(...) sermo qui non intelligitur, says S. Hierome in 1. Cor. 14. barbarus
est: that is, Every language that is not understood is barbarous. And again:
If any speak with tongues not understood of others, his understanding is made
without fruit, if not to himself, yet to others. And lastly, Sic est
loquendum vt intelligant alij. We must so speak that others understand. Saint
Augustine expounding these words of the Psalmist, Beatus populus sciens
iubilationem: nullo modo beatus es, says he, nisi intelligas inbilationem:
that is, thou art no way blessed, unless thou understand thy song of
rejoicing, or iubilation. And again in Psalm. 99. he mistiketh that our voice
should only sing a song of rejoicing or iubilation, and not our heart. Ut vox
nostra sola iubilet, and cor non iubilet: which is (...) the case of Papists,
thanting with a loud voice, and not understanding what they chaunt or pray.
This place our adversary encont. 1. c. 9. nu. 8. would take from us, by saying
that S. Augustine does not speak of any corporal singing psalms, but rather
of inward iubilation. But S. Augustine mentioning our voice, and speaking of
those that sing, and exhorting men in this and such like psalms to praise God,
does refute the fellows foolery. Beside that, if iubilation be with
understanding of the heart, then by S. Augustines judgment, those cannot
rejoice or use iubilation, that understand not what they say: as the Papists do
in their iubilations and iubilies, chanting like pies and parrots, they know
not what, and not conceiving any inward joy of any thing is spoken by the
priest, that is as well understood, as a Monkie chattering with his teeth, and
squealing out an indistinct voice.

Theophylact also and Occumenius writing upon the first to the Corinthians c.
14. (...) our cause, and overthrow the adversaries. Dicit quod expediat (says
Oecumenius) eum qui alia lingna loquitur, sieve in psalmodia, sieve in oratione,
sieve in doctrina, aut ipsum interpretari, and intelligere quid dicat ad
vtilitatem auditorum, aut aliu^ hoc facere conuenit. He says that it behooves
him that uses a strange tongue either in singing, prayer or teaching, either
to interpret himself, and to understand what he says, for the profit of ye
hearers, or that it is fitting another should do it. Theophylact says, that
the Apostle in the whole course of his speech does show, that he that speaks
with a tongue not understood profits himself nothing.

Iustine in his apology, and Dionysius in his Ecclesiastical hierarchy,
describing the practice of the Primitive Church, do plainly show, that the
people understood the Bishop, answered him, and concurred with him. Hierome in
(...). 2. in Epist. ad Galat. and Gregory Nazianzene in orat. in (...) Basilij
do testify, that the people did answer Amen to the priests prayer. But how
could they say Amen to his prayer not understanding what he said? Ephrem made
diverse prayers and (...) in the Syriake tongue, which were frequently used in
the Churches of Syria. Justinian the Emperor made a law, that the prayers used
at the celebration of the sacrament, should be pronounced with an audible
voice. But to what purpose, if it were sufficient, that the people should be
present only, and not understand what is said or praid?

This practice is clearly testified by Nicholas Lyra writing upon the
fourteenth Chapter of the first to the Corinthians: In the primitive Church
blessings and other common things (viz. in the Liturgy) were in the vulgar
tongues, says he.

The adversaries also enforced by the evidence of truth, confess, it were more
profitable to have prayers and the public Liturgy of the Church, in tongues
understood of the people, rather then otherwise: as may be gathered out of the
words of Strabus, Lyra, Caietane, and others writing upon the first to the
(...), chap. 14.

Finally, reasonmaketh against the use of a tongue not understood in public
prayers. For if such are condemned, as come near to God with their lips,
having their hearts far from him, then are not they to be allowed that in
their prayers join not their heart with their words.

Secondly, the Apostle shows, that it is a curse laid upon 1. Cor. 14.
infidels, when God speaks to them in other (...).

I (...), the tongue serving to utter our conceits, it is a (...) thing for
men to utter things neither conceived nor meant.

Lastly, if the Romans and Greeks in ancient time might use vulgar tongues
in their public Liturgies, why is not the same both lawful and commendable
now?

Friar Robert Encont. 1. cap. 8. endenoureth to show reason to the contrary.
But his reason is weak and (...). Comparing prayers with Scriptures, he says,
there is much (...) necessity of public service in vulgar tongues. But if he
had meant to defend the Popes cause and his own, and to propound the state of
the controversy betwixt us aright, he should have said, that there is no
profit, or use at all of vulgar tongues in the public service in the Church,
and that it is rather inconvenient and hurtful, then otherwise. For if it be
profitable, and no way inconvenient, why should not the public Liturgy of the
Church be in vulgar tongues?

Notwithstanding let us see, how he proves that, which Warn-word.
himself propounds, albeit not the point in question. Encontr. 1. cap. 8.
First he says, that public service is appointed to be said or sung to the
praise of God, and in the name of all the people by public Priests, and other
ecclesiastical officers appointed thereunto. But if public service be
appointed to be said, or song to the praise of God; then unless he exclude the
people from the praises of God, the people also is to concur with the Priests
in praising of God, which they cannot do, unless they understand the language
of the service. But, I trow, he will not deny, but that the people ought to
join in singing Psalms, and giving thanks to God in the open congregation.
And therefore the Psalm 95. Come let us sing unto the Lord, is commonly used
in the beginning of Gods service, and the people in ancient Liturgies were
wont oftentimes to answer the Priest. Again, it is false, that public service
was appointed to be said, and sung only by ecclesiassicall officers, and that
the people did not as well pray for things necessaris, as praise God for
benefits received. But how could they do this, not knowing what they said or
prayed? If a man should present himself besore the Pope and speak ghibrish,
or a language not understood by the party, would he not think himself mocked?

He adds further, that it is not needful for the people to be always
present at public service, but only in spirit and consent of heart. But the
fellow does plainly contradict himself. For how can a man be present in
spirit and consent of heart, when he is absent with his understanding, and
knows not what is done or said? Beside that, he overthrows that, which he
would prove. For if consent of spirit and heart be requisite in public
service, then is it requisite the people should understand what is said,
without which understanding, he cannot consent. Lastly, if it be profitable,
that the people be present in the congregation, where God is served; that is
sufficient for us to prove our assertion. For why should not the people meet
to celebrate the praises of God, being commanded to keep his Sabboths? And
why should they rather be enjoined to hear Mass, which is a profanation of
Gods service, then to come to the Church, to praise God, and to pray unto him,
and to hear his holy word? And if the people ought to do this, then is it not
sufficient, that in time of service they should gape on the Priest, or patter
their Pater nosters, or Aue Mariaes, or rattle their beads, as the ignorant
Papists use to do.

Thirdly, he supposes he can prove service in an unknown tongue out of the
ceremonial law of Moses. For because it is said Luke 1. That all the
multitude of the people was praying without at the hour of incense while
Zachary offered incense within: he would infer very willingly, that it is
not necessary, the people should pray with the Priest in a tongue understood.
But if this might be applied to the Mass, then would it also follow, that the
Priest might offer the (...) of the Mass without a Clerk, and the people
attend without in the church yard. It would also follow, that the people might
not hear, nor see Mass. For that the people might not enter within, nor see
what was done in the sanctuary. Against us this example fitteth not. For
neither can any strong argument be drawn from the ceremonies of the law, that
are now abrogated, nor can Friar Robert show, that the Priests of the law
prayed in a tongue not understood, or that they used any public prayer, which
the people heard not.

Fourthly, he alleges, that the three learned languages of Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, were sanctified by Christ in the title of his cross. But neither
is he able to show, why these three languages should be called learned, rather
then others; nor does it follow, that in public service we should use only
these three languages, because they were used in ye title of the cross,
unless our adversary will grant, that it also follows, because Christ rode
upon an ass, that he and his consorts are only to ride upon asses.

(...), he tells us, that ancient Fathers testify, that it is not
convenient, that all things that are handled in Church service, praesertim in
sacris mysterijs, should be understood by all unlearned people in their own
vulgar languages. And to prove this he cites Dionysius, Origin, S. Basil,
Chrysostom, and Gregory. But herein he shows himself a shameless fellow,
albeit all men knew it before. For none of these speaks one word against
vulgar languages. Nay all of them show, that the people understood the language
of public Liturgies. Again, they deny not that it is convenient, that the
people should understand the mysteries of Christian religion, but rather show
the difficulty of it. But what is that to vulgar languages, when the Priests
themselves understand not the mysteries of Christian religion (...)

A sixth argument he draws from the practice of the Jews, supposing that in
Jury and Jerusalem the public service was in Hebrew, and that Hebrew was not
understood of the common people. But neither was public service in all Syria
in Hebrew, as appears by the songs and prayers of Ephrem in the Syrian
tongue, nor is it likely, that the Jews did not understand Hebrew in Christ's
time, seeing now all the Jews, as it is said, teach their children Hebrew. In
Esdras lib. 2. cap. 8. it appears they understood Hebrew. Intellexerunt verba
quae docuerat eos. They understood the words which he taught them. That
therefore which is spoken of interpretation, is meant of the meaning and not of
the words, as very simply our adversaries suppose.

His seventh argument is taken from the example of the Apostles, that (as he
says) appointed the order of service. But this overthrows our adversaries
cause. For if the Apostles never appointed the Mass, or the canon, or that
service should be said in a tongue not understood, but rather ordained another
form of celebration of Sacraments, as I have showed in my books de Missa
against Bellarmine, and if it be a matter clear, that all should be done
decently in the Church and to edification; then is it not likely, that they
would allow, or did appoint the service of (...) to be said in a tongue not
understood of the people, and very hardly understood of most Priests. Here also
he denies, That it can be showed out of any author of antiquity whatsoever,
that any christian Catholic country since the Apostles time had public
service in any language, but in one of these three, (viz. Hebrew, Greek or
Latin) except by some special dispensation from the Pope, and upon some
special confideration for some limited time. But first it makes nothing for
him, or against us, if any nation had their service in Greek, Latin, or
Hebrew, if the same understood the language of the public Liturgy. For we
only say, that service ought not to be said in a language not understood.
Secondly, where he denies the use of all other tongues beside these three, he
shows himself either very ignorant, or very impudent. If he have not read
ancient Fathers and histories, concerning the languages of public Liturgies,
he is but an ignorant nouice in this cause. If he know the practice of the
Church, and deny it, he wants shame.

That other tongues have been used in public Liturgies beside the three
mentioned, it may be proved by diverse testimonies. Hierome in the funeral
Sermon of Paula, says that Psalms were sung not only in Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, but also in the Syrian language. In his Epistle to Heliodorus he says,
that the languages and writings of all nations do sound forth Christ his
passion and resurrection. Nunc passionem Christi, and resurrectionem eius
cunctarum gentium and voces, and literae sonant. And again in his Epistle to
Marcella: Vox quidem dissona, sed vna religio: tot pene psallentium chori, quot
gentium diuersitates. The tongue is diverse, but one religion: there be so many
quires of singers, as there be diversities of nations.

S. Ambrose writing upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 14.
speaking of Jews converted to Christ: Hi ex Hebraeis erant, (says he) qui
aliquando Syria lingua, plerunque Hebraea in tractatibus and oblationibus
vtebantur. These were Jews, which in their Sermons and oblations used sometime
the Syrian tongue, and oftentimes the Hebrew. Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 29. says
Ephrem made Hymns and Psalms in the Syrian tongue. And Sozomen says, they
were sung in Churches.

Chrysostom in 2. (...) Corinth. homil. 18. says, that in celebration of the
eucharist all ought to be common, because the whole people, and not the priest
alone gives thanks. Et cum spiritu tuo, nihil aliud est, says he, quam ea
quae sunt eucharistiae communia sunt omnia: neque enim ille solus gratias agit,
sed populus omnis.

Saint Augustine expos. 2. in psalm. 18., says we ought to understand what we
say or sing, that like men and not like parrots or ousels we may sing.

It appears by Justinians 123. nouel constitution, and by Isidore Ecclesiast.
offic. lib. 1. ca. 10. and by the ninth chapter of S. Augustine de catechisand.
rudib. that the people in time past did understand Church service.

In Britain the Roman music was not in use before the time of James the
Deacon of York, about the year of the Lord 640. Bid lib. 1. hist. Anglic.
cap. 1. signifies, that the knowledge of divine mysteries was made common to
diverse nations inhabiting Britanie by meditation of scriptures.

Auentinus (...). Boior. li. 4. says, The priests of Liburnia are iguorant of
the Latin tongue, and in their mother tongue offer the sacrifice of the
Eucharist. Adhuc (says he) ignari sunt Romanae linguae, sacrificia patrio
more, nempe Slauorum procurant.

The Ethiopian canon of the Mass, which they call universal, is in the
Ethiopian language, as the translation witnesses, that is published in
Biblioth. patr. tom. 6. a Bignio edit.

Sigismundus Baro in his commentaries of the Muscouiticall affairs, tells us
how that nation does celebrate Mass in their mother tongue. Totum sacrum seu
missa (says he) gentili ac vernacula lingua apud illos peragi solet.

The adversaries themselves also testify for us. Thomas Aquinas in 1. Cor. 14.
speaking of the use of strange languages in the Church, says, it was accounted
madness in the primitive Church, because Christians were not then instructed
in Ecclesiastical rites. Ideo erat insania in Primitiua Ecclesia, quia erant
rudes in ritu Ecclesiastico.

In Primitiua Ecclesia (says Lyra in 1. Cor. 14.) benedictiones and cetera
communia fiebant in vulgari: that is, in the primitive church blessings and
other common oraysons were made in vulgar tongues.

John Billet in his sum de divine. offic. in prolog. confesses, that in the
Primitive Church Christians were forbidden to speak with tongues, unless
there were some by to interpret. He says also, that it profits us nothing
to hear unless we understand: lamenting that in his time there were so few,
that understood either what they heard, or what they read.

And thus much to refel Robert Parsons his notorious impudency, that would
needs affirm, that it cannot be showed out of any author of antiquity, that
any Catholic country had public service in vulgar tongues.

His eight argument is deduced from the use of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
tongues in Asia, Afric, and the Western countries. But unless he can show
that these tongues were not understood of those people that had their public
service in them; all this makes for us, and not for him. For we do not deny
the use of these tongues to those that understand them, but only think it
madness to use them, where they are not understood. In Asia the Greek tongue
was common to most nations. Therefore the service was in Greek and not in
Latin, albeit Parsons suppose Latin to be a sanctified tongue. In Afric and
diverse Western countries, Latin was a common language in time past: and
therefore they had their liturgies in Latin and not in Greek. It appears by
S. Augustine retract. lib. 1. c. 20 that diverse understood Latin better then
the Punike tongue: and Cicero pro Archia says, that the Greek tongue was a
common language in his time. Although therefore the public service of the
Church was in Greek and Latin, when those tongues were best understood, yet
it follows not that the same should be still used, when no man of the vulgar
sort understands them: or that the Catholic Church did generally, or ever
practice this: or that S. Augustine lib 4. cont. Donatist. cap. 24. does intend
to speak for the use of unknown languages, as Friar Robert unlearnedly and
blockishly pretends.

Finally he alleges, that every man lightly understands somewhat of the
Latin. But lightly he tells us a loud lie, as experience may teach every man
that is not obstinate. Beside that, if it be profitable for some men to
understand some few words, then reason will infer, that it were far more
profitable, if the public service were in a tongue that might of all the
hearers be understood.

It is therefore a great blessing that we may hear God speaking unto us in
scriptures in our own mother tongue, and praise and honor him with heart and
voice in the public congregation. If then Robert Parsons mean to confirm his
own opinion, and to overthrow our cause, he must bring better arguments, and
answer these testimonies, and not fight with his own shadow, or cavil with
some words, or allegations that are not material.

CHAP. VII. Of the great deliverance of Christians out of the bloody hands of
wooluish Papists wrought by Queen Elizabeth.
No man can well esteem what favor God has done the Church of England, by
delivering the same from the cruel persecution of the bloody and merciless
Papists, but such as either themselves suffered, or else knew the sufferings
and vexations of their brethren in Queen Mary's time. Neither do any so well
apprehend Gods mercy in delivering them from the dangers of the sea, as those
that have either passed great storms, or escaped after shipwreck, seeing
their fellows swallowed in the sea. But those that lived in the days of
Queen Mary, and escaped the cruelty of those times, or else by report know
the desperate resolution of the wooluish persecutors, both well know the favor
of God to the Church and English nation, and can not choose but show them
selves thankful for the same.

The bloody inquisitors neither spared old nor young, noble nor base, learned
nor simple, man nor woman, if he were supposed to be contrary to their
proceedings. The records of Marian Bishops offices, are so many testimonials of
their extreme cruelty. Neither was any free from danger, if any quarrel could
be picked to him for religion. Those that were suspected, were imprisoned and
hardly handled, such as recanted were put to penance, those that confessed the
faith constantly, lost life and all they had. As S. Augustine lib. 22. de
ciuit. Dei cap. 6. says of the Primitive Church, so may we say of the
Christian Martyrs of our time: Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur,
torquebantur, vrebantur: they were bound, put in prison, beaten, racked and
burnt. The brother delivered up his brother, and a man's domesticals were his
enemics. Eusebius lib. (...). de vita Constan. cap. 51. says, That without
respect of age all manner of torments were inflicted upon the bodies of
Christians. Quae incendij flamma fuit, (says he) quis cruciatus, quod
tormentorum genus, quod non fuerit (...) sanctorum corporibus nulla aetatis
ratione habita irrogatum? The like may we say of the holy Martyrs of Queen
Mary's days. For neither hard dealing, torment, nor fire was spared to draw
men from the confession of the true faith. Neither did the cruel adversary
respect the (...) Prelates, nor the tenderness of young age, nor the modesty
of matrons.

But Queen Elizabeth coming to the crown the fires were quenched, the swords
were wrested out of the cruel executioners hands, and true Christians were not
only delivered out of prison and banishment, but also freed from fear of
persecution. Therefore we say with the Prophet, Psalm. 123. Blessed be God, that
has not given us as a prey into their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a sparrow
out of the snare of the fowler. The grinne is broken, and we are delivered. And
as Eusebius said sometimes of the benefits, which Eccles. hist. 10. cap. 1.
ye Church enjoyed by Constantine ye Great, so we may also most justly say: Nos
haec beneficia maiora, quam vitae nostrae conditio fert, confitentes, sicut
(...) Dei eorumdem authoris magnificentiam (...): sic illum optimo iure totius
animae viribus colentes sum celebramus, etc. We confessing these benefits to
be greater, then the condition of our life may bear, as we wonder at the
singular bounty of God the author of them, so we do highly praise him
deservedly with all the might of our soul, and do testify the holy
predictions of Prophets in Scriptures to be true, in which it is said, Come and
see the works of the Lord, and what wonders he has done upon the earth,
ceassing wars unto the end of the world. He shall break the bow, and tear
arms, and burn the shields with fire. Impijs hominibus e medio sublatis, and
potestate (...) deleta, mundus de reliquo velut solis claritate collustratus
fuit. This says Eusebius of Constantine: but the same was also verified of our
late (...) reign. For wicked men being put out of place, and tyrannical power
ceassing, the world afterward seemed to rejoice as lightened with the brightness
of the Sun.

Against this discourse Robert Parsons opposes himself in his first Enconter
chap. 10. number. 11. and belcheth out a great deal of malice out of his
distempered stomach, being sorry, as it seems, that any escaped his consorts
hands. But all his spite is spent in two idle questions. First he asks
whether this freedom for persecution be common to al, or to some only: as if
because seditious Mass priests and their traitorous consorts, and other
malefactors are punished, this were no public benefit, that all Christians
may freely profess religion. Secondly, he asks whether we be free from
persecution passive or active: meaning, because murderers and traitors suborned
to trouble the state pass the trial of justice, that we are persecutors. But
his exceptions do rather show malice, then wit. For first albeit all men be not
freed from punishment, yet is it a great blessing, that true Christians may
profess religion without fear or danger. For in Constantine the Great his
time, murderers, and rebels, and other notorious offenders were punished; and
yet does Eusebius account the deliverance of Christians from persecution a
great benefit. If there had been also then any Assassins, or traitorous
Mass Priests (...) to kill Princes, or to raise sedition, they should have
been executed: and yet could no man have called Constantine a persecutor. Let
Parsons therefore, if he have any shame, cease to talk of persecution,
considering the bloody massacres and executions committed by his consorts upon
Christians for mere matter of religion, and forbear to tell us, either of
Penrie, or an hundred Priests put to death. For they were not called in
question for religion, but for adhering to the Pope and Spaniard, that went
about to take the Crown from her Majesty's head, and for going about by color
of their idolatrous Priesthood to make a party for the aid of foreign
enemies, as by diverse arguments I have declared in my challenge, and Robert
Parsons as a fugitive disputer, and not only a fugitive traitor, answers
nothing.

CHAP. VIII. Of the deliverance of the realm of England from the Popes
exactions.
THe Pope of Rome and his greasy crew of pol-shorne Priests, although they
challenge power of binding and loosing; yet as experience has taught us, do
rather bind heavy burdens on men's shoulders, then bind their consciences, and
rather seek to loose and empty their purses, then to loose them from their
sins. A man will hardly believe, what sums of money they have extorted from
all sorts of men. But if we consider the hooks, engines, and diverse practices,
which they have used to abuse the world, we need not make question, but their
dealings are very intolerable. The Popes have made money of licenses to marry,
to eat flesh, or whit-meate, of dispensations concerning benefices, of
indulgences, of releasing of Church censures, of delegating of causes, of
collation of benefices, of deuolutions, of reseruations, of provisions, of
procurations, of the intricate rules of the Popes Chancerie, of granting
privileges, of licenses to keep concubines, of common whores, of annates, of
contributions, of tenths, of erection of Churches, of canonization of Saints,
of cases reserved. Neither had they any law, or passed any act, but it was a
means to make money. Likewise Mass Priests and Friars learning of their holy
Father, sold Masses, Absolutions, and such licenses and faculties, as lay in
their hand to grant. Neither would they do any thing without money. Monks and
Friars beside buying and selling, had a most gainefull trade of begging. And
such was their shameless dealing, that of the house of God they made a shop
of merchandise, or rather a den of thieves.

In England the Popes had a contribution called Peter pence: and yet not
content therewith, or with the ordinary gain of their faculties, annates, and
contributions, they imposed extraordinary subsidies as often as themselves
listed. The English did make a grievous complaint against the Popes court in a
certain Synod at Lion in the days of Henry the third, as Matthew. of Paris
testifies. The (...) man affirms, that the Romish Court did swallow up like
a gulf every man's revenues, and took almost all, that Bishops or Abbots
possessed. Quae curia (says he) instar barathri potestatem habet and
consuetudinem omnium reditus absorbendi, imo fere omnia quaecunque Episcopi
possident and Abbates. Bonner in his Preface before Stephen Gardiners book de
vera obedientia: speaking of the spoil made in England by the Pope, says it
did almost amount to as much as the kings revenues. Prouentus regios fere
aequabat, says he.

In France king Lewis the ninth complains, that his In (...). sanct.
kingdom was miserably brought to poverty by the Popes exactions, and
therefore he expressly forbids them. Exactiones (says he) and onera
grauissima pecuniarum per Curiam Romans Ecclesiae regni nostri impositas vel
imposita, quibus regnum nostrum miserabiliter depauperatum existit, sieve etiam
imponendas, vel imponenda leuari, aut colligi nullatenus volumus.

In Spain every one of any quality is enforced to pay for two ordinary
pardons, whereof the one is for the dead, the other for the living. Beside this
the Pope upon diverse occasions sends cruciataes and general pardons; by which
he procures great commodity. Josephus Angles in 4. sent. cap. de (...).
signifies, that the king sometime pays an hundred thousand ducats for one
pardon, and afterward remburseth himself, playing the Popes broker. Add then
unto this reckening whatsoever the Pope gets out of Spain by dispensations,
licenses, privileges, contributions and other tricks: and the sum of his
collections will appear a very great matter.

The Germans in their complaints exhibited to the In Conclu. grauam.
Popes Legate, affirm, that the burdens laid on them by the (...) Church,
were most urgent intolerable, and not to be borne. Vrgentissima, at que
intolerabilia, penitusque non ferenda onera.

Generally all Christians complains of them. Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. speaking
of the times of Gregory the 9. and of the covetousness of the Romish Church,
says, That like an impudent and common whore, she was exposed and set to sale
to al men, accounting usury for a little fault, and symony for none. Permittente
vel procurante Papa (...) adeo inualuit Ecclesiae Romanae insatiabilis (...) as
confundens fas nefasque, quod deposito rubore velut meretrix vulgaris and
effrons omnibus venalis and exposita vsuram pro paruo, symoniam pro (...)
inconuenienti reputauit.

Theodoric. a Niem. nemor union. tract. 6. ca. 37. speaking of the Popes
Exchequer, says, It is like a sea, into the which all floods run, and yet it
flows not over. He says further, that his officers do scourge poor
Christians like Turks or Tartarians.

Ipse Romanus pontifex (says Ioannes Sarisburiensis lib. 6. Polycrat. cap.
24.) omnibus fere est intolerabilis. Laetatur spolijs Ecclesiarum, quaestum
omnem reputat pietatem, prouinciarum diripit spolia, ac si the sauros Croesi
studeat reparare. The Pope to all men is almost become intolerable; he
delights in the spoils of the Church; he esteems gain to be godliness:
he spoyleth countries, as if he meant to repair Croesus his treasures. Ioannes
Andre as in 6. de elect. and elect. potest. c. fundamenta. in Glossa, says,
that Rome was built by robbers, and yet retains a tack of her first original.

Baptista of Mantua shows, that in Rome, Churches, priests, altars, and al
(...) of Religion are sold. And yet he forgot to tell of the great revenue the
Pope gets by common whores. It is shame to consider how many benefices the
Pope bestows on one man. Quae vtique abominaetio (says Gerson tractat. de
statu Ecclesiae) quod vnus ducenta alius trecenta beneficia occupat! What an
abominatio^ is this, that one should possess 200. another 300. benefices! We
may imagine what spoils are committed in other things, when the Pope sells
so many (...) to one, and one man spoyleth so many Churches. Therefore says
the Bishop of Chems, oner. eccles. cap. 19. that as in the Roman Empire, so
in the Church of Rome there is a gulf of riches, and that covetousness is
increased, and the law perished from the priest, and seeing from the Prophet.
Heu (says he) sicut olim in Romans Imperio, sic hodie in Romana curia est vorago
diuitiarum turpissima. Creuit auaritia, perijt lex a sacerdote, and visio a
Propheta.

Petrarch calls Rome covetous Babylon. L'auara Babylonia ha colmo il sacco de
l'ira de Dio. And this is the common cry of all men, that are subject to the
synagogue of Romes tyranny.

Is it not then a great favor of God, that by the government of Queen
Elizabeth we were so happily delivered from the Popes manifold exactions,
against which so many have complained and exclaimed, and yet never could find
convenient remedy? Is it not an ease to be delivered from intolerable
burdens, and a great contentment to be freed from such unjust pillages?

Robert Parsons Encont. 1. cap. 11. would gladly have the world to say, no: as
having some share in the spoil, and like a begging Friar living on the labors
of others. But his exceptions are such, as may greatly confirm our yea. First
he says, There has not been so many exactions in time past, as since the
year 1530. and for proof, he refers us unto the exchequer books. But both
his exceptions and his proofs (...) ridiculous. For albeit much has been paid
to the king; yet it does not therefore follow, that we are to pay much to the
Pope. Again, it is ridiculous to seek proofs of the Popes exactions in the
Exchequer books, being so many that they can hardly be registered in any
books. Beside this it is false, that the people of England has paid more to
the King then to the Pope, as may appear by the conference of particulars. But
suppose we should pay more to the king then to the pope: yet these two
contributions are evil compared together. For to the king we owe duty and
tribute, to the Pope we owe nothing, but many bitter execrations for all our
charges and troubles. For his malice is the root of all our troubles, and the
cause of all our payments. He says further, that notwithstanding the exactions
of the Pope, the Clergy in time past did far excel our Clergy in ease and
wealth. But that is no great commendation, if ours excel them in virtue and
piety. Beside that, Matthew of Paris in Henry the third, does in diverse places
express the miserable estate of the prelacie in those times by reason of the
Popes greediness. As for the common sort of priests that lived upon sale of
Masses, and the begging Friars that lived upon alms, Robert Parsons has (...)
reason to extol the^ for wealth, and less certes for other qualities. But were
our Clergy burdened more the^ in times past; yet has this louzie companion no
reason at all to mention the same, seeing the blame arises from ye Sodomitical
priesthood of the popish synagogue, that in king Henry the eight his days sold
and entangled their livings, and have since been occasion of many troubles,
which without charge could not be ouerpassed. He says our Clergy may sing,
Beati pauperes spiritu: and so might (...) Romish Clergy too, if they were
Christians. Robert Parsons certes, himself abusing this place to sport, as the
Pope abuses scriptures to profit, shows himself to be an Atheist: and
talking of his Clergy, he proves himself a sot. For in the world there is not
a more beggarly, I might also say bougerly Clergy, then in Italy, especially
those which live upon the sound of bells, and by their rustie voices, as
Grasshoppers live upon dew, and sing sweetly often times when they have little to
eat save sallades, and pottage of coleworts, and such like suppes, and Italian
Minestraes.

Afterward turning his speech from others, he runs very rudely upon me, and
gives out that I have complained secretly of heavy payments to prince and
patron. But either he lies wilfully and wittingly against all truth and
reason, or else some secret lying companion has gulled him. Certes if he knew
my estate, and how willing I have been and am, to (...) more then ordinary for
resistance both of common enemies, and such Caniball traitors as himself, he
would not impute this unto me. Let him therefore bring forth the man that told
him this (...), or else he must be charged with (...) the lie himself.

Finally he endeuoreth to excuse Innocentius the fourth, and to lay the fault
of the extreme exactions of his time rather upon his collectors and officers,
then upon the Pope himself. He pretends also, that Innocentius required a
collection in a general Council. But who is so simple to think, that the
whole state would complain of the court and Pope of Rome, if the fault were
only in a few usurers and caterpilling collectors? Again, why should Matthew.
Paris so often complain of this, and other Popes for their covetousness, if
the fault were only in the collectors? and why why did not the Pope sometime
punish his collectors abusing their commission? Thirdly it appears, that this
cogging pope abused the world, pretending the recovery of the holy land, and
gathering great sums of money under that pretense, where it appears by the
history of Matthew Paris and others, that he spent the money in (...) to
enrich his (...) and bastards, and employed the adventurers that crossed
themselves for the holy land, against the Emperor, and other Christian states.
Finally it is a mere abuse to call a rabble of idle (...) and busy Friars,
and swinish Masse-priestes combined with Antichrist a general Council, or to
say that the Pope ever meant to recover the holy land, or to enlarge Christian
Religion, seeing by his aspires and contentions the Turks have enlarged, and
Christians have lost their Empire, being abandoned ost times and betrayed by
the Pope.

CHAP. IX. Of the deliverance of the Realm and Church of England from the yoke
of the Popes laws and unjust censures.
ALbeit the Cardinals of Rome, and the priests of Baal, and their adherents do
not willingly complain of the Pope, being diverse of them his creatures, and
the rest his sworn (...) and marked slaves; yet such is the grieuance and
wrong that many have sustained by his (...) and censures, that diverse of them
have been forced to open their mouths, and to talk against their holy Father.

(...) de Alliaco in his Treatise de reformat. (...), says, that the multitude
of statutes, canons, and decretals, especially those that bind to (...) sin
are grievous and burdensome.

Budaeus in his annotations upon the Pandects says, that the Popes laws serve
not so well for correcting of manners, as making of money. His words are these:
Sanctiones pontificiae non moribus regendis vsui sunt, sed propemodum dixerim,
argentariae faciendae authoritatem videntur accommodare.

In France as Duarenus says, it was wont to be a common In Praefat. in lib. de
Eccles. minist.
proverb, that all things went evil since the decrees had ales adjoined to
them, that is, since the decretals were published. Male cum rebus humanis actum
dicebant, ex (...) decretis alae accesserunt.

The Princes of Germany complain, that the rules of Grauam. 20.
the Popes Chancerie, were nothing but snares laid to bring benefices to the
Popes collation, and devised for matter of gain. They say also, that the Popes
constitutions were Ibid. 8.
nothing but clogges for men's consciences.

Neither may we think, but that they had great reason thus to speak,
considering both the iniquity of most of these constitutions, and the
strictness of the obligation by which men are bound to observe them. For what
reason have they either to prohibit marriage to any order, or state of men, not
prohibited by the law of God to marry, or else to restrain the liberty (...)
by the law of God, or to forbid flesh, eggs, or milk upon certain days?
Again, why have they brought in, not only their carnal presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, transsubstantiation, the idolatreus sacrifice of the
Mass, but their purgatory, their indulgences, and infinite such trash? Why
have they abrogated Christ's institution in the celebration of the Lords supper,
not only taking away the (...) from the communicants, but making a private
action of that, which should be a communion? Is not this as much as the
Pharistes did, that transgressed Gods commandment for Mat 15.
their own tradition? And do not the Papists (...), that unwritten traditions
should be received with equal affection, to the holy Scriptures?

Again, what reason have they to curse and anathematise, nay to put to cruel
death, such as obey not their ordinances, Iam. 4.
and unjust decrees? S. James says: We have but one Lawgiver, that is able to
save and destroy. And no where do we read, that the Church of Christ did
persecute Christians, and put them death for matters of their conscience and
religion, much less for matter of ceremonies, or such obseruances. Neither can
the adversary show, that bishops excommunicated Christians, that would not
rebel, and take arms against their Liege Sovereigns. Which of us (says
Optatus, lib. 2. contra Parmenian.) did persecute any man? The Apostle he
commands every soul to be subject to higher powers, and not to rebel. Now
intolerable then are the Romish decretals and rescripts, that not only bind
men's consciences in things free otherwise, but also in things, that may not be
done without impiety?

Likewise have diverse complained of the abuse of popish excommunications. That
which our Savior Christ says: If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee,
as a heathen man or Publican, that the popish faction translateth to the
ridiculous censure of the Pope. And therefore excommunicateth all that place not
the Churches unwritten traditions in equal rank with divine Scriptures; or
that believe not, that Christians can perform the law perfectly, and are
justified before God by the works of the law: or that hold not the doctrine of
the (...) Church concerning their seven Sacraments: or that do not worship
Images, or that receive not their doctrine of indulgences, and purgatory, and
all the herestes and abominations of the Pope: or that submit not themselves
to his tyranny: or that refuse to pay his annates or taxes, or whatsoever he
and his suppostes require. Nay, they excommunicate the subjects, that rebel
not against their lawful Kings. After that Pius the fifth, that wicked and
cruel hypocrite had commanded, that neither the Lords nor people of England
should obey (...) Elizabeth's commandments, or laws: it follows, Qui In
Bulla contra Elizabetham.
secus egerint eos anathematis sententia innodamus. That is: Those which shall
do otherwise, we pronounce accursed, or anathema. Neither did the Pope only in
time past thunder out (...) curses, but also gave (...) to every base
companion, and for every small trifling cause (...) inflict most grievous
censures. Petrus de Alliaco speaking of the Pope and his excommunications,
complains, that he gave leave to his Collectors to thunder out
excommunications, to the offense of many, and that other Prelates for debts and
light causes, did cruelly excommunicate poor men. Saepe (says he) De reform.
Eccles.
per suos Collectores in multorum scandalum fulminauit, and aly
Praelatileuiter, and pro leuibus causis, vt pro debitis and huiusmodi, pauperes
excommunicatione crudeliter percutiunt.

The Germans complain, that many Christians were Grauam. 34.
excommunicated at Rome for profane causes and for gain, to the trouble of
diverse men's consciences. Romae (say they) caeterisque in locis per
Archiepiscopos, ac Episcopos, aut saltem eorum ecclesiasticos iudices multi
Christianorum ob causas prophanas, ob pecuniae denique ac turpis quaestus
amorem excommunicantur, multorumque, sedeorum in fide infirmorum conscientiae
per hoc aggrauantur, and in desperationem pertrahuntur.

Scotus in 4. sent. did. 19. complains, that the Church did De reform.
too often strike with this sword: and Petrus de Alliaeco says, Eccles.
that by this abuse the sword of the Church was in his time grown into great
contempt.

Of late time the Popes of Rome have excommunicated Emperors and kings, if
they would not depart with their towns, countries and crowns, and yield to
their legates what they demanded.

How intolerable this abuse was, we may perceive, if we consider the heaviness
of this censure, being rightly inflicted by the true Church. Our Sauicur
shows, that the party excommunicate is to be holden for a heathen man, and a
Publican. Tertullian. Apolo. 39. does call it, the highest fore-iudgement of
the future judgment. Summum futuri (...) Lib. 1. Epist. 11. 2d Pomp.
praeiudicium. Cyprian does esteem them as killed with the spiritual sword,
Superbi and contumaces (says he) spirituali gladio necantur, dum de Ecclesia
eijciuntur. Commonly excommunication is called Anathema: and Chrysostom homil.
70. ad populum Antioch. calls it the bond of the Church.

We are therefore no less to be thankful for our deliverance from the Popes
unjust laws, then the ancient Christians for their exemption from the yoke of
the Pharisees, and from humane traditions, from which by the preaching of the
Gospel they were freed. Neither may we think it a simple favor, that we are
made to understand, that the crackes of the Popes thundering (...), are no more
to be feared, then the rattling of Salmoneus that impious fellow, that with
certain engines went about to counterfeit the noise of thunder. We knew
always that a man unjustly excommunicated, and by a Judge unlawful, was no
way prejudiced. Origin in Leuit. (...). 48. speaking of a person excommunicate,
says, that he is not hurt at all, being by wrongful judgment expelled out of
the congregation. Nihil laeditur in eo, quod non recto iudicio ab hominibus
videtur expulsus. And the adversaries confess, that excommunication pronounced
unjustly, and by him that is not our Judge, binds not. C. nullus 9. q. 2. and
C. nullus primus. 9. q. 3. and C. sententia, 11. q. 3. But few understood the
injustice, and nullitie of the Popes laws, and that he neither was nor is a
competent judge, until such time, as by true preaching of the Gospel, which
by Queen Elizabeth was restored unto us, the man of sin began to be
revealed.

CHAP. X. Of our deliverance from heresy, schism, superstition and Idolatry.
These things therefore considered, it cannot be denied but that her Majesty's
godly (...) brought great profit to the Church of England. Yet if we please to
look back to the heresies of the Papists, and to remember how they lived in
heresy, schisine, superstition and idolatry, we shall the rather praise God
for that great deliverance of his Church, which he wrought by the means of our
late Queen. For heresy and false doctrine is the (...) and canker of the
Church. The Apostle Paul, If an Angel from heaven should teach us any other
Gospel or doctrine beside that whith himself had taught the Galathians, does
pronounce Gal. 1.
him accursed. S. John in his second Epistle forbids us to receive into our
houses, or to salute such as bring not his doctrine. Gal. 5.
Heresy, schism, and idolatry are reckoned among the works of the flesh,
the workers whereof shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Fly, says Ignatius, those that cause heresy and schism, as (...).
the principal cause of mischief. Quod maius potest esse delictu^ (says
Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 11.) aut quae macula deformior, quam aduersus Christum
stetisse, quam Ecclesiam eius, quam ille sanguine suo parauit, dissipasse? What
offense can be greater, or what blot more ugly, then to have stood against
Christ? then to have scattered his church, which he has purchased with his
blood? Those which do persevere in discord of schism (says S. Augustine lib.
1. de bapt. contra Donatist. c. 15.) do pertain to the lot of Ismael.

Superstition is the corruption of true Religion, and although colored with a
show of wisdom, yet is condemned Lib 1. Instit. divine. c. 21.
by the Apostle, Col. 2. Lactantius speaking of the superstition of the
Gentiles, does call it An incurable madness: Dementiam incurabilem, and
afterward vanitic. Iustine in ser. Ibid. c. 22,
exhort. ad Gentes, says, that idolatry is not only injurious unto God, but
also void of reason. Principale crimen generis humani, says Tertullian,
summus seculireatus, tota causa iudicij idololatria. Lib. de idolol.
That is: Idolatry is the principal crime of mankind, the chief guiltines of
the world, and the whole cause of judgment. No marvel then if John the
Apostle exhort all men 1. Ioh. 5.
To keep themselves from idols, this sin being direct against the honor of
God, and nothing else but spiritual fornication.

Let us therefore see whether the Papists may not be touched with the aforesaid
crimes of teaching heretical and false doctrine, and of long continuance in
schism, superstition and idolatry. That the Papists teach false doctrine and
heresy, the acts of the conuenticle of Trent, of Florence and Constance
compared with the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and faith of the
ancient fathers will plainly declare. For as Tertullian said of old
heretics, so may we say of them: That their doctrine compared with the
Apostolic doctrine, does by the diversity and contrariety thereof declare,
that it proceeds from no Apostle or Apostolic man. Ipsa doctrina eorum cum
Apostolica comparata ex diuersitate and contrarietate sua pronunciabit, neque
Apostoli alicuius autoris esse, neque Apostolici, says he. The Apostle
teachech us, That the De praescrip. aduers. haeret. 2. Tim. 3.
Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect. They say that the
Scriptures are but a piece of the rule of faith, and very imperfect without
traditions.

S. Peter (2. Pet. 1.) compares the scriptures of the Prophets to a candle
shining in a dark place: they teach, that scriptures are dark and obscure.

God commands us to hear his beloved Son, Mat. 3. they command us not to
hear Christ speaking in scriptures to us, but to hear the Pope, and his
cacolike crew, which they endue with the name of the Church.

The Apostle says, That no other foundation could be laid 1. Cor. 3.
beside that which is already laid, which is Christ Jesus. These fellows say,
the Church is built upon the Pope, and that he is the foundation of the Church:
although we find plainly that there was no such Pope for many ages in the
Church.

Christ said, Read the Scriptures: these say directly to the vulgar sort,
read not Scriptures in vulgar tongs without license.

S. John teaches us, that sin is, whatsoever is contrary to the law: these
teach, that many (...) there are not repugnant to Gods law: viz. such things as
are contrary to the Popes law.

The Apostle Paul says, that concupiscence is sin: these affirm the
contrary. He says, original sin passed over al; they deny it. He says no
man is justified by the works of the law, they teach flat contrary.

The law directly prohibiteth the making of graven images, to the end to bow
down to them and to worship them. These notwithstanding make the images of the
holy Trinity, bow down to them and worship them.

The Apostle (Coloss. 2.) speaks against the worship of Angels. They regard
him not, but in humbleness of mind invoke and worship Angels notwiihstanding.

Our Savior instituting the holy Sacrament of his body and blood, said:
Accipite, manducate: take, and eat; and drink ye all of this. They say,
sacrifice and worship, and drink not all of this.

To rehearse all their contradictions to the word of God, and to the Apostles
doctrine, were too long for this short discourse, let these therefore serve for
an introduction. Of their heresies I have before spoken. Pius the fourth, has
set forth a new form of faith, of which that may be said, which Hilarie
speaks to Constantius: Quicquid apud te praeter fidem vna^ Contra Constantium.
est, perfidia, non fides est. Whatsoever this wicked Pope has set forth
beside the faith of Christ, the same is perfidiousnes, and not faith: Of this
quality is his doctrine of (...) traditions, of superstitious ceremonies, of
the blasphemous Mass, of purgatory, of indulgences, of the five new devised
sacraments, and such like doctrines.

That the Papists are by schism rent from the Catholic and universal Church
of Christ, it may be proved by diverse particulars. First, Christ's Church has
but one head, that is Christ Jesus. But the (...) Church has as many heads as
Popes, and heads that teach doctrine both diverse and contrary to Christ our
sole head.

Secondly, Christ his Church has no other spouse but Christ Jesus. But the
adulterous Komish synagogue acknowledges the Pope to be her spouse, and
therefore must needs have as many spouses as Popes, and be not Virgo, but
Polygama; that is, one that has many husbands or spouses.

Thirdly, the Catholic Church is built upon the foundations of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the corner stone; and has beside this no
other foundation. But the Komish Church acknowledges the Pope to be her
foundation. Whereupon it follows, that she is sometime without foundation, at
least during the vacancie of the popedom, and has as many diverse foundations
as Popes.

Fourthly, the synagogue of Rome does acknowledge the Pope to be her lawgiver,
and judge, and that he has power not only to bind (...) consciences, but also
to save and destroy: which does fhew that she deuideth her self from Christ's
Catholic Church, which for many ages after Christ's time had no such conceit.

Fifthly, the same does rely no less upon traditions not written, and upon the
Popes determinations in matters of faith, then upon the written word of God:
which the Catholic Church does not.

Sixthly, this synagogue consists of a Pope, and his Cardinals, together with
a rabble of Monks, Friars, and sacrificing priests. But in the prime
Catholic Church, there was no such state, nor orders of men to be found.

Finally, the members of the Komish synagogue, are not only divided from the
Catholic Church in doctrine, sacraments, external government and fellowship,
but also one from another, the Thomists differing from ye Scotists, the Monks
from begging Friars, the regular orders from secular Priests, one Doctor from
another, and one Pope ofttimes from another. If then Schismatickes be no true
members of the Church as their Doctors teach; then are not the Romanists of the
Church. Again, if they differ from the Catholic Church, and among themselves,
then have they long continued in (...).

The nature and property of superstition does show the Papists to be also most
superstitious. For if it be the nature and property of superstition, either to
give religious honor and worship to such things, as are not capable of it, or
else to worship God after humane devises, and otherwise then he has commanded;
then do they grossly offend in superstition. But it is most notorious, ye they
grossly offend in both those points. For first they invoke Angels. On the
feast of Michael the Archangell they say: Holy S. Michael defend us in battle,
that we perish not in the fearful judgment. In Missal.
They pray also to the Angel that keeps them, whom Romans
they know not: and this adoration of Angels in the (...) Catechism is
allowed, if not commanded.

Secondly, they worship the (...) Maire, and call her In Mariali.
the mother of grace, and port of salvation, Bernardin does call her the
mediatrix betwixt God and us, and the helper of our justification and
salvation. They pray unto her for help, per amorem vnigeniti filij tui, as if
Christ were a Mediator betwixt us and our Lady. Bonauenture transforming the
In Psalterio Bonaucnt.
Psalms which are made to be sung in praise of God, to our Lady, says,
Cantate Dominae, canticum nouum: and laudate dominam in sanctis (...): that is,
Sing to our Lady a new song, and praise our Lady in her Saints.

Thirdly, they worship and call upon other Saints beside the holy Uirgin, and
attribute diverse Saints to diverse cities and countries, as three kings to
Colleine, S. Ambrose to Millane, George to Germany and England, Andrew to
Scotland, James to Spain. They do suppose also, that Nicholas does help
Mariners, Luke painters, Crispine shoomakers, that S. Anthony cures pigges,
S. Gal geese, and S. Sebastian the plague. In the Roman Missall blasphemousty
they translate the honor of our Savior to Leo bishop of Rome, saying to Leo,
Thou art a priest for (...) according to the order of Melchisedech.

Fourthly, they pray to things that cannot hear, nor help, saying, O holy
cross help me: and to the holy (...), Sancte Sudariora pro nobis: O holy
napkin pray for us. And again, Sudarium Christi liberet nos a peste, and morte
tristi. So the Papists of Cahors in France pray, and saluting the picture of
Christ's face called Veronica, they say: Hail holy face printed in a cloth: as
if a good part of their religion were printed in linen cloth.

Fifthly, they worship diverse men departed, of whose salvation, or percase
being, they have no certainty: as for example, S. Catherine, S. Christopher,
S. George that fought with the dragon, S. Dominicke, S. Francis, and a
multitude of other Monks and Friars liker to be in hell then in heaven.
Whereof the common proverb arises, That many are called upon as Saints in
heaven, whose souls are far more likely to be tormented in hell.

Finally, they give (...) worship to the cross, and to the images of the holy
Trinity, worshipping creatures for their Creator. They do also worship rotten
bones, not knowing whether they be the relickes of Saints, or wicked men. They
kiss them, (...), and burn incense unto them. They worship swords, whippes,
nails, the asses (...) whereon Christ rode, as they say, the breeches of
Joseph, and diverse rags, which God knows, from whence they came.

They practice also diverse false forms of worship, of which we may say, who
has required these things at their hands? The Ladies psalter is a form, that
God never commanded. Many of their prayers are most blasphemous. In hortulo
animae printed anno 1565. at Paris by one Merlin, they pray thus: O veneranda
Trinit as, Jesus, Joseph, and Maria, quam coniunxit diuinit as charit at is
concordia: that is, O venerable Trinity, Jesus, Joseph, and Marie, which God
has conjoined with the concord of charity. Never certes did the Prophets and
(...) teach us so to pray, as is contained in the Breuiaries.

Secondly, they say Masses in honor of Saints and of our Lady, and make vows
unto them. But our Savior Christ never taught us to celebrate the Eucharist in
honor of Saints, or to offer his body in honor of S. Francis, Saint Cuthbert,
S. Andrew, and other he and she Saints.

Thirdly, the holy Prophets and Apostles never taught us, that men are saved by
eating saltfish and cockles, and forswearing marriage, and such like
obseruances, in which the Romanists put great holiness.

Fourthly, God never commanded any to whip themselves, and to wear rings of
iron, or woollen next our skin, nor signified, that these things pleased him.
Nay, the Apostle (Colos. 2.) condemns such observations, albeit having a show
of wisdom, in superstition, humility and not sparing the body.

Finally, our Savior never taught his disciples to (...) salt and water to
drive away devils, nor to consecrate Missal. Rom, in fine.
paschall Lambs, and candles, and such like, as the Papists do, prescribing
certain forms thereof in their Missals, and saying over salt, Exorcizo te
creatur (...) salis, per Deum viuum, per Deum verum. That is: I exorcise thee,
thou creature of salt, by the living God, by the true God: and afterward Vt
efficiaris sal exorcizatum in salutem credentium: that thou may be made
coniured salt, for the salvation of the faithful. Over the water they say:
Exorcizo te creatura aquae, etc. vt fias aqua exorcizata ad effugandam omnem
potestatem inimici. That is: I exorcise thee thou creature of water, etc. that
thou may be made exorcised water, to drive away all the power of the enemy.
In blessing of the pasch all lamb they pray, that God would bless and
sanctify the creature of (...), which they desire to receive to the praise of
God. Al which be tricks of notorious superstition. I forbear to speak of the
superstitious toys of the Mass in crossing, turning, knocking, washing,
forms of habits and such like ceremonies, for that they require a whole
discourse by themselves.

It (...) only now, that I declare the Papists to offend in idolatry, because
notwithstanding their manifold abuses in Gods worship, they obstinately deny
themselves to be guilty therein. But whatsouer pretenses they bring, they
shall never be able to excuse themselves. For first it is notorious, and the
adversaries will not deny, but that all those are superstitious Idolaters,
that give the honor, which is properly due unto God, unto creatures.
Superstitiosum est (says S. Augustine lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap. 20.)
quicquid institutum est ab hominibus ad facienda and colenda idola, pertinens
vel ad colendum, sicut Deum, creaturam, partemue vllam creaturae, vel ad
consultationes and pacta quaedam significationum cum daemonibus (...) and
foederata. He says, it is superstitious, whatsoever is ordained of men for
making and worshipping idols, pertaining either to the worship of creatures, or
any part of a creature, as God, or else to magical consultations, or covenants
agreed upon with devils, for revealing of matters. Thomas Aquinas 2. 2. q. 94.
art. 1. (...), that idolatry is nothing else, but the worshipping of creatures
either in visible forms, or otherwise with (...) honor. And this is partly
proved out of the law of God against Idolatry, which not only prohibiteth the
having of strange Gods, but also the making of graven images, with an intent to
(...) unto them, and to worship them. But the superstitious Papists do worship
the Sacrament as God, and call it their Lord and God. They do also give Gods
honor to the images of the Trinity, of the Crucifixe, and cross, and teach,
that what worship is due to the original, is due to the image or picture, as
Alexander Hales, p. 3. q. 3. art. vlt. Aquinas part. 3. q. 25. art. 3. and
Caietan in his Commentaries upon him do (...). They do also make vows to our
Lady and to Saints, and trust very much in them. They do further call upon
Angels and Saints in all places, and offer sacrifices in their honor. Finally,
they (...) unto the images of Angels and Saints, pray before them, kiss them,
and burn incense unto them. All which be (...) of that adoration, that is due
to God.

Secondly, they commit those faults, which the holy scriptures do note and
condemn in idolaters of old time. They worship creatures for the Creator, as
the Apostle Romans 1. says the Gentiles did. They make similitudes of things
both in heaven and earth, bow down to them, and worship them: although the
same be prohibited in the second commandment, Exodus 20. They erect monuments,
and titles, and stones for signs to be worshipped, contrary to the law, Leuit.
26. They make every day new gods, affirming that the priest makes his maker.
Now this making of new gods is noted as a property of idolaters, Psalm. 81.
They rejoice in the works of their own hands, and worship the images which
themselves have made, as did the idolaters whereof S. Stephen makes mention,
Act. 7. They serve the host of heaven, as the old idolatrous Jews spoken of
Amos 5. and Act. 7. serving diverse saints, and as they call them, Militiam and
curiam coelestem: that is, the soldiory and court of heaven. As the statues of
the Gentiles were silver and gold, the work of men's hands, and had mouths and
spoke not, eyes and saw not, as says the Prophet, Psalm. 1 14. so is it with
the images of Papists, that albeit of costly matter and curious workmanship,
yet neither speak with their mouths, nor see with their eyes. As idolaters
burnt incense to their statues, as we read 2. Paral. 30. so do Papists burn
incense to their images.

Thirdly, they fall into those abuses, which the Fathers of yt Church thought
worthy to be reprehended of old time, as savoring of idolatry. The Gentiles
thought they could represent God in a material image. And so do the Papists
making the image of God the Father, and God the holy Ghost. The Fathers
therefore reprehend them both alike. Quis tam amens erit (says Eusebius
praeparat. Euangel. c. 3.) vt Dei formam and imaginem statua viro simili
referri perhibeat? Who will be so mad to think, that the form and image of God
may be expressed by an image like unto a man? Hierome likewise writing upon the
fortith of Isay, What image (says he) will you make for him which is a spirit,
and is in all places? Ambrose in his oration of the death of Theodosius, says,
It is an error of the Gentiles to worship the cross. Inuenit Helena (says
he) crucem Domini: regem adorauit, non lignum vtique, quia hic Gentilis est
error, sed adorauit illum qui pependit in cruce. The council of Laodicea
condemns the worship of Angels, as idolatrous. So like wise says Tertullian,
de praescrip. aduers. haeret. that the heresy of the Simonians in serving of
Angels, was reputed among idolatries. Simonianae magiae disciplina Angelis
seruie^s vtique and ipsa inter idololatrias deputabatur. Hierome in an Epistle
of his to Riparius, says, that Christians neither adore nor worship Martyrs,
nor Sun, nor Moon, nor Angels, least they should therein rather serve
creatures, then the Creator. Tertullian does also say, that every lie of De
praeescript. aduers. Haeeret.
God, is after a sort a variation of the kind of idolatry. Omne mendacium de
Deo variatio quodammodo sexus est idololatriae. Both he and diverse others say,
that heresy is a kind of idolatry. How then can they clear themselves from
the blemish of idolatry, that worship the cross, serve and worship Angels,
and are authors of so many sorts of heresies?

Fourthly, they must needs deny the cross, and the images of the Trinity,
and the crucifixe to be creatures and works of their own hands, or else in
worshipping of them, they must needs confess and yield themselves to be
idolaters. But that they cannot do.

Finally, the testimony of their own conscience does prove them to be
idolaters, in that they leave out the second commandment, or as they make it,
a piece of the first commandment, that is direct against the adoration and
worship of graven images, and the making of them to that end, in most of their
Catechismes, Manuals, Psalters, and rituall books, where they rehearse the ten
commandments, as their Ladies psalters, short Catechismes, and diverse of their
books do testify.

But since it pleased God to restore religion in the church of England, the
leven of popish doctrine and heresy is purged out, the breach of schism and
division from the Catholic Church is repaired, and all superstitious and
idolatrous worships are quite abolished and removed out of the Church.

CHAP. XI. Of good works, and good life.
THe Ministers of God, as they are guides to their people, and teachers of the
law; so ought they to go before their flocks, showing them examples to provoke
them to do good works, and to conform their lives according to the laws of
God. Show thy self an example of good works, Tit 2.
says Paul to Titus. All true Christians also should show Ibid.
themselves zealous of good works. For we are Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2.
created in Christ to good works, which God has ordained that we should walk
in them. This is our doctrine, and the practice of all that profess our
religion. If any hypocrites be found among us, that walk not according to
their profession, we renounce them, we weed them out, we punish them. If
worldings and fleshly Papists, that live in the Realm do give occasion of
offense, this ought not to be imputed to our Religion, nor the true professors
thereof, that desire nothing more then that such may be weeded out, and
expulsed both out of the Church and Commonwealth.

But if we look back to former times, we shall find that the Papists have not
only erred in the practice, but also in the doctrine of good works. For first
they deny, that the law of God is a perfect rule of life. And therefore have
invented other rules, whereby they hope to attain to a further perfection.
Secondly they hold, that by the law of God we have not knowledge of all sins,
teaching that it is as well mortal sin to transgress the Popes laws, as to
transgress Gods laws, as Nauarrus teaches us in his Manual by many
particulars. Thirdly, they give absolution to every heinous sinner, confessing
his sins, before he has repented. Fourthly, they suppose that every man is
able to satisfy for the temporal penalty of (...), and that the Pope has
power by his indulgences to remit (...) concerning the penalty without
satisfaction. (...), they teach that no man needs to repent for venial
sins, and that such sins exclude us not out of the kingdom of heaven.
Sixthly they teach, that man is able perfectly to (...) the law, and by a good
consequent to abstain from all sin, which S. Hierome declares to be
Pelagianisme. Seventhly, they hold contrary to the Apostle, that man is to be
justified by the works of the law, and that eternal life is to be purchased
by our own works and merits.

Many other (...) points of doctrine they have beside these. But their practice
is far worse then their doctrine. For omitting the weightier points of the
law, like their ancesters the Pharisees they stand much on fithing Mint, and
Commin, and washings, and such like ceremonies. Their principal works are
forswearing of marriage, begging like vagabond fellows, eating muscles,
cockles, and salt fish, and such like on fasting days, and saints vigiles,
taking ashes on Ashwednesday, confessing in a priests ear at Shroftide,
shauing of crowns, going to Mass, sprinkling of holy water, lighting of
candles at noone day, crouching to images, creeping to the cross, kissing of
the Popes toe, praying for souls in purgatory, gaining of pardons, going on
pilgrimage, ringing and singing for the dead, aneling and greasing of men and
women desperately (...), and such like.

The Popes, Cardinals, Mass Priests, Monks and Friars, care neither much for
these ceremonies, nor for other good works. If any of them, or their adherents
have a show of godliness; yet they have denied the power thereof. If they do
build schools or hospitals, or give largely, it is for the maintenance of
their state, and to win glory and praise of men. The lives and actions of
most of them, are most (...). The old Roman formularie prescribes this
common form of confession to Romish penitents: Confiteor quia peccaui nimis in
superbia, inani gloria, in extollentia tam oculorum, quam vestium and omnium
actuum (...), in inuidia, in (...), in (...) tam honoris, quam pecuniae, in
ira, in tristitia, in acedia, in ventris ingluuie, in luxuria Sodomitica, etc.
I confess (says the Romish penitent) that I have offended too much in pride,
vain glory, lifting up my eyes, setting out my self in apparel and other
gestures, envy, hatred, desire of money and honors, anger, dullness, sloth,
gluttony, Sodomiticall luxury, in sacrilege, perjury, adultery, thefts,
rapines, and all manner of fornication, in most beastly turpitude, in
drunkenness and banqueting. And afterward there follows such a Catalogue of
all manner of impieties and villainies, that a blind man may discorne the
Romanistes to be a rabble of (...) and indiabolated rakehels, deserving
Tiburnes suspension, rather then the Priests absolution.

Publicly they allow stews both in Spain and Italy. The Pope makes a great
revenue of the hire of whores. The harlots of Rome (says Cornelius Agrippa
lib. de vanit. scient. cap. de Lenocinio) pay every week a piece of money
called a Iulio, (it is about six pence of English money) to the Pope, and this
rent yearly passes twenty thousand ducats. He tells also, how Priests let
out whores to hire. The gloss upon a certain provincial constitution of Otho
de concubin. Cleric. remouend. says, that it seems reason, that the Church
should wink at the sin oflecherie. Nam and Mareschallus Papae de facto
exigit tributum a meretricibus. For de facto the Marshall of the Pope does
exact a tribute from whores. This is also confirmed by the testimony of Io.
Andreas in c. inter opera. extr. de spons. and matrim. and is well known to
Robert Parsons, a great practiser among boys and whores, and to all that are
acquainted with Rome, Italy, and Spain. The Cardinals, that about the time of
the council pretended in Pope Paul the third his time, were to consider what
things stood in greatest need of reformation, speaking of Rome: In hac etiam
vrbe meretrices, (say they) vt matronae incedunt per vrbem. That is: In this
city also whoores go like matrons through the streets. Pius the fifth, that
pretended more zeal, then his predecessors, went about to reform this abuse,
but could not. Such was the desire the Priests and people of Rome had, to keep
this ornament of the city with them still, which as the (...) faction in
Wisbich affirmed, were in Rome with approbation, and with as good right as any
citizen of Rome, or as the Pope himself. All that Pius the (...) could do, was
to draw them into certain In vita Pij 5.
streets, and there to confine them, as well, as such manner of people could
be. The sins of Sodom are so rise in Rome, and all Italy, that no colors
can cover them, no laws remedy them. Boccace in his second nouel testifies,
That the Pope, Cardinals, Prelates, and others, did live dishonestly and
offend, not only in natural, but also Sodomiticall luxury. Egli trouo dal
maggiore insino al minore tutts dishonestissimamente peccare in lussuria, and
non solo nella natural, ma anchora nella Sodomitica, senza freno alcuno di
(...), o di vergogna in tanto che la potenza delle meretrici and de garzoni ad
impetrare qualunque gran cosa non era di picciol potere. Oltre a questo
vniuersalmente golosi, beuitori, ebbriachi, and piu al ventre seruenti a guisa
d'animali bruti appresso alla lussuria, che ad altro, gli conobbe apertamente.
Huldericus of Augusta shows, In Epist. ad Nicolaum.
that while by false show of continency, the Church of Rome refused marriage in
their Clergy, diverse committed inceft and abominable Sodomiticall villainies
with men and beasts. Sub falsa continentiae specie placere volentes, grauiora
vides committere, (says he) patrum scilicet vxores subagitare, masculorum ac
pecudum amplexus non reformidare. Petrarch does call Rome, the slave of
gluttony, and lechery, and says, that luxuriousness Sonnetto 106
is come to extremity in her. Di vin serua, di letti e di viuande, in (...)
lussuria fa l'vltima proua. In his ninteenth Epistle he does not only charge
the court of Rome with incontinencie and unbridled lusts, but with all
impieties and villainies. Quicquid vspiam (says he) perfidiae and doli,
quicquid inclementiae, superbiaeque, quicquid impudicitiae effrenataeque
libidinis audisti, aut legisti, quicquid denique impietatis and morum
pessimorum sparsim habet, aut habuit orbis terrae: totum istic cumulatim vide
as, aceruatimque reperias. Vguetinus in his visions does exclaim against the
(...) of Sodomie. Iterum atque iterum (says the reporter) (...) Sodomitico
verbum intulit. Speaking of Romish priests he says, they give themselves to
follow harlots and luxuriousness, and suppose gain to be godliness. And if
any man suppose, that these were the sins of old time, and that now such
abuses are (...), he shows himself ignorant of the manners of Italy, and
other popish countries. Io. Casa wrote verses in commendation of Sodomitrie,
and a Florentine under the name of Grappa, has written a Treatise called
Cicalamento del Grappa, of the same argument. In the visitation of Abbeys in
England, the Monks and Friars were in diverse places detected for that
abomination. In the contention between the Jesuits and scholars of the Romish
Seminary, one Harward a Jesuit gave out he could detect seven for that sin.
In Rome and other places of Italy this abomination is common. At Gant anno
1578. four Franciscans and one Augustinian Friar were burnt for Sodomie: and
(...) scourged for like filthiness. Robert Parsons, if he list, may search the
acts. He does also remember why not long since he sent for Fisher from Doway,
and why Edward Weston was put out of the College, and from his Lecture in
Divinity. Assuredly it was not for his chastity. Of the Pope that now is, and
of his late predecessors, and the Romish Cardinals I shall have occasion to
(...) hereafter, if Parsons will need stand in contention (...) honesty of
life betwixt his consorts and us. In the mean while he may remember what
fruits come of forced single life. Anselme (as Huntington lib. 5. and Roger of
Chester reports) in one Synod forbad lawful marriage to Priests: but in the
next he was constrained to make laws against Sodomites, and therein condemned
eight Abbots beside other inferior Priests and Friars.

In the Church of Rome adultery and fornication have always been accounted
smaller offenses, as is set down evidently in the chapter, At siclerici. de
iudicijs. I need not therefore stand much upon that, and the rather for
because it is notorious, that the Pope tolerateth common bordels. Yet lest
Baals priests should stand too much, either (...) their virginity or
chastity; I would have them to remember, not only the lives of late Popes,
Cardinals, priests, Monks and Friars, but also what old histories and other
records say against them, when they lived better then now. Let them read
Boccace nouel. 2. and diverse discourses of Monks and Friars honesties.
Petrarch. epist. 19. and others. His 106. 107. 108. sonets, Theodoricke a Niem.
tract. 6. nemoris vnionis cap. 34. where Gregory the Pope testifies, that in
two and twenty Monasteries the Monks and Nuns lived most filthily and
dishonestly. Pene omnis religio, and (...) dicti or dinis, ac Dei timor
abscessit, likido ac corruption carnis inter ipsos mares and moniales, nec non
alia multa mala excessus and vitia, quae pudor est effari, per singula
succreuerunt. The Pope himself was ashamed to speak all. Let them also peruse
the treatise called Onus Ecclesiae cap. 22. who says, that Monks and Friars
are worse then devils. Aretin lib. de hypocritis, Baptist. Mantuan lib. 3.
calamit. Palingenius in Leone, and that which I have cited out of diverse
authors, lib. de Monach. cap. 8. If they desire to hear some men's reports of
them, let them listen to that which follows. (...) palatium (says
Luithprandus, lib. 6. cap. 6.) sanctorum hospitium, nunc est prostibulum
meretricum. The palace of Lateran (says he) that was wont to be a harbor of
holy men, is now become a bordell for whores. Petrarch in his 16. epistle,
speaking of the Popes court, says thus: Nulla ibi pietas, nulla charitas,
nulla fides, nulla (...) reuerentia, nullus timor: There is no godliness, no
charity, no faith, no reverence or fear of God. In his (...) Epistle, he
calls it a den of thieves. Mantuan li. 2. fastor. wills chastity to be
packing into villages, if that they did not also suffer the same diseases, for
that Rome was become a public stews. I pudor in villas, sinon patiuntur
easdem, and villae vomic as: vrbs est iam tota lupauar. Cardinals (says
Brigit) give themselves 4. Brig. 49.
without restraint to all pride, covetousness, and delights of the flesh. And
afterward, Iam nunc in maiori veneratione habetur lupauar; quam (...) Dei
Ecclesia. Now the stews are in more esteem, then the true Church of God.
Bishops and priests should build the Church, but as Brigit says, they build 3.
Brig. 10.
the devil two cities, to wit, the labor of the body, and trouble of the mind.
Catherina of Siena c. 125. says, Religious men should resemble Angels, but are
worse then devils. Platina writing of John the thirteenth, says, He was a man
from his youth contaminated with all filthiness and dishonestie. Writing In
vita Greg. 6
of three Popes, he calls them three foul monsters. By the articles and
proofs exhibited against John the three and twentieth, in the Council of
Constance, as it is called, it appears he was wholly given to vices and
carnal desires, and was convicted to be an incestuous person, and a Sodomite.
Vrspergensis testifies against Clement the fifth, that he was a notorious
fornicator. Matthew Villani hist. lib. 3. ca. 39. speaking of Clement the
sixth, and his continency, says, that being Archbishop he could not keep
himself from women, and being Pope neither could contain nor hide his fault.
Innocent the eight, and Alexander the sixth, had diverse bastards, as
Guicciardine and diverse others report. Paul the second, Julius the second, Leo
the tenth, Clement the seventh Paul the third, Julius the third, are all noted
for their looseness of life, and diverse of them convinced thereof by their
bastards.

Symony and usury among the Romanists is so common, that as Matthew. Paris says,
they account the first no sin, the second a small sin. Felin in c. ex part de
offic. and pot. iudicis delegat. says, that without the rent of symonie the
Popes sea would grow contemptible. Priests in time past were wont to exclaim
much of this abuse. Heu Simon regnat, per munera quaeque reguntur, says one in
hist. citiz. Pauli Langij. Theodoric. a Niem. lib. 2. de schism. c. 7. Usura
(says he) tantum inualuit, vt foenus non putaretur peccatum: that is, Usury
did so prevail, that it was accounted no fault. Paul the fourth, and Pius the
fourth, set up shops of usury, as their acts testify, and Onuphrius records.

Neither the Popes nor their adherents observe oath or promise, as their acts
do at large show, and many poor Christians brought into snare by their
perfidiousnesse have felt. Theodoric. a Niem. lib. 3. de schism. speaking of
Pope Gregory the twelfth says, that with his vows and oaths he deceived the
world. Votis and iuramentis suis decepit mundum. Gregory the seventh contrary
to his oath took upon him the papacy, as is recorded in the life of Henry
the fourth. He did also absolve all the Emperors subjects from their oaths of
allegiance to their sovereign Prince. The like practice did Pius the (...)
use, in discharging the subjects from their oaths to the late Queen. The
articles of the pacification of Gant anno 1578. were confirmed by solemn oath
of the old King of Spain, and yet presently and wilfully broken. Neither had
the Popes faction in France any better color to entrap poor Christians, then
oaths. For whiles the Admiral and diverse of the religion in France trusted
solemn oaths, they were brought within danger, and most cruelly and
perfidiously massacred. Neither need we to marvel if this sect observes no
oaths, seeing in the conuenticle of Constance the same determined, that faith
was not to be kept with heretics, in which number they reckon all that yield
not to the Popes will. The Doctors of this sect hold, that the Pope can
dispense with oaths, and absolve men that are perjured. Finally, those that
have traveled France, Italy and Spain, do know that the common sort of
Papists can (...) utter three words without swearing and blaspheming.

The Popes and their faction have caused all the wars and troubles in
Christendom, as histories do recount. If a man do but look in the life of
Sixtus the fourth, and Julius the 2. he may easily see what seditious and
turbulent spirits they carry. But what need we look so high, seeing the flames
of civil discension in Germany, France, Flanders, England and Ireland, burning
so bright by the solicitation of Paul the third, Pius the fifth, Gregory
thirteenth and fourteenth, and this Clement that now possesses the throne of
Antichrist, do so plainly declare them to be firebrands of war and trouble?
Well therefore said Petrarke, that in Rome all those mischiefs were hatched,
that are now spread through the world: and never shall Christian Princes have
loyal subjects, as long as seditious Mass Priests are suffered to lurk within
their kingdoms.

In countries subject to yt Pope, they count it a little fault to murder me^,
and now from thence are come certain assassins, which for hire and by
persuasions are induced to kill men. There also impoysonments are most common.
The Popes themselves use to drink of poisoned cups, and that by the just
judgment of God, seeing by the cup of their poisoned doctrine, according to
the prophecy Apoc. 17. they have empoysoned many Christian nations.

To conclude this large discourse, there is no state of men under the Popes
jurisdiction, but it is grown to great dissolution and corruption of manners,
and may be convinced of diverse sins and abominations by infinite witnesses
and confessions if we would stand upon it: but I will content my self with two
or three. Breidenbach in the history of his peregrination, speaks generally
and says, Recessit lex a sacerdotibus etc. that is, the law is departed from
priests, justice from princes, counsel from elders, good dealing from the
people, love from parents, reverence from subjects, charity from prelates,
religion from Monks, honesty from young men, discipline from clerks, learning
from masters, study from scholars, equity from Judges, concord from citizens,
fear from servants, good fellowship from husbandmen, truth from merchants,
valor from Noblemen, chastity from virgins, humility from widows, love from
married folks, patience from poor men. O time! o manners! And Walter Mapes that
lived in the time of Henry the second, King of England, Virtutes cunctae (says
he) en iacent defunctae: All virtues lie now dead. Charity is no where to be
found. And again, In truth I find that the whole Clergy does study
wickedness and impiety, envy reigns, truth is exiled. The prelates are
Lucifers heirs. They being now advanced tread down others, blind guides they
are, and blinded with idolatry of earthly things. Robert Bishop of Aquila in
his Sermons, of which Sixtus Senensis makes mention in the third book of his
Biblioth. sanct. speaks thus to his country of Italy: O Italia plange, o
Italia time, o Italia cave, ne propter obstinationem tuam in te desaeuiat ira
Dei, etc. Tu in dies (...) efficeris in peccatis, and malitia perseuerando.
Fiunt iam (...) vsur ae publicae, omnia foedata sunt spurcissimis vitijs carnis
and ignominiosae Sodomiae: superbia pomparum iam occupauit omnes civitates and
terras, (...) Dei, periuria, mendacia, iniustitiae, violentiae, oppressiones
pauperum and similia superabundant. O Italy (says he) lament, o Italy fear,
o Italy beware, lest for thy obstinacy the wrath of God wax not cruel
against thee, etc. Thou every day art more and more hardened, perseuering in
thy sins and maliciousness. Every where men set up banks of usury: all
things are defiled with most foul vices of the flesh, and most shameful
sodomie. Pride in pompous shows have now filled cities and countries:
blasphemies against God, periuries, lies, injustice, violence, orpression of
the poor, and such like vices do superabound. I would further insist upon this
argument, but that I refer diverse matters over to the second book, where I
shall have occasion more particularly to examine the good works of Papists.

But the Church of England neither allows public shows, nor banks of
usury, nor dispenses with oaths of subjects to Princes, or allows
perjury, nor shall Robert Parsons find such filthiness and abominations among
the professors of our religion, as are commonly practiced by yt Popes,
Cardinals, Mass Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nuns, and their followers. All
corruptions in doctrine concerning good works are reformed, and diverse abuses
concerning manners among the Papists taken away. The which seeing it proceeded
wholly of that reformation of religion, which Queen Elizabeth of pious memory
wrought by her regal authority among us, we are most gratefully to accept
that work, and by exercises of (...) and charity to endeavor to show our
selves not unworthy either of our profession, or of so great a blessing.

Against this discourse Robert Parsons talks very scornfully, and says
first, that the experience of the whole world will deny, that good works are
fruits of our religion. But if he had been well advised, he would have
forborne to talk of experience. For whosoever has lived among those, that are
of our religion, and among Papists also, must needs say, that the lives of
Romanists are abominable, offending in whosedome, Sodomie, perjury, usury
and all impieties, and discharge us deterring and abhorring those vices, and
punishing them severely. Beside that, if he meant to win credit, he would not
talk of the whole world, being not able to name one honest man, that will
justify that which he talks.

Secondly, he says, our best friends renounce our works. And then alleges
an Epistle of Erasmus mentioned by Surius, and a Postil of Luther, and a
testimony out of Aurifaber. But first Erasmus is none of our best friends,
being in most points an (...), and a professed Mass Priest. And if he were our
friend, yet have we no reason to believe Surius a malicious enemy, and a base
Monk, hired to speak lies. Secondly, it is a ridiculous foolerie, where we
dispute of the fruits of the Gospel in England in Queen Elizabeth's days, to
bring testimonies of Luther and Aurifaber, that were dead before her time, and
speak of some of their country people. Thirdly, they speak not of the whole
(...) Church in Germany, but rather of some that albeit they disliked Popery,
yet did not sincerely embrace the truth. Finally, neither Luther nor Aurifaber
does charge his country people with such faults, as reign among Papists. He
must therefore seek some witnesses that speak more to purpose, and leave his
own treasons, filthiness, perjury, lying, gluttony, and drunkenness,
before he talk of good works.

Finally, he pratleth much concerning the merit of works. But if he had been
used according to his merits, then had the crows long ere this eaten his
carrion flesh. He (...) also, that we should give a caveat, to avoid
hypocritical oftentation, albeit any man should do good works. But this caveat
concerns him but a little, whose works are most wicked and odious, his
writings being nothing but either lying and railing libels, or fond and
trifling discourses of points of Popery, and his practices tending all to
murdering, empoysoning, sedition, war, and (...).

CHAP. XII. Of temporal benefits enjoyed by Queen Elizabeth's most happy
government.
BEside great success in affairs of the Church, God has also blessed the
people of England in civil matters, in regard that his name is truly called
upon by us: fulfilling that in England which he promised to the keepers of his
law by Moises. Benedictus eris (says Moises) ingrediens and Deuteronomy. 28.
egrediens. Thou shall be blessed in thy coming in, and going out. And again,
Emittet Dominus benedictionem super cellaria tua, and super omnia opera manuum
tuarum: benedicetque tibi in terra quam acceperis. That is: the Lord shall send
his blessings upon thy store houses, and upon all the works of thy hands, and
shall bless thee in the land, which thou shall possess. First, by her happy
entrance we were delivered from the yoke of the Spaniards, and from subjection
to foreign nations. A blessing very great, and which is promised to the
obseruers of Gods holy laws. The Lord (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 28.
shall appoint thee for the head, and not for the tail, and thou shall be
above, and not under, if so be thou will hearken to the commandments of the
Lord thy God, which I command thee this day. That is, God shall make thee
command others, and not to be commanded by others. Liberty is a gift little
esteemed, because free men know not the miseries of people subject to foreign
Lords. But if men would consider the difference of men free, and subject to
strangers and tyrants, they would prefer nothing before it. Pro liberate
Philippic. 10.
(says Tully) vitae periculo decertandum est. For liberty we are to contend,
albeit we should hazard our lives And again, Ibid.
It a (...) est recuperatio libertatis, vt ne mors quidem sit in liberate
repetenda, fugienda. So excellent is the recouerle of liberty, that we are not
to doubt to lose our lives for the regaining thereof. Contrariwise, it is an
indignity not to be suffered by any Englishman honorably minded, ye Spaniards
should reign over us. The Spanish government is very rigorous in Spain: but
in Flanders, Millan, Naples and the Indiaes the same is most tyrannical and
insolerable. Seeing then that by the happy entrance of Queen Elizabeth, the
Spaniards lost their footing in England, which they had already devoured in
their imagination, and both perfidious Marans, and the Popes bougerly Italians
were turned out to seek new countries, wherein to practice their fraud and
cruelty: why do we not continually renew our thanksgiving for so great
deliverance?

Her Majesty was always desirous of peace, and never made wars against any,
but being provoked, and forced thereunto for the defense of her estate and
people. Yet never did she take arms in hand, but she returned with victory.
The French entering into Scotland, and by that means intending to trouble
England, were forced to surrender Lies, and with scorn to return from whence
they came. Upon which great security ensued to both the countries.

When the Nobility and people of France were oppressed by the Popes faction,
that meant after they had (...) their purpose there, to (...) us in England,
(as in diverse Treatises they have declared) by her arms and mediation the
Christians there obtained good conditions of peace, if the adversaries (...)
had not broken them. Both with forces in New-hauen, and by other means she was
always willing to succor that distressed people.

By her support for the most part, the states of the low countries being in
danger to be deprived of their liberty, privileges and laws, and to be
tyrannized by the Spaniards, have long subsisted, and maintained themselves
against most cruel enemies.

Anno Dom. 1588. that fleet of Spaniards, which proudly they called the
invincible Armada, by her ships through Gods favor was chased, dispersed and
vanquished, and all the bragges of Spaniards and their assistants brought to
nothing.

Not long after, when she saw, that to resist the enemies malice it was
necessaire for her to follow the wars, she sent some forces to sea, which
albeit not great nor competently provided, yet did they possess the harbor of
Coronna take the base town, and defeat all the forces that were gathered
against them at the bridge of Burgos. The same also entered Portugal, and had
possessed it, if there had been good correspondence. Sir Francis Drake with no
great forces took S. Iago, S. Domingo, S. Augustine and Carthagena, and laid a
plot to take a great part of the Indiaes from the Spaniard, but that he
defended himself with bribes better then with ships or arms, corrupting
some that always overthrew most traitorously all attempts against him.

At Caliz her Majesty's soldiers burnt the kings fleet, took the town, and
had entered farther into the country, had not the Spaniard some as good friends
in our army, as the Queen.

Not long since the English together with the States soldiers overthrew the
Cardinals army between Newport and Ostend, to the utter overthrow of the
Cardinal, and the Spaniards in that country, if the victory had been
pursued. And now albeit coldly pursued, yet has it so broken his forces, that
he has lien idly ever since before Ostend, hoping rather by treaty, then by
force to prevail.

In Ireland the Lord Gray overthrew the Earl of Desmond, and cut the Italians
and Spaniards, that kept the fort at Smerwike, in (...). About ye time also
died Sanders the Popes Legate, and other traitors stirred up to rebellion by
the Pope and his agents.

Neither could D. Iuan d'Aquila keep his footing in Kinsale, albeit he had
with him many good soldiers and great advantages. Diverse times has the Pope
troubled her both in England and Ireland, stirring up first the Earls of
Westmerland and Northumberland, and then certain rebels in Norfolk, and
afterward procuring diverse seditious fellows in Ireland in hope of his
blessing to rebel. But his blessings have been turned into cursings, and all
his treacherous devises have come to nothing.

Finally, we find Gods promise to his people by Moses Deuteronomy. 28. verified in
her. For where he says, That God would make all his peoples enemies to fall
down before them, we see that all the Queens enemies fell before her, and that
the more they maligned her, the more God advanced her. Such reputation she wan
both with Christians and with Infidels, that al men had great respect unto her,
except such as maliciously oppugned her. The King of Poland and the
Transiluanian have received favor of the Turk for her sake, and her friends
great comfort in all their distresses.

Before the Queens time the Pope claimed a great part in the government of
England, challenging power to make Ecclesiastical laws, to send hither
Legates, to ordain and appoint Bishops, and in diverse cases to dispose of
Ecclesiastical livings, and those that possessed them. He did also levy
tenths and first fruits, and by procurations, licenses and Bispensations drew
great sumines of money out of the realm. In some cases he took upon him to
judge the king, and to dispose of the crown of England. Hereof it follows
first, that the Kings of this land for some ages before King Henry the eight,
were but half Kings, neither meddling with the external government of the
Church, nor being authorized to rule their Clergy, or to dispose of their
livings. Secondly, that they held that poor half of their kingdom, which
remained at the Popes pleasure, and no further, as appeared by the insolent
dealing of the Pope with King Henry the second, and King John, out of whose
hands the Pope had almost wrested the scepter of their royal authority. But
her Majesty abolishing the (...) power of the Pope, freed her self and her
successors from his tyranny, and restored that power and jurisdiction to the
Crown, that was by his craft and fraudulent dealing long usurped. She found
that it belonged to godly kings to make laws for religion, to rule their
subjects, to dispose of the affairs and goods of the Church according to
right. So did Constantine the great, and other godly Emperors. So did Charles
the great, and Jews kings of France. So did Alfred and S. Edward Kings of
England: as the laws of the Code and Novel constitutions, the constitutions
of Charles and Jews, and of the ancient Kings of England declare. Neither
before Pope Heldebrand, or rather that firebrand of hell, did any Pope take
upon him to give out laws or decretals for the government, either of the
whole Church, or the Churches of other kingdoms. For this matter therefore
Queen Elizabeth's name deserves to be had in perpetual remembrance, for that
she freed her self and her subjects from the Popes wicked laws and
usurpations, and restored the ancient privileges and dignities to the Crown.
The which had been much in a man, but in a woman was much more glorious.

With her also peace, which by the practices of the Spaniards had been exiled
to our loss and shame, returned again into this land. For finding this land at
variance with France, and forsaken of Spain, she (...) means to compound with
France, and began to settle matters at home. According to the Prophets
admonition, she sought peace and Psalm. 34.
followed it. And such success has it pleased God to give her, that although
the Pope by diverse practices has sought to raise discord and rebellion within
England, yet maugre his head, we have enjoyed peace this (...) and forty
years to the great contentment of her subjects, and the wonderment of the
world. For who wondreth not that France and Flanders and other our neighbor
countries being in a flame and the Pope desiring nothing more then to set our
country on fire, that the moderation of a woman should maintain her State in
peace, when great Kings could not keep their state from being consumed with
wars? (...) great this benefit is, both the commodities of peace and the
miseries of wars may teach us. Et nomen pacis dulce est, says Tully, and
ipsa res salutaris. The name of peace is sweet, and the thing Philippic. 2.
it self safe and commodious. Neither does a people more desire De leg. Agrar.
contra Rull.
any thing then peace, as he says in another place: and in peace not only
those to whom nature has given sense, but also houses and fields seem to
rejoice. Quid est tam populare ac pax? qua non modo ij quibus natura sensum
dedit, sed etiam tecta atque (...) videntur? Contrariwise, wars work
destruction of men, cities, countries, and as Tully says, have Philippic. 2.
uncertain events: and nothing is more execrable then civil wars. Tully
(...) him unworthy to live among men, Philippic. 3.
that delights in civil discord and war.

By means of long peace, this land is also grown to great wealth. The country
is better cultiuated, trade is much increased, all arts and occupations grown
to greater (...) then in time past. Noblemen and Gentlemen have doubled their
revenues, Yeomen and Merchants aspire to the degree of Gentlemen, and diverse
men of occupation do exceed men of their sort in former times. Whosoever
compares the common people of England with men of their quality in Spain,
Portugal and Italy, must needs confess, that in wealth and means our country
men do far exceed them.

Finally, never was England so populous and strong in men, as in our late
Queens days. Spain and most places of Italy seem desolate in comparison.
That these are great blessings, it cannot be denied. For God promises increase
of substance, and men, to his people as a blessing, Deuteronomy. 28. Blessed shall be
the fruit of thy body, (says Moses to the people of God) and the fruit of
thy land, the fruit of thy cattle, the flocks of kine and sheep. And the
multiplication of Abraham's posterity, Genesis 17. and in diverse other places was
accounted to him as a great blessing.

Wherefore as often as we look back to former times, we cannot choose but call
to mind those graces which we have long enjoyed by Queen Elizabeth's means,
and be thankful unto God for them. If any be either unmindful or unthankful,
if he be English, I doubt not but he will prove a traitor to his Prince and
country; if a stranger, then he will show himself an enemy. In the the first
rank I place Robert Parsons, in the second, certain malicious Italian and
Spanish Friars. But their discourses, wherein they would denigrate her glory,
are so fond and (...), that they do rather illustrate the same. To show that
her Majesty had no power in foreign countries, Parsons alleges, that since
Calice was lost, we had not one foot of our own beyond the 1. (...). cap. 11.
nu 7.
seas. As if none could have power or credit in foreign parts, but such as
have cities and dominions of their own beyond the seas, or as if it were not a
sign of great power that her forces by sea and land have always been able to
(...) the ambitious aspires of the Spaniard, and the cruel rage of Antichrist,
and that her authority has swayed much in foreign parts, both with friends
and enemies. Again, that the English have lost their footing beyond the seas,
and were shamefully driven out of Calice, which was reputed the key of the
kingdom of France, and a door whereby the Kings of England were wont to enter
into that kingdom, it was not our fault, but of that unfortunate woman Queen
Mary, that lost all, and had no good success in any thing, and of her
butcherly Clergy, that were murdering of Christ's lambs at home, while
foreign enemies oppugned the state abroad, and would suffer no succor to be
sent over in time.

He talks also very idly of large Provinces possessed by the English living
under popish religion, and of the loss we have sustained by change of our old
mighty and honorable allies, as he calls them. For the relikes of those
large Provinces were lost not by Queen Elizabeth, but by that unhappy woman
Queen Mary, and her bloody and butcherly priests. Moreover, if King Philip
fell at variance with us, the same was not the Queens fault, that kept good
correspondence with him, albeit he betrayed her to the French at her first
coming to the crown, and succored the rebels of the North anno 1569. and
conspired with that louzie Friar Pius the fifth to overthrow her. Neither have
we lost any thing, but rather gotten by his falling from us, being united to
the Low countries, and able to master him at the sea, if the king of England
will be pleased to follow his advantage.

He charge her further with supporting rebels, heretics, and Atheists, and
obiecteth unto her, familiarity with the Turk. But neither shall this railing
companion, and principal proctor of popish traitors, rebels, and atheists
prove them rebels, whom she has succored: nor can the Spaniard justly
challenge her in this course, beginning himself first, and falling out with
her for the Popes pleasure. As for that contract which her Majesty had with
the Turk, it was only for trade of merchandise, as the articles will show;
and not for amity. And yet if by this means she had any credit with the Turk,
she used it to the good of Christians, as the Polonians and Transiluanians can
(...). But king Philip ended his wars with the Turk to fight against
Christians. And therefore no marvel, if upon his death bed he confessed, that
he never reaped other fruit of his travel and expense, but sorrow and loss.

To show that peace was no ornament of Queen Elizabeth's 1. Encont. (...). 11.
nu. 5.
praise, he says: we have had more stirs within this seventy years, then
in a thousand years (...). But he should have spoken of tumults and stirs in
her reign: for that is the time we speak of. Again, he should have declared,
that these stirs have proceeded from us, and not from wicked Popes, that have
been the firebrands to set all Christendom on a flame. For if by wicked Popes,
and their agents, rebellions were stirred in Yorkshire and Lincolneshire in
king Henry the eight his days, and in Cornwall and Devonshire, and other
places in the reign of king Edward, and in the North, and Norfolk, and Ireland
in Queen Elizabeth's days; then are they to be charged for these disorders, and
not we. But suppose great stirs had been raised before Queen Elizabeth's
time; yet that was her commendation, rather then disgrace, that she was able
notwithstanding the malice of traitorous Mass Priests, to govern her
countries a long time peaceably, which her ancestors could not.

He does also talk very impudently of the patience of Papists: as if their
mild and bearing natures, and not the Queens moderation, had been cause of our
long peace. But the storming of the butcherly Prelates at the Queens first
coming to the Crown, the rebellion in the North, anno. 1569. the Norfolcian
stirs, the practices of Allan with the duke of Guise, of Allan, Englefield,
and diverse other traitors, with the Pope and Spaniard for an invasion, anno
1588. of Parsons and others 1597. the conspiracies first of Parrie, then of
Throckmorton, then of Someruile and Arden, then of Ballard and Babington, and
afterward of Lopez and Squire; and finally the (...) and bloody wars in
France and Flaunders do show, that they neither are mild, nor patient, nor
seek any thing else, but murder and (...). If then any patience they have had
at any time, it is, as the French men say, the patience of Lombardes, that rest
when they cannot move stirs. Furthermore it is apparent to the world, that
the Queen was wholly resolved to follow peace, never taking arms, but when she
was constrained, and refusing to accept of the Low countries offered into her
hands, because she would not intricate her self with wars, albeit she might
with great honor, and safety have accepted them long before.

Having nothing to allege against her Majesty's peaceable government at home,
he tells us, that she has had almost perpetual war with all our neighbors
round about us. But neither does he speak truly, the attempts of Newhauen, and
Lies, being of short continuance, and her Majesty not entering into the Low
countries quarrel before the year 1586. Nor to purpose, our discourse
concerning principally the Queens peaceable government at home. (...) this,
the forces her Majesty employed in the Low countries were so small, and the
course so (...), that the action does scarce deserve the name of wars, being
with so little trouble to our nation, and intended rather to resist a few
cut-throates, that sought to murder men, then the army of a king, that sought
with force to subdue a country by just wars. As for the Spaniards (whom
Parsons ridiculously calls our surest allies, although they have without
cause dealt against us, as (...) enemies) they can not say, but the Queen
dealt justly defending her self against public enemies, that sought her
destruction, and the overthrow of her people.

To prove that the land has not increased in wealth in 1. Encountr. cap. 11.
the late Queens time, he obiecteth, that the Nobility and Gentry keep not
so great houses, nor families, as in times past. But the witless fellow
speaks against himself. For the less is spent, the more remains. But that
many are able to keep as great houses as in time past, it cannot be denied.
Further if he knew the state of the country, he might know that many houses
are built and kept, where in time past there was neither housekeeping nor
house. He tells us further of tributes, and other duties. But his talking and
dealing therein is but frivolous. For compare all that is paid in subsidies and
other duties with former payments, yet is it not half of that, which was
exacted by (...) Pope, and spent in superstition and vain devises. But were
our subsidies greater; yet being bestowed upon our own soldiers and people,
the land is never a whit the poorer, but rather poor men employed by those,
that can well spare all which they give, and more.

Finally, he would insinuate, that increase of people is no blessing, seeing
the Turks by multitude of wives have many children, and holy Cunuches are
commended that have no children. He does also under hand (...) at the marriage
of Ministers. But first, he denies that, which the spirit of God does directly
teach, viz. that children are the blessing of God, and that God did promise the
multiplication of his seed to Abraham as a great blessing. Secondly, albeit
particular men that keep themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven, are
commended: yet that concerns the lecherous and bougerly Mass priests and
Monks nothing, that rather for swear marriage, then keep themselves chaste.
Neither is that a commendation to a whole State or kingdom, if some live
chastely.

Thirdly, albeit Turks have many wives; yet God does not so bless them with
children, but that they are compelled to use the children of Christians, and to
exact a tribute of them. To conclude, this bastardly fellow shows himself to
be past shame, to talk against marriage, when himself was begotten by a
filthy priest, and his consorts wallow in all beastly abominations.

Wherefore let the adversaries storm and rage as much as they list, yet will
we say, and may say it most truly, that both the Church of God and the State
has received great blessings by Queen Elizabeth's late happy government. And
if nothing else, yet the vain opposition of enemies and traitors may persuade
us, that it is so. For not only their (...) do (...), that both the Church and
State was well ordered, (for otherwise they would have been better pleased) but
also their vain ianglings and contradictions, they being not able to object
any thing, which sounds not to her Majesty's honor and high commendations,
confirm the same.

CHAP. XIII. Parsons his cursed talk of cursings of England by change of
Religion, and government under Queen Elizabeth, examined.
THe Prophet David speaking of the foolish and wicked men of his time, says,
that their throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 14.
and afterward; that their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. The which
we see verified in the Pope, and his impious sect. For their throats are wide
as the (...), and swallow the wealth of Europe. They also degorge out of them
all the wickedness and villainy they can devise against the godly. Pius
Quintus and (...) Quintus accurse the Queen, Robert Parsons following their
(...) raileth upon her in diverse libels. In his Warn-word that is a complement
of his foolery, he says, We received no blessings by her, but rather cursings.
Here therefore we are to answer the barking of this cursed hel-hound, and of
his accursed companions.

In the first encounter of his Wardword p. 4. he (...), We are divided from the
general body of catholics in Christendom. But this should have been proved
if he would have any man to give him credit. For we allege, that the Papists,
from whom we are divided, are no Catholics, believing the new doctrines of the
late conuenticles of Lateran, Constance, Florence and Trent, and other Friars
and priests, which neither were received of all men, nor in all times, nor in
all places, which is the true property of Catholic doctrine. Next we offer
to prove, that we are true Catholics, seeing the doctrine of our faith is
Apostolical, and universally approved of all true Christians, and for the most
part confessed by the Papists, until of late time. If then this be a principal
curse, to be divided from Catholics, then does the same fall on Parsons his
own head, and upon his treacherous consorts, and not upon us.

Secondly he says, that we of England are divided from Lutherans, Zuinglians,
and Caluinists abroad, and from Puritanes and Brownists, and other like good
fellows at home. But this common Iergon of Papists is already answered. For
neither do we acknowledge the names of Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Caluinists,
nor cau he show that the Church of England is divided from the Churches of
France, Germany or Suizzerland, or that one Church oppugneth another. If any
private man do maintain private opinions in (...), as diverse Germans, French,
and English do, or else if there be any difference among us concerning
ceremonies and (...), that does no more make a schism in our church, (...) the
diverse rites of Spanish, French, and Italians, and diverse opinions in all points
of religion between old and new Romish Doctors, makes a schisine in the Romish
Church. For generally we all agree in substance of faith, and in rites and
ceremonies refer every Church to their liberty. In England publicly there is
more uniformity in doctrine, prayers and ceremonies, then in the Romish
Church; albeit some private men, whom Parsons uses to call Puritanes, dissent
in some points. As among the Papists there are diverse that allow not all, which
they hold commonly. But says he in his Warne-word, Encont. 1. c. 15. the
French, Germans and Scottish do not agree with the English in the rule of
faith, as is proved in the four, five and six and sequent chapters. But if he
had found any differences, he would not have spared to set them down. In the
chapters mentioned, he shows not that we differ in any article of faith, or
substantial point of religion, but rather in rites, ceremonies, and some
diverse interpretations of some words of Scripture.

Thirdly, he would make his reader believe, that we have no certainty in
religion, and that as he foole-wisely imagines, because we have no certain
rule whereby to direct our consciences. And this he handles both in his
Wardword 1. Encontr. and Warnw. 1. enc. c. 15. and 16. and other places,
skipping like an ape up an down without rule, order or reason. But while he
talks of the rule of faith, he is direct contrary to himself. For in his
Wardw. p. 6. he says, that the universal Church was the direct rule and squire
which we ought to follow, and in the Warnw. Enc. 1. c. 15. nu. 10. he teaches,
that it is the sum and corpse of Christian doctrine delivered at the
beginning by the miracles and preachings of the Apostles. Where I omit to tell
Robert Parsons, that it is absurd to make the same thing to be a rule and a
squire, the rule being direct, and the squire being square. It is also
ridiculous, though I do not tell him of it, to say that Christ's doctrine was
delivered by miracles: for it was delivered by writing and preaching, and
confirmed by miracles. But I cannot for bear to tell him, that there is great
(...) between the Catholic Church and the Catholic doctrine. How then can
these two make one rule? Next he takes exception to my words, where I say that
the Church of England has a certain rule to follow in matters of faith, as if
she canon of scriptures, and those conclusions which are to be drawn out of
them, were no certain rule: or else as if traditions, that are no where
certainly described or set down, were a more certain and authentical rule
then scriptures, and necessary deductions out of them.

Fourthly he gives out, that we despair of all certain Warnw. 1. encont.
cap. 17.
rule or mean to try the truth: which is a most desperate and impudent kind
of dealing. For directly I told him before, and now I tell him again, that our
rule is most certain, being nothing else but the canonical Scriptures, and
the conclusions necessary drawn out of them. Nay this rule may in part be
confirmed by Parsons his own confession. For if the corpse of Christian
doctrine preached by the Apostles be the rule of faith, as he says VVarnw. 1.
encont. c. 15. where are we to find it but in holy Scriptures? He holds
percase that it is to be found in the Popes bosom. But if he say so in
schools, he shall not want a greater plaudit then he had, when having ended his
comicall dealings in Bayliol college, he was rung and hissed out of the house.
For who knows not, that scabs and villainy are rather to be found in the Popes
bosom, then any corpse of (...) doctrine? for that is very rife with them.
With the corpse of Apostolical doctrine the Italian atheistical Popes are
little acquainted.

We tell him further, ye for trial of any point of doctrine we are not to run to
the Popes sea, which is as much able to resolve us, as his close stool; but to
the word of God revealed in Scriptures, and if there be any difference about a
place of Scriptures, we are then to compare the same with other places, to
search the resolutions of Councels, of ancient and later Fathers, of the
Church of England and learned men. Provided always that nothing be received as
a ground of faith, which is not to be deduced out of ye word of God. Whether
then S. Augustine, or Hierome, or Ambrose, or Luther, or Calvin, or any
preacher among us bring us the word of God, it is to be received. But if they
teach without that, we are not necessarily to credit them, nor to believe them
in grounds of faith.

Out of the Scriptures we learn, that Christ has given some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers; albeit all particular
matters are not precisely set down. So likewise we are taught that these
words, this is my body, are most true, and that the sacramr^t is Christ's body
in a mystery or sacramentally, albeit how the Sacrament is called Christ's body
there may be some differences. Likewise out of Scripture we are taught, that
the King is the most principal man in his Realm, and not to be subject to any
other in external government, albeit every one percase understands not the
several points of his supreme authority. These differences therefore
notwithstanding, our rule of faith is most certain.

Fifthly he would insinuate, that as virtue, houskeeping, and true dealing is
much decayed, since her Majesty came to the crown, so pride in apparel, (...),
drunkenness, lechery, swearing and other vices are much increased. But the man
should show that these virtues are decayed, and vices increased in men that are
truly of our Religion. If he say so, then let him name the men that are guilty
of these faults. If the men that are guilty be Papists, that for the most part
are known to be carnal and cruel, and most vicious, he strikes himself and
not us. If they be Atheists or hypocrites, then his allegation makes not to
purpose. This I will speak to his teeth, that if our Ministry be no more
honest and virtuous, then the Popes, Cardinals, Friars, and Mass Priests, and
our true professors then zealous Papists, it were pity they should live on the
face of the earth. Some proofs I have brought before, and more I shall allege
herafter. Let Parsons do the like against us, and leave his hypocritical
oftentation, and general declamation, that makes men rather to wonder at his
impudency, then to believe that he deals truly or sincerely.

Sixthly, he very impudently imputes all the troubles, Ward w. p. 3.
wars and calamities that have happened in Scotland, Ireland, Warn w. 1. (...).
(...). 18.
Flanders and France, to alteration in Religion, and would lay the blame wholly
upon us. But if he look into their immediate causes; he shall find, that the
mint of this money was the Popes consistory, and that he and his agents are
the only firebrands of all mischief. In Ireland, Gregory the thirteenth
stirred up rebellion by the traitor Saunders his legate: in England Pius
Quintus by his agent Ridolphi and by Morton his messenger moved the two Earls
to rise in the North, Anno 1569. The same Pope animated the Spanish King to
make wars against the Queen of England, and against them of the Low
countries. The same Pope sent not only his agents, to stir the French, but
aided them both with men and money. Gregory the thirteenth likewise sent aid
to Irish rebels. The wars of Germany were enflamed by that butcherly Pope
Paul the third. To make short, all massacres, trecheris, wars and troubles
have wholly proceeded from their malice against the truth. If the Pope and his
adherents therefore have been troubled, so was Herod and all Jerusalem with him
at the birth of Christ. If they blame us for their troubles, so did the Pagans
impute all their troubles to Christians, and their religion. But the true cause
was not religion, but the hatred of impious Papists against religion.

Finally, he says, that if her Majesty (...) not altered religion, then her
kingdom had been flourishing and secure, and that she would have had issue,
and her succession certain, and continued in friendship with the Pope, and
ancient confederates, and neither had wars abroad, nor treason at home: and
insinuates, that by reason of alteration of religion al is fallen out
contrary. But if Will Summer had written this discourse, he could never have
spoken more foolishly, nor impertinently. For first I have showed, that the
state of the kingdom for diverse respects was never more flourishing. Secondly,
if any danger hanged over our heads, the same might easily be avoided, if laws
had been executed against traitors. Thirdly, it is now apparent to the world,
that want of issue in her Majesty has not hurt us, God sending us so gracious
and magnanimous a king. Fourthly his royal Majesty succeeding in her throne
has declared, that she wanted no succession. The same act also shows, that
Parsons and all his consorts are a pack of false Prophets. Parsons his book
of succession does also declare him to be a false traitor. Fifthly, it is a
ridiculous thing to tell us of union with the Pope, and his mediation of peace.
For there ought to be no agreement between Christians and Antichrist. Here the
Noddie will storm, that his holy Father should be called Antichrist. But let
him answer my reasons in my fifth book De Pont. Romans against Bellarmine; and
then let him storm, while his heart break. Sixthly, we have so little loss by
breaking with the Spanish king, that all men of knowledge pray, that either he
may change his former courses, or that the wars may still continue. Finally,
this land has no reason, either to fear foreign wars, or domestical
treasons, unless we will uncouple the Popes hounds, that come hither to tear
the kings Majesty and State in pieces: which I hope he and his Council of
state will look unto.

Whether then we look into the Church, or the State; we must needs say, that
Queen Elizabeth's reign was most happy. And that so much the rather, for that
all her adversaries wit and malice does not afford any one sound argument,
that does any way sound to her disgrace. Robert Parsons has long barked in
vain against her proceedings. But he should remember, that the end of mad
barking curres, is beating, if not hanging.

The second Book, showing the miserable estate of Papists both in England
under Q. Mary, and elsewhere under the Popes irreligious tyrrannie, weakly
defended by N. D. in a lewd Libel entitled the WARNE-WORD.
The Preface to the second Book.
THE nature of man being subject to change, it is no marvel (good Christian
Reader) if naturally all men desire change. But that such as profess religion,
and have experience in the world, should desire to change for the worse, and
seek from liberty and peace, to return to miserable captivity and slavery,
under the grieuousyoke of popish government, it seems to me not only
strange, but also repugnant to the rules of religion and reason. Stand fast
(says the Apostle) in the liberty, wherewith Christ Gal. 5.
has made us free; and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. And
Tully would have men contend for liberty unto Philip.
the death. The poor slave in Plautus could say, that all men had rather be
free then bond. Omnes profecto (says he) liberi libentius In Capt.
sumus, quam seruimus. Yet such is the overthwart humor of some men, that
rather then they will continue long in one, and the self same settled state,
will not doubt to hazard their life and liberty, upon hope of better hap in
a new government. The children of Israel had not long continued in the
wilderness, after their wonderful deliverance out of Egypt, but they began
to murmr upon the first pinch of hunger. And all the congregation of the
sons of Israel (says the Scripture) murmured against Moses and Aaron in the
wilderness, and the sons of Israel said unto them, would to God we had died by
the hand of God in the land of Egypt. So much it grieved them, to remember
their bellies, which were wont to be filled in Egypt, not remembering the
slavery wherein they once lived, nor the land whereto they were going.

So likewise some there are among us, that not knowing, or not remembering the
grieuances of the popish government, nor well considering their present
freedom, and happy state, look back to Rome, and the Popes golden promises,
and rather will venture their souls and bodies, then still enjoy that liberty
and freedom, which they have received from their ancestors. Of this sort are
first a sort of rinegued English fugitives, that run to the Pope and
Spaniard, and are by them persuaded to become sacrificing Priests and traitors,
and secondly such, as are seduced by them, all of them drinking of the golden
cup of the whore of Babylon, and as if they had drunk of Circes cup, from
men being transformed into beasts, and brutish Papists.

Wherefore to reclaim these haggard English if it be possible, and to stay the
stirring humors of others,, as I have in the former Treatise recounted diverse
excellent graces bestowed upon our country and nation, by means of the pious
and prosperous government of our late Queen, that broke down the altars of
Baal, and established Christ's true religion among us; so now in the Discourse
ensuing I purpose by Gods grace to enter into a due consideration of the
calamities and miseries, whereto our nation was subject during the reign of
Queen Marie, and whereto all Papists living under the Popes jurisdiction are
ordinarily subject. Wherein that I may proceed more perspicuously, first I
will speak of matters of the Church, and then of matters of civil policy:
and that first as they concern the King, and next as they concern his people.

Now because Robert Parsons according to his best skill indeuoureth to advance
popish government, I have thought it not amiss now and then, as the course of
my Discourse carries me, to enterlace his idle arguments, and to refute them.
Not that I suppose any man of reason will give credit to such a lying
companion, that shutting his eyes against light, commands his tongue to
walk and talk against all truth, but that by his trifling objections you may
perceive our plain dealing, and his parasiticall and palpable glosing. I may
well say of this wicked Atheists wranglings, as Origin said of Celsus in his
discourse against Christian Religion: Non est periculum, Lib. 1. contra Celsum.
vt eis subuertatur vllus fidelium. Absit enim vt inueniatur aliquis in
charitate Dei, quae est per Christum Iesum tam frigidus, vt Celsi verbis, aut
similium dimoueatur a proposito. There is no danger, least any faithful man be
overthrown by them. God forbid that any should be so cold in the love of God,
which is through Christ Jesus, that he should be disturned from his godly
purpose by Parsons his wrangling Wardwords and Warne-words, or by such
frivolous devises of any of his consorts. But as the Apostle says, All have
not faith. And many want both the love of God, and the love they ought to bear
to their Prince and country. Against these I dispute, and for those I labor
that persist in their first love. Mark therefore, I pray you, the ignorance of
Papists in matters of Religion, the falsehood and absurdities of their doctrine,
the burdensome and grievous tyranny of the Pope; and then judge without
partiality, whether the same be not like the captivity of Babylon, and
darkness of Egypt, out of which all true Christians ought to desire to be
delivered. God grant all men grace to see it, and avoid it.

CHAP. I. Of the ignorance both of the Clergy and Laity of England in matters
of Religion in Q. Mary's time, and generally of Mass Priests and their
followers at all times, and in all places.
BEfore I enter to discourse of Religion, first I am to show the misery of
Papists, that for the most part lived in time past, and yet live without the
knowledge of Religion. Nay diverse of the Mass Priests and common people were
ignorant and deuoyd of all good learning and knowledge. The ignorance of
priests and people in the days of John Peccham Archbishop of Canter bury, may
appear in that he begins his provincial constitution with ignorantia
(...); and teaches C. ignorantia. de sum. Trin.
them the articles of the Creed, and how to handle the sacrament of the altar,
showing them, that the wine given to the communicants in lesser churches, was
not consecrate, and that they were not too much to break the sacrament with
their teeth (percase for hurtiing of it) but to sup it up. Instruant eosdem,
(says he c. altissimus. constit. de sum. trinit.) sumptum ore sacramentum non
nimis dentibus comminuere, sed tritum modice sorbere perfect. O miserable men,
that were taught to sup the sacrament like an oyster! And why might they not
as well be taught to eat wine, as to sup bread?

The same man in the chapter Ignorantia sacerdotum. de officio Note that this
is a common text among the Papists.
Archipresbyteri, thinks it sufficient for priests to teach by themselves, or
by others, and that once every quarter, the articles of the Creed, the ten
commandments, the two commandments of the Gospel, (for this fellow scarce
believed that the jove of God or his neighbor, was commanded in the moral
law) the seven works of mercy, the seven deadly sins, the seven principal
virtues, and seven sacraments. And what was this quarter teaching? for sooth
nothing else but the construing or expounding of these things in English, as
the text says, Absque cuiuslibet subtilitatis textura fantastica, without any
fantastical patcherie of scholasticall subtilties. For that ordinarily these
fellows were wont to talk of logical and philosophical questions, tending
rather to the subversion, then the edification of the hearers. Now what
learning I pray you was required to turn the Creed and ten commandments into
English?

Bishop Walter also in his provincial constitutions, teaches his priests what
to believe of confirmation and extreme unction: which argues great rudeness
in his disciples.

In Queen Mary's days it was thought sufficient for priests to read Latin:
not one among twenty understood Latin. Bonner in the first convocation in
Queen Mary's days, in his oration in praise of priesthood, told the priests
that they were creators of their Maker: yet few of them could construe the
canon, and few of them understood it. Their gross ignorance is yet fresh in
memory.

The Germans complain, that Bishops advanced unlearned Grauam. 47.
idiots, unfit, vile and ridiculous fellows to the function of priesthood.
Episcopi (say they) saepenumero indoctos, idiotas, inhabiles, vilesque ac
ludicr as personas ad sacerdotij functionem ordinant. Neither may we think
they spoke this of malice. The Onus Eccles. cap. 23.
Bishop of Chems says, the people is seduced by blind guides which are
ignorant idiots, presumptuous, covetous, hypocrites, symonicall and luxurious
persons. Again he says, that Bishops Ibidem.
admit men unworthy to charges, without all choice or due examination. Indignos
beneficiatos admittunt, absque omni delectu, and debita examinatione instituunt.

Uenalitate curiae Romanae (says one) inaniter praeficiuntur lenones, Aureu^
speculu^ in Anulog.
coqui, stabularij aequorum, and pueri. Through the briberie of the court of
Rome, bawdes, cooks, horsekeepers, and children are preferred to government
in the Church.

Aluarus Pelagius lib. 2. de planct. eccles. art. 20. shows, that the Bishops
of Spain deal no better then others, ordaining men unlearned and unworthy,
and indiscreetly committing charge of souls to men insufficient. Episcopi
alicui nepotulo suo, (says he) committunt multa millia animarum, cui non
committerent duo pira. Bishops commit many thousand souls to some little nephew
(or bastard) of theirs, to whom (if they did right) they would not commit two
pears. How learned the priests were, we may imagine, when few of them could
well say their Mass, and few understand it. We may see in the cap. retulerunt.
did. 4. de consecrat. that some could not rehearse the words of baptism, but
said In nomine patria, and filia, and spirita sancta. Platina wondreth at the
ignorance of the priests in matters of Religion. Speaking of priests in
Marcellino: Quanta ignoratio (says he) cum suijpsius, tum doctrinae
Christianae?

Neither may we marvel at the ignorance of mean priests, when the Popes
themselves are utterly unlearned. Laziardus writing of Gregory the sixth, Epit.
cap. 183. has these words: Vt dictum est, alium cum esset rudis literarum,
secum consecrari fecit: He made another to be consecrated with him, being
himself void of learning. Constat plures Papas (says Alphonsus a castro lib.
1. aduers. haeres.) adeo illiteratos esse vt grammaticam penitus ignorent. He
confefseth that some Popes are so unlearned, that they are utterly ignorant of
grammar. And that may be exemplified by Julius the second, that for fiat said
fiatur, and by other Popes. Paul the second, and Julius the third and diverse
others are by their own friends reported to have bin but simple clerks. Felin
in c. si quando. de rescriptis. says, that the Pope cannot be deposed for want
of learning. Papa propter defectum literaturae non potest deponi.

But were they learned, yet unless they be learned in holy Scriptures, and
teach their flocks committed unto them, their learning is to the people
unprofitable. For like idol shepherds they do nothing, but possess the room
and places of shepherds. The Popes, albeit they claim the title of universal
Bishops, teach (...), having contrary to the example of Peter and other Bishops
of Rome given over the office of feeding and teaching, and now only famishing
and destroying the Lambs of Christ. Rapis and depraedaris a me innumerabiles
animas (says Christ to the Pope in Brigits revelations) nam quasi omnes qui
veniunt ad curiam tuam mittis in gehennans ignis, ex (...) quod non diligenter
atlendis ea quae pertinent ad curiam meam. Quia tu es Praelatus and (...) ouium
mearum, ideo culpa tua est, quod non discrete consideras ea, quae ad
spiritualem salutem earuns sunt facienda and corrigenda. That is, Thou do
ravish and take from me innumerable souls: for thou sendest to hell almost all that come unto thy court, because thou attendest not those things that belong
to my court. Because thou art a prelate and a shepherd of my sheep, therefore
it is thy fault that thou do not discreetly the things that for their souls
health are to be done and performed. And again: Papa qui clamare deberet
(says Brigit) venite and inuenietis requiem 6. Brig. 96.
animarum vestrarum, clamat, venite and videte me in pompa and ambitione
plusquam Salomonem. Venite ad curiam meam, and exhaurite bursas vestras, and
inuenietis perditionem animarum vestrarum. The Pope which ought to cry, Come
and you shall find rest to your souls, cries, come and see me advanced in
pomp and ambition above Solomon. Come unto my court, and emptic your purses,
and you shall find the destruction of your souls. Occham in the second book
of the first part of his Dialogue, confesses the ignorance and unskillfulness
of Popes in Scriptures, and says, that no Popes since Innocent the thirds time
were excellent in the knowledge of them.

Few Popes study the law of God, many study the laws of men, some study
neither, but give themselves to worldly delights. Quotidie perstrepunt in
palatio leges, (says Bernard) Lib. 1. de consid.
sed Iustiniani, non Domini. Daily laws sound in thy palace, but the laws of
Emperors, not of the Lord. But now it is far worse. For neither law nor reason
is there to be heard, but all is governed by the Popes will. Is it not then a
riviculous thing, that the Pope should be called ye chief pastor, that feeds
not all, and that he should be made the chief (...), that in matters of faith
has neither learning nor judgment?

Likewise the Cardinals, popish Bishops, and prelates are both unlearned and
(...). For their learning I refer my self to experience, and to diverse
histories that record their notorious ignorance. Their defect in preaching is
notoriously known. There be few of them, but would take great scorn of it. So
far are they departed from the steps of their auncesters. Lois Mersilius an
Augustinian Friar, as says Poggius, being asked what the two points of a
Bishops miter signified, answered, the old and new testament. Being asked
further, what the two strops mean that hang down from the miter on the
Bishops back, said, that the Bishops knew neither old nor new testament. In
ore Episcoporum (says he that wrote the treatise titled Onus Ecclesiae, est
lex vanitatis pro lege veritatis: The law of vanity is in the mouth of Bishops
in stead of the law of truth. They should build the Church of God, but as
Brigit says, they build the 2 (...). 10.
devil two cities. Catherine of Siena cap. 129. says, that unprofitable
pastors do not drive the woolues from the sheep: for that they want the dog of
conscience, and staff of justice. She says also, that they feed not their
sheep in the pastures of salvation, nor lead them the way of truth. Quid
hodie e^rant Episcopi, (says the Cardinal of Arles in the meeting at Basil)
Syluius de gestis council.
nisi vmbrae quaeda^? Quid plus eis (...) quam baculus and mitra? Basil. lib. 1.
What are Bishops of our time, but shadows? What remains to them more then a
staff and a miter? If any be more studious then other, (...) it is not in
Scriptures, but in laws, and matters of state and story.

The Mass priests in time (...) used not to study Scriptures, nor to preach.
It was sufficient for them, either by themselves or by others, to expound in
English the Creed and Law and some few things more, and that only at four
times in the year, as appears by the chapter Ignorantia sacerdotum. de
officio Archipresbyteri in our provincial constitutions. Now to do this, little
learning was required, and less understanding. Clerks (says Math. Paris in
the life of William the Conqueror) were then so unlearned, that those that
understood grammar were a wonderment to their fellows. Adeo literatura
carebant, vt caeteris esset stupori qui grammaticam didicisset.

The Friars were then the only preachers, (...) whose teaching the edification
of the popish Church wholly relied, unless percase some will suppose that faith
may come by gazing on the priest at Mass, or on the crucifixe and dumb images,
which as the prophet says, are teachers of vanity. But these Friars were for
the most part unlearned, as the sermons of Menot, Maillard, Bromeyard and
others will testify. Secondly, they preached (...) in Aduent and Lent, and some
few extraordinary times. And thirdly, the ground of their sermons were either
fables or else philosophical positions, or idle questions little tending to
edification, or matters for their own profit. And finally, they came without
lawful (...), to teach lies rather then the truth, to destroy rather then to
build, to make a schism and division, rather then to reduce men to love,
unity and concord.

Dante shows, that the Friars of his time wrested scriptures, Ca. 29. parad.
and little regarded them. Quando e posposta la diuina scrittura, and quando e
torta. Again he says, they desired their own glory, and preached their own
inventions, hiding the Gospel in silence.

Per apparer ciascun s'ingegna, and face
Sue inuentioni, and quelle son trascorse
Dapredicanti e'luangelio sitace.
He tells us, that they tell fables, and feed ignorant and simple people with
wind.

No ha in Fiorenza tanti Lupi and Bindi,
Quante si fat fauole per anno
In pergamo sigridan quinci and quindi
Siche le pecorelle che non sanno,
Tornan dal pasco pasciute divento.
Agnellus general of the Minorities, hearing the Doctors Chronic. Citizens.
Long.
dispute whether this proposition, there is a God, be true, exclaimed against
this manner of dealing, and detested such questioning.

Cornelius Agrippa speaking of school doctors, says, that De vanit. scient.
c. de Theolog. scholast.
for the Gospel and the word of God, they preach mere toys and humane words,
preaching a new gospel, and adulterating the word of God. Pro Euangelijs and
proverbo Deimeras (...), and humana verba crepant, (...) euangelium,
adulterantes verbum Dei.

Likewise does Orthuinus Gratius in (...). ante lib. Petri de Alliac. de
reform. (...). speak against schelasticall Divinity, saying, that the same is
ingenious to lay burdens on men's souls, and again cunning in devising
excuses for sin. Est ingeniosa cum ad aggrauandas conscientias, tum rursus
adinueniendas excusationes in peccatis multo solertissima.

Robertus Gallus vis. 34. says, that the Friars preaching idle and curious
questions, were designed by a vision, wherein a man appeared laden with bread,
but gnawing a long stone with a snakes head appearing at either end. Which
resemblance is not altogether (...), seeing those that leave the instructions
of Scripture to scanne such endless questions, leave bread to gnaw a stone,
being in the end stung with their own curiosity.

Seeing then that the preaching of popish Doctors is so mixed with idle tales,
endless questions, and philosophical discourses; what profit can thereof
redound to the (...) of God? Quid Athenis and Hierosolymis? (says Tertullian
de praescript. aduers. haeret.) quid Academiae and Ecclesia? What concord is
there between Athens and Jerusalem? between Philosophers schools, and the
Church?

Cardinal Prat Archbishop, as he calls himself, of Decret. c. 36.
Sens in France in his visitation made a law against such preachers, as like
vile buffons rehearsed ridiculous old wives tales to move their auditorie to
laughter: which shows that this was wont to be a common fault. Their
preaching was also very contentious, and full of quarrels, one calling another
heretic, schismaticke, sacrilegious, false Prophet, and ravening wolf; and
endeavoring to prove the same by Scriptures and arguments: as appears by the
testimony of the Waldenses in their confession to Ladislaus.

Vbertinus affirms, that the locustes mentioned in the Apocalypse of S. John,
do signify the begging (...), because they are scurrilous, and light
skip-iackes, live (...), and gnaw the Scriptures. Quia scurriles, leaves,
volatiles, carnales, rodentes sacras literas.

Commission for their preaching these Friars can show none. The Apostle, where
he talks of pastors and teachers, and other Ministers of the Gospel, leaves
no room Schol. Paris. apud Matthew. Paris.
for such vermin. The Doctors of Paris say, that Friars come without
canonical mission, that they preach against the truth of Scripture, that they
brag of their knowledge, and preach for gain. How then is it like, that such
fellows can build the Church of God? Can we look for truth at the hands of
false Prophets, or edification by them that come without calling? In the
prophecy of Hildegardis we read, that the principal study and endeavor of
these false teachers shall be to resist true teachers, and to bring them to the
slaughter by their intelligence with great men.

Seeing then the Papists have no other teachers, then these false Apostles, or
rather seducers, and hear nothing but tales and idle questions; it is not
possible they should profit by such Sermons. Much less therefore is it likely
they should grow in knowledge, seeing neither their leaders are desirous to
teach them, nor they to learn of their teachers.

Linwood speaking of the articles of the Creed, says, It C. ignorantia de
sum. Trin. in Gloss.
is sufficient for lay and simple men to believe them with an implicit faith,
that is, to believe as the Catholic Church does believe them. Alijs (says he)
qui sunt simplices, vel laici sufficit, quod credant eos (scil. Articulos
(...)) implicit, id est, sicut docet and credit sancta Ecclesia catholica. He
says also, that such knowledge is sufficient for Clerks, that have no means
to maintain themselves at school, as some suppose. But suppose they could say
the articles of faith, and believe them, and the rest which Peccham in the
constitution, ignorantia. (...) officio Archipres. does require at their hands;
yet should they be very ignorant. For a man may believe, as the Church
believes, and yet know nothing, nor be able to answer to any point of faith.

Thomas Aquinas 2. 2. q. 2. art. 6. compares Gods people to asses, and their
teachers to oxen, holding, that it is sufficient for them in matters of faith
to adhere to their superiors, because it is said, Job 1. Quod boues arabant,
and asinae pascebantur (...) eos. Whereby it appears, he requires no great
knowledge at lay men's hands, but would have them believe, as their teachers do,
without further enquiring. He fetches his proof out of Gregory. But whence
soever he draws it, he uses Gods people very rudely, that compares them to
asses and oxen. Yet thus much I am content to yield, that the Mass Priests and
their followers are like oxen and asses firmly linked together by the Popes
cow-heards and muleters, for the devil their masters service.

The same man 2. 2. q. 2. art. 5. teaches, that lay men are to believe all the
articles of the Creed, and no more, explicit. The which is no point of deep
learning, and yet his scholar Siluester in sum. in verb. fides 6. will not
allow so much, saying, that it is not necessary for a lay man to believe all
the articles of the faith, but as much as is sufficient to direct us to the
last end. Nec tamen necesse est cuilibet, (says he) explicit credere omnes
articulos fidei, sed quantum sufficit ad dirigendum in vltimum finem.

The author of Summa Rosella says, that it is sufficient for Apud Siluest. in
verb. fides.
simple people, and percase for lay men coming to years and discretion, to
believe, that God is a rewarder of all good, and a punisher of all evil. And
that other articles are to be believed implicit, that is, believing all to be
true, which the catholic Church teaches. Simplicibus and forte omnibus laicis
discernentibus and adultis sufficit credere Deum esse praemiatorem bonorum
omnium, and omnium malorum punitorem: alios autem articulos sufficit credere
implicit, credendo scil. verum, quicquid Ecclesia catholica docet. But beside
that this is an argument to prove the adversaries allowance of the peoples
extreme ignorance, it is false and blasphemous to say, that any man may be
saved without notice or believing in Christ, as the author of Summa Rosella his
words imply.

Loath the Pope is, that the people should know too much: and therefore he
forbids Scriptures to be either translated, or read in vulgar tongues
without license. In public Liturgies it is not the fashion of Papists, to
suffer the (...) to hear Scriptures read in vulgar tongues.

The Papists also that understand not Latin pray with their lips, but not
with their understanding and spirit. For the Popes pleasure is, that the
public Liturgy of the Church shall not be read in vulgar tongues: whereupon
the people must needs grow dull and ignorant. John Billet in prolog. lib. de
divine. offic. complains of this abuse. Quid nostris te^poribus est agendu^,
says he, speaking of reading of Latin service, vbi nullus vel rarus reperitur
legens vel audie^s, qui (...), videns vel agens qui animaduertat? iam videtur
impletum quod a Prophet a dicitur: Et erit saccrdos quasi de populo vnus. He
says, that there are few or none, that read or hear, that do understand or
mark what is read or heard: and that the saying of the Prophet is fulfilled:
That the priest shall be like one of the people.

Costerus says, That God and the Saints understand all In Enchirid. c. de
precib.
languages, and therefore, that it is sufficient, if the people pray in Latin.
Which as it is blasphemous, making Saints (...) recitand.
present in all places, so it is an argument, that he requires little
understanding in the people.

Hosius commends the Coliars faith, that could not tell In confess. Petrik.
one article of his belief, but only answered, that he believed as the Church
believes; which is an argument, first of the commendation of ignorance among
the Papists, next of Hosius his blasphemy, that would have a man saved,
believing as does the Catholic church, albeit he believed, or knew nothing of
Christ Jesus.

Seeing then the Papists require so little knowledge in the people, and will not
suffer them, either to pray, or-to have Scriptures read publicly in vulgar
tongues, and preach so seldom and so leudly; is it likely that they should
prove great clearkes?

Furthermore, the Priests in England were commanded to teach the people the
worship of the cross, of images, of relics, and how far the same reaches,
as appears by B. Arundels provincial constitution beginning (...). de
haereticis.

They were also taught, what manner of men were S. Austin of Canterbury, S.
Bernac. S. Dunstane,, and such good fellows. And were wont to hear many good
tales of the miracles of S. Audrey, and S. Cuthburge, and other she Saints. But
all this tended little to instruction in faith, or reformation in manners.

Finally, in stead of true doctrine they were taught the traditions of men
concerning worship of Saints, crosses, images, relics, fasting on Saints
Uigils, pilgrimages, indulgences, purgatory and such like. Petrus de Alliac.
lib. de reform. Ecclesiae, wishes, That Apocryphal Scriptures, and new
hymns, and prayers, and other voluntary novelties should not be read in
churches: Quod in huinsmodi festis Scripturae Apocryphae, aut hymninoui, vel
orationes, seu aliae voluntariae nouitates non legerentur: but he prevailed
not. Nay further, they do not only teach false doctrines and Apocryphal
novelties, but also most wickedly rehearsing the commandments, they have left
out the second commandment that concerns worship of images, albeit S.
Augustine quaest. ex vet. test. 7. do set it down for a distinct commandment
from the first.

Being then taught very little truth, and much falsehood, it must needs follow,
that the Papists were in time past very ignorant; and that John Billet in
prolog. de divine. off. plainly confesses. Experience also teaches the same,
and manifestly shows that they scarce understood any article of the Creed. A
certain Italian being asked not many years since by his confessor in Rome,
whether he believed the holy Trinity: answered, yea. Being further demanded,
what the Trinity was: What (said he) but our Lord God, and our Lady, and you
our masters the priests and Friars? They are so brutish, that they verily
believe that images walk and talk, and have life. Certain parishioners of a
village Poggio.
not far from Florence coming to the city to bespeake a Crucifixe, the
caruer seeing the simplicity of the men asked them, whether they would have
one alive or dead. The parties after some deliberation answered, they would have
a crucifixe alive. For (said they) if the parish like him not, we will kill
him, and so rid our hands of him.

Most of them believe the lies and fables, that Priests tell them out of their
legends. And those are the best part of their knowledge. A poor country man
of ours believed, ye S. Tinnoc of Portle mouth in Deuon was a good guardian of
sheep: and therefore offered every year a fleece. On a time passing over the
water at Salcomb with his offering, and being in danger, vowed, if he escaped
to offer his horse, which he did, and the Saint with good glee and a beck
accepted him. But not being able well to return on foot, he prayed he might
buy his horse of the Saint. The priest was the broker and made the bargain,
but it was so hard, that the poor man said, he was a good keeper of sheep,
but a cut throat Saint to deal with all in buying and selling.

Commonly they neither understood what they prayed, nor what was said in the
Church, neither do they now understand much more, albeit the Priests in their
new and (...) Catechismes endeavor to teach them somewhat.

If men will not believe experience, yet let them read what Friars themselves
in their Sermons, and what others say in their writings. Vincentius in his
treatise De fine mundi, speaking of the people of his time, says:
Praedicationes non audiunt, articulos fidei nesciunt. They hear not sermons,
they know not the articles of the faith.

Robertus Gallus in his 32. vision says, that all children (except a few)
shall depart from their fathers, leaving the examples and admonitions of their
elders, and that worldly minds shall remain under counterfeit religion.
Apostatabunt filij omnes, exceptis paucis, a patribus suis, (...) vitas and
monita maiorum suorum, and sub palliata religione seculares animi permanebunt.

Brigit in her revelations says, That the works and words 3. Brigit. 15.
of Christ were so neglected, that few thought of them, or remembered them.
Opera and verba Christi sunt adeo neglecta, vt iam pauci ea recolant.

Hosius disputing against Brentius tells us of a Coliar, De authorit. Eccles.
that could answer nothing of his faith, but that he believed as the Church
believed.

We may therefore assure our selves, that the apostacy spoken of by the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. is plainly seen in the Romish church, and that the smoke,
that ascended out of the bottomless pit, like the smoke of a furnace, and
darkened the Sun and the air, as we may read Apocalypse 9. was nothing else
but the errors and ignorance of Papists, that covered Christian religion, and
obscured the face of the Church. Of this defection and darkness Robertus
Gallus does speak in his visions ca. 3. showing, that the church should be
overwhelmed with this darkness, and that the same should arise out of the
Church. Egressa est (says he) caligo illa ab Ecclesia.

Sol (says another) qui est spiritualis potentatus factus est niger, O^us
Eccles. cap. 19.
quia non serenum coelum, sed tetrum infernum aperit. Propterea peruersu^
Pontifex nuncupatur Angelus abyssi. The Sun which is the spiritual power was
made black, because he (the Pope) opens not the clear heaven, but black
hell. Therefore a perverse Pope is called the Angel of the bottomless pit.
And again: the seat of the beast, that is, the malignant Church, is in the
court of Rome, whose kingdom is dark.

Francis Petrarch in his seventeenth Epistle describing the court of Rome:
Nullaibi lux (says he) nullus dux, nullus index anfractuum, sed caligo vndique
and vbique confusio, ne parum vera sit Babylon, ac perplexitas mira, vtque
Lucani verbis vtar, nox ingens scelerum, tenebrosa inquam, and aeterna nox
expers syderum and aurorae nescia, tum profunda and iugis actuum opacitas.
There is no light there, no guide, no leader in turnings, but darkness round
about, and confusion every where, lest it should not seem to be true Babylon,
wonderful perplexity, and to use Lucans words, a great night of abominable
sins, I say, a dark and continual night, without starlight, or glimmering of
morning twilight; and a deep and continual obscurity of men's actions.

Most miserable therefore, and calamitous is the state of the Papists. For if
eternal life consist in the knowledge of God, and Christ Jesus, as himself
teaches us, Ioh. 17. what hope can they have, that are ignorant of God and
godliness; of Christ, and Christ's true religion? If they live in darkness,
and without light, that want the light of Gods word; then is the darkness of
popery great, where public prayers, and Scriptures read publicly are kept
under the cover of strange tongues, as a candle under a bushel. If the people
of God were led away captive, for that they wanted knowledge, as it is, Isa. 5.
what possibility have the Papists to free themselves from the captivity of the
devil and Antichrist, that are ignorant of religion, and led by the noses by
impostors, and false teachers suborned by Antichrist? Finally, if the people
perish, where there is no prophesying, as we read Proverb. 29. then are the
Papists in a most fearful and damnable state, among whom the word of God is
not sincerely preached, and to whom wicked Mass Priests and Friars for the
word of God preach humane devises and lies. The very heathen understood, that
the knowledge of God was the beginning, the cause, and rule of humane
happiness. (...) (says Pythagoras) (...) Apud Stobaeum.
(...). If then they understand not their misery, that want the knowledge of
God; they are more ignorant and less excusable then heathen people.

Against this assertion, I doubt not but Robert Parsons will take exception,
who in his Wardw. page 12. stormeth, when he hears us but once to mention the
ignorance of Queen Mary's times. But the matter is too manifest for him to
face out with big words. He tells us of Tonstal, Watson, Christophorson,
Fecknam, Gardener and White. But neither was the learning of these men
extraordinary, as some of their doings yet extant declare, nor was their
learning great in the true knowledge of divinity. Nor was this a good
consequence, these men were learned, therefore the people were also learned. For
these men seldom preached, and but to few, and to very little edification. He
adds therefore in the Warn-word (...). Encountr. cap. 6. that the learning
and skill of Doctors and teachers makes the people intelligent and skillful.
But that is, (...) they teach and instruct the people, which these did not.
There also he (...) us, (...) in other countries the common people, yea
children and babes are able to answer in Christian religion. But first this
concerns times past nothing. And next this fashion of (...) is but in few
places exercised, and by the Iebusitos in imitation of true teachers. For so
the devils ministers imitate Christ's Apostles. Thirdly, the Catechism of
Papists is nothing, but the Creed, the Pater noster, the Law, and seven
Sacraments, as (...) (...) his doctrine in his Italian Catechism: and of Aue
Maria, and other devises, as other Catechismes show. Fourthly, there is much
mixture of ceremonies and false doctrine. Finally, the Italians and Spaniards
are little wiser for this catechizing.

He tells us also in his Wardw. p. 12. of the profound learning of the
school-doctors in Spain and Italy, and says, We dare not once appear to
dispute with them. But neither makes the skill of the diverse sects of (...)
for the Priests or the people, that are not taught by them. Nor is their
learning skill in Scriptures or Fathers, which few of them read, as appears
by the confession of Ferdinand Vellosillo in his preface upon his aduertences
on the Doctors. Nor are there so many learned, as is pretended. True it is,
that they are now more diligent, then they were in time past, but it is rather
to suppress truth, then to teach truth. For they teach seldom, and talk of
vain speculations, and desire nothing, but that the people should be ignorant
in Gods word: which popish ignorance is now almost as much in Italy and
Spain, as in time past. God enlighten those nations, and make them once see
the truth, and understand their ignorance.

CHAP. II. Of the common works of Papists.
BUt may our adversaries say, albeit in time past men were not so learned; yet
they lived better then men of our times. And true it is that S. Augustine
says, That men Li. 3. conf. c. (...)
unlearned earnestly contend for heaven, while learned men without
understanding wallow in flesh and blood: if we understand it of those that
only had learned Christ Jesus and him crucified, and were unskillful in other
matters; and not of those rude and ignorant people, that albeit cunning in
worldly affairs, were notwithstanding utterly ignorant of Christ Jesus.
Wherefore as we have before proved the Papists to be commonly most ignorant of
divine matters, so now we will briefly touch their lives and actions, to see if
their manners correspond with their skill. And the rather I follow this course,
for that Schoppius tells us De (...).
of their brave works done in the times of Iubileys, and Robert Parsons is
ever talking of good works, as if that were the proper possession of his
consorts. Wherein I would not have any to think that when I name Papists, I
mean to speak against all our forefathers (who indeed positiuely held not all
points of popery, but rather professed Christianity positiuely, albeit they
did not resolutely deny popish errors) but only such as are the chief
founders, teachers, and maintainers of popish Religion, and which with great
zeal persecute all that resist it, or refuse it.

These fellows therefore, I say, have no cause to (...) or boast of their
works. For whether we look into the diversity of times or states of men, or
else consider every virtue and good work by it self, or look into the
countries drowned in Popery; I doubt not but we shall find the zelators and
chief pillars of popery very defective, and no way answerable to the
commendation which their hired Proctors do commonly give them.

For the times before the year of our Lord 1500, I have already alleged the
testimonies of Brigit, Pettarch, Catherine of Siena, Boccace, Breidenbach,
Hugetin, Robertus Gallus, Math. Paris, and diverse (...): unto which I will add
the testimony of Platina, Vspergensis and VVernerus. I need not say (says
Platina) how excessive the covetousness In Marcellino
of Priests is, and of those especially that are in principal places, nor how
great is their lust, ambition, pomp, pride, sloth, ignorance of themselves,
and of Christian doctrine, how corrupt their religion is, and rather dissembled
then true, and how corrupt are their manners, in profane men, whom they call
secular, to be detested, seeing they offend so openly and publicly, as if they
sought praise hereby. He says, their vices were Ibidem.
so increased, that they seemed scarce to leave any place for Gods mercy. And
in Gregory the fourth, In omnem luxum and libidinem se effundit (...) or do:
The Clergy (says he) does run headlong into all luxuriousness and lust. If
then the people follow such guides, we may well imagine in what terms the
Church stood in his time. Then began mischiefs to be multiplied, says
Vrspergensis, there sprang up hatred, deceits, and treasons. Heu, heu, Domine
Deus, (says Wernerus) In fasc. temp.
quomodo obscuratum est aurum, mutatus est color optimus! qualia contigisse
circa haec tempora, etiam in Ecclesia and sede Apostolica, quam vsque huc tanto
zelo, custodiuisti, legimus scandala! quales contentiones and aemulationes,
sectae, inuidiae, ambitiones, intrusiones, persecutiones! o tempus pessimum, in
quo defecit sanctus, and diminutae sunt veritates a filijs hominum! Alas, alas,
O Lord God, how is our gold obscured! how is the good color (or state of
things) changed! what scandals do we read to have happened about these times
in the Church and Apostolic see, which hitherto thou have with such zeal
preserved! what contentions and emulations, sects, enuies, ambitions,
intrusions and persecutions! o most wicked time, in which holy men are failed,
and truth diminished from the sons of men! He says also, that about one
thousand years after Christ, Christian faith began to fail, and that men gave
themselves to soothsaying and witchcraft.

The wickedness and profaneness of latter times, and of times present, the
Papists themselves must needs acknowledge. And yet because Robert Parsons
thinks so well of his consorts, I would have him to turn back to that which
is said already. Let him also read that which follows out of later writers.
Apud plerosque religionis nostrae In or at. ad
primores (says John Picus of Mirandula) ad quorum exemplum Leon. 10.
componi atque for mari plebs ignara debuisset, (...), aut certe exiguus Dei
cultus, nulla been viuendi ratio atque institutio, nullus pudor, nulla
modestia. Iustitia vel in odium, vel in gratiam declinauit, piet as pene in
superstitionem procubuit, palamque omnibus in hominum ordinibus peccatur, sic
vt saepenumero virtus probis viris vitio vertatur, vitia loco virtutum honorari
soleant, ab his qui suorum criminum quasi septa, and tanquam moenia, and (...)
petulantiam, and diuturnitatem impunitatem esse putauerunt. Amongst the most of
the principal men of our religion, says he, after whose example the ignorant
sort of people ought to conform themselves, there is either none, or but little
religion, no order or institution of good living, no shame, no modesty.
Justice inclines to hatred or favor, godliness is almost overthrown by
superstition, and al states of men do sin publicly, and in such sort, that
oftentimes virtue is a reproach to honest men, and vices are honored for
virtues, of those who have thought unusual insolency, continuance and
impunitie, to be the walls and defenses of their crimes. Afterward he taxes
the luxuriousness of all estates, the furiousness of lusts, the ambition and
covetousness and superstition of the Clergy.

Baptista of Mantua writing to Leo, has these words: Lib. fast. 4.


Sancte pater, succurre Leo, respublica Christi
Labitur, aegrotatque fides iam proxima morti.
That is, Help holy father Leo, the Christian common wealth is falling, and
religion is sick, and at the point of death.

Marcellus Palingenius in his book to Hercules Duke of Paling. Virgo
Ferrara, complains of a general corrupiton in the world.

Imo libenter, says he, Destituam hunc mundum innumerisque refertum
Fraudibus atque dolis, incestibus atque rapinis,
(...) vbi nulla (...); piet as vbi (...), nec vlla
(...), and (...); and (...), (...) crimina (...).
That is, Willingly I leave this world, full of innumerable frauds, deceits,
incests, rapines; where there is no true dealing, no piety, justice, peace or
rest, and where all sins reign. And again:

Et rura and siluae infames, vrbs quaeque (...).
Both cuntries and woods are infamous, every city is now a bordel. If we
consider the Popes, although they be called most holy, yet nothing can be
devised more wicked and flagitious. Sabinian that followed Gregory yt first,
went about to abrogate all his acts. His life was blameable (as says Werner)
and his end fearful. Of Constantine the second, he says, that he governed
with great scandal, and was the fifth infamous Pope. Not long after succeeded
John the eight, or as some count the ninth, that played the harlot being Pope,
and died in travel of childbirth: a matter most infamous, and not to be
excused with words, or any impudent denial of (...). Platina in the life of
Sergius the third, speaking of diverse Popes about those times: Hi vero
largitione (says he) and ambitione pontificatum quaere^tes, and adepti
posthabito diuino cultu inimcitias non secus ac saeuissimi quidam tyranni inter
se (...) suas voluptates postea securius exoleturi, cum nullibi extarent, qui
eorum vitia coercerent. That is, These men seeking the popedom by bribery and
ambition, and having gotten the same, neglecting the service of God, did
prosecute their enemies no otherwise then most cruel tyrants, purposing
afterward to satisfy their pleasures, when there was none to correct or
control them.

VVernerus of John the twelfth says, that he was totus lubricus, that is,
wholly given to lust. Platina accords with him in the man's faults, though he
reckon him ye thirteenth. Both agree, that he was slain of the devil. In the
life of Greg. the sixth, Platina calls 3. Popes, three most foul monsters.

Beno, Platina and others testify, that Siluester the second and Benedict the
ninth were Magicians, and gave themselves over to serve the devil.

Of Gregory the seventh, not only Beno the Cardinal, but also diverse others
report that he was a Necromancer, a murderer, a bloody and cruel man. The
Council of Brixia deposed him as a notorious necromancer, possessed with a
diabolical spirit, and an apostate from the faith.

After the times of Gregory the seventh, the Popes never ceased to trouble
Christendom, until such time, as they had overthrown the Roman Empire, and
made way for the Turk, and dissolved all good orders both concerning religion
and justice.

He that continues the story of Vrspergensis says, that Clement the fifth
was a notorious fornicator. Hic, vt habet Chronicon Hermanni, (says he) fuit
publicus fornicator.

Matteo Villani in his history lib. 3. cap. 39. witnesses against Clement
(...), that he kept the Countess of Turenna, and made no conscience of the
shame of the Church. Della vergogna della sancta Chiesa non sifece conscienza.

John the 23. was an incestuous person, a Sodomite and a most abominable
atheist, that believed not the immortality of the soul, as was proved in the
conuenticle of Constance. The articles and proofs are yet to be read in the
acts of that assembly, and reported by Peter Crabbe. Sixtus the fourth passed
Nero the tyrant in all cruelty and villainy.

Gaude prisce Nero (says one) vincit te crimine Sixtus,
Hic scelus omne clauditur, and vitium.
Of Innocentius the eight the common report went, that he begot of diverse women
sixteen bastards, eight males, and so many of the female kind.

Octo nocens pueros genuit (says Marullus) totidemque puellas.
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem.
He was otherwise given to gluttony, avarice, idleness, and all filthiness,
as Marullus records:

Spurcities, gula, auaritia at que ignauia deses,
Hoc Octaue iacent, quo tegeris, tumulo, says he.
Yet none of the rest may seem to compare with Alexander ye sixth, whether we
respect beastly life, or impious infidelity He wasted the world, (as one says
of him) overthrew law and religion.

Orbem rapinis, ferro and igne funditus vastauit, hausit, eruit.
Humana iura, nec minus (...), ipsosque sustulit Deos.
He had secret intelligence with the Turk, set Italy on a (...), by
empoysonment and practice took away men's lives, and beside harlots, of whom
he begot diverse children, he abused his own daughter Lucretia, as diverse
Historians report.

Such as these were, we find that Leo the tenth, Clement the seventh, Paul the
third, Julius the third, Pius the fourth, and the rest, have been accounted,
that is, men without religion or honesty. What Clement the eight now is, Rome
knows, and his decayed (...) speak. Therefore does Brigit bring in Christ
speaking to the Pope and saying, Why do thou hate me? why is thy boldness
and presumption so great? For so indeed they live, not as if they were ignorant
of Christ, but as if they did deadly hate him.

The Cardinals, which are the Popes assistants, would be loath to shame their
holy Father, and creator the Pope. And therefore albeit he excel others, yet
these sometimes excel him in all licentiousness and looseness of life. The
Cardinal Pietro Aldobrandini, and S. George, and Detti, the present Popes
minions I hope will say for me. To leave them to their friends, and to their
own consciences, let us look back to the Cardinals made by Clement the sixth.
Mattheo Villani in his third book, cap. 39. signifies, they had neither
learning, nor honesty. Sixtus quartus his nephew Petrus Riarius died young
spent with pleasures. Obijt, voluptatibus confectus, says Onuphrius. His
excess in gluttony and venerie by his own friends was much noted and spoken
of. Farnesius prostituted his sister to Alexander the sixth for a Cardinals hat.
Neither was he more infamous for baudrie, then for lechery, cruelty, and
unkind dealing with his kindred.

The Cardinal of Valentia killed his own brother and threw him into the river
of Tiber: and afterward being called Caesar Borgia proved the most infamous
monster, whereof there is any record in histories. Innocentius de monte that was
Julius the thirds Ganymedes, was made Cardinal for a reward. What manner of men
Hippolito de Medici, and the young Cardinals made by Leo the tenth were, let
the stories report. Brigit says, that sometime justice dwelt in 3. Brigit. 21.
Rome, but now her princes were murderers. And 4. Brigit 49. Cardinales
extenti, and effusi sunt ad omnem superbiam, cupiditatem, and delectamentum
carnis. That is: Cardinals are excessive in all pride, covetousness, and
delights of the flesh. Aluarus Pelagius, lib. 2. de planctu Eccles. art. 16.
speaking of Cardinals, says: That in riches they are increased, but much
diminished in piety. Aucta est possessio, diminuta religio.

The Prelates, Monks, Friars, and Nuns, follow the steps of their leaders.
Aluarus Pelagius having reckened up many faults of popish Bishops, known to
the world, as admitting men unworthy, using negligence in their calling,
wanting knowledge, and such like, he says, they offend privily, yet so as it
may be easily seen, in uncleanness of life, simonie, fraud, pride,
covetousness, and that they are not ashamed. Nay he says, they have a whores
forchead, Lib. 2. de planct. Eccles.
and declare their sins like Sodom. In occulto peccant per suas immunditias,
and Simoniacas pactiones, frauds, superbias, and inuidias, art. 20.
and auaritias, quae tamen a plerisque sciuntur. Nullam habent verecundiam
aliqui ex eis, sednec de eis in quibus public delinquunt. Imo in peccatis
gloriari videntur, vnde frons meretricis facta est eis. Nec de peccatis
erubescunt, and peccatum suum sicut Sodoma praedicauerunt.

The military orders of Knights professing religion, as Ibid. art, 23.
he says, tread their obseruances under foot with their fleshly Art. 25.
living, and serve the flesh rather then Christ Jesus. Monks degenerate from
their ancestors, conspire, wander, contend, live dissolutely. Priests live in
continently, give themselves to Ibid. art. 27.
witchcraft, entangle themselves in worldly affairs. Contra sanctam
castitatem, quam Domino promiserunt, (says he) sic offendunt continue, etiam
public, praeter ea nefandissima, quae in occulto perpetrant, quod nec chartae
reciperent, nec calamus possit exarare. No books (says he) can contain, nor
pen describe the unspeakable abominations which they commit.

Speaking of lawyers, soldiers, merchants, husbandmen, Lib. 2. de planctu
Eccles.
men and women he does reckon up such impieties, blasphemies, witcheries,
filthiness and abominations, frauds, oppressions and other faults, that it
seems impossible among the Gentiles and Turks to find worse men.

With him Brigit also concurreth, charging the Governors 3. Brigit 10.
of the Church with three notorious vices, that is, whoredom, avarice, and
prodigality. Tria facinora exercent Ecclesiae prouisores, (says Brigit) in
carne vitam meretricalem habent. Secundo sunt insatiabiles similes voragini
maris ad cupiditatem pecuniae. Tertio, bona irrationabiliter, and prodigaliter,
sicut torrens impetu suo aquam fundens, pro superbia largiuntur. She says
also, that as they ride great horses, so the devil rides them, striking their
breasts with his heels. Supra colla Praelatorum, qui pro vana gloria magnos
equos ascendunt, sedent Diaboli, and suis calcibus pectora little impellunt.

Catherine of Siena cap. 125. says, that religious men, pretend Angels life,
but for the most part are worse then devils. Religiosi collocati sunt in
religione, velut Angeli, sed quamplurimi sunt daemonibus deteriores. And
again: religious men are made the devils instruments corrupting religion
within themselves, and among their brethren, and without among lay men. 1.
Brigit. 41.


Of lay men Brigit gives no more commendation, then of the rest. Lay men
(says she) in Baptism and other Sacraments promise to serve God, but now they
are departed from God, as if they were ignorant of him. The word of God they
mock, and Gods works account as vanity: they say Gods commandments are too
grievous, they break their word and their oaths, they have left God, and
joined them selves to the devil, they seek their own things, and not those
which are Gods. Laicus dedit fidem in baptismate, ac in susceptione aliorum
Sacramentorum promisit se Deo seruiturum: nunc autem discessit a Deo, quasi
ignorans Deum: verba sacra habet pro ludibrio, opera diuina pro vanitate,
mandata Dei ait sibi nimis grauia, factus est fidei and promissi iuramenti
violator, derelinquit Deu^, and associauit se diabolo, propriam laudem quaerit,
and quae sua non quae Dei sunt.

Mantuan speaking of Mass Priests, says, that shepherds Alphons. lib. 6
hate their flocks and care not to feed them, but to sheare them and mock them
being so spoiled. Pastores odere pecus, nec pascere curant, sed tondere greges,
pecorique illudere tonso. And in his third book of Calamities, he says, they
are filthy, incestuous, and hated of God.

Inuisi superis, foedaque libidine olentes,
Heu frustra incestis iterant sacra orgia dextris.
Religious men also, as he says, have wooluish hearts, Lib. 3. (...).
and are defiled with great crimes.

Ouium molli sub vellere frauds (says he)
Mente lycaonias servant, and crimine sordent.
Palingenius tells us, that if we mean to keep our houses Leo.
undefiled, we must avoid Monks, Friars and al manner of Mass priests: he says
that there is no greater plague, that they are the scumme of the people, a
fountain of foolery, a sink of sin, wolves clothed in lambs skins, serving God
for hire, and not for religion, that they deceive simple men under a false
color of religion, and under the shadow of religion commit an infinite number
of wicked acts and villainies. Finally, that they are robbers, adulterers,
bougrers, and slaves of gluttony and luxuriousness.

Sed (...) (says he) praecipue non intret limina quisquam
Frater vel monachus, vel quauis lege sacerdos.
Hos fuge. Pestis enim nulla immanior. Hi sunt
Faex hominum, fons stultitiae, sentina malorum,
Agnorum sub pelle lupi, mercede colentes,
Non pietate Deum, falsa sub imagine recti
Decipiunt stolidos, ac relligionis in (...)
Mill actus vetitos, and mill (...) condunt,
Raptores, moechi, puerorum corruptores;
Luxuriae atque gulae famuli.
And this may be verified by the filthy lives of the (...) in England, which
enter into no house, but leave a filthy savor of their villainy behind them,
neither sparing the good wife, nor the good man's daughters, nor the servants of
the house, as partly the diverse confessions of the priests themselves and of
parties abused, and partly the depositions of witnesses and records do prove:
of which I would set down some here, but that I would not blemish any that is
repentant, nor touch (...) reputation of any simple Papist, but where I am
urged.

The same man does say further, that al is full of errors, fooleries and
flagitious crimes.

Hinc tanta errorum scabies (says he) tot stultitiarum Virgo.

Colluuies, hinc and tot millia flagi iorum.
But if Papists do so many good works, as Parsons pretends; let us see what
they are, and in what places they are done. First, works of true and sincere
religion they care not for. The Popes give over teaching, and busy them selves
not much with praying. Nay they persecute such as profess religion, and will
not suffer the vulgar sort to understand what they pray, commanding them to
pray publicly in tongues not understood.

Pontifices nunc bella iuuant (says Palingenius) sunt cetera nugae, Nec
praecepta patrum, nec Christi dogmata curant.

Prelates now delight in war, other things they esteem as toys, they
neither regard the precepts of their fathers, nor Christ's Religion.

Justice is slowly administered among them: for the Pope easily dispenses with
the breach of all Ecclesiastical laws, and gives absolution for most heinous
sins before, and sometime without all satisfaction. Vrspergensis speaking of
the days of Innocent the third, Exaltatum est cornu (says he) iniquitatis:
The horn of iniquity is exalted. He shows also, that then justice was sold
for money. In time past (says Brigit) 3. Brig. 21.
justice dwelt in Rome, and (...) princes were studious of peace, but now all
is turned into dross, and her princes are murderers.

Neither do they so many alms deeds, or deal so bountifully, that they need
much to brag of their liberality. Petrarch does call (...) covetous Babylon:
and says, that Cant. 107.
covetousness reigns there. Multo aequanimius ferunt millium Epist. 19.
(...) nom.
animarum iacturam (says Clemangis) quam december solidorum: De corrupt.
They had rather lose ten thousand souls, then ten shillings. Eccles. stat.


But percase by reason of their solemn vows they are chaste and continent.
Alas there is nothing more sensual and luxurious. Quis non moechatures (says
Palingenius, speaking of the Romish unchaste (...)) that is, Who does not offend
in luxuriousness? Huldricus does show, that this forswearing In Ep. ad Nic.
of marriage is cause of great uncleanness. Pelagius lib. 2. de planct.
Eccles. art. 27. says, that by reason of priests vows and licenciousnesse,
almost half the people in Spain are bastards. Speaking of priests, Nimis
incontinenter viaunt (says he) atque vtinam nunquam continentiam promisissent,
maxim Hispani and regnicolae, in quibus prouincijs in pauco maiori numero sunt
filij laicorum, quam clericorum. This I cite at large for the honor of bastard
Parsons, that is so well affected to some old bastard Spaniards.

Truth is no friend to such lying companions. What Epist. 16. (...) nom.
truth can be there (says Petrarch) where all is so full of lies? He excepteth
not the secret places of Churches, the seats of justice, nor the Popes throne.
Quis vsquam (says he) vero locus, vbi omnia mendacijs plena sunt? For their
fraud and lies, (...) calls priests and Friars impostors and crafty In Leone.
foxes.

Hos impostores igitur, vulpesque dolosas Pelle procul.
Neither can we commend them much for their clemency, albeit their Popes
sometimes affect the name and title of Clement. For they prosecute their
enemies as cruelly, as ever did tyrants, as Platina says in Sergio. 3. they
torment poor simple Christians, that touch their abuses and massacre them.
They are red with the blood of saints.

Finally, neither virtue nor piety shows it self in any of their actions.
What are then the good works that our adversaries so much commend in them
selves? Forsooth pilgrimages to Rome, oblations to saints, alms given to
sturdie Friars and Monks, building of Seminaries for rebellious youths, eating
of fish and to adstooles, and muscles on fasting days, vowing of virginity
and (...) life, whipping a man's self, doing penance by a Proctor, praying to
Saints, hearing of Masses, and such like. Nay they account it meritorious, to
massacre Christian Princes and others, when the Pope does excommunicate them.
But part of these works are flagitious, part (...), none good. If then they
allege us not their good works and prove them, their glory and boasting of
their works will prove vain and odious.

Finally, they must show us, where these works are done, for which the Papists
look to merit eternal life, and by which they claim justification. If they
say at Rome, as no doubt they will, calling the same the holy city, then we
shall wonder at their impudency. For that city both in regard of Priests, and
people, of all others is known to be Lib. Calam. 3.
most flagitious. Peter's palace (says Mantuan) is polluted, and rotten with
luxuriousness.

-- Petrique domus polluta fluenti Marcescit luxu.
And again:

Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara Cynaedis
Seruit, venerandae diuum Ganymedibus aedes.
The same man (lib. 4. fastorum) tells Leo the tenth, that he was to reform
three things: first, the bloody broiles of Italy: secondly, the poison of the
court of Rome that infected all countries: and thirdly, the abuses of religion,
that was much oppressed. The manners of Italy, Robert Bishop of Aquila
rehearses The sins of Rome are noted by Petrarch in his Sonnets beginning:
Fiamma dal cielo, and L'auara Babylonia, and Fontana di dolor, where he (...),
that she deserves to be consumed with fire from heaven, for her notorious
wickedness. Palingenius brings in the devil Capricorn.
affirming, that both the men and women of Rome were his, for that all did
apply themselves to luxuriousness, gluttony, theft, and fraud, contending who
should excel others.

Cuncti (...), (says he) atque (...), furtisque dolisque
Certatimincumbunt, noster que est sexus vterque.
If then pure religion is to visit the fatherles and widows in their
adversity, and to live an unspotted life in this world, as James the Apostle
teaches, then is not Popish religion true nor undefiled. If such as do the
works of the (...) described Galat. 5. shall not inherit the kingdom of God;
then is the state of Papists most miserable, unless they repent. They may say
to themselves, Peace, peace, and boast themselves, that they can do mischief.
But there is no peace to the wicked, neither shall their mischienous malice and
bloody massacres always escape unpunished.

CHAP. III. Of the erroneous, and absurd doctrine of Papists, concerning the
foundations of Christian Religion.
WHetched is the state of those, that live in (...) and ignorance, and without
the knowledge of religion and virtue. Ignorantia magnum malum, and as Tully
says, nescire turpe: It is a shame not to know. But not to know God, nor his
laws, is both shameful and (...). Qui ignorant, ignor abitur, says the
Apostle: that is, God 1. Cor. 14.
will not know him, that is ignorant of God. Yet far worse it is, to do
maliciously and wickedly, then only to live in ignorance and blindness. But
worst of all it is, to hold obstinately dangerous and false opinions, contrary
to the faith of Christ. If then beside their ignorance and leudnes, the Papists
hold diverse erroneous and false opinions concerning religion, then cannot their
estate be otherwise, then miserable. Let us therefore see, what they hold both
concerning the foundations, and also concerning diverse necessary points of
religion.

The Papists give out, that the Pope is the foundation, and the rock, upon
which the Church is built. Bellarmine lib. 2. de pontif. Romans cap. 31. talking
of the Popes titles says, that he is called a foundation, and that he is
fundamentum (...), the foundation of the building of the Church. In his Preface
before his books de Pontif. Romans speaking of these words of Isay, Ecce (...)
in fundamentis Sion lapidem, lapidem probatum, angularem; says, that these
words not unfitly may be applied to the Pope: as if he were that corner stone,
that is placed in the foundations of Sion.

Stapleton like wise in his Preface before the (...) of his doctrinall
principles, affirms desperately, that God speaks in the Pope, and that the
foundation of Christian religion, is necessarily placed in his authority
teaching us. It was much to say, that he was any way the foundation of
religion. But to make him a necessary foundation, was a greater presumption,
then I find in his fellows. His words are these, In hac docentis hominis
authoritate, in qua Deum loquentem audimus, religionis nostrae cognoscendae
fundamentum necessario poni cernimus.

Neither can any of them well deny, but that the Pope is the rocks, upon which
the Church is built, and against which the gates of hell cannot prevail,
seeing generally they prove the Popes authority out of Christ's words to Peter,
Mat. 16. For if these words be not meant of the Pope, but of Christ, whom Peter
confessed; then are they fondly alleged for justification of the Popes
authority.

In sum all their practice shows, that the Pope to them is summa summarum,
and the corner stone, and chief foundation of the popish Church. For allege
Scriptures, they quarrel about the interpretation, and admit no sense but that
which the Pope allows, although his glosses and interpretations be never so
contrary to the text. Again, allege Councels, they enquire, if the Pope have
allowed them. Allege Fathers speaking against the Pope, they reject them. But
allege the Popes determination, there they stop like restie iades, and will
not be (...) further. So the Pope and his resolutions are the foundations, nay,
they are all in all with Papists.

But this is not only contrary to the words of Scripture, Isay 8. and 28.
Mat. 16. and 1. Cor. 3. and Ephesians. 2. where Christ is made the corner stone and
sole foundation of the Church, but also contrary to all Fathers, and good
interpreters of Scriptures.

The same is also most absurd and contrary to reason. For first if the Pope
were the foundation of the Church; then should there be as many foundations, as
Popes. Secondly, the Church should be built upon foundations diverse from
Christ. Thirdly, the foundations of the Church should differ one from another,
one Pope contradicting, and crossing another. Fourthly, the Popes being
sometimes reprobates and damned, hell should prevail against the foundation of
the Church, which is most absurd. Fifthly, the Church during the vacation should
be without foundation, and a woman being Pope, the Church should be built upon
a woman. Finally, the Church should be built upon men subject to infirmities,
errors and mutations, and not upon Christ Jesus, the immovable rock.

The Conuenticle of Trent talking of the books of the Sess. 4.
old and new Testament, and of traditions as well concerning faith, as manners,
does receive both with equal affection and reverence, as it were either
delivered unto us, either by the mouth of Christ, or by the holy Ghost, and
kept by continual succession in the Catholic church. Omnes libros tam veteris
quam nouitestamenti, (...) vnus Deus sit author, nec non traditiones (...), tum
ad (...), tum ad mores pertinentes, (...) a Christo, (...) a Spiritu Sancto
dictatas, and (...) successione in Ecclesia (...) conseruatus pari pietatis
(...) ac reuerentia (...) ac veneratur.

Those likewise among the Papists, that proceed Doctors, or take any degree in
schools do profess, that they most firmly admit and embrace the traditions
of the Apostles, and the Church, and other ecclesiastical obscruances, and
constitutions. Apostolicas and ecclesiasticas traditiones, reliquasque eiusdem
Ecclesie obseruationes, and constitutiones firmissime admitto, says every one
of them.

Bellarmine lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 1. beginning to (...) of traditions,
hitherto (says he) we have disputed of the written word of God; now we will
begin to speak briefly of the word of God not written: accompting traditions
to be the word of God as well as holy scriptures.

Aliud hodie religionis Christian fundament (...) (says Stapleton) Praefat
ante relect princip. doctrine.
habemus, non quidem a Christo aliud, sed ab (...) Euangelicis and Apostolicis
aliud: That is, we have now another foundation of Christian religion, not
diverse from Christ, but diverse from the Evangelical and Apostolical
scriptures. So either he excludes scriptures from being the ground of
Christian religion, or else makes unwritten traditions equal unto them.
Afterward in his Analysis prefixed before his Doctrinall principles, delivering
to his disciples the grounds of Christian religion, he vouchsafes the
scriptures no place among them.

But (...), if (...) the books of the old testament they understand all the
books contained in the old latin vulgar translation of the Bible; then they
admit the third and fourth books of Esdras, and all additions to the original
text, to be canoniall scriptures: which (...) their own decrees concerning the
canon of Scriptures.

Secondly it is absurd to make unwritten traditions equal with the holy
Scriptures. For these are certainly known to proceed from God. But of
unwritten traditions the adversaries can bring no proof, but from men. Now who
is so presumptuous as to match the (...) of men with the word of God? Augustine
in his 48 (...) to Vincentius, speaking of the fathers writings, says, they
are to be distinguished from the authority of the canon. And in his eight
epistle which is to (...), he says, that unto the Scriptures alone this
prerogative is to be given, that none of them contains any errors. All other
authors he would have censured and examined by them, being not (...) from
errors.

The holy Scriptures are always consonant and agreeable to themselves. But
traditions do not only contradict one another, but also are repugnant to holy
Scriptures. Polycrates as Eusebius lib. 5. Eccles. hist. c. 23. reyorteth,
maintained the observance of the feast of Easter according to the practice of
the Churches of Asia to be according to the Apostles traditions: Victor and the
Church of Rome thought contrary. Some maintained the fast upon the Sabbath,
others denied it, and both held by tradition. Sieve hodie Christus natus est,
etc. whether Christ was borne or baptized as this day, says (...) sermon. de
not. to. 3. there is a diverse opinion in the world, and according to the
diversity of traditions, there are diverse judgments. The Romanists do found
their communion under one kind, and their Masses without communion, and the
external and propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, and the hanging up the
Sacrament in the Pixe, and the divine adoration given to it upon tradition. But
all these observations are impious, and contrary to Scriptures.

Some traditions are now abolished, as the prohibition of Saterdayes fast, the
rite of standing when we pray between Easter and Whitsontide, the forms of
prayer in old time used in celebration of the sacrament of the Lords supper,
and diverse others, whereof some are mentioned by Basil lib. de Spir. san. c.
27. Bellarmine also lib. 4. de verbo Dei, c. 2. confesses, that some
traditions were temporary. But it is impious to say, that the holy Scriptures
are temporary, or at any time to be abolished.

Diverse traditions are no where found, but in the Legends, Missals and
Portesses, and such books of small account and credit, as for example, the
ceremonies and rites of the Mass, the prayers of the canon, the formal
adoration of Saints and Angels, the incredible narrations of S. Clement, S.
Nicholas, S. Christopher, S. George, S. Catherine, S. Dominicke, S. Francis and
infinite other Saints: which no man may receive with like affection as he
receives holy Scriptures, but he shall infinitely disgrace the Scriptures, and
show him self to be no Catholic.

Furthermore, if the Papists build their (...) upon traditions, then is their
(...) humane, as having no ground but the testimony of this man and that man,
that speaks of traditions. Their faith is also most weak and (...), as being
built upon the lies reported in Legends, and the fantastical ceremonies
contained in the Missall and Breuiary.

The holy (...) are called the old and new testament, and the Apostle Ephesians. 6.
calls the word of God the sword of the Spirit. Writing to Timothy he says,
holy scriptures 2. Tim 3.
are able to make the man of God perfect and absolute, and wise unto salvation.
But howsoever the blind Papists favor their traditions, yet I hope they will be
ashamed to call their fardle of traditions Gods eternal testament, or the sword
of the spirit, or to say, that traditions are able to make the man of God
perfect, or wise to salvation.

Finally, no holy father did ever make Ecclesiastical traditions not written,
nor contained in Scriptures, but only commended by the Church of Rome, or kept
by custom, or taken up by fancy, and recorded only in humane writings of
equal authority with canonical scriptures. Infidelitatis argumentum est etc.
(says Basil) It is an argument of infidelity, In sermon. de fid confess.
and a most certain sign of pride, if a man will reject any thing that is
written, or bring in any thing not written. The like saying he has Moral. 72.
c. 1. and 86. and 22. Neither is it like that he should speak of traditions
repugnant to scriptures, as some do answer. For every Christian man knows,
that nothing is to be received contrary to Scriptures: and to admonish men of
that, had been superfluous.

Si quid dicatur absque scriptura (says Chrysostom hom. in Psalm. 95.)
auditorum (...) claudicat, nunc annuens, nunc (...). If any thing be spoken
without proof of scripture, the mind of the hearers rests in suspense, now
yielding, now denying. Neither does he speak only of a man's own invention,
but also of all other men's reports or devises without ground of scripture. In
his thirteenth homily upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, he
calls Scriptures a most exact rule. What need then have we of the additions
of traditions not written, if scriptures be a most exact rule?

Diabolici spiritus est (says Theophilus lib. 2. paschal.) aliquid (...)
scripturarum sacrarum authoritatem putare diuinum. It is a sign of a devilish
spirit to think that any thing is divine which is without the authority of
holy scriptures. What reason then has Bellarmine to call traditions the word
of God not written? Hierome in his commentaries upon the 23. of Ma thew,
speaking of a certain tradition: Quod de scripturis authoritatem non habet,
eadem facilitate (...), qua probatur: That which is not confirmed by authority
of scriptures, is with the same facility contemned, that it is proved. And
writing upon the first chap. of the prophet Aggey, he says, That the sword of
God does strike all those things, which men of their own accord do find out,
and feine as it were Apostolical traditions without the authority and
testimony of scriptures.

Ubi de re (...) disputatur (says Augustine lib. 2. de peccatorum merit. and
remiss. c. 36.) non adiuuantibus diuinarum scripturarum certis, clarisque
documentis, cohibere se debet humana praesumptio, nihil faciens in alteram
partem declinando. Where we contend about some most obscure question, there
man's presumption ought to stay it self, declining to neither side, if the
certain and clear documents of scripture help us not.

The next ground of the late Romish faith is laid upon the old latin vulgar
translation. For whosoever receives Sess. 4.
not the scriptures, as they are contained in the old vulgar latin translation
is pronounced accursed by the conuenticle of Trent. Again, the same
conuenticle purposing to declare what Latin edition or translation of
scriptures is authentical, determines that the old latin vulgar translation
shall be authentical, so that no man upon any (...) dare or may reject it: Vt
nemo illam reijcere quouis praetextu audeat vel (...).

Canus in his theological common places, as he calls them, doubts not to
affirm that the Jews have corrupted the Hebrew text of the old testament: and
this diverse other papisticall writers have also supposed. The gloss upon the
chapter vt veterum. did. 9. affirms plainly, that both Jews and Greeks
have corrupted the copies of scriptures in those tongues. But the old vulgar
Latin translation most Papists now hold to be sincere, incorrupt and pure, and
allow as authentical.

Bellarmine in his second book De verbo Dei, cap. 2. says, that albeit the
scriptures in Hebrew be not altogether corrupted, yet they are not sound and
pure, but have certain errors. Likewise lib. 2. ca. 7. speaking of the Greek
text of the new Testament, he says, that the same is not sound nor without
errors, and that it is not safe always to correct the Latin by the Greek.
But in the same book cha. 10. with all his force he endeuoreth to defend the
old Latin translation as authentical. The which is not only a plain
declaration (...) the weakness of the Romish faith, that is built upon so
corrupt grounds, but also of the absurd and unreasonable (...) of our
adversaries. The prophet cries (...) against the (...), that forsook God the
fountain of living water, and dug to themselves pits or cisternes that
could Ier. (...).
hold no water. Is it not then admirable that any should be so blind as to
forsake the original textes of Scripture, and to fly to the corrupt cisternes
of the Latin vulgar translation?

Hilary upon the 118. psalm says, That he has often admonished his hearers,
that the Latin translation could not yield satisfaction for their
understanding. Frequenter admonuimus (says he) non posse satisfactionem (...)
ex latinitatis (...) praestari.

Ambrose teaches us, that where there is contention about (...). 2. de Spir.
sanct. c (...).
the variation of Latin translations, there the Greek books are to be looked
upon. Si quis de Latinorum codicum varietate contendit (says he) quorum
aliquos perfidi falsauerunt, Graecos inspiciat codices. And in his book De
incarnat. (...). 8. So have we found (says he) in the Greek text whose
authority is greater.

Hierome in an (...) to Sunia says, that in the old testament we are to have
recourse to the Hebrew text. In his (...) in 4. Euang. he shows, that there
is great variety of Latin books, and that in correcting of errors and finding
the truth we are to return to the (...) originals. Si veritas est quaerenda
(says he) cur non ad Graecam originem reuertentes, ea quae (...) ab (...)
reddita, vel addita, vel mutata corrigimus?

Augustine also in his second book De doctr. Christ. cap. 10. says, That to
correct Latin copies, we are to have recourse to the Hebrew and Greek books
of Scripture. Ad exemplaria Hebraea and Graeca, (says he) a Latinis
recurratur. And in the same book chap. 15. Latinis emendandis, Graeci
adhibeantur codices. Latin books of Scripture are to be mended by the Greek
originals.

The adversaries also themselves are ashamed sometimes to say, that either the
old Latin vulgar translation is to be preferred before the original Text of
Scripture, or that the same is authentical. The (...) glossing upon the (...).
vt veterum. did. 9. affirm, that where the Copies vary, the original is to
be exhibited, and that the Latin of the old Testament is to be corrected by
the Hebrew; and the Latin of the new Testament, by the Greek books. Isidore
Clarius, Caietane, Pagninus, Forerius, Oleastrius, Erasmus, and diverse others
have noted diverse faults in the old Latin vulgar translation. Sixtus Senensis
lib. 8. Biblioth. sanct. confesses, that diverse faults, barbarismes,
solecismes, and transpositions are found in the Latin translation. And says:
that the Church was moved by diverse just causes to dissemble them.

Finally, reason teaches us, that the determination of the Romish Church, that
prefers the Latin vulgar (...) before the Hebrew and (...) text, is most
absurd. For if the Latin books were to be preferred before the Hebrew and
Greek text, or else to be (...) authentical; then were we either to prefer,
or to give like credit to Hierome, and other authors that translated the old
vulgar Latin books, and to the holy Prophets and Apostles. Again, transumpts
and copies might by like reason be preferred before the original instruments.
Thirdly, the old Latin translation is proved false by diverse witnesses, by
comparing of places, and for that one edition of ye old vulgar translation does
differ from another. Non potest verum esse, quod dissonat: that cannot be true,
that is repugnant and contrary to it self, as Hierome says in Praefat. in
Iosuam, and in Praefat. in 4. Euang. But the edition of the vulgar translation
set out by Clement the eighth does much differ from that, which Sixtus Quintus
set out before. Iosue 11. 19. Clement reads, quae se traderet: Sixtus reads
quite contrary, quae se non traderet. 2. Reg. 16. 1. Clement has and vtre
vini: Sixtus reads, duobus vtribus. Joan. 6. 65. Clement reads qui essent
non credentes: Sixtus, qui essent credentes. And so it may appear by diligent
collation, that there are notable differences throughout the whole Bible.
Lastly, if the Latin text were more authentical, then the Hebrew or Greek:
why do not our adversaries show, that the ancient Fathers, or some learned men
of late time at the least, have corrected the Hebrew and Greek, according to
the Latin, and not rather contrariwise?

The fourth foundation of Romish religion is the determination of the Pope in
matters of faith. The Conuenticle Sess. 4.
of Trent teaches, that it belongs to the holy mother the Church to judge of
the true meaning of Scriptures. Now for as much as no man knows more
certainly, what is the holy mother Churches meaning, then the Papists holy
Father the Pope, therefore they do hereof conclude, that the Pope is to
determine principally of the true sense and meaning of Scriptures.

In the Rubrike of the decrees cap. in canonicis. did. 19. we find, that the
Popes decretals are to be reckened among canonical Scriptures.

Bellarmine lib. 3. de verbo Dei cap. 3. says: that the Spirit of God (he
should say of the devil) is in the Pope, and that he together with a Council
is chief Judge in matters of controversy of religion. And in the same book
cap. 4. he holds, that no man may recede from his judgment, or determination.

Stapleton in his book of doctrinall Principles, or (...) of his religion,
goes about to prove, that the Popes sentence and determination is infallible.
And so much do these good fellows rely upon their holy Mothers and holy
Fathers interpretation, that they receive the same without any long
inquisition, though never so foolish and contrary to Scriptures. Our Savior
in the institution of the holy Eucharist, said, Take, eat: but they (...) the
Pope, that says, (...) and gaze, but take not, nor eat: but rather hang up
the Sacrament. He said, Bibite ex hoc omnes, that is, (...) all of this, but
the Pope says, Drink not all of this, and they (...) the Pope. The Apostle
says, It is better to marry then to burn, and that marriage is honorable
among all men. But the Pope does interpret these words so, as if he had said:
It is better to burn then to marry, and that marriage is reproachful and
unlawful to Priests: and Papists (...) Pope. So do they likewise in (...)
false interpretations.

But that the Popes interpretations and sentences should be the foundation of
religion, is a matter contrary to religion and reason. The Apostle Ephesians. 2.
says: that the Church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ being the corner stone. And therefore it is said to be
built upon them, because both of them preach Christ. Apostolos habemus
authors, etc. we have the Apostles for authors of our doctrine, says
Tertullian, lib. de praescript. aduers. haeret. He says also, It lies not in
man's power to determine any thing (in matters of faith) of his own head.
Quamuis sanctus sit aliquis post Apostolos, etc. Howsoever holy, or eloquent a
man be, says Hierome in Psalm. 86. yet coming after the Apostles he deserves
no authentical credit. The Lord declares in Scriptures.

Augustine in his second Epistle to Hierome shows, that no man's writings are
comparable to holy Scriptures. And this the Canonists themselves confess in
their glosses upon the Chapter, Nolimeis: and Ego solis. did. 9.

Are not the (...) then most miserable, that build their (...) upon the Popes
Decretals, that are contrary to Scriptures, to Fathers, one to another, and
oftentimes void of truth wit, learning, religion or honesty?

The last foundation of Romish faith is the preaching of Mass Priests and
Friars. Quomodo Christus eiusque doctrina (says Stapleton) Christianae (...)
fundamentum est, sic (...) (...) aute relect princip. doctrine.
nunc a Christo missi, eorumue doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio, fundamentii
apud me (...) and locum habehunt. As Christ and his doctrine is the foundation
of Christian religion: so others now sent of Christ, and their doctrine,
preaching, and determination shall in my opinion have the force, and place of a
foundation. says he. And afterward he declares, that those, whom the Pope
sends, are sent by Christ, and the men which he means. But if this be the
foundation of their religion, then is the same built upon old wives fables,
(...) traditions, lying legends, philosophical subtilties, scholasticall
disputes, popish Decretals, humane inventions and such like principles. For of
the^ consists ye greatest part of these fellows sermons, as both experience
and diverse Friars idle Homilies, which every man may see, do plainly testify.

Furthermore, if these be the foundations of popish Religion, then is the same
built upon man, and not upon God; upon humane devises, and not upon the (...)
word of God; upon sand, and not upon a rock. Such also as these foundations
are, such is the building, that is, weak, false, and erroneous: such is the
Romish religion, which the Pope and his adherents by force of arms, treasons,
murders, empoysonments, lies, (...) flattery, and all means possible would
thrust upon us: and such are the conclusions that are built on these
foundations.

Finally, seeing no man can be saved, that builds his (...) upon men, upon
unwritten traditions, upon uncertain grounds and lying reports, let the
Papists consider with themselves in what miserable state they stand, and
return to the true faith in time, lest like the foolish man in the Gospel,
they build their house on sand, and be overwhelmed Mat. 7.
with the fall thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Of diverse other blasphemous, ridiculous, and absurd points of
popish Religion.
TRue Religion is most true, venerable, and respective of Gods true service. If
then popish Religion contain any untrue or ridiculous, vain, and blasphemous
doctrine, then is it not true, or Apostolical, or Christian: nor can it stand
with Christian Religion, seeing no man can serve God and Baal, nor Dagon could
stand before the ark of God. But notorious it is, that popish Religion
contains many blasphemous, ridiculous, and absurd points.

First, concerning the flesh of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus they teach
falsely and blasphemously, and say, that a mouse or dog, or hog may eat the
body of Christ. Nay they are not ashamed to affirm, that his most holy body
may be cast out upon a dunghill, or into any unclean place. Prima opinio
(says Alexander Hales part. 4. sum. q. 53. m. 2.) quae dicit quod corpus
Christi defertur, quocunque species deferunt, vt in ventrem canis, vel suis,
vel in alia lo ca immunda, videtur vera. And again, p. 4. sum. q. 45. m. 1. si
canis aut porcus deglutiat hostiam consecratam, non video quare corpus Christi
non simul traijceretur in ventrem canis vel porci. If a dog or hog should
swallow a consecrate host (says he) I see no reason why the body of Christ
should not withal pass into the belly of a dog or hog. Thomas Aquinas
likewise, although made a saint by the Pope, yet shameth not to hold this
profane and unholy opinion, part. (...). q. 80. art. 3. And in his comment. in
4. sent. did. 9. q. 2. The same is also stiffely maintained by Brulifer in 4.
sent. did. 13. quest. 5. And this is the common opinion of schoolmen.

That the priest is able to make his Creator, they make no question. Bonner
counted this among the prerogatives of priesthood, in his absurd speech which
he made in the Convocation house in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign. And
Innocentius in the mysteries of the Mass, lib. 4. cap. 19. holds the same
very confidently. Panis in Christum transubstantiatur (says he) and it a in
creatorem. Sic ergo (...) quotidie fit creator. Bread is transubstantiate into
Christ, and so into the creator: and therefore a creature every day is a
creator. The like sayings are to be found in the book called Stella
clericorum, and diverse other authors. Neither do these men doubt, but that the
communicants do eat their Maker. But this is most absurd, and (...) to the
Turks and heathen, that Christians should be said to eat up their God, and
for this cause Auerroes said, that of all other Religions, that of the Papists
was most ridiculous. It is absurd also to say, that man can make God, or the
creature his Creator.

They affirm also that Christ at his last supper did truly and really eat up
his own body whole and entire. As if Christ had come into the world not only
to be eaten carnally of others, but also to devour and eat up himself: a
matter most absurd, and clearly repugnant to scriptures, fathers, and sense.
For Scriptures and Fathers teach, that Christ took bread, and called it his
body. And sense and reason teaches us, that it is unnatural for one man to
eat up another, and impossible for the same man to eat up himself. For then
there should be no difference (...) the terms of relation: and the same man
should be the eater, and the thing eaten; the thing containing, and contained;
and the same person should be a relative to himself: which is against all
rules of Logic, sense, and common reason.

While they say, that Christians do really and carnally eat Christ's flesh, and
drink his blood, they make them Canibals, and (...) then the barbarous
Scythians and Sarmatians, that drunk their horses blood: For it is more
inhumane to drink man's blood then horses blood, and Canibals are nothing else
but barbarous eaters of man's flesh. Neither can they defend themselves by the
words of our Savior, John 6. who says, unless we eat his flesh and drink his
blood, that we cannot have life in us. For he adds, that the spirit
quickneth, and the flesh profits nothing: condemning the Capernaites, that
imagined that his flesh was to be torn with teeth, and his blood swallowed
down into the belly carnally as the Papists also imagine: and reproving all
carnal and literal interpretations of his words. Haec inquam, omnia carnalia
mystice and spiritualiter intelligenda sunt. All these carnal things (says
Chrysostom hom. 46. in Joan.) are to be understood mystically and spiritually.
Likewise Origin in Leuit. 7. says, that the literal understanding of these
words, Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. kills. Augustine
also teaches, that these words are to be understood sacramentally, and that
being spiritually understood they quicken. But what should I speak of the
Fathers of the Church, seeing Homer and Virgil talking of Polyphemus do
condemn the eating of man's flesh, as a thing both barbarous and monstrous?

Concerning Christ his (...) they teach strangely, Catech. Romans in Symbol.
saying, that he being borne of the virgin Mary did no otherwise pass out of
the womb, then as the Sun beams do pass through the substance of the glass:
their words are, Vt solis radij concretam vitri substantiam penetrant: which do
plainly overthrow the mystery of his nativity. For how was he true man, if
never man passed through his mothers womb, as the sun passes through glass?
or how was he like to us in all things, sin only except, if he were not
borne like to us?

They believe also and teach, that Christ his body did pass through the grave
stone, when he rose from death, and through the door when he entered the house
where his Disciples were assembled, after his resurrection. The Fathers hold
(says Bellarmine lib. 3, de Eucharist. cap. 16.) that Christ's true body came
out of the sepulcher being shut: Quod per clausum sepulchrum verum corpus
exiuerit. And his meaning is, that his true body passed through the stone at
the graves mouth, as may well be gathered by the drift of his discourse, where
he refuteth the opinion of those that held that the grave stone yielded and
gave place to Christ's body. Likewise in the same place speaking of Christ's
coming to his Disciples the doors being shut, he affirms that Christ passed
his solid body through another solid body: Quod Dominus corpus suum solidum
per aliud solidum introduxerit.

In the sacrament they say that Christ his true body is really: and by
consequent confess, that the same is in as many diverse places at once, as is
the sacrament. They hold also, that the same body is there neither felt nor
seen, and that he is not extended according to the nature of an humane body,
nor occupies any place being in the sacrament.

But these are matters direct contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles and
fathers: they also repugne against reason, and imply notorious contradictions.
They brought him to Jerusalem (says Luke c. 2.) to present him to the Lord, as
it is written in the law; every male child that first opens the womb, shall
be called holy to the Lord. Matris vulua (says Origin hom. 14. in Luc.) (...)
tempore reserata est, quo and partus editus. The mothers womb was then opened,
when her child was brought forth. Tertullian lib. de resurr. carnis: speaking
likewise of Christ's birth: Who (says he) was truly holy, but the son of God?
Who did properly open the womb, but he which opened it being shut? The same
says Ambrose, lib. 2. in Luc. c. 7. Neither is this any blemish to the blessed
virgins perpetual virginity. For that is not lost nor perished by ouerture of
the matrix, which may diversely happen; but by the carnal knowledge of man.

Further we read Heb. 2. that Christ took man's nature, and not of Angels; and
that it behooved him in all things to be like to his brethren. In Luke the sour
and twentieth chapter, when our Savior Christ would prove himself to be man,
and not a spirit, he said, Palpate and videte, etc. that is, Feel and see: a
spirit has neither flesh nor bones, as you see me to have. We do also profess
in the Athanafian Creed, that as he is perfect God, so he is perfect man.
Ignatius Epist. ad Polycarp. Ambrose in Luc. 24. Theodoret dial. 2. and diverse
other fathers acknowledge, that Christ his body is to be felt and seen, and
that he has flesh, blood and bones like unto us.

But if our Savior Christ did no otherwise pass out of his mothers womb,
then as light through glass, then was he no perfect man, nor fleshly (...).
The same may (...) be concluded, if his body did (...) through stones or (...)
of doors. For never did any man pass through stones or boordes in that sort,
nor did ever any man come out of his mother, as light from glass. Further,
this sauoreth much of the heresy of the Marcionites, that supposed that Christ
had no natural flesh, nor true body, and destroys the article of Christ's
incarnation and nativity. If he have a body that can neither be felt nor
seen, then has he no true body. Which also follows, if his body may be in
infinite places at once, and yet fill no place. For never yet had any man such
a body, that could be in many places at once, and yet fill no place.

Furthermore, nothing could more repugne against reason, then that a man's body
should pass through stones and boords, or be as subtle as the beams of the
sun, or that a man should subsist without the natural properties of man's
nature, as weight, height, depth, breadth, color, grosnesse and such like. And
as well may a body be in all places, as in every altar. For a body cannot be in
two extreme terms, but the same must be in the (...). Furthermore, if all the
world may be turned into bread, and bread into Christ's body, then may Christ's
body fill the whole world, as Bellarmine lib. de incarnat. c. 11. confesses.
He does also confess, that the vbiquity of Christ's body is repugnant to the
(...) Incar. c. (...)
articles of our Creed concerning Christ's conception, nativity, death,
burial, descension to hell, ascension to heaven, and coming to judgment. If
then he be not able to defend the vbiquitie of Christ's body in every
conserated host, without yielding simply to the vbiquitaries, then it
follows that the real presence of Christ's body, as it is taught by the
Papists, does overthrow diverse articles of our Christian (...) by the very
confession of the adversaries. The same also may otherwise be proved, if they
should not confess so much. For how is Christ ascended, if his body be hanging
over every altar? How is it credible that he shall come from heaven to judge
quick and dead, if he be lurking in every consecrate (...)? How was he
conceived, and borne of the virgin, and suffered death on the cross, if he
had a body of such a simple nature, that it was like light in glass, and might
be in many places at once without filling any?

Finally it implies a notorious contradictio^ for Christ's body to be in heaven
visible, and here invisible; to be there palpable, and here impalpable; to be
continued, and not continued; eaten here, and not eaten in heaven; here without
filling of a place, there filling a place; here in the priests hands, and there
not.

Absurdly also do the Papists talk of Christ his most holy sacrifice. Christ
(says the Apostle Heb. c. 9.) was once offered, that he might take away the
sins of many. And Hebr. 10. Christ having offered one sacrifice for sins,
does perpetually sit at the right hand of God. And again: With one oblation he
has for ever sanctified those that are sanctified. But the Papists say, that
our Savior offered him self twice, once at his last supper, and the second
time upon the cross. They teach also, that the priest in every Mass Synod.
Trid. sess. 22. c. 1.
does offer up the body and blood of Christ really for a sacrifice for quick
and dead. The which is not only contrary to Scriptures, but derogateth much
from the perfection and unity of Christ's sacrifice. For how is Christ's
sacrifice perfect, if the same be so often reiterated? How is Christ his
sacrifice one and the same, if every pelting priest do offer up this sacrifice?
The same is contrary to the doctrine of the Fathers, which teach that the
sacrifices of Christians are spiritual, and no where say, that they offer up
Christ's body and blood really. Justin in dial. cum Tryph. says, that prayers
and praises of God are the only acceptable sacrifices of Christians. With him
concurreth Tertullian lib. 3. contra Marcione^. This visible sacrifice (says
Augustine lib. 10. de ciuit. Dei ca. 5. speaking of the Eucharist) is a
sacrament of the invisible sacrifice, that is, the same is a holy sign of it.
Likewise Chrysostom hom. 17. in epist. ad Heb. says, that our oblation is but
a commemoration of Christ his death, and a figure of that oblation which Christ
made. (...), it is most blasphemous. For in the Mass the priest takes on him
to be a mediator for Christ, and prays that God would look on Christ with a
propitious and serene countenance, and accept the sacrifice of his body as he
vouchsafed to accept the offerings of Abel, Abraham and Melchisedech. The
scriptures teach us, that Christ only is a priest after the order of
Melchisedech, as we may read in the 110. psalm, in the fifth and seventh
chapter to the Hebrews. The Lord has sworn and it shall not repent him,
says God by his Prophet, thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. The same also is proved, for that he only continues for ever.
He was without father concerning his humane nature, without mother concerning
his divine nature, and has neither beginning nor ending. But the Mass Priests
continue not for ever, nor are they without father or mother, nor are they
without beginning or ending. Are they not then presumptuous fellows to enter
upon Christ's office, and to arrogate to themselves priesthood after the order
of Melchisedech?

But were they priests after the order of Melchisedech, yet did Melchisedech
never offer the body and blood of any man, nor do we read that either he or
Christ did offer for the quick and dead at his last supper. Are they not then
flagitious fellows, that imagine themselves able to offer the son of God? Are
they not presumptuous priests, that without warrant have devised such a
sacrifice? Our Savior Christ says, that such do worship God in vain, which
teach doctrines, which are the commandments of men. But these fellows devise
a worship of God contrary to his word crucifying Christ again, and laying
violent hands upon him according to their own imaginations.

Christ has taught us to pray unto the Father in his name, saying, Our father
which art in heaven. He has also promised we shall obtain our prayers which
we shall so make. If you shall ask my father any thing in my name (says he)
he will give it unto you. The Apostle does also teach us, that as there is but
one God, so there is but one Mediator betwixt God and man, the (...) Christ
Jesus. In the Epistle to the Hebrews we read, that it behooved us to have an
high Heb. 7.
Priest, holy, innocenr, undefiled, separated from sinners, and higher then the
heavens. For such a one only was able to reconcile us, and to make
intercession for us. As for Angels, Saints, or saints relikes, the ancient
fathers did never use as mediators, or intercessors, or spokesmen to God.
Ambrose in his treatise of Isac says, that Christ is our mouth, by which we
speak to the Father; and our eye, by which we see the Father; and our right
hand, by which we offer to our Father. S. Augustine writing upon the 108.
Psalm, affirms, that the prayer which is not offered by Christ, is not only
not able to put away sin, but also is sin it self.

But the blind Papists teach us a far different form of prayer, and fly to
the mediation of our Lady, of Saints, of Angels, of the cross; as if these
were our intercessors and mediators, and as if the priesthood of Christ had
been translated to saints. They say, Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae:
Mary mother of grace, mother of mercy: turning our father which art in heaven,
into our mother which art in heaven. They say, Hail Mary full of grace, our
Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of
thy wo^b Jesus: holy Mary mother of God, pray for us sinners now and in the
hour of death: taking upon them presumptuously to speak those words, which
the Angel spoke by Gods direction to the holy virgin, and corrupting the
words of scripture by their additions, and by iumbling the words of the Angel
and of Elizabeth together. In their Mattins in honor of our Lady between
every verse of the Psalm Venite exultemus, they put either Aue Maria or
Dominus tecum, corrupting and falsifying the words of scripture. Bonauenture
also most blasphemously has corrupted and transformed the Psalms into the
praises of our Lady, beginning thus: Beat us vir qui diligit nomen tuum virgo
Maria, gratia tua animam illius confortabit. That is, Blessed is the man that
loves thy name holy virgin Marie, thy grace shall comfort his soul. And
Psalm. 7. O Lady in thee have I put my trust. And Psalm. 11. Save me O mother of
fair love. Wherein plainly he gives the honor of God to the virgin Mary,
which I think no man can deny to be idolatrous. In a book called Hortulus
animae, printed at Paris anno 1565. by William Merlin, in the 107. leaf, she
is called, (...) sanctarum animarum, and vera saluatrix earum, and mediatrix
Dei and hominum: The praise of holy souls, and true savior of them, and the
mediatrix betwixt God and man. And fol. 224. we read, O veneranda (...),
Jesus, Joseph and Maria: O holy trinity, Jesus, Joseph and Marie. Now what is
blasphemy if this be not? In the Rosary she is called, the repairer and
saluior of a desperate soul, the distiller and giver of spiritual grace.
Goodric a certain holy hermit, that lived in Henry the second king of England
his days, prayed thus: O holy Mary, Christ's marriage chamber, virgin all
purity, flower of thy mother, put away my sins, reign in me, lead me unto
happiness with God. In the feast of S. Catherin they pray thus: Deus qui
dedisti legem Moysi in summitate montis Sinai, etc. O God which have given thy
law unto Moses on the top of the mountain Sinai, and in the same place have by
thy holy Angels placed the body of blessed Catherine a virgin and martyr,
grant we beseech thee, that by her merits and intercession we may come to the
mountain that is Christ. And on S. Nicholas day they pray thus: O God which
have adorned Nicholas thy Bishop with innumerable miracles, grant we beseech
thee that through his merits and prayers we may be delivered from the flames of
hell. But if prayers be fruitless, if not sinful, if they proceed not from
true faith, and if faith be grounded upon undoubted and prime truth, how can
these (...) avail us, that are grounded upon S. Catherines and S. Nicholas his
legends? Again, if Christ be the mediator of salvation only, as the Papists
hold, how can they hope to be saved by the merits of S. Catherine and S.
Nicholas? And how can they deny them to be mediators of salvation, by whose
merits they suppose to be saved? I will not ask them what Catherine and
Nicholas have to do with them, but yet they may do well to prove that there was
ever any such virgin in the world, being the daughter of king Costus, as they
give out.

Upon S. Francis his day they use this prayer: O God which by the merits of
blessed S. Francis do amplify thy Church with the birth of new children,
grant that by his imitation we may despise earthly things, and always rejoice
being made partakers of heavenly gifts through Christ our Lord. But the Apostle
exhorts us to be followers of Christ Jesus, and of others so far as they be
followers of Christ: and justly we may doubt, whether Francis followed Christ
or no, being the author of a rule diverse from that of Christ, and of diverse
strange fancies. We may also well make a question, whether his disciples be
Christ's true disciples, seeing the doctors of Paris affirmed, they were in the
state of damnation. Sure we are, that by Christ's merits, and not by his merits
or imitation, we are made partakers of heavenly gifts.

Upon S. Bathildis day, according to the order of Sarum Missai they prayed,
that her merits might obtain, that their sacrifices and oblations might be
accepted, seeing she offered up her self a living, holy, and welpleasing
sacrifice unto God: as if Christ's body and blood were not to be accepted, but
by the merits of S. Bathildis, or as if by her sacrifice, our sins were done
away.

Upon Thomas of Canterbury his day they prayed, that by the blood of Thomas
they might ascend to heaven. And on S. Lucies day they pray, O Lucie, spouse of
Christ, thou did hate the things of the world, and shinest with Angels, by
thine own blood thou have overcome thine enemy. As if men were saved by the
blood of Thomas, as well as Christ's blood: and as if Saints by their own blood,
without Christ, could overcome their enemies.

So wicked and blasphemous these prayers are, that the most ingenious Doctors
of the popish school have much a do to excuse them, and do very badly agree
either one with another, or with the truth. Hosius in confess. petrik. ca. 58.
has these words: When a man comes to saints, he does not desire (...) of
them, but only their intercession. And again: We give no more unto them (says
he) when we call upon them, triumphing with Christ in heaven, then to any one
of our brethren militant on earth. But therein he lies notoriously. For
commonly they call the virgin Mary mother of mercy, and desire her to protect
them, and to do away their (...). Likewise they pray to be saved by the blood
of Thomas, and by the merits of other saints; which I trow is more then they
will give to every one of their brethren in earth.

Bellarmine says, that it is not lawful to ask glory or grace, Lib. (...). de
(...). beatit. (...). 17.
or other means tending to blessedness, of saints, as authors of Gods
benefits. But this is contradicted as well by the doctrine, as by the practice
of the Romish church. Sotus in confess. cath. says, that saints in heaven are
our coadiutors, and fellow-workers in the work of our salvation. Saltzger
writing upon this argument, affirms that we pray to saints for two benefits,
the first is to the end they may pray for us, the second is, that either
visibly or inuisibly they may bestow their help upon us. Clichtouey teaches,
that saints have several graces to bestow on them that call upon them.
Alexander Hales says, Sanctos oramus vt mediatores, per quos impetramus. We
call upon saints as mediators, by whom we obtain. Thomas says, we receive
benefits from God by the means of saints: Beneficia Dei sumimus mediantibus
sanctis. Antoninus part. 3. sum. Tit. 3. says, that Gods benefits descend
down to us by the mediation of Angels and holy souls. And again p. 4. Tit.
15. Maria it a aduocat and interpellat, vt Deum patrem placet, and conuersos in
gloriam inducat. Mary is so our advocate and intercessor, that she does pacify
the Father, and bring repentant sinners into glory. Bernardine in his book of
Mary, says, that no grace comes from heaven unto the earth but by Mary, and
unless the same pass by the hands of Mary: for that all graces do enter into
Mary, and from her are communicated to us: and for that she is the mediatrix of
salvation, of conjunction, of intercession, of communication. Commonly they
pray to the virgin Mary in this (...): Give us peace, protect me. To S. George
they address themselves saying, this saint let him save us from our sins,
that we may rest in heaven with blessed souls: Hic nas saluet (say they) a
peccatis, vt in (...) cum beat is possimus quiescere. And if they did only
intercede for us, and not bestow upon us the things we pray for; why do some
beg of S. Anthony the health of their swine, and of S. Winnoc the good standing
of their sheep? Why do they pray to S. Luis for their horses, and to S.
Nicolas for good passage at the sea? Why do Painters call on S. Luke, and
Physicians on Cosmas and Damianus, and Shoo makers on S. Crespin? Finally, why
do they tell us in their legends of the apparitions of diverse saints in time of
war, pestilence, and other (...), and working diverse feats? For if they did
only intercede for us, then one saint might serve for all purposes, and then
should they only appear as suppliants to God, and not as bestowers of graces
and workers of wonders. Finally, then should we not say, help me, heal me,
defend me, but pray to God that I may be helped, healed, and defended.

Are not the Papists the^ in miserable state, that forgetting for the most part
their only Mediator and Redeemer, run to saints and Angels? nay, run to such
as are no saints, nor ever were in the world, as George that killed the Dragon,
Catherin the daughter of (...), Christopher that bore Christ, and such like?

Are they not mad to pray unto such as they know not, whether they (...) them
or not? And do not some say, that they are every where present to hear our
prayers? Others, that they hear such prayers as God reuealeth unto them?
Others, that they see all things in Gods face? Others that they understand by
relation of Angels? It cannot be denied. For Bellarmine confesses it, lib. 1.
de (...) sanct. ca. 20. and that which he affirms, that saints do see all in
God from the first beginning of their blessed estate, is most absurd. For what
is seeing to hearing? Again, how can things temporary be imprinted in the
essence of God? or can Saints see some things, and not all, if they comprehend
that, which is in the incomprehensible essence of the Deity?

Most wretchedly also they do worship dumb images kneeling unto them, kissing
them, and burning incense unto them, saying to the cross: O crux aue spes
vnica: auge pijs iustitiane, reisque dona veniam. All hail, o Cross, my only
hope, increase justice in the godly, and grant pardon to sinners. And crying to
the Crucifixe, Thou have redeemed us, thou have reconciled Bellar. de imagine.
c. 23.
us to thy Father: and calling a block mother of mercy, and saying before
stocks and stones: Our Father, and Aue Maria, and knocking their breasts, and
whipping themselves before Images, as the idolatrous Priests did before their
idols. The Apostle when he laid before the Corinthians the miserable state they
stood in, while they were yet Gentiles, he uses no other terms then these: Ye
know that ye were Gentiles, and were carried away unto dumb Idols, as ye were
led. Which is as much, as if he should say: You were miserable and blind, when
ye were carried away unto dumb Idols. Why then may we not say the same to
Papists? They may percase deny the case to be like. But in my challenge I have
by many arguments proved them to be gross Idolaters, and have clearly showed,
that they have no better excuse for their worship of Images, then the
idolatrous Gentiles had for their worship of idols. Are they not then likewise
blind and miserable? Thinking to thrust others out of their society, which
they call the Church, they have flatly excluded themselves from the society
and communion of the Catholic Church. For if their Church be a company of men
professing the same faith, and participating the same Sacraments, under the
rule of lawful pastors, and especially of the Pope: as Bellarmine says, lib.
2. de Eccl. milit. cap. 2. then are they not the catholic Church. For that
Church was long before either Pope or Bishop of Rome. Beside that, false it is,
that either the (...), or whole Apostolic Church was subject to the Bishop of
Rome, or that John the Evangelist, that (...) long after Peter, was subject to
Linus, Cletus, or Clement, in whose (...) he lived. Finally, false it is, that
God appointed the church to be governed by the Bishops of Rome: there is
nothing thereof in Scriptures. The Fathers show, that the chief authority in
external matters was in general Councels and Emperors. And Bellarmines idle
disputes concerning his Pope are long since overthrown.

That they are not the true Church, it appears also, for that they hear not
the voice of Christ, but follow a stranger: for that they have received diverse
heresies, and devised new Sacraments, relinquishing Christ his institution in
the celebration of the Lords supper: for that they have other foundations of
their religion, then were laid by Christ, or his Apostles: for that they
persecute true Christians, murder them, and massacre them, and by all means
persecute them: and for diverse other reasons laid down in mine answer to
Bellarmines (...) De Eccles. militante. If then it be not possible to be saved
without the Church, in what case are they, that running after the Pope, which
is that Antichrist, of which the Apostle speaks 2 Thessalonians. 2. are run out of
the Church? And whither are they run? forsooth into the confusion of Babylon:
where the Pope, Cardinals, Mass Priests, and (...) make merchandise of men's
souls. De Eccles. milit. cap. 2.
Bellarmine says, that neither faith, hope, nor charity, nor other internal
virtue is required, that a man absolutely may be said to be a part of the
Church, but only an external profession of the faith and communion of the
Sacraments. Who then will not leave that society, which, for ought that we
know, may be a pack of Turks and (...), without all virtue, religion, and
honesty, especially if they profess the Romish (...) externally?

Further, as they have excluded themselves from the Church, so they have put
themselves under the subjection of Antichrist, that is the head of the
malignant Church, and to his Cardinals, Mass Priests, and Friars, which
rabblement are (...) resembled to the master Cook of hell, his scalders, the
blacke-guard, and all the scullerie of Satan. Whatsoever the Pope decrees,
that they receive. Agatho C. (...) did. 19.
the Pope has told them in good earnest, that all sanctions of the Apostolic
see are to be received, as if they were confirmed by the divine voice of Peter.
Be the Pope never so unlearned, or foolish, or perverse; yet if he say the word
sitting on his close chair, it must stand. His voice they take to be
infallible: his sentence is honored like a divine Oracle. Likewise his
Cardinals, Mass priests, and Friars, albeit they be the false Prophets, spoken
of by S. Peter, 2. Pet. 2. and diversely detected by S. John in his Revelation
to be limbs of Antichrist, yet are they followed. These lead, and their simple
hearers follow them the way, that leads to destruction. Their teachers bring
to themselves swift damnation, as the Apostle S. Peter says, and they cannot
escape believing their damnable (...), and running after them in their wicked
ways. Pius Quintus that helhound, that first barked against Queen Elizabeth
our late Soueraign, In Bulla contra Eliz.
says, that Christ committed his Church to Peter alone: vni soli. But that is
most false. The Apostle (Ephesians. 4.) says: He gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers. Likewise Mat. 28. he
said to all the Apostles, Go and teach. Beside that, what does the authority
of Peter belong to the Pope? S. Peter had neither such rubie Cardinals, nor
such a parti-colored guard of Switzers, nor such a hellish rabble of
Mass Priests and Friars, as the Pope has. Contrariwise, he preached and
suffered as the Pope does not. Others say, that Mass Priests and Friars are
the Apostles successors. But we find them to be the locustes, that (as S. John
forefold) came out of the bottomless pit, mentioned Apocalypse. 9. If they
were the Apostles successors, then would they teach the Apostles doctrine, and
not the Popes decretals, scholasticall inventions, philosophical subtilties,
and such fooleries. Again, they would not lead their miserable disciples from
Christ to Antichrist.

They have also declined from the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles
concerning the Sacraments. Our Savior only instituted two, that properly
deserve the name of Sacraments, to wit, Baptism and the Eucharist, as the
writings of the Apostles bear witness. The Fathers also confirm unto us two
only Sacraments of the new Testament. Cyprian, lib. 2. Epist. 1. Tunc demum
(...) sanctificari, and esse silij Dei possunt, si (...) Sacramento nascantur.
Then may they be sanctified and made the sons of God, (says he) if they be
regenerate by both the Sacraments. Augustine de symb. ad Catechum. says, Hac
sunt Ecclesioe gemina Sacramenta: these are the two Sacraments of the Church.
Neither does any Father name more Sacraments then two, where he speaks
properly, as may be proved by the testimony of Iustines second Apology, of
Tertullian, lib. 1. and 4. contr. Marcion. Of Clement recognit. lib. 1. Of
Ambrose lib. de Sacrament. Of Cyril of Jerusalem, in his carechisticall
Sermons, of Augustine lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. cap. 9. of Gregory cap. multi
secularium 1. q. 1. (who although he name Baptism, Chrisme, and the body and
blood of our Lord; yet Chrisme was nothing but an addition to Baptism:) Of De
corp. and sang. Christi.
Paschasius and others. Sunt Sacramenta Christi (says Paschasius) in Ecclesia
catholica, Baptismus, corpus quoque Domini and sanguis. The Sacraments of
Christ in the catholic Church are Baptism, and the body and blood of our
Lord. And so manifest a matter it is, that Bessarion writing upon the
Sacrament, confesses, that there are two Sacraments only delivered in the
Gospel. But the Papists have added other five Sacraments unto these two,
giving like virtue unto confirmation, marriage, order, penance, and extreme
unction, as unto Baptism and the Lords Supper: and teaching that Sacraments
contain grace, and justify the receiver. So that if we will believe them, as
well he is justified, that is confirmed, married, ordered or anointed, as he
that is baptized, or made partaker of the Lords body and blood. Where Christ
distributed the Sacrament of his body and blood, and gave both the kinds to
all communicants, they seldom distribute the sacrament, and take the cup from
all but the priest. In confirmation and extreme unction they use other signs
and forms then ever Christ ordained. They teach that Christians are able to
satisfy for their sins, and that the Pope by indulgences has power to remit
satisfaction, and to do away the temporal punishment of (...). Are they not
then most miserable, that have corrupted the sacraments and seals of Gods
eternal testament, and as it were broken the covenants betwixt God and us, and
despised the pledges of his love?

Of Christian faith they think so basely, that they make it nothing but a bare
assent to Gods word, as well in fearing the threatenings of the law, as
believing the promises of the Gospel; and teach that not only reprobate men,
but also the Biuels also may have true faith. Bellarmine lib. de instif. 1. c.
15. speaking of the faith of wicked men and devils, says, that both is true
and right, and catholic faith, and comparable to S. Peter's faith concerning
the object.

Grace that makes us acceptable to God (says Bellarmine) cannot really be
distinguished from the habit of charity. But Lib. 1. de gratia cap. 6.
if this be true, then may Christians be saved by their works without the help
of Gods grace working with the^, which is mere Pelagianisme. For if charity,
as it is in us habitually, make us beloved; then it is our love toward God,
and not Gods grace or love toward us, or his grace helping us, and remitting
our sins through Christ that (...) us properly.

They deny that a man is certainly to persuade himself of his own salvation,
or to believe the same, and all their confidence they put in their own works
and merits, hoping to be saved by pilgrimages, indulgences, eating of (...),
creeping to the cross, kissing of the Popes toe, praying to saints, to
stocks, to stones, giving of money to lazy Monks and Friars, and such like
humane devises.

Are they not then most wretched, that neither understand what is grace, nor
what is faith, nor what is charity, nor what belongs to good works? He that
believes not (says our Savior, Mark 16) shall be damned. The Apostle also
shows, that none is justified, but by the grace of Christ. Tit. 3. Ibidem.
Nay he says, that Christ saved us, not by the works of righteousness, which
we had done, but according to his mercy, by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost. By eating holy bread, they hope to attain
health of body and soul, as it is in the Romish Missall: they doubt not also,
but that their eating of their paschall lamb, tends to the praise of God. By
holy water they teach, that not only devils are driven away, but also venial
sins remitted. Finally, there remain but few points of religion which the
Papists with their leven, partly of Iudaical and heathenish superstition, and
partly of heretical doctrine have not corrupted. What then rests, but that
we deplore their blindness which admit such erroneous, absurd, and blasphemous
points of doctrine, and wilfully resist those that offer unto them the truth
out of Gods word?

CHAP. V. The miserable state of Papists in matters of Religion is proved
further, for that they are deprived of those blessings which we have received
by the abrogation of popish heresies and superstition.
I Do not think but that our adversaries, albeit they differ from us in other
points, yet in this will join with us, and confess that it is a miserable
thing to wander (...) any certainty in religion. Parsons in the first
encounter of his Wardword does in effect say so much: and albeit they should
deny it, yet it is a matter very evident. For as the Apostle says Romans 2.
Those that sin without the law, shall perish also without the law. If they
know the law, and do it not, the law will accuse them and condemn them. If
they regard not to know the law, yet shall Gods justice lay hold upon them for
offending the law, which they ought to have known. The Apostle Ephesians. 2. when
he would put them in mind of their miserable estate before their conversion,
says they lived without Christ and without God in the world. As if nothing can
be devised more damnable, then to live with out certain knowledge of God and
of Christ Jesus. The Gentiles (as the Apostle says Ephesians. 4.) walk in the
vanity of their mind, having their understanding darkened, and being strangers
from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
hardness of their heart: which argues the miserable state of Christians, that
live like Gentiles without the true knowledge of Christ Jesus. God has also
appointed a certain ministry in the Church, giving some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, and among the rest one
end was, that henceforth we should be no more children, wavering and carried
about with every wind of doctrine. But the Papists, for the most part, as is
showed, live without the knowledge of God, and the rest are carried about with
the blast of every blundering Pope, and wavering as the wind of his blustering
bulls and decretals do carry them. Upon the Scriptures they ground not
themselves, but must take both such scriptures and such doctrine, as he shall
deliver them.

Secondly, it is a miserable thing to be divided from the unity of Christ his
Church. For as out of the ark of Noah all perished in the old world; so all
that are without the Church of Christ, shall undoubtedly perish. Those (...)
that are without Christ his fold, are exposed to the mercy of the wolf, and
without hope of salvation. How then can the Papists look for salvation, that
in faith and sacraments are divided from the Catholic and Apostolic Church?
Further, by many properties they show themselves to have no affinity with the
true Church, as before I have declared.

Thirdly, without true faith it is impossible to please God. The same is the
door, by which we enter into the kingdom of heaven. But we have showed, that
in many points the Papists have declined from the true faith. What hope then
can they have either to enter into the kingdom of heaven, or to please God? How
happens it they see not their wretched state? Absque notitia sui Creatoris,
omnis homo pecus est: Without the knowledge of God, a man is no better then a
beast, says Hierome epist. 3.

Fourthly, the Sacraments are the seals of the new Testament betwixt God and
us. Our Savior taking the cup at his last supper, called it The new Testament
in his blood. If then the Papists have violated Christ his institution, in
their doctrine and ministration of sacraments, as by diverse arguments we have
declared; then have they declared themselves unworthy to be partakers of his
covenant.

Fifthly, Those which despise the Lord, shall themselves be despised, says the
Lord 1. Sam. 2. And as he promises blessings to those that worship him, and
keep his commandments; so he threatens cursings to those that refuse to
hear the voice of the Lord, and to keep his commaundents and ceremonies
prescribed for his worship. Quod siaudire nolueris vocem Domini Deitui, vt
custodias and facias omnia mandata eius and caeremonias, quas ego praecipio
tibi hodie, venient super te omnes maledictiones and apprehendent te, says
Moses Deuteronomy. 28. Let the Papists then consider well with themselves what they
have done, in transforming the worship of God into the worship of creatures,
and serving him not, as he has appointed, but according to their own devises
and fancies: and let them beware that these plagues and curses overtake them
not, seeing they have wholly neglected the true worship of God.

Sixthly, Strange tongues are for a sign (as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14.)
not to them that believe, but to them that believe not. The Prophet also
threatens as a plague, that God will speak to his people by men of other
tongues, and in strange languages. In loquela labij, and lingua altera loquetur
Isay 28.
ad populum istum. It is therefore strange that the Papists feel not the hand
of God upon them, when they hear scriptures read, and prayers said publicly
in a language, which they understand not: and a thing to be wondered at, that
they choose rather to live in this blindness, then to have the word of God read
in a tongue which they are able to understand, and whereby they may learn to
fear God.

Seventhly, the very heathen have often times chosen to die, rather then to see
themselves oppressed by tyrants. Yet such is the stupiditie of Papists, that
they suffer the Pope and his Priests to tyrannize over them, loading their
consciences with intolerable laws and false doctrine, and spoiling their goods
by diverse kinds of exactions, and endangering their lives by their Inquisitors,
and massacrers, and such like executioners of their bloody decrees.

8. Most dangerous is every division among those of one society, but most
miserable it is, when they which profess themselves to be of Gods Church, are
divided one from another. For the Church is a house of unity, and not of
dissension. But among Papists one holds of Benet, another of Francis, another
of Dominicke, another of Clare: and in no point of doctrine do all their
Doctors agree together. Superstitiously also they observe days, times, and
distinction of meats, and consecrate salt, water, bread, candles, and paschal
Lambs. Finally, they leave the Creator, and serve our Lady, Angels, and
Saints, and other creatures. Nay, for relics of Saints they worship often times
the ashes, relikes and bones of wicked men and reprobates; nay, of brute
beasts.

9. It is an unseemly thing for those, that profess holiness, to show
themselves examples of all beastliness, as the Popes and holiest men of the
papists are wont to do. Therefore seeing yt dogs, sorcerers, whore-mongers,
murderers, idolaters, and liars shall be shut out of the kingdom of heaven,
they are not to look to be admitted, without speedy reformation.

10. No Prince living under the Pope can assure himself of his state: nor can
any subject, that lives under such a prince assure himself either of his
life, or goods. For if the Pope have power to take away kingdoms, and to
bestow them upon others: how can any King or prince assure himself he will not
attempt the same, when occasion serves, considering his violent proceeding
against Emperors and kings in time past, and against our late noble Queen,
against Henry the third and fourth of France, and diverse others? And if every
one by him and his Inquisitors declared Heretic, is to lose life and goods;
who can assure himself of either, if he acknowledge not his authority, and
refuse his religion?

11. No man certes shall prosper, that shall follow Antichrists sect or
re^ligion: If any man worship the beast, and his image, (says the Angel
Apocalypse. 14.) and receive his mark in his forehead, and in his hand, the
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, of the pure wine that is
powered into the cup of his wrath. But that new Rome and the Popes government
is the image of the old Roman Empire, and that the Pope is Antichrist, it
plainly appears by diverse arguments, which I have declared in my fifth book
De pontif. Romans

12 Those Kings that live under the Pope, are but half kings. For first, their
Clergy in diverse cases is exempt from them, and next they have not to do with
the rest of their subjects in ecclesiastical causes. O miserable kings, that
have fallen down to worship the beast, and have suffered such base bougerly
Italians to take away more then half of their royal authority!

13 We find that no kingdom can long live in peace, which is subject to the
Popes controlment. For if the Pope do find himself aggreeued, then does he
trouble the peace of the State; if the same offend him not, but pay what he
requires: yet if he fall out with others, then must that kingdom make wars
at the Popes pleasure. By the Popes solicitation both England, France,
Flaunders, Spain, and all Christian countries have endured great troubles. The
Turks live far more quietly under their Sultans, then Papists under the Pope.

Finally, considering the intolerable exactions of the Pope, and his furious
inclination to war and bloodshed, and the tyranny both of the Pope and his
adherents: it is no marvel, if the (...) people be poor, and much wasted.
Whether then we respect things of this life, or of the life to come, there is
no creature more miserable then a Papist. Do you not then wonder, that any
should like the popish government? It were certainly much to be wondered, but
that experience does teach us, that the Cimmerians that dwell in darkness care
not for the light, and that brutish beasts delight in brutishness, and base
people in servitude, and superstitious people in vanities and superstitions.

CHAP. VI. Of the contradictions of popish Doctors in principal points of
Religion.
OF the dissentions of popish Doctors in matters of religion, I have said
somewhat before. Yet because Papists make unity in matters of faith to be a
mark of the Church, and confidently deny, that their Doctors dissent in any
point of any moment; I have thought good to insist yet more upon this point,
that the world may see, not only their misery, that as men not resolved in
most points of religion, waver betwixt contrary opinions, but also their
notorious impudency that deny it. Therein also does appear some Papists
wonderful simplicity, that seeing the contention of their Doctors, do not
understand their differences; and seeeing their differences and uncertainty of
popish Religion, do notwithstanding stick fast in the filthy dregs, and
abominable corruptions thereof.

Pighius lib. 1. Eccles. hierarch. cap. 2. says, That Scriptures 12. cap. 15.
holds, that the Church and Scriptures are of equal authority. Eckius in
enchirid. loc. com. cap. de Eccles. says: That the Scriptures are not
authentical without the authority of the church. Bellarmine thought best not
to dispute this question.

Nicholas Lyra, Hugo, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo Cardinalis, 1. Biblioth.
sanctae, reject the last seven Chapters of the book of Hester, as not
canonical Scripture. The Conuenticle of Trent, Bellarmine and most popish
Doctors of late time hold them to be canonical: and think hardly of those,
which teach contrary.

John Driedo, lib. 1. de Scripturis and dogmat. Eccles. denies Baruch to be
canonical Scripture. Bellarmine lib. 1. de verb. Dei, and most of his fellows
be of a contrary opinion.

Caietan and Erasmus in their Commentaries upon the Hebrews, of James, Jude,
the second of Peter, the second and third of John, do dissent from the rest of
their fellows, partly concerning the authors, and partly concerning the
authority of those Epistles.

James bishop of Christopolis in Praefat. in Psalm. And Canus lib. 2. cap. 13.
de locis theologicis, affirm, That the Jews have depraved and corrupted the
Scriptures. An opinion false and blasphemous, and therefore contradicted by
Bellarmine lib. 2. de verb. Dei. and diverse others.

Saints Pagninus in Praefat. interpretationis suae Biblior. Paulus bishop of
Foro-sempronij lib. 2. cap. 1. de die passionis Domini, deny, that the vulgar
Latin translation was made by Hierome. Augustine of Eugubium, and John Picus
of Mirandula hold contrary. Bellarmine and Driedo say, that it is part his,
and part others.

Alexander Hales and Durand hold, that the divine attributes Henricus and
Albertus Magnus in 1. Sent. did. 2. hold contrary.

Richardus in did. 3. lib. 1. sent. holds, that the most holy Scotus, and
Francis Maronis, and Thomas affirm contrary.

About the faculties of the soul, called potentiae, the schoolmen Vid. lib 1.
sen. did. 3. and dd.
al one with the substance of the soul: others, that they are accidents: the
third, that they are between substances and accidents.

Abbas Ioachim and Richardus de sancto victore, taught diuinam essentiam
generare and gigni. The contrary is taught by Ibidem.
Peter Lombard and his followers.

Peter Lombard lib. sent. 1. did. 17. taught, that charity, But now most of
his followers have in this point forsaken him, and hold contrary.

In the 24. distinct. of his first book, the same Peter Lombard

In the 44. distinction of the same book he says, that God But his disciples
hold direct contrary.

Thomas p. 1. q. 46. art. 2. holds, that the world, or at the Bonauenture,
and some others. Richardus does maintain the opposite opinion.

The Master of Sentences in 4. did. 1. and Gabriel, and Vega lib. 7. in
council. Trident. c. 13. hold, that not only substances, but accidents are also
created. Alexander Hales q. 9. m. 6. and q. 10. m. 1. and Thomas p. 1. q. 45.
art. 4. affirm that only substances are created.

About this question, An omnium aeuiternorum, sit vnum aeuum vel (...): there
are five Different opinions, the first of Scotus, the second of Thomas, the
third of Durand, the fourth of Henricus, the fifth of Bonauenture.

Likewise about this question, Quae sit ratio formalis cur Angelus sit in loco,
there are five (...) opinions, all repugnant one to another.

Thomas and Richardus do affirm, that (...) Angels cannot Scotus, Occham, and
Gabriel hold the contrary.

Thomas teaches, that Angels have not intellectum agentem and possibilem.
Scotus does directly contradict him.

Scotus and Gabriel teach, that devils and good Angels do but to Thomas p. 1.
q. 57. art. 4. this seems absurd.

Antisiodorensis lib. 2. sum. teaches, that Christ had Angelum custodem: other
schoolmen deny it.

Scotus says, that the will is the only subject of sin: Thomas denies it.

Concerning the place of paradise, there are three different Thom. in 2. did.
17. and (...) (...) place it upon a high mountain. The rest place it in the
East.

Concerning the nature of free will, (...) are diversities of Josephus Angles
shows in lib. 2. sent. did. 24. and 25.

Richardus holds that free will cannot be changed by

Thomas, Bonauenture and Sotus hold, that grace is not a and Scotus hold that
it is a quality infused.

Josephus Angles in lib. 2. sent. did. 26. rehearses three several in
gratiam operantem and cooperantem: whereby it may appear, that in talking of
grace they do endeavor to shut out grace.

Certain scholars of Thomas believe and teach, that no Scotus, Vega and
Caietane say quite contrary. Both their opinions are touched by Josephus Angles
in 2. sent. did. 27.

Richardus in 2. did. 27. art. 2. q. 1. Scotus in 1. did. 17. q. 1. art. 1.
Durand in 1. did. 17. q. 2. and others hold, that a man may merit the first
grace de congruo. Gregorius Ariminensis in. 2. di. 26. Lyranus in Joan. 1.
Waldensis and others do deny it. Sotus li. 2. de not. and great. c. 4. says,
that the former opinion is near to (...).

Gregorius Ariminensis in 2. did. q. 1. and Capreolus in 2. di. q. 1. hold
that no man without the illustration of Gods special grace, can attain to the
knowledge of any moral truth. But Thomas and Scotus in 2. did. 27. do hold
contrary.

Durand places original sin in the carnal appetite: Thomas places it in
the whole substance of ye soul: Scotus differs from both, and places it in
the will of man.

Josephus Angles rehearses three diverse opinions in 2. did. 37. about this
question, whether a sin of omission may be committed without a positive act.

The same man reckeneth five different opinions about What is sin of malice.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de pontif. Romans c. 12. says, that the keys holds that
the keys of the Church include somewhat more.

Pighius lib. 4. hierarch. eccles. cap. 8. holds, that the Pope Turrecremata
lib. 4. sum. part. 2. c. 20. says, that the Pope falling into heresy ipso
facto, is deposed before God, and cast out of the Church. There also he says,
that some held that the Pope neither for manifest nor secret heresy is
deposed, or could be deposed. Caietane in tract. de author. Papae and council.
c. 20. and 21. holds, that the Pope proving a notorious heretic, is not
deposed ipso facto, but that he may and ought to be deposed by the Church.
Bellarmine himself lib. 2. de pontif. Romans c. 30. holds, that if the Pope be
a notorious heretic, he then of himself cease to be Pope.

Iansenius denies, that the coming again of Helias Ecclesiasticus.
Bellarmine lib. 3 de (...). Romans c. 6. wondreth that he should be of that
opinion.

Franciscus Victoria relect. 2. de potestate Ecclesiae g. 2. and Alphonsus a
Castro lib. 2. de haeret. just. punit. says, that as well Bishops as Apostles
did immediately receive jurisdiction from God. Turrecremata lib. 2. sum. de
Eccles. c. 54. and Iacobatius de concilijs, hold, that the Apostles received
their (...), and other Bishops from Peter's successor. Caietane in tract. de
author. Papae, Dominicus a Soto in. 4. did. 20. and Heruaeus de potestate
Papae, teach, that the Apostles received their power from God, and all other
Bishops from the Pope. And this is also the opinion of Bellarmine.

Hostiensis in c. nouit. de iudicijs, and Augustine Triumphus in summa de
potestate Ecclesiae g. 1. art. 1. and others very triumphantly affirm, that
the Pope by the law of God has full power over the whole world, as well in
(...) as Ecclesiastical affairs. Driedo, Turrecremata, (...), (...) and
others reckoned up by Bellarmine lib. 5. de Pontif. Romans c. 1. are content to
abate somewhat, and to say, that directly the Pope has not power over all the
kingdoms of the whole world.

The Doctors of Paris hold, that a general council cannot 2. c. 21. and
Turrecremata lib. 3. sum. c. 32. hold contrary.

Petrus de Alliaco, Ioannes Gerson, Iacobus Almain, and De potestate Ecclesiae,
hold that a general Council is above the Pope. Others hold, that the Pope is
above the Council, as Iacobatius de (...), Sanders de visib. monarchia, and
Bellarmine lib. de concilijs. Others ween, that although the Pope be above the
Council, yet it lies in his power to make the Council above the Pope, as is
evident by the gloss, non (...). (...). 7. and c. in synod. did. 63.

The Roman Catechism in the exposition of the Creed: Waldensis fol. 1. lib.
2. c. 9. Turrecremata lib. 1. c. 3. and others do shut out excommunicate
persons from being members of the Church: but this is (...) by others, as
Bellarmine confesses lib. de Eccles. militant. c. 6.

Alexander Hales 3. part. q. vlt. art. 2. and Turrecrem. lib. 1. de Ecclesia
cap. 30. affirm: That in the passion of Christ the holy virgin only had true
faith. Bellarmine lib. de Eccles. milit. cap. 17. maruelleth at them, and
condemns their opinion.

Joan. Mayor in 4. did. 24. q. 2. says, that by Gods law The same opinion
does Clichtouey hold, lib. de continentia Sacerdot. cap. 4. But Thomas in 2. 2.
q. 88. art. 11. says, that the (...) of continency is annexed to priesthood
by the laws of the Church only. And many follow his opinion, and among the
rest Bellarmine.

Marsilius de Padua Writes, that Clearkes are subject to in c. tributum. 23.
q. 8. and in c. quamuis, de censibus in 6. hold, that both their persons and
goods are exempted from temporal princes jurisdiction. Franciscus victoria
relect. 1. q. vlt. de potest. Eccles. and diverse others cut the controversy in
the midst, and hold, that they are free for their persons and goods, partly by
the law of God, and partly by privileges of Princes, and partly by neither.

How the (...) of holy men departed do know what (...) Bellarmine brings in
three diverse opinions, lib. de sanct. Beat. cap. 20.

Caietan in Exodus cap. 20. takes an image and an idol for Bellarmine lib. de
cult. sanct. cap. 7. reproves him for it. Likewise he misliketh Ambrose
Catharine, who in a tract of images says, That God prohibited images simply,
but that this prohibition was positive and (...)

Occham, Mayor and Richardus are of opinion, that a Sacrament Scotus in 4.
did. 1. q. 2. holds, that it may be defined imperfectly. Ledesma in tract.
de Sacrament. in genere q. 1. art. 2. holds, that it may properly be defined.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de Sacramentis cap. 18. brings in diverse

Finally, I have already rehearsed infinite contradictions of the Romanists
concerning the Mass, in my book de Missa contra Bellarm. concerning
purgatory and indulgences, in my books against Bellarmine of that argument. I
have also in the first book touched diverse contradictions and co^trarieties in
the doctrine of our adversaries. And to be brief, I say, and offer to prove,
that there is no article of Christian faith, wherein the adversaries do not
vary and disagree one from another. God grant they may once see it, and
leaving their idle bangling about vain questions of mixed divinity, return to
the Catholic faith, which is a doctrine of agreement and unity.

CHAP. VII. Of the servile and wretched (...) of the English nation, under the
reign of Queen Mary, and generally of all people living under the Popes laws
and religion.
Having at full discoursed concerning matters Ecclesiastical, it follows
now, that I speak of matters teuching the state politic, beginning first with
our own nation under the unhappy reign of Queen Marie, sometime Queen of
England, and then touching other Princes and States, that are subject to the
thraldom of the Pope and his Babylonish religion.

First then it is apparent, that she brought her self and her people into
danger, by reason of her match with king Philip: and no question but she had
brought this kingdom into subjection, if not into servile bondage, if God had
not crossed the deseignes of man, and dealt mercifully with us, both taking
away the Queen in the strength of her age, and preventing the wicked counsels
of bloody traitors and persecutours, who (as John Hales says) meant to have
In Orat. ad Eliz.
brought this land under strangers: and altering the State before ye Spaniards
had taken any firm footing in England.

How great danger this land stood in, those that then lived may well remember,
and we cannot choose but acknowledge, if we look back and consider the working
of Queen Marie, of the popish prelates, and of the Spaniards. The Queen sought
by all means to put the kingdom into the hands of king Philip. The popish
prelates sought to suppress religion, which could not be without the
oppression of our liberty. The Spaniards ruled insolently, and went about to
make themselves strong, advancing those which were of their faction, and
thrusting back all, that were studious of their countries liberty. The
bulwarks or blocusses, that were made for defense of the land against
strangers, they suffered to fall: they brought in strangers; they put the
command of the kingdom into the hands of such as were best affectioned to
themselves, and least careful of their countries liberty.

What would have ensued of this, it is an (...) matter to conjecture by the
deportment of Spaniards in other countries, that are subject to their
government.

In the Indiaes they rule not like men, but rather like barbarous tyrants and
savage beasts. Contemning all justice, (says Bartholomaeus a casas writing of
the cruel usage In his Preface to king Philip.
of the Spaniards toward the Indians) they delight to see streams of man's
blood, which they have shed, and seek with infinite slaughter to deprive those
great countries of the natural inhabitants thereof. In short space they killed
diverse hundred thousands, only in one Island called Hispaniola: the women they
abused, the treasure and commodities of the country they spoiled.

The people of Naples were in the time of Charles the fifth, who otherwise was a
good prince, so vexed and oppressed by the Spaniards: as an Ambassador of the
people of Siena said to Henry the French king, that for release of their Not.
Com. hist. lib. 6.
extreme bondage they seemed desirous to live under the Turk: Vt Turcarum
imperia ad tantarum miseriarum refugium exoptare videantur. He says further,
that the Spaniards laid so many grievous tributes upon the people, that diverse
ancient towns were thereby deformed, and left desolate.

The Duchy of Milan also by the Spanish tyranny, as those that have
traveled that country do know, is brought to great poverty. The tares and
customs are grievous, the oppressions wrought by the soldiers many, the laws
unsupportable Neither does it avail them to complain. For that remedy they
have often tried, but all in vain. But no people was ever more oppressed, then
the Flemmings, Brabansons, Hollanders and other nations of the Low countries.
Their liberties they have disanulled, their laws they have little regarded,
their towns they have spoiled, their country they have almost wasted. By the
fundamental laws of the country, they might neither place strange governors
over them, nor bring in (...) forces among them. But the Spaniards have done
both. By the laws, the king of Spain could neither impose taxes upon the
subject, without the consent of the States, nor condemn any man, but by the
laws of the country. But he has both done the one and the other. The Duke of
Alua without the consent of the States, or order, required the hundredth part of
that which every man was worth, and the tenth of all things bought and sold in
the country. The noble (...) of Egmont and Horn, and diverse Noble men of the
country, that had done him great service, he caused to be done to shameful
death. The prince of Oranges eldest son, contrary to the laws of the
University of Louain and country, he caused to be carried prisoner into
Spain. Finally, contrary to the laws of the country he altered the
ecclesiastical State making new Bishops, and erecting new offices of
inquisition in diverse places of the country. And this the king did, having
sworn to observe Ludouic. Guicciard. de Paesi bassi.
the laws and privileges of the country. I will not here recount the
murders, rapes, robberies, (...), spoils, and wrongs which the Spanish
soldiers and officers have committed. For that would require a great volume,
and it would be said, that these are the calamities of wars, and wrongs of
private persons. Yet if Spaniards bring wars and calamities with them, and
see not these wrongs redressed: it shows how much their tyrannical
government is to be avoided and detested. But that is made apparent by the
laws and proceedings, which are publicly auowed.

The Portingals may be an example to all nations, sufficient to make the
Spanish government odious. For although they be near neighbors, and agree
with the Spaniards in Religion, language, laws and humors; yet have they not
found any more favor at their hands, then other nations. Their Nobility is
almost overthrown, the Merchant decayed, the Commons spoiled. The exactions
are intolerable, and yet far more tolerable then the wrongs offered by (...),
from whom neither the husband can keep his wife, nor the father his daughter,
nor the citizen or countriman any thing he has. Add hereunto the violence
that is offered to men's persons, and the injuries of words that they daily
sustain; and then you will confess, that the Portingals live in great misery
and bondage.

In England also the Spaniards, albeit but few, began to play their parts,
offering violence to diverse men's persons, and attempting the chastity both of
matrons and virgins. In the parliament, which is the foundation of the liberty
of our nation, they attempted the overthrow of our liberty, not only by (...)
king Philip with the Queen, but also leaving out the Queens title of supreme
authority in the summons, and taking away the free election of the Commons in
choosing their Burgesses, and thrusting out Bishop Watson, Alexander Nowell, and
diverse Burgesses out of the parliament.

Nay such is the rigor of the Spanish government, that the Spaniards
themselves cannot well like it. The privileges of Aragon, the last king
abrogated upon pretense of disorder in the fact of Antony Perez. Escouedoes
sons could never have justice for the death of their father. Murders and
violences are rarely punished. The taxes, customs and payments are so
grievous, that notwithstanding all the riches that comes from the (...),
nothing can be devised more bare, poor and miserable, then the common sort of
Spaniards. The imposition upon fish, wine, oil and silks, which are the
principal commodities of the country, is great: and other customs are not
easy. In the market the tenth (...) is (...) commonly for all commodities
bought and sold.

Wherefore if we respect nothing else but the yoke of the Spanish government,
we may account our nation in very miserable terms in (...) Mary's days.

Yet was not that all the mischief she brought with her. For beside the yoke
of Spaniards, she put upon her subjects the yoke of the Popes tyranny, and of
his Italians, relinquishing the first fruits and tenths of Ecclesiastical
livings to the Pope, and making her people subject to all his extortions and
pillages: which not only to this nation, but also to all Christians has
always been very grievous.

Matthew Paris speaking only of one Popes Legate, and In Hen. 3. P. 530.
his rauinous pillages, says, excepting church treasure, there remained not so
much money behind as he had carried with him out of England: Nec remansit eadem
(...), vt veraciter dicebatur, in Anglia tantum (...), exceptis sanctorum vasis
and ornamentis Ecclesiarum, quantum a regno extorserat Anglicano. The same man
beside all this, as the same author testifies, (...) three hundred benefices
at his own and the Popes pleasure. Underegnum quasi vinea exposita omni
transeunti, quam exterminauit aper de sylua, miserabiliter languit desolatum.
Whereupon it fell out, says he, that the kingdom did miserably languish, being
laid desolate, and made like a vineyard, exposed to every one that passes by,
and which the bore of the wood did root out. He that shall read that story,
shall find strange inventions to extort money from the people, and understand
that great sums of money were transported out of England by the Popes agents
and countrymen. Bonner in his preface before Stephen Gardiners book De vera
obedientia, says, that the Popes prey in England was so great, that it
amounted to as much almost as the revenues of the Crown.

The English nation complained to the Pope in the synod Math. Paris. in Hen. 3.
at Lion in the days of king Henry the third, of diverse enormous pillages and
exactions made by him and his officers, but could find no remedy. The Emperor,
as Matthew Paris Ibid.
testifies, found fault with the King of England, for that he suffered his
country to be impouerished so shamefully by the Pope. Imperator reprehendit
regem Angliae says Matthew Paris) quod permitteret terram suam tam impudenter
per Papam depauperari. If we account the tenths, first fruits, rents coming
of dispensations about Ecclesiassicall benefices, for marriages and vows, money
for licenses to (...) flesh and white meats, to keep concubines, to erect new
societies and orders of Friars, money for indulgences and pardons,
canonizations of saints, erecting of Churches, for rescripts of justice, for
absolution from oaths, for sale of Masses, and such like Babylonish
merchandise: we shall find that the sum does far exceed Bonners account. So
injurious was the Pope in extorting, and so patient was this land in bearing
all burdens, that worthily it deserved to be called the Popes ass.

Nay such corruption was entered into the Romish church, that no act of religion
could be executed without paying somewhat. At christening they paid a chrisme
cloth; at (...), a hearse cloth. Neither could any be married, or (...), or
absolved, but some what was paid. At Candlemasse they offered candles, at
another day bread, and because bread would not down without drink, they
offered also good ale in some places. By these means the priests of Baal lived
upon the poor man's labor, and got the husbandmans cow, the artificers
instruments, and what every man had, from the owners: and pressed the very
marrow out of the common peoples bones.

To all these pillages, from which king Henry the eight of famous memory, and
his son king Edward had freed us, Queen Mary did make her people subject.

She also put her people under the bloody hands of the butcherly Romish
inquisitors Bonner, Gardener, Story, and their fellows: which contrary to
justice, and all good form of proceeding, caused (...) or five hundred to be
put to most cruel death in a short space, and were the occasion of the death
of many hundreds more, that either for want, or by diseases died, being (...)
to leave their houses, and to shift for themselves. Some also died in prison,
before they came to their trial. Whosoever would not forsake the truth, was
driven to forsake his country, kindred and friends, and to fly into strange
countries for succor. So we (...) murder, tortures, banishments, bands and
persecution of Gods saints were the monuments of her reign.

Therefore it pleased God to afflict this country with a great penury and
dearth: the like was not heard of for many years before, nor since. (...)
histories say, that (...) was for four marks the quarter, and malt for 44.
shillings: which, considering yt rate of things, is twice or thrice so much as
that sum amounts unto now. Hereupon it came to pass, that the people were
constrained to make bread of acornes, that had refused the bread of Gods word,
and that many died for extreme want and penury: and yet was not the country
half so populous as now.

Finally, to her perpetual dishonor, and the fhame of all Papists, she lost
Calice, Ghines, and whatsoever by the kings of England was left her in France.
King Edward the third that most victorious prince (...) Calice: and she like a
most disastrous Queen (...) it: neither did any thing prosper that (...) took
in hand. In the beginning of her reign she was driven to (...) into Suffolk
disguised, and had by all likelihood lost both her life, crown and hope, if
the professors of the Gospel of Norfolk and Suffolk had not resorted unto
her, and defended her against those that pursued her: for the which she
promised them liberally, but performed nothing. They delivered her from danger,
and she eontrary to her promise, delivered them up to the bloody executioners
to be pursued with fire and faggot.

She married with a stranger, to the great dislike of all true hearted
Englishmen. But well was she (...). For her husband never did well like her,
and in the end he went from her, and did in a manner forsake her.

Great hope she had to leave us a king of her own body to reign after her;
but her expectation was turned into a mockery, and all the Masses said, and
prayers devised, and offerings to Saints relikes, for her safe delivery, took
no effect. The saying of the Prophet (Psalm. (...).) was fulfilled in her. She
(...) grief and brought forth iniquity. Concepit dolorem, and peperit
iniquitatem. Solomon for that he was a just Prince, had a son given him to
sit upon his throne (...) him, as we read 1. King. 3. Was not then this (...)
Queen justly punished with barrenness, for inaking so many childlesse?

Without cause she fell at variance with the French, entering into her husbands
quarrel. But she spent her labor and treasure in vain, left the (...) in
debt, and lost all she did adventure for.

At the sea she was most (...), losing a goodly ship called The great Harrie,
by (...), and (...) no success in any thing. And so it appears, that she
lived and died (...), leaving (...) memory behind her, but of cruel
persecution, of Spanish slavery, and of (...), (...), and loss to our nation.
Neither does any account otherwise of her, then as of a woman unhappy in her
marriage, cruel in persecuting Gods Saints, ungrateful to those that were her
best friends, unkind to her subjects, (...) in all her enterprises.

The like success had those kings of England, that were most forward in the
Popes service. Before king Henry the seconds time the Popes agents had little to
do in England. He was the first that gave them grace. But see his reward. The
Pope maintained Becket and other his rebellious subjects against him, and
forced him to most disgraceful and base conditions of agreement. Furthermore
the Popes agents in his time found such favor, that until the reign of king
Henry the eight, this Land could never be rid of them.

(...) Richard the first for the Popes pleasure crossed him self for the holy
land, and went thither with great forces of men, and royal provisions. But
nothing he gained, beside a vain name of a valiant man. On the other side, his
losses and disgraces were exceeding great. For first, he lost most of his
(...): then he lost the best part of his men. Thirdly, he lost diverse good
towns in France, where his enemies took advantage of his absence. Fourthly,
he was taken prisoner in his return. Fifthly he impouerished himself and his
country in leauying money for his ransom. And lastly, was vnnobly slain
before a little castle in France by a base fellow. So little did the Popes
pardons and blessings avail him.

Never did any king of England more for the Pope then king John. For he
resigned his Crown into his Legates hands, (...) also as much as in him lay,
to make his kingdom tributarie to the Pope. Let us then (...) what fruit he
reaped of his devotion to the Pope. First, he lived in continual jar with
his (...). Secondly, he lost Normandy, and (...) towns of great moment, to
the French. Thirdly, in his (...) the French made war (...) him in England,
and (...) him (...) at his own doors. Fourthly, he suffered his kingdom to
be pillaged by the Pope. Finally, he died of poison ministered to him by a Monk
of Swinsted Abbey, as Caxtons Chronicle reports.

King Henry the third was flatly (...) by Innocent the fourth, and deluded with
a promise of the kingdom of Naples for his son Edmond. But for this vain
title he paid full dear, not only suffering the Pope to spoil his country,
but also paying himself great sums to the Pope.

King Henry the eight, for the deliverance of Clement the seventh, spent (...)
treasure vainly. And that was the success of all the kings of England that
did service to the Pope.

Generally, all those that live under the Popes (...), (...) most miserably,
being neither secured for their (...), nor lives, nor liberties, either from
their neighbor princes, or from the Pope. First, they serve two kings,
wheresoever they live: that is, their King or Duke, and the Pope. If they
offend the Pope, they are (...) heretics, and are deemed worthy of death,
yea albeit the controversy be no matter of Religion. Lewis of Bauier and his
followers were reputed (...), he for taking on him the (...) without the Popes
allowance, these for yielding obedience to their lawful prince. The like
censure was (...) against all that followed the Emperor Henry the fourth, and
Frederick the second.

If they offend their Princes, either in word or (...), the penalty is death.
Poggio shows, that a rich man being accused of treason, answered, that he had
not offended, but if his goods had offended, he would not consent with them.
And thus by renouncing that which he (...), he escaped.

The laws are very rigorous both of Pope and popish (...), the executions
(...) cruel and (...). (...) speaking of the times of Alexander the sixth,
says, that there was never more outrages committed by (...) and cut throats:
that the people of Rome had never less freedom: that there was a great number
of privy promoters, and that every evil word was punished with death. But
this is common to all Italian princes. Murders and spoils are little regarded,
every word, nay every thought against them if it be known, is (...) most (...).

The Spanish inquisitors in (...) pass most savage beasts. Upon every light
surmise they proceed against most innocent persons, and some they rack, some
they samish, some they burn, some they cut (...). The very Papists themselves
could never endure it, nor would suffer it, Natal. com. hist. lib. 2.
but by force. The Venetians will none of it. The Neapolitans refusing the
same, yield this reason, quia per simplicem alicuius maleuoli accusationem,
nullis requisitis probationibus, nullisque defensionibus acceptis, posset
quisque in carceres detrudi, and vita, honor, and facultatibus priuari.
Because by the single accusation of one malicious fellow, neither proofs being
sought, nor exceptions received, any man might be thrust into prison, and
deprived of his honors, goods and life. Are they not then miserable, that live
under the danger of the (...)? Meteran. lib. 2. hist. Bell.
The people of the Low countries do affirm, that (...) Inquisition was the
original ground of the troubles and tumults of the Low countries, and that the
Cardinal Granuelle endeavoring to bring in the same, was the ruin of his
country. At the first the (...) was (...) principally against Turks and
Moors. Who then does not detest the Spaniards and Italians, that practicing
the same against Christians, do plainly declare, that they hold them to be no
better then Turks and Moors?

The common form also of inquisition against Christians is very cruel,
odious, and intolerable, considering first that the Romanists take all for
heretics, that (...) them for their villainies, superstitions and heresies; and
next for that they neither observe form nor order of (...), nor respect young
nor old, men alive nor dead: oftentimes (...) Cap. (...) de (...). in 6.
men's bodies most cruelly, and spoiling their goods most greedily, and
punishing any that dissent from the synagogue Cap. ad abolendam. de haeret.
of Rome in matter of the Sacraments, as if they had conspired the destruction
of their prince and country.

By this cruel proceeding in the reign of Charles the (...), the bloody
popish tormentors in the low countries put to death fifty thousands, as the
Histories of the Low countries (...). In England, like savage wolves they
spoiled Meteran. hist. Belg. lib. 2.
the flock, during the reign of Queen Marie. How many have been executed in
Spain, Italy, France, and Germany by these (...), it is hard to recount. Of
late, because the executioners were not sufficient to satisfy their cruelty,
they have caused many thousands without all order to be massacred.

Paul the 4. that first brought the inquisition into Rome, brought himself and
his house into perpetual hatred of the (...). in Paulo. 4.
Romans, insomuch, that upon his death the people ran furiously together,
broke his statue, threw down the arms of his house, burnt the inquisition
court, and were hardly restrained from doing further violence to the
inquisitors.

The Popes exactions in all countries are very gricuous, Ipse (...) Pontifex
(says John of Salisbury) omnibus grauis (...). lib. 6. c. 24.
and fere intolerabilis est. The Pope is become grievous and intolerable unto
all men. Again, speaking of the Church of Rome, he says, She shows her
self rather a steppe-mother then a mother, and that Scribes and Pharisees sit
in her, which lay importable burdens on men's shoulders, which they will not once
touch with their fingers.

Petrus de Alliaco speaking against the multitude and De reform. Eccles.
greatness of the Popes exactions, busieth himself to find a remedy, by
diminishing the excessive charges of the Pope, the number of Cardinals, and
disorders of inferior prelates: but (...) in vain. He proves by the testimony
of Humbertus, Ibidem.
that the cause that disposed the Greeks to revolt from the Church of Rome,
was the grieuance of that Church in exactions, excommunications and laws.
Speaking of the orders of Friars, he says, that their state is burdensome to
all men, and hurtful to hospitals and lazar-houses, and prejudicial to all
states of the Church.

Bernard of Clugny describes the qualities of Rome fitly: In Satyrd.
Roma dat omnibus, omnia dantibus: Rome gives all things to all men (says he)
but provided that they pay for it. And again: Omnia Romae cum praetio: All
things may be had at Rome if you will buy them.

Amongst us (says Mantuan) Churches, priests, altars, masses, crowns, fire,
incense, prayers, yea heaven and God himself is set to sale.

Venalia nobis (says he) Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae, Calamit.
lib. 3

Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale Deusque.
Budaeus says, that the Popes laws serve not now so much Annot. in Pandect.
for direction in manners, as by bankers craft (for so I may almost term it)
to get money. Sanctiones pontificae non moribus regendis vsui sunt, sed
propemodum dixerim, argenturiae faciendae authoritatem videntur accommodare.

Matthew Paris affirms, that the Church of Rome in the In Hen 3.
times of Henry the third, (...) right and justice, like a shameless and
common whore was set to sale to all men, accounting usury for a small fault,
and symonie for none. Eodem tempore (says he) permittente, vel procurante Papa
Gregorio (...) inualuit Romanae Ecclesiae insatiabilis cupiditas confundens fas
nefasque, quod deposito rubore, velut meretrix vulgaris and effrons omnibus
venalis and exposita, vsuram pro paruo, symoniam pro nullo inconuenienti
reputauit

And this taking with the Pope, is a matter so plain and open, that they count
symony for no sin in the Pope. Papa non (...) facere symoniam conferendo
beneficia and dignitates accepta pecunia, says Bartolus in l. Barbarius. de
offic. praet. 2. col. And that as Theodoric a Niem in his book of Schism
says, is the opinion of diverse Canonists. Felin de offic. and potest. iudic.
delegat. in c. ex part. 1. nu. 1. says, that modern Doctors hold without
distinction, that the Pope is not obnoxious to the crime of symonie, and that
himself is of that opinion.

What by color of law, and what without law, the Pope and his shauelings do
spoil the whole Christian common wealth. The gain of the Popes faculties, and
of popish pardons, Masses, and dirges, and other such like papal wares and
commodities, amounts to a great mass of money. Therewith the Pope makes
wars, the Massepriests and Friars maintain themselves, and their baggages,
and all their pompous train and bravery.

In the mean while the poor people wring, that bear most of this charge.
Further, they are bound to provide the furniture of altars, images, Churches,
and all that is required for Masses. In a certain visitation at Como, by the
Popes legate called Bonhomme so many particulars are The Acts of that
visitation were printed at (...). anno 1585.
commanded to be provided, as could not in seven leaves be comprehended. In
Spain every man of any sort is compelled to buy two indulgences; the one for
the quick, the other for the dead. The common rate of a pardon they say is
four reals of plate. If the executors will not be at the charge of a funeral,
they use to compel the parties.

The Pope to get money in his own territory beside all this raises new
customs and impositions daily, makes a monopoly of whores, and has ordinary
banks of usury, as the world knows, and popish writers confess, where they
speak of their Monti di pieta.

The like do other popish Princes, in so much, that if a man do well consider
all, he must (...) that their government is nothing else but a mere tyranny,
odious to God and man.

Therefore God does punish them often with wars, sedition, sickness and
famine, and other vsitations. In Spain it is an ordinary matter to see the
people die of famine. In Italy caterpillars have often devoured the corn, and
namely anno 1576. In the life of Pius the fifth, the people of Genua an. 1572.
do write, that many of their people died of hunger, and that few had means to
satisfy themselves with bread. The (...) in their annual letters speak of a
great famine in Italy and Sicily an. 1592. and show, that (...) were
constrained to (...) dogs.

What success the Popes soldiers, and other idlolatrous Papists have had of
late years, diverse may remember: the histories are full. Charles the fifth
serving the Pope against the Germans, was in the end forced by D. Maurice to
leave the country, and to save himself by flight. The which he did with such
speed, that diverse of his company forgot to put on their boots. In his
enterprise against Algier, he lost a great part of his army and fleet, and
returned laden rather with scorn then spoil. In the end when he saw nothing
succeed, he crept contemptibly into a monastery, and died as some say crazed in
his brain, and most ingloriously.

King Philip in his memorials to his son confesses, that he spent 5594.
millions of ducats in 33. years, and yet never reaped any thing for his
labor, but anguish and sorrow. His noble acts by his son Charles, were
written in a blanke book. His first attempt was against the Mores in the I Will
of Zerbi. But therein his fleet was taken and overthrown by the Turks, and
his whole army slain or discomfited. Leaving the Turks, he thought to try
his manhood against Christians. But in his wars he behaved himself so
manfully, that thinking to subdue the Low cuntries by force, which yielded unto
him for love, in the end he lost half of that which he possessed before.
Purposing to make a conquest of England, he was himself conquered and overcome
by a woman. Bragging of his invincible fleet, he found himself and his fleet
vanquished by small forces. In the end he aimed at the crown of France,
promised unto him by the traitorous (...), and their associates, but his loss
and scorn received in that country made an end of that old King.

In Hungary nothing has succeeded of late years, that has been enterprised
by the Popes counsel. Eugenius the fourth caused Ladislaus the King of Poland
and Hungary to break with the Turk, promising him great pardons and aides.
But his whole army was defeated, and himself slain at the battle of Varna.

Francis the first, that was confederate with Pope Clement the seventh, was
taken prisoner at Pauia: and promising to root out religion out of France,
never prospered in any enterprise.

Henry his eldest son confederating himself with the Pope for the
extirpation of such as forsook the errors of popery, was slain miserably at
a tournament, receiving a wound in his eye, with which he threatened to see Anne
Bourg a holy Martyr executed.

His son Francis died young of an aposteme in his ear, being justly punished,
for that he refused to hear the cries of the oppressed.

His brother Charles the ninth, the author and contriuer of the bloody massacre
of France, anno 1572, wherein so much innocent blood was shed, died bleeding at
all the conduits of his body, and wallowed in his own blood after he had shed
so much of others.

Henry yt third, was slain by a Dominican, or rather a demonicall Friar,
having bestowed great charge and labor in killing of Gods saints. And so the
line of Francis de Valois, and his sons failed, and the kingdom is translated
into the house of Bourbon, which they persecuted.

The Leaguers of France, which mutined for the maintenance of popery, are now
ruined, and the Duke of Guise and the chief leaders of those rebels come all
to unhappy ends.

Neither had those Christians, that either in the holy land or elsewhere,
fought under the Popes banners better success for the most part. Rodolphus who
at the request of Gregory the seventh, rebelled against the Emperor Henry, was
by him overthrown and slain in battle. Neither did Mathildis the Popes
paramour, and her soldiers speed much better.

Matthew Paris rehearses diverse attempts by Christians, In Willel. 2.
set on by the Pope against the Sarracens, but for the most part unhappy.
Walter Sansauior that first went against the^, lost his army in Bulgaria.
Peter the heremit was defeated with all his forces before Nice. Godescalcus a
Dutch priest also, would needs lead an army against the Turks: but he was
likewise overthrown with all his company. Godfray of Bullein, albeit he wanne
Jerusalem, yet he lost diverse hundred thousands in the adventure, and his
posterity did not long hold that which they had won.

In this service Lewis the ninth of France was taken prisoner first, and
afterward lost his life. In the same did the noble Frederick Barbarossa
perish, and infinite other Christians. The French men blasphemed against God,
seeing Ibid.
they had no better success in the holy land, as he says. De diuina conquer
bant ur ingratitudine, qui labores suos and deuotionis sinceritatem non
respiciebat, sed quasi in alienum populum tradi in manus hostiu^ patie batur.
Finally, all that took the Popes part against the Emperors Henry the third,
fourth, and fifth, Fridericke the first and second, and others, had evil
success.

Considering the promises therefore it is much to be wondered, that any princes
should serve the Pope, that is so notoriously declared to be Antichrist, and
that they should take his mark in (...) hands and foreheades, especially seeing
the evil success, that others have had in his service, and the plagues, that
are threatened against these, that take his mark upon them. Much also it is to
be lamented, that Christians should continue under the grievous yoke either of
the Pope, or popish religion. Rome in time past was mistress of ye world, and
the Church of Christ there most famous for piety throughout the world. But now
she serves Antichrist most basely, and is infamous for her impieties.

Baldus speaking of Italy, says: that she is of all other countries the most
miserable, as wanting one to redress her wrongs. Olim prouinciarum domina,
nunc omnium (...).

Lewis the 9. in his pragmaticall sanction confesses, that the kingdom of
France was miserably impouerished by the Popes exactions. Molinaeus in his
book de paruis datis, calls the Popes exactions barbarous. Iolian a
Cardinal in an Epistle to Eugenius the fourth, who deluded the Germans
demanding reformation of certain abuses, told the Pope plainly, that the
ruin of the Papacy was at hand, if order were not taken presently to satisfy
the people. Finis pro certo est, says he, securis ad radicem posita est.

The Germans in a certain meeting at Nuremberg told the Popes Legate, that
the burdens imposed by the Pope Grauam.
were so grievous, that they neither could, nor would bear German.
them any longer. Praedicta vrgentissima atque intolerabilia, penitusq non
ferenda onera diutius se nec perferre velle, nec tolerare posse. Among these
grieuances they reckon prohibitions of marriages, and certain meats at
certain times, and to certain persons, contrary to Gods law, pillages by
pretense of pardons under color of going to war against Turks, or building
of Churches, and such like; reservation of absolution in certain case, (...)
of stationarie Friars or limitors, the multitude of Friars, drawing causes to
the Popes cognition, appointing of delegate Judges and defenders of men's right,
as they are called, exemptions, reseruations, and prouissons of livings
Ecclesiastical, privileges, rules of the Popes chancerie, commendaes,
immunities of Monks, Friars, and priests, from payments and punishments,
unjust excommunications, and interdicts, multitude of holidayes, lands coming
into mortmayne, encroching upon lay men's lands and goods, pensions and charges
laid upon benefices, superfluities and superstitions in honoring of Saints, and
such like.

What rests then, seeing as Christians do see the miseries of the people,
that live under the yoke of the Popes kingdom and his adherents, but that they
seek all lawful means to be freed from this tyranny, and to shake off the
yoke of this Antichristian government.

CHAP. VIII. That no king living under the Pope, and receiving his doctrine,
can assure himself of his kingdom.
THat the yoke of Antichristian and popish government is grievous and
intolerable to all Christians, we have made it apparent by diverse particulars.
But could any Christian endure it; yet Christian Kings and Princes have least
reason to do it. For as their place is higher then others, so the dishonor that
is offered to (...), and the hazard which they incur, is of far greater
consideration, then if ye same should be offered to private persons. And yet no
man runs into greater hazard, nor receives greater wrongs at the Popes
hands, and by means of his doctrine and government, then Christian Kings and
princes. For first they are in no assurance of their state: and secondly, they
run in danger to lose their lives, if they receive the Popes authority and
doctrine within their kingdoms: Of which two we will speak severally and in
order.

That they stand in no (...) of (...), it may be proved, first, by the Popes
doctrine: and secondly, by their practice. Their doctrine is clear both by the
Popes decretals, and by the common opinions of their principal Doctors.
Clement the fifth in the Chapter beginning Romani de iureiuerando. declares,
that the (...) Emperors take an oath of fealty and subjection to the Pope.
Romani principes (says he) orthodoxae fidei professores, etc. That is, the
Emperors of Rome professing the faith, with fervor of faith and ready
devotion honoring the holy-church of Rome, whose head is Christ our Redeemer,
and the Bishop of Rome our redeemers Vicar, have not thought it an indignity
to submit their heads, and to bind themselves by oath, from whom they have
received, not only the approbation of their person assumed unto the imperial
dignity, but also unction, consecration, and the crown of the Empire. But if
the Emperor receive his Empire from the Pope, then may he be deposed by the
Pope. And if he take an oath of fealty and obedience to the Pope, then is he
forsworn, if he obey not his sentences and censures, as the Canonists teach.

Likewise the same Pope affirms, that the Emperor Clem. Romans de iureiurando.
is bound by oath to root out the enemies of the Romish church, and not to
make any confederation or league with any enemy of the Pope, or any suspected
unto him. Which being granted, it follows, that no King or Emperor can make
peace with others, then such as the Pope likes, and that he is to make wars
upon such as he misliketh. A matter which now presently much concerns all
Christians. For if the Spaniards or other the Popes vassals have respect to
this law, as no question but they have, then all capitulations betwixt them,
and Christian princes of our profession are made by his dispensation, and to
hold no longer then it shall stand with the Popes good liking.

The Author of the gloss upon the same chapter does also plainly declare,
that the Emperor is subject to the Pope. Modo quaero, (says he) nonne Jesus
voluit, etc. Now I ask (says he) whether Christ Jesus would not, that these
Princes, to whom he has given temporal jurisdiction, etc. should be in some
sort subject unto his Vicar, that is, to the Bishop of Rome: and whether he
would not, that these Princes should give oath to the Bishop of Rome; and
whether he would not, that they should submit their heads to the same Bishop.
Whereunto Clement answers in the text, that they should. And very plain it
is, that this was the meaning of Clement, seeing he determines, that the
Emperor ought to take an oath of fealty and obedience: fidelitatis and
obedientiae: but if he swear fealty and obedience, then is he to show
himself obedient, and the Pope may punish him, if he swear false. So we see,
that if the Popes law hold, then the Emperor for his Empire is tenant at the
Popes will, and may hold it no longer, then he continues in his obedience,
unless he will either refuse to swear, or be forsworn.

In the chapter Pastoralis Clement. de sent. and re indicata: the Pope
declares, that he has superiority over the Empire, and that in the vacancie
of the Empire himself ought to succeed the Emperor. Thereupon also he
contradicts the Emperors proceeding, and declares the Emperors sentence
against Robert king of Sicilie to be void, and without effect. But if the
Emperor cannot proceed against rebels, but that his sentence shall be
reuersed by the Pope; then is he the Popes vassal and subject, and cannot
longer hold the crown, then it shall please the Pope. Neither may other
princes look for greater favor at the Popes hands, then the Emperor.

Boniface the eight in the Chapter, Vnam sanctam. extr. com. de maiorit. and
obedient. does expressly determine, that the Pope has both swords, and that
he has power both to make kings, and to depose them. Spiritualis potestas
potestatem terrenam instituere habet, and iudicare, si bona non fuerit. That
is, the spiritual power has right to ordain the earthly power, and to judge
the same, if it be not good. And again: if the earthly power go astray, the
same must be judged by the spiritual power That is, by the Pope. But if he
have right to judge kings; then has he right to (...) judgment against them,
and to take their crown from them. This decretal was published against Philip
the French King, but no doubt, but the Pope takes himself to have the same
right against all other kings. Nay, albeit the same sentence seems to have
bin suspended in regard of the French king by the chapter (...). com. de
priuilegijs, yet have later Popes proceeded against some French Kings, as for
example, Lewis the twelfth, and Henry the third. How may then other Kings hope
to escape their censures that are not privileged?

Now if any man except and say, that this is not the doctrine of Rome that now
is, he shall show himself to be but a nouice, that thinks that any Papist dare
depart from the doctrine of his holy fathers decretals. Beside that, if we
search the books of late writers, we shall find that they do not digress from
their elders. Josephus Vestanus in his treatise De osculatione pedum
Pontificis, p. 137. among diverse principles and dictates of the Popes doctrine,
derived as he says from Gregory the seventh, sets down these two: first,
that it is lawful for the Pope to depose the Emperor; and next, that he has
power to absolve subjects from their oath of obedience to tyrannical princes.
But if he have power to depose princes, and to loose the subjects from the band
of their obedience unto them; then is it manifest, that princes can no longer
hold their crowns then it shall please (...) Pope.

Bellarmine likewise lib. 5. de Pontif. Romans c. 6. speaking of the Pope, says,
he has power to change kingdoms, and to take from one, and to give unto
another, if that be necessary for the saving of souls. And this he offers to
prove. Potest (...) regna (says he) and vni auferre, atque alteri confer si
id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem, vt probabimus.

Pius the (...) in his bull against Queen Elizabeth affirms, that the pope
is made a prince, and set over al nations and kingdoms, to pull up, to
destroy, to dissipate and spoil, to plant and build. Hunc vnum (says he)
super omnes gentes, and omnia regna Principem constituit, qui euellat,
destruat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet and (...).

The (...) of France, in their book entitled, La verite defendue, a book as
true as Celsus his book written against Origin lib. 1. contra (...).
Christian religion, entitled by him Veraoratio, or a true discourse) do defend
the authority of the Pope, which he chalengeth in judging and deposing
temporal princes. Nay, which is more strange, they blush not to affirm, that
this great soueraignety in the Pope is profitable for princes, that stand in
more doubt of loosing their te^porall kingdoms then of any other loss. But
howsoever it is, if princes stand upon loosing their crowns at the Popes
pleasure, then are they in poor estate, and without any assurance of their
kingdoms, (...) especially the malice of the Pope against such as profess the
truth, and his ambition in encroching upon his neighbors dominions.

Ghineard a Iebusite was hanged in Paris anno 1594. for writing and holding
diverse seditious positions, whereof one was, that the crown of France might,
and ought to be translated into another family, then that of Bourbon. Neither
need any man make question, by (...) he meant that this feat should be wrought,
seeing the Pope is the man, whose authority the Iebusites and Cananites (...)
to (...) Kings.

Finally, Robert Parsons in his Warnword, part. 2. f. 117. 6 alleges a book
entitled, De iusta Henrici tertij abdicatione, that is, of the just deposing of
the French King Henry the third: whereby it is apparent, that he also holds,
that the Pope may (...) depose Kings. Neither is it likely, that he would so
busily have sought to stir up rebels in England, and to suborne cut-throtes
to kill the Queen, or that he would have desired that Pius the (...) his bull
against her might be suspended for a time (...) Papists, if he had not taken
her to be deposed by the Pope.

But because this (...) of the Popes authority, that of it self is little
worth, would avail nothing, unless the people also can be drawn to favor
the Popes faction; therefore the Pope and his scholars give also a power to
the people to depose Kings and princes, especially if once they prove tyrants,
that is, as (...) teach, if they be excommunicate by the Pope, or else seek to
maintain their state or the truth against the violence and practices of the
popish (...). Gregory the seventh took away all regal power from Henry the
fourth, and gave the same unto Rodulph of Saxony, commanding all Christians
to receive Rodulph for their King, and not to obey the Emperor Henry in any
thing, as being absolved from their oaths, which they were wont to give unto
Kings. Regiam ei potestatem adimo (says Gregory the Platina in (...). 7.
seventh) interdicoque Christianis omnibus illo (...) absolutis quo fides
regibus (...), ne Henrico vllain re obtemperent, Rodulphum in regem suscipiant.
But this could not be executed, unless the people had some power given them,
to put by the one, and to receive the other. Nor can princes stand firm, if
seditious Popes can give the people this power.

Innocent the fourth, likewise deposed Friderick the second, Math. Paris in
Hen. 3.
forbidding his subjects to obey him, and commanding them to whom it
appertained to choose another King. As if it lay in the power of the people to
do the one or the other: or as if the princes authority (...) in this case
upon the peoples pleasure.

Pius the (...) declared Queen Elizabeth's subjects to be freed In Bulla cont.
Elizabeth.
from their obedience, and not only commanded them not to obey her, but by
all persuasions moved them to depose her. Is not this then a plain and evident
argument, that the Pope does give power to the people contrary to the doctrine
of the Apostle, Romans 13. and Tit. 3. to rebel against princes, and to depose
them?

William Raynolds a renegate Englishman, in a treatise set out under the (...)
name of William Rosse, and entitled, De iusta reip. Christianae supra reges
impios and haereticos authoritate, iustissimaque Catholicorum (he should say
cacolicoru^) ad Henricum Nauarraeu^, and quemcunque haereticum a regno Galliae
repellendum confederatione, does in express terms give the people power to
depose Kings, and maintains impudently the wicked league of the French rebels
against their King. In the 2. chap. of that book, he affirms, that the right
of all the Kings and kingdoms of Europe is laid upon this foundation, that
common wealths or people, may depose their kings. His words are, Quod ius omnium
Europae regum and regnorum hoc fundamento nititur, quod resp. possint suos
reges deponere. But therein he shows himself and his consorts to be the most
notorious traitors of all Europe.

Likewise Robert Parsons our adversary (if such a base companion may deserve
that name) and a notorious (...) of sedition, in his book of succession to the
crown of England made against the just title of King James, and in favor of
the infanta of Spain, in his first book chap. 1. (...) to prove, that
succession to government by nearenesse of blood, is by positive laws of the
commonwealth, and may upon just causes be altered by the same. His intention is
to show, that they which made that law may also alter it. In the third chapter
he strives with himself to show, that not only unworthy pretenders may be
put back, but that Kings in possession may be chastised and deposed. The first
part of which proposition is directed against our most worthy and rightful
King, before his coming to the crown: the second aymeth at him now, that by
Gods grace he is attained to the Crown. In the fourth chapter he says, that
oaths in diverse cases bind not subjects, and that sometimes they may lawfully
proceed against Princes. Matters so seditious and odious, that it seems to me
admirable, that such a lewd companion should be suffered so impudently to bark
against the authority of Kings, or that the Archpriest or the (...), or Mass
priests that depend upon him, and allow this doctrine, and percase yet stand
for the infantaes title, together with their co^sorts, should be suffered to
live by the laws of that king, whom by their wicked doctrine they have sought
to dispossess of his right, and to depose from his royal throne. Neither is
this the doctrine of these base companions only, but also of other more famous
Doctors, and of the most illustrious ringleaders of the Iebusites.

Bellarmine lib. 5. de pontif. Romans c. 6. says, It is not lawful for
Christians to tolerate a King that is an infidel, or an heretic, if he go
about to draw his subjects to his heresy or infidelity. His words are these:
Non licet Christianis tolerare regem infidelem aut haereticum, si ille
pertrahere conetur subditos ad suam haeresim aut infidelitatem. Now it is well
known, that such as receive not the superstition and heretical doctrine of the
Romish synagogue, are by the sect of Papists accounted heretics, and little
better then infidels.

Emanuel Sa a Iebusite also, in a book called Aphorismi confessariorum,
holds these aphorisms ensuing. In verbo Princeps. That the Prince may be
deprived by the commonwealth for tyranny, and also if he do not his duty, or
when there is any just cause, and another may be chosen of the greater part of
the people. But some (says he) suppose, that only tyranny is a just cause of
deposition. His words stand thus: Potest princeps per remp. priuari ob
tyrannidem, and si non faciat officium suum, and cum est causa aliqua iusta,
and alius eligi a maiori part populi. Quidam tamen solam tyrannidem causam
putant. And in the word Tyrannus, he affirms, that he may deposed by the
people, although they have sworn to be obedient to him, if being admonished he
will not amend. Potest deponi a populo etiam qui ei iur auit obedientiam
perpetuam, si monitus non vult corrigi. True it is, that he speaks of a
tyrant. But the Papists account al tyrants, that will not yield to the Popes
will, or that are by him excommunicate, as is proved by the example of their
writings against King Henry the eight king of England, and the French Kings
Henry the 3. and 4. and diverse others.

Friar Ghineard a French (...) held, that Henry the French King now living was
very favorably dealt withal, if he were only deposed and thrust into a
monastery. The same man in diverse positions maintains the rebellion of the
leaguers in France, which by force of arms sought to depose their King. A
doctrine seditious, and so judged by the parliament of Paris, which also
adjudged the author to death for the same. Finally, we are not to doubt but
that this is the doctrine, not only of the Iebusites, but also of al Papists
that are combined together for the maintenance of the Popes seat and faction.

This then being the wicked and seditious doctrine both of the Pope and his
principal Doctors, concerning the deposing of Kings, and translating of
kingdoms: let us now see whether the papistical faction has not from time to
time endeavored to put the same in execution. Gregory the seventh, otherwise
called Hildebrand or helbrand, as he was the first that broched this doctrine
of deposing of Kings, so did he use all manner of violence to execute the same.
He set both Germany and Italy on fire, while he prosecuted the Emperor with
fire and sword. He did also trouble the peace of the Church, and brake the
unity of Christians. (...) (says Beno de vita and gest. Heldebrandi) non solum
Ecclesiae perturbauit pacem, sed etiam ecclesiasticam scidit vnitatem.
Sigebertus In Chron. anno 1085.
says, that the same Gregory confessed, that by the instigation of the devil,
he had stirred up anger and hatred against mankind. Confessus est etc. says
he, se suadente diabolo contra humanum genus odium and iram concitasse. The
Emperor by this means was spoiled of a great part of his Empire, and had his
true subjects (...), and his country vexed with wars, and himself in the
end brought to great extremity.

Alexander the third having excommunicated Fridericke Barbarossa, stirred up
Germany, France, and Italy against him, purposing wholly to dispossess (...)
of the Empire. He sent letters to Christian Princes and people, (says Platina)
yielding reasons of his proceeding against Fridericke. Neither need we to
doubt, but that the drift of his letters was to move them to take arms
against the Emperor.

Innocent the third caused both Philip and other Emperors to be furiously
persecuted, both by their subjects, and by others. Neither did he cease until
he had brought them both to destruction. Against Philip he gave out very
bravely, that it should cost him his miter or triple crown, but he would pull
the crown from his head. The same Pope brought John king of England into such
straites, that he forced him to surrender his Crown into the hands of his
Legate, and to receive the same of him again, as it were of favor. O miserable
blindness of princes, that did suffer themselves to be brought to this
slavery! O miserable seduced people, that followed a stranger, nay Antichrist
against their Christian King!

Gregory the ninth having excommunicated and deposed the Emperor Friderick the
second, set up Robert the French Kings brother against him, promising him aid
and money for the attaining of the Empire. Ad quam (dignitatem) opes and operam
effundemus consequendam, says Gregory. By the preaching Math. Paris in Hen. 3.
of the Friars, he armed the people of Millan, and others Ibidem.
against the Emperor, absoluing them from their sins if they would (...)
against him. When preaching served not, he made the Minorites and others to
rise in arms against the Emperor. Praefectos Mediolanenfis (says the Emperor)
imo vero (...) exercitus, statuens loco sui G. de monte longo pradictu^, and
fratrem Leonem ministrum ordinis fratrum minorum, qui non solum accincti
gladijs and loricis, verum etiam (...) insistentes Mediolanenses and alios,
quicumque nostrum and nostrorum personam offenderent, a peccatis omnibus
absoluebant. Further, he stirred up those which had bound themselves by vow to
fight against Saracens, to leave them, and to fight against the Emperor. The
like course did Innocent the fourth continue, stirring up not only open
enemies, but also domestical traitors, by poison, or by other means to
destroy the Emperor. Praedicti facinoris patratores (says Fridericke) tam
(...).
fugitiui scilicet, quam obessi fratrum minorum stipati consortio, crucis ab
eis signo recepto, authoritatem summi pontificis per Apostolicas literas
praetendentes, (...) aperte se gerere sacrosanctae matricis Romanae Ecclesiae
praedicant, ac praedictae mortis and ex (...) nostrae summum pontificem (...)
asserunt incentore. The Emperor plainly declared, that the Pope not only
authorized those that made war against him, but also such as by treason
conspired to take away his life, promising great reward by the false preaching
Friars, to those that should kill him.

John the 22. Bennet the 12. and Clement the 6 with implacable hatred
prosecuted Lewis of Bauier for no other cause, but because he took upon him the
title of Emperor, without their allowance. Joan. pontifex (says Platina)
Iohann. Vr sinum in Italiam propere mittit, qui Florentinos and Guelphos omnes
in Bauarum confirmaret. Writing the life of Bennet the 12. he says: That by
his procurement all the country fell into arms. Ad arma omnia respiciebant.
The same man caused the Romans to rebel against the Emperor. Clement the 6.
dealt with the Uicounts of Milan to resist the Emperor, and both in (...)
maintained a strong faction against him, and also made Charles king of Boheme
Emperor to trouble him in Germany.

Boniface the eight gave plenarie remission of sins to all that would fight
against the house of Colonna, which he before had excommunicated. Taking
displeasure against Philip the French king, he did excommunicate him, and gave
away his kingdom to Albert. Philippum eiusque regnum (says Platina) Alberto
regi subijcit. He did also endeavor to put his sentence in execution: and
percase had done it, but that Philip by the industry of Sciarra Colonna and
Nogaret prevented him, and apprehended the furious Pope. Ferdinand king of
Spain had no other pretense to invade the kingdom of Navarre, but only to
execute the sentence of Julius the second, that had excommunicated him for
taking part with the French. No doubt therefore but one time or other the
French king, that is the king of Navarre also, will require satisfaction of the
Pope and Spaniard, that did him this wrong. But in the mean while we may see
in this fact of Julius the arrogance of the Popes, that take upon them to
depose kings at their pleasure, and to give away their kingdoms.

This seditious course of the Pope in sentencing kings, was also the sole
pretense almost of the Leaguers rebellious stirs against Henry the third in
France. For when the Iebusites and their faction had declared, that the king
was justly deposed, then did the rebels take arms against him, and ceased not
to pursue him to the death. The Spaniards also for the same cause aided them,
and concurred with them. Likewise the execution of the Popes sentence against
Henry the fourth of France, was the cause both of the revolt of his subjects,
and of the wars made against him by the prince of Parma and the Spaniards.
Such a firebrand of wars do we find the Popes sentence to be.

No sooner was Henry the eight, king of England, pronounced excommunicate by
Paul the third, but he sent Cardinal Poole to stir up the French King to
invade his kingdom. Afterward when he saw, that the French could not be
stirred to execute his pleasure, he caused diverse rebellions to be raised
against him by the seditious clamours of Mass Priests, Monks, and Friars,
both in Yorkshire and Lincolne-shire, and other parts of England. Sanders
(...), that he commanded the Nobility and chief men De schis. lib. 1
of England, by force and arms to oppose themselves against the king, and to
cast him out of his kingdom. Principibus viris ac Ducibus Angliae, (...)
Nobilitati praeeipit, vt vi and armis se Henrico opponant, illumque e regni
finibus eijcere nit antur.

The like course held Pius Quintus that wicked Pope, against Queen Elizabeth
of pious memory: for he did not only declare her deprived of her kingdom,
but by all means sought actually to deprive her of it: and that first by
dealing with the French and Spanish, by force of arms to invade her realms,
and afterward stirring up and comforting Malcontents and Rebels, to set the
realm in combustion by civil wars. Hierome Catena in the discourse of the
life of this impious Pius, shows: how he persuaded the Spaniard, that he
could not otherwise better secure the Low Countries, then by overthrowing the
Queen of England. He declares further, how he induced the French to take part
against her. Likewise did Gregory the thirteen send forces into Ireland,
together with his legate Sanders. Sixtus Quintus by all means hastened the
Spanish fleet, that came against England, anno 1588. Neither have they and
others ceased upon all occasions to seek her hurt and destruction.

This therefore is a most clear case, that no Christian king can be in
safety, as long as he suffers Iebusites and Mass Priests to advance the
Popes authority, and to preach seditiously, that the people has power to put
Princes out of their royal seat. It is very dangerous also to foster any man
within the Realm, that believes this seditious doctrine.

True it is, that Papists cast many colors to hide the deformities of this
doctrine: but these colors are easily washed away, as not being able to abide
any weather. First, they allege, that diverse popish Princes have enjoyed
their kingdoms quietly without molestation. But we are able to show more
Princes of late time troubled by the Popes practices, then they are able to
show, to have lived peaceably by them. Furthermore, the reason why Popes do not
trouble all, is, because it were not safe for them to fall out with too many at
one time, and not because their over large authority is not prejudicial to
all. For (...) the Pope may depose all kings upon cause. then all kings stand
in like danger, seeing no man can avoid all causes of quarrel.

Bellarmine lib. 5. de pontif. Romans cap. 6. says that the Pope does practice
this power for saving of souls. But experience teaches us, that through his
excommunications, and sentences of deposition pronounced against diverse kings,
he has ruined kingdoms, and brought infinite people to destruction both of
body and soul. Theodoric of Niem speaking of the deposing of the king of
Hungary by Boniface the 9. says: There followed of it great slaughter of
innumerable people, destruction of churches and houses of religion, the burning
of cities, towns and castles, and infinite other mischiefs, which follow long
wars: because kings without the hurt of many cannot be deposed. His words are
these: Vnde clades hominum innumerabilium, and Ecclesiasticorum and piorum
locorum, and Monasteriorum enormis destruction, incendia (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...) non infinita alia mala, quae guerrae secum producunt, diu vigentia
(...): quia non sine multorum dispendio (...) deponuntur.

Emanuel Sa in his (...), for confessaries does signify, that this doctrine
holds against tyrants only. But what does this relieve the Papists, when
those which fall out with the Pope, and yield not conto his most unreasonable
requests, are presently by Friars and priests proclaimed tyrants? The very
Papists themselves cannot deny, but that Queen Elizabeth was much renowned for
her rare clemency: and that not without cause, seeing she spared always
those, that would not have spared her, if it had lien in their power to have
hurt her: and yet they accuse her of tyranny. In the resolution of certain
cases of conscience, set out by Allen and Parsons for instruction of English
traitors: Non gerit se vt Roginam, (say they) sed exercet (...). She does not
behave her self as a Queen, but does exercise tyranny. The like words they
gave out against the French king now reigning, albeit he has showed mercy to
many (...) none. (...) Ernest sending away one, that undertook to kill the
Count Maurice: amazzate (said he) quel (...)? that is: kill me that tyrant?

Others allege, that the Pope proceeds only against heretics and notorious
offenders. But that is a most notorious and palpable untruth: for no man is
more eagerly prosecuted, then religious, pious, and godly Christians, as the
executions of France and Flanders do show. And if they will not confess it
true in Christians of our time: yet can they not deny it in the times of the
Emperors, Henry the third, fourth, and fifth, of Frederick the first and
second, and of Lewis of Bauier, who made such confessions of their faith, being
declared heretics, as the Popes themselves could not contradict: and yet did
the Popes excommunicate them, and sought to depose them as heretics and
tyrants. Likewise did they prosecute other kings and Emperors, albeit
consenting with them in matters of faith. Henry the third of France, of late
was cruelly persecuted, and murdered by the popish faction: and yet was he very
superstitiously addicted to popish religion. Suppose then, that the Pope would
(...) against none but heretics and tyrants; yet it is an easy matter and
very usual for him to pick quarrels, and to impute heresy and tyranny and
great crimes to most innocent men.

Finally they may say, that the Pope is always assisted by Gods holy spirit,
and cannot err in his sentences of excommunication, and deposing of Princes,
especially for matters of religion. But this allegation is most brutish,
ridiculous, and refuted by evident experience and most evident proofs that
teach us, that he is rather led by the spirit of Satan, who was a murderer
from the beginning, and is the author of rebellions and troubles, then by the
spirit of God, that is the God of peace, and author of concord among Christians.

Wherefore let all Princes that live under the Popes obedience, consider well
the former reasons and examples, and look into their own danger and slippery
estate. For albeit now the Pope (...) his hands full, and cannot or dare not
offer them wrong; yet many occasions may be offered of falling out betwixt them
and the Pope. And in that case either they must confess, as we do, that the
Pope is a false prophet and Antichrist; or else yield up their Crown at his
pleasure, or else defend their right without lawful title, and that both
against rebels and foreign enemies: which will be a matter hard for them to do.

CHAP. IX. That no King or Prince can secure his person against the attempts of
traitors, if he suffer any in his kingdom that teach or hold the Popes
doctrine concerning the deposing and killing of Kings.
THis corollary or conclusion, is necessarily deduced from the doctrine of
Papists, concerning the Popes power in deposing of Kings and Princes. For if it
be lawful for the Pope to depose a Prince from his royal throne, then is it
lawful for the Pope to command any assassin or cutthrote to murder him, seeing
it is not likely that a magnanimous King will yeelo to so base a companion as
the Pope, nor give up his Crown without force and compulsion.

The same is also proved by the general practice of Popes, by the words of the
Popes bulls, by the doctrine of their principal followers, and by diverse
particular facts and attempts both of Popes and their wicked instruments and
agents. For first we find, that those Popes that have gone about to depose
Kings, have also used all means to destroy the^ (...) to cut their throtes.
The which may be verified by the proceeding of Gregory the seventh against
Henry the Emperor, of Paschalis and Urban against his son, of Alexander
against Fridericke Barbarossa, of Innocent the third against Philip and Otho,
of Gregory the ninth and Innocent the fourth against Fridericke the second, of
Clement the fifth against Henry of Lucembourg, whom he caused to be poisoned in
the sacrament. Of John the 22. and Clement the sixth against Lewis of Bauier,
of Paul the third against Henry the 8. King of England: of Pius the fifth,
Gregory the 13. and Sixtus Quintus against Queen Elizabeth: and finally, of
the Popes that favored the rebellious leaguers of France against the French
Kings Henry the third and fourth, and diverse others. For why did they raise
rebellion, move wars, and suborne secret traitors to attempt against the
persons of Kings, but that they meant to give leave to desperate cutthrotes to
kill them?

Secondly, the words of the Popes bulls, and the doctrine of their wicked agents
does notoriously manifest their lewd and damnable purposes touching this point.
Gregory the 7 Platina, in Greg. 7.
does (...) deprive Henry the Emperor of his Empire, and forbids his (...)
to obey him. Next, he commands all to accept of Rodolph as their King, and
to obey him. But neither could he be deposed without arms, nor might Rodolph
be suffered to reign during the life of the Emperor Henry.

Paul the third in his seditious bull against Henry the 8. king of England,
commanded the Nobles and other principal men of the country to oppose
themselves with force and arms against him, and to cast him out of his
kingdom. But arms are taken in hand for no other purpose then to kill such as
resist: and a weak conceit it is to think, that King Henry could be thrust
out of his kingdom, unless he were also deprived of his life.

That impious Pope Pius the fifth also, that sent Nicholas Norton to move an
insurrection against Queen Elizabeth in England, and his legate Sanders to do
the like in Ireland, did intend no less then the (...) of her person, if the
rebels had prevailed. In his bull against her he declared, that he had
authority to pull up and to destroy, and forbids her subjects to obey her:
which could not be executed without her destruction.

Sixtus the 5. in his declaration anno 1588. against the same Queen, having at
large rayled with his foul and filthy mouth against the Lords anointed,
exhorts all her people to lay hands on her, to arrest her, and to (...) to
her punishment. That is also the end of that traitor Cardinal Allen his
seditious exhortation to the Nobility and people of England and Ireland. But
because the Papists had no better success an. 1588. therefore they suppressed
this discourse for very shame, least their dealings for the destruction of
princes should be made manifest, and least the mysteries of Romish Babylon
should be revealed.

Parsons that bastardly English renegate, in his book of Parsons an abbettor
of cutthrotes and King-killers.
succession, part. 1. cap. 3. allows the deposition of (...). John, of King
Edward the second, King Richard the second, King Henry the sixth, and of diverse
violent attempts made by (...) against their lawful Kings. Thereby it
appears also, that he approves wars and rebellions made to depose Kings,
and to destroy them. Nay, allowing the violent death of Caesar in the Senate,
he seems directly to persuade the murder of princes: which is the rather to
be (...) leeued, for that he was an agent in the printing, and as his consorts
the (...)-priests say, in making the libell set out by Allen against Queen
Elizabeth, proclaiming reward to all that could lay (...) upon her, nay that
could kill her.

Now least any man should doubt of the doctrine of the (...) in this point,
Emanuel Sa in his aphorisms In verbo Tyrann.
for confessaries, does thus instruct all Mass priests: Tyrannice gubernans
just acquisitum dominium, non potest spoliari sine publico iudicio, lata vero
sententia potest quisque fieri executor: That is, he that governs
tyrannically his state, which he has gotten instly, cannot be spoiled of it
without public sentence (of the Pope); but sentence being passed, every man
may execute the sentence: he means, that he may kill the King. He says also,
that the people have power to depose the prince. He does further understand the
Pope to be every Kings lawful Judge. Is it then to be (...), if the
Mass Priests and their followers, grounding themselves upon these resolutions
attempt against princes persons?

John Ghineard one of the sect of the Iebusites, did publicly acknowledge in
the parliament of Paris, anno 1594. that he had written these words: The cruel
Nero (that is, Henry the third) was slain by one Clement, and the counterfeit
Monk by the hand of a true Monk. Again, the heroical act done by James
Clement, as a grace of Gods holy spirit, and called by that name by our divines
the Iebusites, was justly commended by Bourgoin late prior of the Iacobins, a
confessor and martyr. Talking of the king now reigning, he wrote that he would
have him shut into a cloister, and deposed. But if he cannot be deposed without
war, then (says he) let war be made against him. And if there be no means
to prevail by wars, let him otherwise be killed. I would therefore have
indifferent men to judge, whether this be not spiritual doctrine.

Our own country Mass Priests also do not differ from their fellows in this
point. One of them setting down certain resolutions for the instruction and
consolation of the English, as he says, asks this question, Whether a
Catholic like (he should say, a traiterous papist) is not bound by virtue of
the Bull, (of Pius Quintus) to take arms against Elizabeth, and to depose her,
imprison her, and kill her; if occasion should serve, and if he have hope to
obtain victory. To this he answers: Ex (...) Bullae, (...) eum non teneri
ad ea quae proponuntur, nisi omnia it a compar at a essent, (...) certa
parataque spes esset victoriae: quo (...) propter bonum (...) fidei and
religion is (...) tenerentur, qui aliquid possent praestare. That is: by force
of the Bull, we do not think, that he is bound to do those things that are
proposed, unless all things were so ordered, that the hope of victory were
certain and ready: in which case, for the common good of the faith and
religion, those should be bound, that are able to do any thing. So it
appears, that nothing held the Papists from laying violent hands upon the
Queen, our most gracious sovereign Lady, but that they had not all things
ready, nor were in hope of certain victory. And this no doubt is the
resolution they have against all princes, that resist either the Pope, or their
cacolike religion. The tenth question is this: An stante Bulla in virtute, etc.
Whether the Bull of Pius Quintus standing in force, a private man might not
kill Elizabeth, (our (...) Queen) and the reason is, because she is a tyrant,
and had no just title to the Crown: and whether the Pope cannot dispense, that
this may be done, so it were likely; that by her death, catholic (they should
say popish) religion should be restored. To this question answer is made: As
touching this matter, if any by her death could certainly deliver the realm
from oppression, without all doubt, it should be lawful for him to kill her:
but as matters do now stand, it is best not to speak of that matter. Hereby we
may plainly see, that this generation does continually talk of killing
Christian kings, and desire nothing more, then to murder the^, and to destroy
them, that they may make way for the Pope. These questions are found in the
acts of the council of York, and were found in a search for David Ingleby a
Mass Priest, and no doubt, were allowed and brought into England either by him
or by some of his consorts.

According to this damnable doctrine, the Popes and their (...) have from time
to time endeavored, partly by cut throats and assassins, and partly by
diabolical practisers and (...) to destroy princes, that stopped the course of
their ambition. Beno the Cardinal says, that Vita and gesta Hildebrandi.
Gregory the seventh watching the Emperor, that was wont to pray much in the
church of S. Marie, hired a fellow to place great stones upon the beams or
vault of the church, right over the place where he prayed, which being thrown
down might kill the Emperor. The words are these: Imperator solitus erat
frequenter ire ad orationem ad Ecclesiam S. Mariae, quae est in monte Auentino,
Hidelbrandus autem, cum per exploratores omnia eius opera solicit inquireret,
locum in quo frequentius Imperator velstans, velprostratus orabat, notari
fecit, and quendam, promissa (...), ad hoc induxit, vt supratrabes Ecclesiae
occulte lapides magnos (...), and ita aptaret, vt de alto super caput
Imperatoris demitteret, and ipsum contereret. About the same time also, he
sought (says Beno) to destroy the Emperor Ibid.
by secrettraitors, but God preserved him. And then there were some, that
thought Hildebrand to be conscious and the setter of the treason, because a
little before the treason, like a false Prophet he presumed to foretell the
kings death. The words of Beno are these: Eisdem diebus parauit Imperatorem
perdere per occultos proditores: Deus autem eum custodiuit. Et eodem tempore
fuerunt (...), qui existimauerunt ipsum Hildebrandum conscium extitisse, and
ordinatorem proditionis, quia eisdem diebus paulo ante proditionem, de morte
regis falso prophetata praesumpsit. Neither are we to doubt, but they will
empoyson princes if they can, seeing Popes (as Beno, and diverse authentical
authors testify) use to empoyson one another.

Innocent the fourth, by Peter de vinea, a special favorite Matt. Paris in
Henric. 3.
of Fridericke the 2, caused poison to be offered unto him. Ecclesiae inimici
dixerunt, (says Mat. Paris speaking of Pope Innocent) quod ad hoc facinus cor
Petri eneruando muneribus and pollicitis maximis inclinar at. The enemies of
the Church (or of the Pope rather) say, that with great rewards and promises,
the Pope had induced Peter de vineis to undertake this foul fact. And
afterward, absorduit Domini Papae fama per hoc non mediocriter. That is: The
fame of the Pope by this fact was not a little stained. Furthermore, says
Matthew. Paris, the Emperor returned into Apulia having drunk poison, as it is
said: Redijt in Apuliam, vt dicitur, potionatus.

Henry of Lucemburge the Emperor was poisoned by a Dominican Friar, that
being hired by the contrary faction conveyed poison into the Sacrament. (...)
religiosus (says Vrspergensis) porrexit Imperatori intoxicatam Eucharistiam.
Anno 1313.
A certain Friar gave poison to the Emperor in the Eucharist. The same is
also testified by Baptista Ignatius, supplementum Cronicorum, Textorin officina
cap. veneno extincti, and diverse others. Auentinus says, the Friar was moved
thereto by Clement the fifth. That it was so, the great execution done by the
Emperors soldiers upon diverse conuents of the Dominican Friars, does declare.

But what need we seek foreign histories, when histories Caxtons history.
report, that king John of England was poisoned by a Monk of Swinsted Abbey,
for that he was supposed to be adverse to the popish faction?

We may also remember, that of late the French king Henry the third, was most
shamefully murdered by a Dominican Friar called James Clement, set on by the
popish Leaguers, and persuaded thereto by the Iebusites of Paris. The Pope also
that then was, did highly commend the man's zeal in a solemn oration, made in
the consistory of Cardinals upon the first intelligence of this fact. Neither
do I think, that any of the popish faction will condemn the man, although his
deed was most execrable.

John Iauregui a desperate Spaniard anno 1582. discharged Acta Joan. Iaureg.
and Metecanihist Belg. lib. 11.
a pistole upon the prince of Orange, with a full purpose to kill him. His
master persuaded him unto it, but nothing did work more with him, then his
confessors encouragement, who understanding his resolution, did not only
confirm him in his purpose, but also give him absolution, and minister the
Sacrament unto him. For that is the fashion of these helhounds, to give the
Sacrament to such wicked assassins, to confirm them in their wicked purpsses.
Confession of Gerard.
That which Iauregui attempted, Balthazar Gerard did afterward perform most
trecherously and villanously. And so by the hand of a base rascal, a noble
prince was murdered, and a lion trecherously slain by a curre. The attempt
was grounded partly upon the old king of Spains promises, and partly upon the
encouragements given him by one D. Geryon a Minorite of Tornay, and a Iebusite
of Trier, to whom he confessed himself, and which promised, that he should be
a martyr, if he died in the execution of that enterprise.

Diverse desperate assassins likewise have attempted to Meteran hist.
murder that valiant and noble prince Maurice, which has Belg. lib. 17.
so long maintained his countries liberty against the tyranny of the
Spaniards. Michael Reinichon a Mass priest and curate of a village called
Bossier, was executed for that attempt. He was apprehended first upon
suspicion, but afterward he went about to hang himself, his own conscience
accusing him. But being stopped of his course, he did afterward confcsse his
malicious purpose, and his abettors.

Peter du Four confessed, that he was set on to kill prince Maurice, by the
promises of Duke Ernest, who speaking to him in Italian, uttered these words:
Facete quel, che m'auete promesso, amassate quel tyranno: that is, perform
your promise made to me, and kill that tyrant. He confessed also, that by
virtue of a Mass, which he heard in a certain chapel at Brussels, he was
made believe, that he should go invisible.

Peter Pan voluntarily confessed, that certain Iebusites persuaded him to
kill the Count Maurice, and that by their means he was furnished with a knife
for the purpose. He persisted in his confession at his execution, and so was
done to death. A matter so plain and manifest, that Coster and Parsons denying
it, do rather confound themselves, then convince the man's confession. For
suppose the poor man was mistaken in some names, which might well be, (...)
that the Iebusites do use to change their names; yet it is absurd to think,
that any would confess a matter against himself, and set it down with so
many circumstances, if there never had been any such matter.

Peter Barriere was executed not many years since at Melun, for that he was
convinced by diverse witnesses, and afterward confessed that he came to the
court of France with a full resolution to kill the French King Henry the 4. He
confessed also, that he was animated thereto by a Carmelite, a Iacobin, a
Capuchin, and a Iebusite at Lion, and that he had conferred with the Curate of
S. Andrew at Paris, who told him, that he should for this fact be translated
into paradife, and obtain great glory. He talked also with the Rector of the
college of Iebusites, where he received the sacrament, and with another
preaching Iebusite, who (as he said) assured him, that his resolution (viz. for
killing the king) was most holy and meritorious. Wherefore being convinced by
diverse witnesses and presumptions, and by his own confession, wherein he
persisted unto the death, he was by an ordinary course of justice condemned and
executed. The Iebusites and their followers (I confess) say, that he was a
light headed fellow. But his answers, and the whole proceeding against hun,
which is particularly set down by a Papist in the Iebusites Catechism, lib.
3. cap. 6. does declare the quite contrary, and prove manifestly, that he came
to the place with a full resolution to do that wiched act, being encouraged
thereunto by the Iebusites, and other pillars of the (...) Church, that without
such execrable murders cannot stand. The same also proves, that he answered
in all that cause like a man well advised.

John Chastel wounded the French King Henry the fourth Registers of the
Parliament of Paris.
with a knife, and purposed to have cut his throat. After the act being
examined, he confessed that he had learned by philosophy, which he had studied
in the college of Iebusites at Paris, that it was lawful for to kill the King,
and that he has often heard the Iebusites say, that it was lawful to kill the
King, being out of the Church. In the end persisting in his confession, he was
put to death. His (...) also which taught him this philosophy, was banished
the Realm of France. Finally, the parliament of Paris considering the sequel
of this damnable doctrine, pronounced the Iebusites to be enemies of the king
and kingdom, and banished them out of France, and caused a pillar to be
erected in the place where Chastels fathers house did stand, testifying that
the Iebusites are a pernicious sect, and enemies to kings. Gladly would the
Iebusits put away this disgrace, but it is engraue^ in stone: and their
instances and answers are such, as rather further blot them, then relieve them.

Crighton accused one Robert Bruis before the Count de Fuentes, for that he had
not murdered a certain Noble man of Scotland, nor would disburse fifteen
hundred crowns to three, that at his solicitation had undertaken that murder.
Such is the violent humor of the Iebusites, and so are they transporsed in
their passions and rage to kill princes.

But nothing I suppose, does better discover the execrable intentions of the
wicked Iebusites and Mass Priests against Kings, then their treacherous
practices at diverse times attempted against Queen Elizabeth. Pius Quintus
dealt with the King of Spain by force to overthrow her, and stirred up her
subjects secretly to rebel against her. Sixtus Quintus an. 1588. (...) not off
to solicit the Spanish king against her, until the Spaniards were overthrown
at the sea, and had their land forces scattered. But when wars and open force
wrought no good effect, they and their fellows and adherents set murderers and
empoysoners on work. Anno 1584. William Parry undertook to kill her: the
which resolution so well pleased Pope Gregory the 13. that Cardinal Como in
the Popes name, promised him pardon of all his sins, and a great reward besides
for his endeavor. Monsignor, says he, his Holiness has seen your letters,
with the credentiall note included, and cannot but commend the good
disposition, which as you write, you hold for the service and benefit of the
public weal: wherein he exhorts you to continue, until you have brought it
to effect. And that you may be helped by that good spirit that has moved you,
he grants you his blessing, and plenary indulgence and remission of all your
sins, assuring you beside the merit you shall have in heaven, that his
Holiness will make himself your debtor, to acknowledge your deserts in the
best sort he can, etc. Where note I pray you, that the Pope promises heaven,
and not only reward in earth to such as desperately adventure to kill Kings.
The said Parrie was not only encouraged by the Pope, but also resolved by
Palmio a Iebusite at Venice, and other Iebusites at Lion, and lastly by
Anniball Codret to put his disseine in execution. And so having received the
sacrament at Paris, he came for England with full assurance to be made at the
least a martyr, and with a desperate purpose to murder his dread Sovereign:
matters not only made manifest by witnesses, and presumptions, but also
confessed by himself, and recorded in public acts and histories. It appears
also, that Robert Parsons, whose head is now become a mint of treasons, had a
finger in this business. His own letter dated the 18. of October, an. 1598.
will convince him, if he deny it. For therein he confesses, how when he
perceived that a certain English gentleman meant to discover Parries practice
against the Queen, that he did dissuade him, and so wrought with the man, that
he was content Parry should proceed on without being by him bewrayed.

When as D. Gifford at Paris, and other priests at Rhemes, Notes of the
practices of Iebusites.
had persuaded Savage to kill the Queen, as the only obstacle of their
purposes; yet did he seem cold in his resolution, until such time as a
Jesuit meeting with him at Ewe in France, did persuade him to go on
resolutely, and without doubting.

That Ballards and Babingtons conspiracy tended to the destruction of the
Queens person, it cannot be denied. For not only witnesses and presumptions,
but also their confessions declare so much. Neither did Babington give over his
wicked purpose being taken, but wrote to Savage by all means to hasten his
enterprise for the killing of the Queen: which was the cause that brought both
them and others to their ends.

Neither are we to doubt, but that diverse Papists of note, both in England and
other places, knew of this treason, seeing always it was their fashion, in
general termesat the least, if not in particular manner, to give notice of such
matters. For Ballard went over of purpose to Paris, to acquaint D. Allen and
the Duke of Guise and others, with his own and his consorts determination.

Someruile was so resolute in his purpose, and so iocund, that he could not
keep his own counsel secret, but would needs profess to his friends, that
he was determined to kill the Queen: but being detected, he wilfully made away
him self, to save the hangmans labor. Arden was executed for the same treason.

Sir William Stanley and Jacques his Lieutenant, with the help of two Jesuits
called Holt and Sherwood, and certain other traitorous English Mass Priests,
persuaded one Patricke Collen an Jirsh man, and a desperate fencer, to go over
secretly into England and to murder the Queen, showing by what means he might
do it, without any great danger. To encourage him the better, they gave him
thirty pound sterling, for to put himself in order and to defray his charges,
and loaded him with large promises of further reward and preferment: all which
the man being apprehended did voluntarily confess, as the acts and process do
declare, and was therefore condemned and adjudged to die.

Edmund York and Williams being charged with the like treason, confessed also,
that partly by the persuasion of Holt the Jebusite, who abused the consecrated
host, to induce them and resolve them, and partly upon hope of an assignation
of forty thousand crowns showed them by Hugh Owen, they promised to undertake
the killing of the Queen. They said further, that D. Gifford, D. Worthington,
and that unworthy knight Sir William Stanley, together with diverse other
English fugitives beyond the sea, were acquainted with this their resolution
and practice, and encoraged them by all means to go forward. Afterward, when
these seditious Jebusites and Mass priests, and their abbettors perceived,
that by the sword they could not take away the Queens life, then they set on
empoysoners to do the fait. And that is apparent first by the fact and
confession of Lopez and his consorts, and next by the treason of Edmund Squire,
and the Jebusite Walpoole. Unto Lopez for this execution fifty thousand
crowns were promised: and the only stay of assurance, was the safety of the
Queen. The bills of payment directed to Carrera and Pallacio for the sum
aforesaid, are yet extant, and will always (...) the actors in this most
execrable attempt of notorious villainy.

Walpoole delivered a poison to Edmund Squire, wherewith it was agreed, that he
should anoint the pummell of the Queens saddle. He coniured the man with all
the violent adiurations he could devise. He caused him to receive the
sacrament, and to damn himself if he did not both mean truly, and resolutely
execute that which he had promised. In the end he promised him the state of a
glorious saint in heaven, if he died in the performance of the act. The which
things the party himself constantly confessed without all torture, and
persisted in his confession to the end. Little therefore does it avail Martin
Array, and Fitherbert, or rather Fitzputain, Parsons, or others to deny it,
grounding themselves upon the violence of the rackmasters, as they call them,
and the reuocation of his confession at the gallows. For neither was the man
ever put to the rack, nor ever did he recant that which he had said before of
VValpoole and his practice: whereof, the first is testified by public acts,
the second by infinite witnesses yet living. Are they not then both shameless
and witless, that upon mere fancies and hearesayes deny public acts,
confessions of parties, depositions of witnesses, plain presumptions, and most
evident proofs.

Wherefore if Christian princes will either believe the doctrine and grounds,
or look into the practice and proceeding of this Satanicall race of
king-killers and empoysoners; I doubt not but they will prudently beware of
them, and neither suffer them nor their abettors to come near them, or to
remain within their dominions. If they have not hitherto looked into matters,
which so near concern their lives and safety, I pray God they may yet do it
in time. Queen Elizabeth, being a most mild prince, was told that Pope Clement
and his faccion thought well of her, and meant her no harm. But wise men
considering the manner of her death, and effects of some drugs that are wont to
exulcerate the mouth, to grieve the stomach, to bereue men of sense, to work
a stipticity and stupidity, and the concourse, and whispering, and preparations
of the popish faction about the time of her sickness, do much fear that she
was not well dealt withal. I pray God reveal the truth, and grant al others
by her example to beware of the Popes and Jebusits most dangerous practices,
which never cease working mischief if they may have fit opportunity.

CHAP. X. That kings and Princes living in subjection to the Pope, are but
half kings, and demi-princes.
BUt suppose the Pope and his conspiring and working crew, should neither
attempt to take away the crown, nor the life from a prince, that believes his
laws and yields to the Pope all that authority which he claims, yet does
he lose half his revenues, authority, and regal sovereignty.

For first the Pope shareth the Kings revenues, claiming tenths, first fruits,
subsidies, confirmation and (...) of Ecclesiastical livings, and infinite
sums of money for pardons, licenses, dispensations, and all manner of
rescripts. Those which are acquainted with the Popes faculties and incrochments
in former Kings days within this land, and now in Spain, Italy, and other
popish countries, know they are intolerable, and no way inferior to the Kings
revenues. Nay, if a King need a dispensation for an Ecclesiastical matter, he
is forced to bargain with the Pope, and to buy it dear. The absolution of
King John had like to have cost him the Crown of England.

Secondly, not the King but the Pope is King of priests and ecclesiastical
persons. Boniface the 8. in the chap. Clericis de immunit. eccles. in 6. does
excommunicate both Kings and others, that impose taxes and subsidies upon the
Clergy. He does also lay the same censure upon those clergy men, that pay any
subsidies to civil Magistrates: which shows, that he kept them for his own
self.

Alexander the fourth, in the chap. Quia nonnulli de immunit. eccles. in 6.
exempteth the possessions and goods of clergy men from toll and custom.

(...) Bellarmine in his treatise De exemptione clericorum cap. I. sets
down these propositions. In causis Ecclesiasticis liberi sunt clericiiure
diuino a secularium principum potestate. That is, In Ecclesiastical causes
clerks are free from the command of secular princes, by the law of God. And
by ecclesiastical causes, he understands all matters which concern the
church, and which by hook or crook the Popes have drawn to their own
cognition. Again he says, Non possunt Clerici a Iudice seculariiudicari,
estiamsi leges ciuiles non seruent. That is, Clerks are not to be judged of
secular Judges, albeit they keep not his temporal laws. His third proposition
is this: Bona clericorum, tam ecclesiastica, quam secularia libera sunt, ac
merito esse debent, a tributis principum secularium. That is, The goods of
clerks, whether they belong to the Church, or be temporal, are free from
tributes of princes, and so ought to be. He says also, that secular princes,
in respect of clerks, are not sovereign princes, and that therefore clerks
are not bound to obey them. Now, how is the King absolute in his kingdom, if
he have neither power over the persons of the clerks, nor their goods?

Emanuel Sa in his aphorisms, In verbo, Clericus: in his book first printed,
and alleged by him that wrote the Franc discourse, has these words: Clerici
rebellio in regem, non est crimen laesae maiestatis, quia non est subditus
regi. The rebellion of a clerk against the King, is no treason, because he is
not the kings subject. This is plain dealing, and shows that ye king is no
king of the Clergy, where the Popes laws bear sway. But because these words
be some what too plain, (...) in a later edition of these aphorisms set out
at Venice, they have for their own ease cut out the words, albeit in effect
Bellarmine and others teach so much.

Their practice also declares that this is their meaning: for Thomas Becket
stoutly resisted Henry the second, and his Mat Paris. in Hen. 2.
parliament enacting, that clerks offending against the kings laws, should
answer before the kings Justices. Further, he would not agree that clerks
lay=fee should come in trial before them.

Sixtus quartus did enterdite the state of Florence, for that they had executed
the Archbishop of Pisa notoriously taken in a conspiracy against the State.
Xistus, quod sacrato viro, and Archiepiscopo it a foede interfecto Cardinalem
quoque captiuum fecissent, Hieronymo instigante grauissimum Florentinis (sacris
omnibus interdictus) bellu^ intulit, says Onuphrius: That is, Sixtus warred
upon the Florentines, and enterdited them for that they had killed the
Archbishop of Pisa being a priest, and laid hands on a cardinal. And yet he
declares they were actors in the conspiracy against Julian and Laurence de
Medicis, that then ruled the State.

This was also the greatest quarrel of the Pope against Henry the third of
France, for that he caused the Cardinal of Guise to be killed, being culpable
of most enormous treasons against him. Now what can Kings do against their
subjects, if they may not punish them offending in treason?

Thirdly, the Popes do draw many temporal matters from the cognition of the
King, to themselves and their adherents. Boniface the 8. c. quoniam. de
Immunitat. Eccles. in 6. does excommunicate all those that do hinder matters to
be brought from trial of temporal judges to Ecclesiastical courts, and
namely those, that will not suffer all contracts, confirmed by oaths, to be
tried before Ecclesiastical judges. By which means almost all causes were
brought before them, and the Kings jurisdiction almost stopped and suspended.
The Kings of England therefore, to restrain these incrochme^ts, made the law of
Praemunire, putting them out of his protection, that would not be tried by his
laws. Is it not strange then, that Christian princes should suffer such
companions to usurp their authority, and not only in causes Ecclesiastical,
but also in temporal to bear them selves as judges.

Finally they deny, that Christian Princes have power either to make
Ecclesiastical laws, or to reform abuses in the Church, or to govern the
Church concerning external matters. All papists do so distinguish betwixt
Ecclesiastical and politic government, that they exclude temporal Princes
from the government of the Church, and make them subject to the Pope.
Bellarmine lib. 1. de Pontif. Romans c. 7. determines, that temporal Princes
are no governors of the Church.

If then Christian Princes loose part of their revenues, and part of their
jurisdiction, and are quite excluded, both from the government of the Church,
and also disposing of the persons and goods of Ecclesiastical persons; most
apparent it is, that such Princes as admit the Popes authority, are either but
half kings, or else not so much, loosing more then half their authority, by
the Popes incrochments.

How contrary this is to the doctrine of the Apostles and ancient fathers, we
need not here dispute. S. Peter teaches Christians to honor the King: and
Paul exhorts (...) soul to be subject to the higher powers. Now what
greater dishonor can be offered to a King, then to take away his authority?
And how are they subject, that pay the King nothing, and claim exemption from
his government? Our Savior wills all to give to Caesar, that which is due
to Caesar, and Peter paid tribute to Caesar. But his false successors pay no
tribute to Caesar, but take tribute of Caesar, and challenge it as due to them
selves. Nay, they have against all right usurped his imperial city of Rome,
and released all clerks from temporal Princes obedience.

Tertullian says, Christians honored the Emperor, as the Ad Scapulam
next man in honor to God, and only inferior to God. Colimus Imperatorem
(says he) sic, quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, vt hominem a Deo
secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consequutum, solo Deo minorem. Chrysostom
shows, that the Apostles words Romans 13. concern clerks and religious men,
as well as lay men.

The same is also contrary to the practice of the Church under the Law, and
under the Gospel, and derogatorie to the Kings authority. For both under the
Law, and when Emperors began to profess Christian religion, they made laws
for the Church, and reformed Ecclesiastical abuses, as both Scriptures, and
the laws of the Code and Nouelles testify.

Thirdly this authority is plainly usurped by the Pope and his followers. For
until Gregory the seventh his time, who by force and arms prevailed more,
then by reason; we find, that the clergy and Church wa^ governed by Christian
princes, and their laws.

Finally the same is disgraceful to Kings, and burdensome to subjects, and
most unreasonable. Disgraceful it is to Kings to loose their royalties, and to
be made subject to forreiners. Burdensome it is to good subjects, upon whom the
whole burden is laid, and they exempted which are best able to bear. The
Germans in their grieuances, Grauam. 28. show, that the charge of the war
against the Turk is laid wholly on laymens shoulders. Finally, it is no
reason, that those should live under the Kings protection, that neither pay him
tribute, nor acknowledge his authority.

But of the unreasonableness of these incrochments we shall have occasion to
dispute elsewhere. Here it is sufficient to show, that the Popes usurpations,
exactions ^^ whole authority is prejudicial to Kings, and intolerable to
their subjects.

Be wise therefore O ye Kings of the earth, and serve Christ Jesus: but beware
that in stead of Christ, ye serve not Antichrist. And you that are freed by the
preaching of the Gospel from the bondage of the Popes traditions and
exactions, take heed that you suffer not your selves to be entangled again in
his snares, and brought again into bondage. The Popes agents tell you of many
goodly actions of the Pope, and set out the beauty of traditions with fair
words. But they seek nothing, but to bring you into a snare, and to make
merchandise of your souls, and to blind you so, that you shall not be able to
see the misery of those, that live under him, or the trash of his false
doctrine and traditions. God grant you therefore the spirit of wisdom and
discretion, that you may stand fast in the liberty of (...) Christians, and
never be entangled again with the yoke of Popish bondage.

The third Book, of the answer to Robert Parsons his supernodical Warnword,
containing a list of his lies, falsities, fooleries, impieties, and other
enormous faults and abuses, therein and elsewhere by him committed.
The Preface to the third Book.
THus having ended our defense of Queen Elizabeth's godly reformation, and
noted the miserable estate of Papists living under the Popes tyranny and
deformation, it will be no hard matter for us to dispatch the rest of the
Warne-word, being nothing else but a bundle of patcheries and fooleries patched
together, with a number of idle and vain words, scarce worth the reading or
running over. Wherein (notwithstanding) that I may proceed with more
perspicuity, I will first examine the qualities of the author of this
(...)-word: and that so much the rather, that you may forbear to wonder at
this warning piece, or peeced Warneword, considering the quality of the warm
fellow, that made us this brave piece of fire-worke. Next I shall enter upon
the title and front of the book, and let you see how neither the portall
corespondeth with the rest of his building, nor the work with the inscription,
and that the same does well resemble a clome portall set beside a straw
thatched house, or 2 pig-stie set before Robert Parsons his putatiues fathers
forge. Thirdly his personal accusations and slaundrous imputations, both
against my self and others, shall be answered. The fourth place is due to his
impieties, which require a sharp censure. After that his ridiculous errors,
impudent falsifications, vain allegations, gross lies, saucie railing terms,
and clamorous outcries, poor shifts and sottish answers, lamentable begging of
things in controversy, insolent brags, and such like fooleries, shall
severally be scanned and reproved. A man would percase wonder, that a man in so
idle a work should run into so many inconveniences and absurdities. But this
our adversary is a beast, and a gross pecoran, and no man. How should we look
for other stuff out of such a malicious heart? Do men gather figs of thorns,
or grapes of briars? As Hierome says of Heluidius, so I may say of Parsons:
Loquacitatem facundiam existimat, and maledicere omnibus bonae conscientiae
signum arbitratur. He supposes babbling to be eloquence, and that railing upon
all men is a sign of a good conscience. Let him therefore have patience to have
his own coxcombe pared, and let him bark still like a helhound, if he take
pleasure in barking. I doubt not but we shall so break his dogs teeth, that he
shall hurt none by his biting. But to cut off all preambles, let us now see if
we can bring the jade Parsons from his gallop to his ambles.

CHAP. I. A legend of No saint, but of Robert Parsons his life, calculated in
favor of that swarm of traitors, which every year he sends out of his
seditious Seminaries.
BEfore I enter into this discourse, I do protest, that I was drawn into it
more then half against my will, by the importunity of Robert Parsons, who
first began this course: and albeit without commission went about to make
enquiry what I am, what I did at Caliz, what in Ireland, and what in other
places, and to object whatsoever he thought might move either suspicion of
crime, or occasion of jest. But seeing I am forced to defend my self, I
profess and proclaim it openly, that I will spare neither Iebusite nor Mass
priest, nor Archpricst, nor provincial Iebusite, nor Pope, nor Cardinal, that
shall come in question. Howbeit let all the rest sleep for this turn. Now we
will talk only of Robert Parsons, and see what reason he had to ask a reason
of other men's actions, that is so obnoxious to so many accusations himself.
Our Savior Christ calls him hypocrite, that Math. 7.
espieth a mote in another man's eye, having a beam in his own eye. Qui sibi
hoc sumpsit (says Tully) vt corrigat mores (...). in Verr. lib. 3.
alioru^, ac peccat a reprehendat: quis huic ignoscat, (...) qua in re ipse ab
religione (...) declinarit? Whosoever arrogantly takes upon him to correct
other men's manners, and to reprehend their faults; who will pardon him if in
any thing he decline from the religious and prescript rule of duty? Let us
then see whether Parsons has kept himself within the compass of religion or
rule, and walked within any precincts of duty.

The man was borne in an obscure village in Somersetshire: his putatiue father
was called Cowbucke, a poor Blacksmith, of the race, or at least quality of
Vulcan: for he was matched to Parsons his mother, a woman scarce so honest, Her
husband took a filthy dilease of her, of which the poor man died. Some call
that discase, Il mal (...).
they say, as Venus. His true father was sir John Haywood a Mass priest, and
sometime a Monk of the Abbey of Torre in Devonshire, a lusty stallon, both as
a Monk, and as a (...)-priest, and an honest man, as may be presumed: for he
lost one of his ears for conueying away an honest woman condemned to the
gallows. This decowled Monk made the marriage betwixt Cowbucke the smith and
Robert Parsons his mother. So Stalino would have placed Casina Plautus in
Casina.
with his hind Olympio, Sperans sibi parat as fore clam vxore excubias for as:
That is, hoping without his wives priuitie to keep watch abroad. And Holt the
Iebusite would have married his wench or concubine to one Thomas Edwards (a man,
and matter not unknown to Parsons). It may be he will say, this is from the
purpose: yet can he not deny, but that it is good to illustrate matters by
examples.

Some say Robert Parsons is not unlike the Monk, Tum quod male audit, that is,
both because he hears evil of one side especially, and because he has not
both his ears on one side. The lineaments of his face also do bewray him to be
of kindred to Haywood. Finally, his desire to be a monkish Iebusite, and a
priest, does argue that he was a priests or Monks son: and his gibing and
jesting, that he was Haywoods son, who was in his time a mad ieasting (...).
For as Tully says, sons do follow lightly the example of their fathers, Pro
Rabir. (...).
as he proves by the examples of Scipio and the younger Decius. Neither is it
material that these men were not bastards, seeing bastardie does not alter the
case.

Certes if Haywood was not his father, then was he much deceived, keeping
Parsons at school, and bringing him up as his son. Then was also Robert
Parsons much abused, that would not be called by the beastly name of Cowbucke
that had his name of two horned beasts, but of the priestly title of his true
father: and being charged with bastardie in Bayliol college in Oxford durst
never stand to it, but as guilty of that matter departed the college, for
fear he should have been thrust out headlong. The matter certes was much
suspected, this Heywood lying in the blacksmiths house, and supplying the man's
place, and being generally defamed for this matter.

Finally, if he will not believe me, let him hear his own consorts ye secular
priests depose against him. Parsons (says the author of the discovery of
English Jesuits) is by birth a bastard, begotten of the body of a base woman,
by the parson of the parish where he was borne, and his right name is not
Parsons, but Cowbucke. Again: the same parson that begot him, did afterward
foster him, and having brought him up at the school, sent him to Oxford, and
placed him in Bayliol college, whence he was expelled being master of Arts,
not for religion, as he has vaunted, but for his bastardie, factious
conversation, libelling, and other misdemeanors. This note of bastardie is also
put upon him in a certain declaration of the priests made to the Pope, and was
(...) forgotten either by him that wrote the reply to Parsons libell fol. 91.
or by the Quodlibetist, Quodl. 4. art. 2. p. 109. We may not imagine (says he)
that father Parsons was ignorant of his own estate, as being a sacrilegious
bastard in the worse sense, scilicet a Spurius, begotten by the parson of the
parish where he was borne, upon the body of a very base queen. This is the
testimony of Watson, a popish martyr: and I hope Parsons will not deny a
martyrs testimony.

If then, Spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, nec stabile firmamentum
collocabunt: that is, if bastard slips shall not take deep root, nor stand on
a firm foundation, then is it not like, that this caluish vitulamen, or
bastard, the son or calfe of goodwife Cowbucke, can take deep root. Insomuch
as many wonder that this bastard slip is not grafted upon Tiburne stock, and
long since withered like an elderne sticks without pith.

While he was young, the fellow was much noted for his singular impudency and
disorder in apparel, going in great barrel hose, as was the fashion of
hacksters in those times, and drawing also deep in a barrel of ale. Hear I
pray you, what A. C. the author of the Mass priests late supplication, says
of him in his third letter. He was (says A. C.) a common alehouse squire, and
the drunkenest sponge in all the parish where he lived. His mother could keep
no good liquor for him: such a dangerous enemy was he to the aletap. The same
A. G. charge him with begetting two bastards male and female upon the body of
his own sister between the age of seventeen and 23: and this says he, was
the cause why he ran away, and became a Jesuit. O famous virgin Iebusit, or
rather filthy incestuous Cananite! O brave patron of (...) or rather rammish
virginity!

Of nature he was malicious, and from his youth given to speak evil, and to
write libels. One libell he wrote against D. Squire, wherein he touched a
certain (...), which had like to have turned him to much trouble. Since he ran
out of his country, the writing of infamous libels against his dread (...), and
other principal governors of the State, has been his principal study, as
the libell against master Charke, the libell against my Lord of Leycester,
commonly called Greenecote, the libell against the Queen, set out under the
titles of Cardinal (...), (...) Veridicus, and Andreas Philopater, against my
Lord Treasurer lately deceased, against the whole state entitled de Schismate
Anglicano, and diverse others, which either he wrote, or published, or help to
write or publish, do plainly testify.

If then the authors of famous libels be infamous; why is not Parsons punished
for an infamous libeller? If bastards be irregular, why is he made a Jesuit
and a priest? Are such bastardly and infamous Parsons (...) persons to be made
priests? and is this the perfection of the Iebusiticall order, which they brag
off?

While he continued in Bailiol college, one Stancliffe Bagshaw in his Apology.
his fellow burser did charge him with forgery: Beside that diverse other
articles were put up against him, and twenty nine or thirty came before the
master and fellows, as Bagshaw says, to demand justice against him.
Christopher Ibidem.
Bagshaw his fellow priest testifies, that being burser, he disfurnished the
college library of many ancient books, and rare manuscripts. A true man he
is, as it seems, being convinced both of forgery, filchery, and perjury: But
because he was sworn to be true, a true thief to the college. For these and
other misdemeanors, he had the favor to resign being first lawfully expelled,
as says Bagshaw in his apology against Parsons slanders, and with such favor
he departed, that no man seemed desirous he should remain in the college any
longer. I think he may remember, that he was rung with belles out of the
house, which was either a sign of triumph, or else of his dismal departure
out of the world. At the same time, he made a submission with many tears, as
says Bagshaw, and promised, that he would ever after carry himself in a good
sort: but if he forgot his oath made first, it was no marvel, if he forgot his
promise made after.

Having received this disgrace, not long after he fled like a fugitive out of
his country, and became a Iebusite. For note, that perjured fugitives, make
prime Iebusites. So, that was verified in him, that is commonly found true in
others, Quod desperatio facit monachum. For desperately he cast himself away
into a monkish order, although not long before he had deeply protested, that
he would never become a papist.

What religion was in him, it may appear, for that suddenly he took on him a
religion, which he had a little before forsworn. Beside that, being in England
he always professed the same religion that we do, and in private
communication with his friends, seemed desirous to learn some good course of
study of divinity. Being burser, he bought many books written by learned men
of our side, and placed them in the library of Bailioll college in Oxford.
What is then to be collected of all his demeanor and actions, but that
disgrace and (...), and no other reason made him a papist, a friar, and an
apostata?

Departing out of the country, he went not away empty handed. For he carried
away diverse sums of money, which he had received of his scholars friends,
without rendering account. Promising also to make a match betwixt one of his
scholars and a gentlewoman his mothers neighbor, he took money of both the
parties friends, albeit neither of the parties knew any such matter, nor their
friends had talked together. A very pretty trick to be played for his first
prize of cosinage. The seculer priests charge him with mispending the alms
that is bestowed on the english Seminaries, upon his intelligencers, and spies,
in postage, and upon his private pleasures. After his departure out of England,
the man cosined the Prince of Parma, the Spanish king, and others, offering
like a montebanke, the crown of England to sale to any that would buy it. A
thing certes of good price, if he could have made his sale good.

He may remember, that Marforio in Rome touched him in a certain ticket for
this gross (...). But great wonder it is, that the Pope has not trussed him
ere this, finding all his promises of intelligences, treasons and packes in
England, to be nothing else but mere cosinage, mockery, and knavery, to (...)
himself to be made Cardinal.

And this, both himself, and his brother and friends did so greedily look
for, that on a time being advised to wear a piece of scarlet before his
stomach, and giving order, that a piece might be brought from the merchant,
his witless brother thinking the time of his advancement had been come, caused
as much scarlet to be brought to him as would make him a Cardinals robes. But
with great confusion and blushing, like as if his face had been died scarlet,
Parsons conveyed the man and his scarlet out by a posterne gate. But the scorn
and blemish still stuck to him.

Of his virtuous life in Spain, and in the college at Rome, we need not to
stand much, seeing the marks of his honesty appear in ye pustules of his
face, but especially in his scabbed legs. The which mysteries of Iebusites,
least they should be revealed, they have a grant of the Pope to have
Physicians of their own company. While the stirs continued between the
Jesuits; and the English scholars in Rome, one Harward gave out, that he could
name seven Sodomites in that college. But may Parsons friends answer, That is
no nouelty among the fiery Ignatians, that forswear marriage. For seeing they
refuse honorable marriage, it is Gods just vengeance upon them, that they
should fall into these filthy and abominable disorders. Every one of the
mass priests according to the formulary of Rome does say and confess, quod
peccaui in Sodomia, that is, Ordo Romans edit. ab Hittorp.
I have sinned in Sodomy.

The man naturally is a coward, yet when he passes through strange countries,
he goes disguised, and calls (...) Captain Cowbucke. But albeit he be no
soldier, nor worthy of that profession, yet should he have come anno 1588.
with the Spanish forces against his country. And so many has he suborned to
kill the Queen, and to stir rebellion in England and Ireland, that he has
caused more blood to be shed, then the greatest soldier of our time. His
impudency in lying, and great cunning in iugling, may be convinced by his bold
assertions and denials against all truth, and by his shifting and cogging in
all his writings: which give plain evidence, that the man when he fled from
his country, left honesty, shame, and conscience behind him, if ever he had
any, as by diverse arguments in the treatise ensuing shall, god willing, be
verified. In the mean while, see what his fellow traitors say of him. He that
set forth the reply to Parsons libell, does testify, that he will affirm, or
deny any thing, and says, that he has a brazen forehead, and prays, that
God would send him more shame, more honesty, and more truth. Speaking of his
cunuing conueiance he says, he will never leave his iugling tricks: and
again, that like a Gipsey he plays at fast and loose.

His life unto the rest of his consorts is so scandalous, that the martrized
Nuodlitelist with admirati o^ does thus exclaim, quodl. 8. art. 5. pa. 238. o
monster of mankind, fitter for hell then middle earth, and afterward: thou
give occasion for diverse to think, thou art not a mere man, but some fairies
brat, or begotten by some incubus, or aerish spirit, upon the body of a base
woman. and quodl. 6. art. 7. and discovery pa. 70. Blackewell, says a certain
mass priest, must depend upon Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons on
the devil. Do not you think then, that this is a brave dependence, and that
the warneword is brave stuff that is calfreted and devised by a dependant upon
the devil? but may his friends say, this was spoken out of choler. Hear then
what the archpriest said, when he heard, that Robert Parsons was first come
into England. This man said he, will shame us all: he is for his expulsion, and
manners so infamous. Howsoever he has shamed others, himself he has shamed
by his lewd, loose, and discomposed patcheries.

Of his cruel disposition, he has given us many arguments. Bagshaw his
apology.
While he was yet in Bailioll college he prosecuted seven young men of far
better parentage then himself, and gladly would have had them hanged for
taking certain puddings from a pupil of his called Himmes. He endeavored to
draw Himmes his father into bond, that he should not cease to prosecute the
fellonie, and would have proceeded further, had not the council taken order to
stay his violence: it may be he thought, that taking of puddings was a great
matter, considering especially, that the wealth of the tripewife his mother
consisted in tripes, puddings, and souce: but see Gods hand against this
prosecutor of takers of puddings, he is now so swollen like a black pudding,
that the memory of Parsons puddings will not lightly be forgotten. A man shall
hardly find a fitter fellow to play Ballio the baud, then Parsons being a
baudy, burley, pudding grown fellow, and very like the baud in Plautus, cum
collatiuo ventre and oculis herbeis, that is, with his bumbasted and barrellike
belly, and eyes greenish like grass. In Rome he has long been the tormentor
of the boys of the English college, although his friends in his excuse say,
he loves them but too well, and namely one Fisher a fine youth, that sometime
was a Ganymedes to Edward, or as he called himself Odeward Weston sometime
reader of Sodomiticall divinity at Doway: although now for his beastly love,
they say, he has lost his place and lecture, and is sent to Antwerpe to love
wenches there. Provided always, that he meddle not with boys, especially,
scandalously. As for Fisher he is now at Rome, as they say, to do penance with
Robert Parsons Protonotarie of Sodom: if he be not fishing in the sea. When
Bishop and Charnocke agents of the secular priests in England, were sent to
Rome, Sir Robert handled them very rudely. These priests do exclaim mainely
against his cruelty. He took away their writings and valists, he caused them
to be imprisoned, and hardly examined: and at the length sent them away, re
infectissima. But what should I need to stand upon proves of his bloody and
cruel disposition, when it is apparent, that diverse ways he has sought to
destroy the Queen, whom he should have honored, as his most gracious
sovereign? He sought also to deliver up his countrymen to have their throats
cut by the Spaniards, nay by Italians, Marans and infidels. One William Brown
alias Chapter P. in a letter dated the 16. of August anno 1599. affirms, that he
has a letter of Parsons his own hand, dated 1598. wherein he confesses, that
he knew of Parries practice for the killing of the Queen, and that the said
Parsons kept back a gentleman, that intended to discover the same. A certain
other papisticall fellow, in a treatise concerning the practices of Jesuits for
killing of Princes, does charge Parsons for advancing the practice of Parry and
Savage against the Queens life, for dealing with the Duke of Guise to enter
into England with 5000. men, to surprise the Queen lying at Greenewich, and
the city of London. Neither have the Spaniards made any attempt against
England without the priuitie and solicitation of Parsons, the arch-plotter of
treasons.

William Brown alias Chapter P. does charge Parsons to be a In a letter dated
August. 16 anno 1599
common detractor, and says that he detracteth without respect of religion,
truth, or common honesty. If then he detract from his own fellows, and (...)
upon such, as himself pleases, though in the general cause joined with him;
we may not marvel, if he play his parts with us, whom he takes to be his
enemies, and by whose detractio^ he hops to merit, and to win a Cardinals
hat. Finally the man's traitorous practices against the Queen and his country,
in many volumes cannot sufficiently be desciphred. His first coming into
England was to make a side, and to move rebellion. And that is proved by his
faculties granted anno 1580. Petatur (says he) a S. domino nostro, etc. that
is, Let it be desired of our most holy Lord the Pope, that the bull
declaratorie of Pius the fifth against Elizabeth and her adherents, be
understood in this manner, that the same bull shall always bind her and all
heretics, but not (Romish) Catholics, as matters do now stand, but only
then, when the bull may publicly be put in execution. By this faculty being
granted, then it appears, that the bull of Pius Quintus was in (...) against
the Queen and her subjects, and that Parsons came to stir up false
Catholics, or rather false traitors, to put it in execution, as soon as
occasion should be offered. Now according to the tenor of his faculties, the
fellow ceased not to rake in the coals of men's discontented humors, and to
make a party against the Queen. The papists saw he dealt so openly, that they
feared, least if the fire took, a number of them should be burned in the
flames. Such was the fear of the wisest of them, that they told him plainly,
that if he retired not himself, they would discover him to her Majesty's
officers.

Being thus forced more then half against his will to depart out of England,
yet ceased he not to procure us troubles from Scotland, as the king now
reigning can tell, and his libell against the Earl of Leicester, that seems
to favor the kings title, does manifestly prove. Nay in a letter to the Earl
of Angus he does plainly confess, that at that time he was for the kings
title, and sought presently to set it on foot, without longer staying for the
Queens death.

In France he encouraged the D. of Guise to come with an army into England, not
forgetting in the mean while to advance the treason of Parry and Savage. There
also he was acquainted, by the means of Ballard, with Babingtons conspiracy.
Neither is it to be doubted, but he knew of friar Sammiers coming to the kings
mother, of which ensued the ruin of her, as the author of the Jesuits
Catechism testifies. It is said also, that he caused 500. crowns to be
delivered to Chapter Paget to come over into England to treat with the Earl of N.
whereof his destruction ensued not long after.

In Flanders he sought also to draw the D. of Parma into quarrel with the
Queen of England, offering him the Lady Arbella, and the crown of England for
his son. But he was no more able to perform his offer then the devil, that
promised to give all the kingdoms of the earth to Christ. That pack being
broken, he solicited the preparations of the Spaniard against England anno
1588. ayding Card. Allen to make that most execrable libell, which he titleth
an exhortation to the Nobility and people of England and Ireland, which
contains all the disgrace that could be devised, both against the Queen, and
her subjects. Whatsoever he did in devising of that traitorous libell, one W.
Br. alias Page charge him, that he help to print it, and gave diverse copies
to his friends.

Departing out of the low countries, he committed the managing of matters to
one Holt, a man of his own society and confrairy of traitors. If then Holt
was acquainted with the practices of York, Williams, and Daniel, for killing
the Queen, as he is charged by W. Br. alias Chapter Page or with Heskets
treacherous agency with the Earl of Darby; then no doubt, but R. Parsons was
made privy therewith also, seeing he was but as an inferior sphere concurring
with Parsons, that like primum mobile drew with him all inferior traitors, and
made all matters of treason to be taken in hand.

Residing in Spain, his only purpose was, to set this land in combustion. To
work a detestation of her Majesty, and of the English nation in the minds of
the Spaniards, he caused a most slanderous libell set forth before in Latin, to
be translated into Spanish by one Ribadineira a man of his own traiterous
order, adding thereunto diverse slanderous and most untrue reports of his own,
auouching his own lies upon the credit of Sanders being now dead. And that
this is true, not only his own conscience does witness, but that ribald
Ribadineira must acknowledge, if he be alive, and will testify truth. For to
draw the king of Spain into the party, he set out a most fond book of (...)
to the crown of England, casting the same with all (...) of his wit upon the
Infanta of Spain, seeking to deprive the right heirs, and endeavoring to bring
us under the captivity of strangers: to which end also he caused diverse of the
English nation residing in Spain to subscribe to that title.

With the help of Creswell and others his adherents, he caused diverse
treacherous inuectiues to be published against her Majesty and the State; and
that partly under the names of Andreas Philopater, Didimus Veridicus, and such
like counterfeit names, and partly without names.

By his, and other his traitorous consorts solicitation, King Philip the second
sent forth a fleet to sea: of which, two attempts followed: the one about the
year 1598. in which diverse ships by stresse of wether were wracked on the
coast of Spain, (...) the Rock and Cap. finis terrae: the second followed not
long after. The first is proved by D. Stillingto^, and other Massepriests,
persuaded by Parsons to come with public enemies against England: the second
is mentioned in a letter of the said Parsons to Th. Fitzherbert, and publicly
diuulged by the Adelantadoes proclamation, of which hereafter we shall have
occasion to speak. And so earnest was the king of Spain in setting forth this
fleet against England, that at one time, returning to himself out of a
trance, the first words he spoke, were, Whether is the Adelantado gone for
England? At another time, being at his (...), he said, He would spend the
furniture of his chapel, but he would be revenged upon the English. The
Secular priests in their reply to Parsons libell, fol. 65. do also mention
these preparations. Neither is it to be doubted, but that Parsons concurred in
the solicitation of them. The author of ye Reply speaking of these preparations
for England: These two preparations (says he) are so evident, to have
proceeded with his concurrence and cooperation, as he no way can deny it
without the note of impudency, so many witnesses, and his own letters bring in
testimony against him. He does likewise affirm, that the urging of diverse to
subscribe to the Infantaes title, is a matter notorious and evident, and to be
proved by the oaths of diverse priests. In his letters to a certain Earl of
Scotland, Parsons plainly confesses diverse practices set on (...) by himself
against England, and that he sought to advance the Spanish Infantaes title, as
being of his religion.

The resolutions of cases of conscience, set out by A. P. that is, Allen and
Parsons, for direction of their traitorous scholars, are nothing else but
resolutions to prove them both traitors, and enemies to their country,
declaring the Queen to be a tyrant, and no lawful Queen, and her officers no
lawful officers, and aiming wholly at the overthrow of the State.

Finally, it is auerred by the secular priests, that Parsons had a finger in
the rebellions of Ireland. Neither is it to be doubted, but that he and his
agent Creswel were acquainted with the enterprise of D. Iuan d'Aquila in
Kinsale, many traitorous English being that time in company with the Spaniards.

If then this be one of the chief pillars of Romish faith, certain it is,
that the Romish faith stands upon (...) and treachery, or atleast upon a
wicked disloyal traitor. (...) Papists would consider these his practices, they
would not so much esteem his directories, libels, discoueries, inuectiues,
wardwords, or rather a (...) of knavery and villainy, his Warnewords, and such
like odious fardles of idle words, which rather direct men to the gallows,
then to religion and virtue: which shall further appear in the answer
following. This in the mean while I thought to relats, for ease of his holy
father, if percase he list to saint this horseholy Friar. And if in the mean
while he be not created Cardinal, by reason of his infamous bastardie, and
foul vellaquerie, and too open playing above board: yet let him be a
Cardinal, and a card excarnificable, vested with Cardinals robes of yellow,
blew, and green, like the Knave of Clubbes.

CHAP. II. Of the title Warne-word, and other matters promised and prefixed in
the front of Parsons his book.
A Goose (they say) may be known by a feather. If men will not believe me, yet
may it be verified by the goose Parsons. For by his most foolish title, being
the first fether of his gooseships work, we may assure our selves we shall
have a great piece of foolerie. For albeit he promise us but one Warneword, yet
has he sent us a whole fardle of idle words and fantastical fooleries.

Secondly, as admonitions and warnings are sent to friends, and not to enemies;
so might he have done well to have given some admonitions to the bougerly boys
of the English seminaries, that suffer themselves to be abused too shamefully
by the bougeronicall Mass priests, to the dishonor of their nation; and not to
us, that regard not witless admonitions a straw. The tragical poet might have
told Eurip. in Medea.
this comicall admonitor, if he had but had any one grain of wit, that a
wicked man's offers and gifts are unprofitable. The Greek is, (...). But the
ass understands no Greek, and not much Latin, being only acquainted with
the iron tongue of his mother the blacksmiths wife.

Thirdly, his whole labor being spent in iangling and bangling about some pild
matters of his popish paltry religion; he must show how all that nastie gear
will come within the compass of his title, unless he will have the same
thrown out among the waste of his idle inventions.

Fourthly, his running upon the letter in the titles of his Warneword,
Wardword, Wastword, and in his mentioning of Watchword does show, that there is
more rhyme then reason in his book, and does presage, that we should rather
have rattling words, then sound reason. He says, that the VVarneword contains
the issue of three treatises. And yet he only handles two chapters of eight,
beside other controversies, seldom daring to give the true issue, taking
always Papists for Catholics, and popery for truth: which is denied. Is it
then like that he means truth, that falsifieth his word so grossly in the
first words of his book?

After that he talks of a reiection of an insolent and vanting minister,
masked with the letters O. E. and of certain shifts and deceits, as he
pretends of ours. But herein his friends complain, that his eyes were either
out or not at home. For if he had looked upon himself, that comes forth
masked with N. D. which letters with the help of O. E. come near Noddey: he
would not have found fault with me for the same matter. Howbeit to provoke him
to show his bastardly face, I have been content to leave all the four letters
to him alone, and plainly to set down my name, promising that I will take him
to task, in what form soever he turns himself into, if it be not into the
shape of a clew of packthreed, which is endless, and of no good goust. In the
mean while, if he had not been the minister of Satan, he would not have made a
jest at the ministry of the word of God, which is an office not refused by ye
Apostles, nor by holy fathers of the Church, nor by any, but by ye idolatrous
priests of Baal. As for the terms of insole^cy and vanting, of shifting and
deceiving, I doubt not but to fasten them so justly upon Parsons, and that by
due proof, that all the world may see the vanity and insolency of this
deceiuer. Now I will only tell him, that it becomes not him to object
insolency, vanting, shifting and deceit to any other. For nothing is more
absurd then that such a buzzard as he, should impute to others his (...)
buzzardly qualities.

For the posie of his book, he takes a sentence that fitteth himself
wondrous well: neither will we deny that it belongs to him. Fly an heretic
(says the Apostle) after Titus 3.
one or two admonitions. Who then does not fly Robert Parsons an
archhereticke, as I have proved at large? It follows, says Parsons, For such
a one is subverted, and sins damnably against his own judgment. Where I
omit to speak of Parsons his false translation. For why should I help him,
that pronounces sentence against himself, by his own judgment, while he
remained among us? And now no doubt but in his own conscience he is condemned,
knowing that it is idolatry to give divine honor to the sacrament of the Lords
body, and to the images of the Trinity, and heresy to hold, that a man can
live without al sin, or at the least to fulfill the law perfectly. For that
by the Fathers judgment is Pelagianisme.

In the end he adds, Permissu superiorum: as if his superiors had given him
license to play the knave. Beside, he may do well to tell us who these
superiors are. For if the Pope and his general give him license to publish
libels and slanders against us; we will be bold to answer his libels, and to
touch his superiors to their little fatisfaction, and to the great grief of
Parsons.

CHAP. III. An answer unto certain personal accusations of Robert Parsons
against my self and others.
AGainst all our adversaries accusations, beside particular defenses, we have
these general exceptions for the most part: first we say, of matters criminal
that we are clear. Secondly, that Robert Parsons and his consorts are most
guilty. Now what is more ridiculous then that blind bayard should find fault
with him that has good eyes? Omnia quae vindicaris in altero (says the famous
Roman orator Lib. 3. accusat. in Verrem.
Tully) tibi ipsi vehementer fugienda sunt. Etenim non modo accusator, sed ne
obiurgator quidem ferendus est is, qui quod in altero vitium reprehendit, in eo
ipse deprehenditur. That is, All those faults which you will censure in others,
you must diligently eschew your self. For who can endure him to accuse or
chide others, which is taken himself in trip for that which he reprehendeth in
others? Thirdly we say, that our adversaries have no reason to exclaim against
us for every small fault, when they offend far more grievously themselves. It is
absurd for him that has never a good leg, to reproach a man for halting. The
Poet says, Loripedem rectus derideat, Aethiopem (...).
albus. Let him that goes upright, laugh at him that halteth: and him that is
white, point at a black Moore. Finally, such things as fall out indifferently
on both sides, are not to be objected as crimes to the other. Si iniquus es in
me iudex, (says Tully to Curio) condemnabo eodem ego te crimine. If unjustly
you censure me, I shall justly condemn you for the same fault.

To come to particulars, this admonitor does charge sir In the Epistle to the
Reader
Francis Hastings, for that without commission he made himself a general
watchman over all the land, and has written a most bitter and bloody
pamphlet against the Catholics, (as he says) replenished with all kind of
slanders, and most odious calumniations. Likewise in his observations upon the
preface of my reply to his Wardword, fol. 11. b. he says, my preface tends
wholly to bloodshed and cruelty against Catholics: and sticks not of his
liberality to call me a notorious firebra^d of sedition. But if he charge no
better, we shall easily discharge our selves, and lay such a charge upon him,
that his own friends shall confess him to be a notorious sot, and a lewd
accuser, to deal on this fashion. For first, what reason had he to ask a
commission in this case, seeing every one has not only a commission, but is
also bound by duty and allegiance to maintain the State, and to do his prince
and country service? In reos maiestatis and publicos hosts (says Tertullian)
omnis homo miles est: that is, Every one is authorized Apolog. c. 2.
a soldier against traitors and public enemies. Could Robert Parsons more
manifestly declare himself enemy, then by bauling against those that speak
against traitors and public enemies? Secondly, why may not a Knight speak
for his prince and country, when he like a traitorous knave without commission
or allowance takes to himself liberty to speak for notorious traitors and
public enemies? Thirdly, it is a matter ridiculous for an enemy to accuse men
of bitterness and bloody cruelty, of slanderous accusations and sedition, and
yet to bring neither proof nor suspicion to convince them. This therefore is
rather a trick of a scurrilous rayler, then a grave accuser: and such terms
Tully in his oration pro Caelio, calls rather railing and scolding, then
accusing. Fourthly he shows himself an absurd fellow, to talk either of
bitter and bloody pamphlets, or of odious calumniations, or of bloodshed and
cruelty, or of Catholics, when as himself is a (...) heretic, and an
apostate from religion, and has spent now this twenty years and upward in
railing and libelling, in laying plots of treasons, in soliciting invasions,
and such like practices: seeking nothing else but to cut the throtes of his
countrymen, and to bring them into subjection unto the Spaniards and Italians,
as before has been declared at full. We are therefore to beseech his
knaueship, seeing he pleads for enemies, and traitors and heretics, to give
us leave to speak for our country, our Sovereign, our Religion and liberty.
Fifthly, Catholics are they, which believe and hold that which the Catholic
church in old time did universally hold, as says Vincentius (...) de haeres.
c. 34. But the Catholic church in old time did never universally hold either
the popish real presence of Christ's body without any distance from the
accidents of bread and wine, or that the accidents did subsist without their
substance, or that Christ's true body was impalpable and invisible, and both in
heaven and earth at one time, or transsubstantiation, or the popish Mass, or
communion under one kind, or the rest of the popish sacraments, or popish
purgatory and indulgences, or such like. Nor did Catholics ever prefer the
Latin translation of the old and new testament before the original text, or
place traditions in equal rank with Scriptures. Saint Lib. de vera relig.
cap. 2.
Augustine shows, that catholics and true believers are all one. But Papists
are not Orthodoxi, nor true believers, as I have showed in my challenge.
Sixthly, when we speak against Papists, we mean properly the factious
adherents to the Pope and Spaniard, and Parsons his crew of seditious
archipresvyterial and diabolical practisers against the state: against whom
when we discourse, our whole intention is to save, and not to spill blood,
which they seek to do, and will, if they be not speedily restrained. Finally,
seeing Robert Parsons is so brave a disputer, we must pray him to bring good
arguments, or else to lay aside his great bombasted Iebusiticall words of
slander and calumniation. He may do well also, to show us the difference
between slander and calumniation, which he in great heat has distinguished,
especially being so excellent a (...) in calumniation, as his publication of
Sanders de schismate, and Philopater and other (...) do prove him to be. It
would finally be known, why this fellow that never knew his true father, and
loved so well his mother, should be called Andreas Philopater, rather then
Andreas Philiometer. It is a question also why he should be called Andreas,
rather then Robertus Philopater. But percase on his toombe he will have this
graven: Hic iacet Andreas, qui lapidauit eas. Pro Andreas Philopater, dic Aue
Maria and Pater noster.

Speaking of sir Francis Hastings in his Epistle to the Reader, he would gladly
fasten upon him a suspicion, as if he desired some dividend of the livings of
Papists. And again, 1. encont. c. 11. he charge him and other knights with
daily feeding upon papisticall fellows goods. In his observations upon my
preface, fol. 11. b. he says, I watch for scraps: and that I and my hungry
crew stand by, and for desire lick our lips, hoping to have some share in the
deuidend. Drawing metaphors from his own, and his hungry companions practice,
who couching like dogs at the Popes feet, are still looking for scraps and
bare bones, and gaping for diuidends: and to satisfy their extreme need,
sometime like curres run grinning up and down the streets of Rome, and cannot
be satisfied. Others fall together by the ears for bishoprics and promotions
in England and Ireland; which they hope will be conquered daily. But their
ambitious desire is like a hungry man's dream, that thinks he eats, and yet
arises in the morning sore ahungred. In his table he notes, that I am poor
and needy, but if he had not been a poor and needy pamphleter, he would have
been more wary, then thus desperately to lie upon the credit of his
intelligencer. For it is well known, that Sir Fr. Hastings lives in honorable
reputation without desire of any man's goods. I, albeit I had no preferment of
the Church, yet could I live of my patrimony. Neither of us, nor any knight
professing the Gospel, does live in such estate, that he being a begging Friar
by his profession, and by birth a poor blackesmithes wives son, may well
object either need, or greedy scraping for other men's goods unto us. Nay we
are so far from desiring the goods of papists, that we wish them, as Saint
Augustine epist. 50. did the Donatists, that they were Catholics and honest
men, and so we would not only leave them that is theirs, but give them also
part of that is ours. With us they deal as the Donatists did with S.
Augustine, and we answer Parsons as he did them. Quodnobis obijciunt (says
he) quod res eorum concupiscamus, and auferamus, vtinam Catholici fiant, and
non solum quae dicunt sua, sed etiam nostra in pace nobiscum and charitate
possideant. If this wish content them not, I would wish them together with all
their goods in Italy with their own holy father. Which if the Spaniards and
Italians, and the bloody Inquisitors would permit to men of our profession,
they would account it a great favor. But now such is the cruelty and
extremity of the papists, that they torment and put to death all that profess
the truth, and not only share and divide, but also take all, most greedily
without respect of their poor widows, fatherless children, or their poor
kinsfolks. This havoc the Inquisitors make in Spain, and this spoil was
made by our butcherly enemies in the days of Queen Mary. Parsons therefore,
in putting this upon us, did nothing else, but put us in mind of the rapines of
papists in Queen Mary's days, and show, what detestation we ought to (...) of
that cursed, rauinous, and woluish brood, that deals with Christians in this
sort.

He (...) also fault with my (...), as outrageous and Answer to my Epistle
fol. 1. b.
intemperate: and (...) scurrilitie and turpitude unto me. But if he would have
men to believe him, he should have convinced me by proofs. For no man, I
think, that is wise will believe such a bankerout disputer on his bare word.
Again he should have showed good example himself, that requires such
respective terms in others. He is still railing and raging like a butter wife,
and most intemperatly and furiously. Having therefore declared himself a
scurrilous filthy fellow, he shows himself an impudent sot, to object his
own faults to others. Of his scurrilitie I do mean to make a whole chapter.
Of his turpitude, his baudy and filthy rimes against Beza in the defense of
his railing censure against master Charke, yield proof sufficient. I may
therefore use (...) his words to Parmeniam against him. Cum pro his erubescere
debueras, catholicos innocents accusas. That is, where thou should blush
for thine own faults, thou accusest others that are innocent. As for my style
and terms, they shall always be justified, when Parsons has any matter to
object against them.

Descending from his magistrall throne of his royal pedantery, Ibidem.
to speak of my epistle, it pleases him to divide it into three principal
parts, to wit: into notorious folly, apparent falsehood, and ridiculous vanity
in bragging and vanting. But seeing he has divided no more wisely, he must
take the parts all to himself, being a notorious sot, a false packer, and a
vain and ridiculous bragger. Such a one the wise man describes Proverb. 6.
Homo apostata (says he) (...) inutilis graditur (...) peruerso, annuit oculis,
terit pede, digito loquitur, (...) cord machinatur malum, and omni tempore
iurgia seminat. It seems a proper description of Parsons an apostate from
religion, a man of little worth, that goes up and down with a perverse and
wide mouth, which winketh with his eyes, gives a sign with his feet,
speaks with his fingers, deuiseth mischief in his wicked heart, and at all
times sows discord and contention. It follows therefore, that he look for
the execution of that which follows: (...) exemplo veniet perditio sua, and
subito conteretur, nec habebit vltra medicinam. This man's destruction will come
quickly, and he shall suddenly be broken in pieces, and shall find no further
remedy. As for the folly, falsehood and vanity he talks of, they are so
surely fastened upon himself, that he shall never put them upon me. To
convince me offolly, he has alleged the words of Tully, that calls him a
noddy orator, as he says, that alleges such matter as makes no less for
his adversary, then for himself. But if this be the part of a noddy, then is
Parsons a threefold noddy, who alleges almost nothing, but it may with better
reason be rejected upon himself, then cast upon others: as for example, where
he talks of heresy, railing, bloody pamphlets, folly and such predominant
humors and qualities in himself. Against me the words of Tully make nothing.
For albeit I do call him noddy that takes for his devise N. D. which with the
addition of two vowels make noddy; yet cannot he by (...) means make noddy out
of O. E. which letters I assume to show his folly, unless he will lend me his
own (...), which I do not mean to borrow at this time. Again, if he may come
upon the stage with the mask of N. D. why may not he that defends, take the
two next letters O. E? The laws are 1. ff. quod quisque iuris.
plain that no man may refuse to stand to that law, by which himself means
to receive advantage. Furthermore talking of two letters, where I say he is a
man of two or three letters; he answers but by half, and therefore is like
to rest a noddy, and a man of three letters, that is Fur, and the rather for
that like a thief he came into England, entering not by the door, but stealing
in some other way with picklocke faculties, and treacherous instructions from
the Pope. Finally the man shows himself to be, not an orator, but rather a
foolish grammarian, that calls consonants the material part, and vowels the
formal part of words. For if this were true; then should no word be compounded
of vowels, nor should vowels stand without consonants, nor should form and
matter be proper to bodies, but common to words also, and fancies. Thus we see
how Robert Parsons, since he ran out of England has outrun both grammar and
logike, and is now learning to spell N. D. It may be if he pass Tiburne
cleanly, he will shortly enter into his Puerilis, and learn to construe stans
puer ad mensam, or percase pendens in patibulo. To convince me of apparent
falsehood, he says, albeit he might remit himself to a multitude of examples
in the encounters ensuing, yet he will show one for a proof of the ministers
talent in this kind. But whosoever list to compare my answers with his
examples, shall find that his multitude of examples does show the multiplicitie
of his vanities, and that his whole Warneword, is but a fardell of foolery. As
for this one example, which he alleges, it may serve to justify my honest
dealing throughout the whole book, and to show, that he has neither wit, nor
honesty. In my reply I charge him, that he has written diverse odious chartels
and books, both against particular men and the State, and namely, First
certain chartels against some in Oxford: Next Leicesters commonwealth.
Thirdly, a libell entitled a Confutation of pretended fears. Fourthly, the
book set out under the name of Andreas Philopater: Fifthly, the Libell to the
nobility and people of England and Ireland, set out under Card. Allens name.
Sixthly, Dolmans book of titles. Seventhly the Wardword. Eighthly, the relation
of the dispute betwixt M. Plessis and Eureux. But because I do not mention
other books written by him, as for example Houlets reasons of refusal: the
Discovery of Nicols: the Censure against Charke: the Epistle of persecution,
and his Directory; he says that in recounting eight books, I tell nine lies,
five privative, and four positive. But in talking of privative lies, he
shows himself not only a positive, but a superlatiue dizard. For if every
one lied, that reckned not up all his paltry pamphlets; he would bring himself
and his own friends within the compass of lying. He must (...) justify this
fiction of (...) lies, for else he does nothing. It stands him also upon, to
show that every one is to take notice of his fooleries, and patcheries. For
such is the howling of Parsons Houlet, and the Epistle of persecution, where he
takes that which is in question for granted. The Censure of Charke, and
Discovery of Nicols do consist principally of railing. The Directory is stolen
out of Gaspar Loarti, Granatensis and others. He has no reason therefore to
brag of such bald inventions. Where he obiecteth falsehood to me, for charging
him with certain libels written against some in Oxford, and with the libell
called Leicesters Commonwealth, and the treatises entitled a Confutation of
certain pretended fears, and Letters to the nobility and people of England
and Ireland; his friends are much ashamed in his behalf. For the style and
phrase of these books, compared with the Wardword, and other pamphlets
confessed to be his, the testimony of diverse priests in England, that
ordinarily charge him with these books, the confessions of some of his
friends, do convince to lie most shamefully. Nay his own conscience does
accuse him, and convict him. For listen, I pray you, what he answers. I never
heard, says he, any man of notice and judgment ascribe them to him before:
and if I be not deceived, other authors are known to have written them. Now
what is this, but to confess that covertly, that he denies coldly? And what
traitor or fellon, or seely fellow being charged at the bar with notorious
treasons and fellonies cannot answer thus, albeit he be charged with things
most manifest? For what traitor cannot say, I never heard any man of judgment
or notice ascribe this treason unto me? And again; If I be not deceived,
others are known to have committed this treason. But if To. Parsons answer no
better, he will soon be convicted and trussed for a traitor. In the mean
while, he shall here only rest convicted of lying and foolery. Of which he may
also be convicted, in that taking on him to disprove me, where I charge him to
be the author of the Wardword, he does afterward plainly confess it. He does
also make me to say, that he has written in all, eight contemptible treatises
(which are no words of mine, but cogged in by him) and charge me with
suppressing his books: where I confess plainly, that he has written other
base and paltry pamphlets. Whosoever therefore will esteem the rest of my
discourse, by this against which he takes such exceptions, as he would have
it, may see, that as I have dealt in all things plainly and sincerely, so this
fellow (...) most childishly, impudently and idly in most of his discourses.

To convince me of ridiculous vanity in vaunting, (as he calls it) he
alleges nothing, but only a challenge made by me to himself in five new
encounters. I do also request, if himself be busy about some pack or
practice of treason, or else percase about some plot to win a Cardinals hat, and
will not or has no leisure to answer; that either Creswel, or some other
babbling Iebusite may be set forth to try his skill in this combat. But neither
is it a ridiculous matter to defend the truth, nor any vanity to challenge
Parsons, or his paltry scholars, and seditious companions. Beside that, if it
be vanity in us to challenge some few, then should Robert Parsons be a most
notorious vain fellow, that in defense of his Censure against master Charke,
does most proudly challenge the whole Church of England to dispute, and in his
Wardword vanteth that we dare not to deal with him and his fellows; Campian
also challenged all comers, in his ten reasons, as if a common fencer should
challenge all men at ten weapons. And yet Parsons I trow, will not accuse him
of ridiculous vanity in vanting. Neither will the seditious crew of traitorous
seminary companions give ye title of Thraso, Goliath, Behemoth, or Leuiathan to
all challengers. For then could not ruffling (...) Robert, nor cauilling
Campian escape their censure: considering especially that in all their
pamphlets they breath fury out of their nostrils, and folly out of their dried
sculs, bragging and vanting most vainly and excessiuely. But Parsons speaking
against others, forgets always to look back upon himself, or else age
perhaps has dried up his wit. Omnia fert aetas, animum quoque, says the Poet,
age decays Virgil. Eglog
all things, and Parsons understanding also. His brain is dried with Spanish
sack, and Spanish scabbes have seized on his scull.

Afterward, not being able to justify his threefold accusation against my
Epistle, he roueth at certain personal matters far from the questions in
controversy. First he says, I have been a soldier, but what of that? was not
Ignatius ye first founder of his sect, a lame soldier? And were not Pope
Clement the seventh, Julius the second, and other Popes, whom he dare not
disclaim, great men of war? Let him therefore beware, least desiring to
strike others, he wound the lame soldier his founder, and the Popes his holy
fathers, and himself, that counterfeiteth sometime to be a soldier, and
calls himself captain Cowbucke, being but a cow and a coward. But it may be
percase, that he accompteth it irregularitie, for a man of the Church to be a
soldier: for so he seems to insinuare. But he is much deceived in his own
canons. For albeit, to be a bastard is irregularity, yet is it not so to be a
soldier. And if it were so by the Popes laws, who (because the Jews said, it
was not lawful Joan. 18.
for them to put any to death) do therefore exclude their clergy from judging
of matters of death; yet it is ridiculous to exact the observation of the Popes
laws of Christians, when the papists do reason so absurdly from the words of
the Jews, and regard their own constitutions nothing at all. Beside that, if
such traitors as himself and the Iebusites of Paris think it lawful to bear
arms against their liege Souereignes; I hope he cannot disprove them that have
served their princes against foreine enemies and traitors.

He says also, I have been a pirate. But that shows, he is badly informed,
and worse affected, that calls all that serve their country by sea, pirates.
As for me, I count it honor, to be rayled on by professed enemies of their
Prince and country, and shall the rather endeavor to do service both against
enemies, traitors and railers.

Further; says he, I understand, that he has been judge marshall among
soldiers. But while he thinks to offer me disgrace, he says more honor of
me, then I would percase have said of my self, if I had not been occasioned by
him. For that is a place of honor, as the Auditors general of the Spanish
armies can assure him. Neither is the same incompatible with my calling,
although I served the (...) in that place in the low countries, before I had
any function in the Church.

He is also much offended, that I have sometime taken upon me the trayning of
young soldiers, that were to be led against such villeines and traitors as
himself, coming with Spainiards, and foreign enemies against their country.
But if he be sorry that he and his consorts could not cut his countrimens
throats without resistance, I am glad, if I have made my countrymen the more
able to serve both against common enemies, and such cut-throate traitors: and I
doubt not but to use my skill to the benefit of my country, if ever such
traitors as himself is, offer to bring with him any bougerly Italians, or
bragadocio Spaniards against England.

He proceeds and says, I am married and matched, as a minister ought to be.
In an other place he glanceth at my wives French hood. But what if I was
married before I entered into the ministry, and be able to maintain her so
without any profits of my Ecclesiastical livings? Beside that himself being a
filthy bastard, and borne of a base queen, as the Quodlibetist being a goodly
martyr in the Calendar of traitors tells him, he shows himself both
witless and shameless, to speak against honorable marriage, and such as are
known to be descended of worshipful parentage. Furthermore he gives us
occasion to detest the filthy mass priests, monks and Iebusites, that
abiuring lawful marriage, burn in unlawful lusts, and are known to be
adulterers, fornicators, sodomites, and most beastly and swinish fellows.

He shameth not also to affirm, that I was forced to retire out of Ireland for
certain injurious speeches against the Earl of Ormond, and the Irish nation.
But what if the Earl of Ormond and the Irish nation will clear me? Is not he
a busy fellow to meddle with their matters without fee? Again, what if I came
away with the leave and liking both of the general and others? Will it not
appear that he lies like a shameless fellow, without leave or liking of any
but himself, who like (...) monky likes best his own deformities? But he may
(...) both, if he list to inform himself either by English or Irish that knew
those matters, how they passed. As for those whom he styles witnesses, Omni
exceptione maiores, they never received any greater disgrace then in meddling
with me, and have since declared themselves to be men rather to be lamented for
their folly, then credited for their dignity.

But nothing is more ridiculous, then that Robert Parsons should find fault
with my intemperancy of speech, seeing I do but answer his intemperate and
exorbitant inuectiues, that in scurrility and railing are superlatiue. But if
he will needs find fault, let him bring reason, least his writing seem to want
both wit and reason.

His last charge against me in his answer to my Epistle concerns
coffeehouse, and complaints against the State. But it is like the rest, that
is, fond, false, and frivolous. For neither is it likely that I should be
discontent with ye present state, or grieved with any ordinary charge, when
both in most honorable actions, and in my public writings, I have to the
uttermost of my power defended the State, and have willingly put my self to
extraordinary charge in all services for my country. This resolution also is
both in my self and others, not only to spend our goods, but our lives also
in defense of our country and of the truth against all malignant (...) of
sedition, and miserable slaves of Antichrist that shall dare to assail the
Realm. Finally, if in any thing I have showed discontent, it is in that I have
seen such notorious treachery, as is discovered in Parsons and his lewd
consorts to escape unpunished, and sometimes uncontrolled.

Not content to accuse us, the ranging fellow runs out in diverse places, and
rayleth with a wide and filthy mouth against the late noble Earl of Essex,
whose calamity all that knew him do much lament, and whose blood, I doubt not
but God will require at all the hands of some of his consorts that sought to
spill it, as he has already begun to revenge it in some principal persons that
eagerly followed the matter against him. Well, let us see notwithstanding what
this Blackesmiths dog has to say against that noble lord. First, says he, the
Earl of Essex was pitifully seduced by Fol. 6. b.
the puritanes. But every one that is not ignorant of the true causes of his
coffeehouse, knows well, that his pretense was not for religion, but
rather for other causes. It is also well known, that sir Christopher Blunt,
and the popish faction was the cause of his ruin. For understanding his
coffeehouse, they set him forward with hope and promise of assistance in
private quarrels, not doubting, but either to trouble the state by his means, or
else to bring him into a snare, whom they knew to be firm for religion. It may
be also, that his enemies by their cunning drew him into this dangerous action,
by practice of traitorous companions that were about him. Howsoever it was,
much it is to be lamented, that refusing a pension offered him by the King of
Spain, he could not also discover this train laid for him by the Popes
agents. And I cannot but much disdain, that so bastardly and base a swain as
this paltry Parsons is, should insult over so noble and magnanimous an Earl: a
dog over a Lion: a bauling curre over a most famous and worthy man of war.

He tells us further, that he was stout against peace with foreign princes,
and that he had wrought such a troubled water under hand, that if his stream
had not been turned against him, he might chance to have inhooked the greatest
fish in England. But this devise of a great fish, is nothing but a vain
surmise of a great conger-headed companion. For neither did he, nor could he
pretend any title to the crown. And as for his stoutnesse against peace with
Spain, it proceeded from the love of his country, and was occasioned upon just
grounds, for that he saw no sincere dealing on the behalf of the Spaniard, but
rather a surceasing of hostility, that in the mean while Mass Priests and
Iebusites, and their adherents might work treason. It may be also, that he
meant to show the weakness of the Spaniard, and the power of the English
nation, which the Spaniards heretofore too much despised. Neither he certes,
nor any man else misliketh an honorable, profitable, safe, and durable peace.
Fol. 8. a. he does again talk vainly, and tells us of the Essexian
assault, and says, it may be presumed, that it would have abbreuiated the
Queens days, especially in the intention of the puritanes. But he is an
absurd fellow to object that which his greatest enemies sought to prove, and of
which he cleared himself sufficiently at the bar. And most shameless he
shows himself, to impute that to men of our profession, which like a lewd
Laiolian he calls puritanes, which was continually desired of Papists, and
much feared of all that truly professed religion. Again, fol. 13. he
mentions the Earl of Essex his attempt, and golden purposes, and says, that
my Lord and young king Essex plotted her Majesty's overthrow under pretense of
meeting at a puritan sermon. But if all plotters of her Majesty's overthrow
had bin rewarded according to their desert, then had the crows long ere this
fed on Parsons his quarters, the most notorious arch-plotter of treason that
this age has affoorded. Likewise he and his consorts have made many attempts
against the State, and in the destruction of their Queen and country they hoped
to have a new world, and therein placed their golden time. As for the good
Earl, his purposes, howsoever they were drawn to his destruction, and
disorderly managed, yet could no man prove that he (...) harm to the Queen.
Seeing therefore this Patch obiecteth to the Earl an imagination of that which
the traitorous consorts of Parsons have long desired: I will here bestow on him
a crown of fox tails, and make him the King of al renegate traitors: and
doubt not if he come into England, but to see him crowned at Tiburne, and his
quarters enstalled at Newgate and Moregate. Finally, fol. 88. b. he does again
inculcate the same matters, and pretends that he was set on by certain
puritanes and hungry protestants. But if he knew any of us guilty of such a
crime, I doubt not but he would have revealed their names, using to keep
nothing secret that might hurt us. We have rather great cause to suspect
Papists, who were the principal men about him, and some percase suborned by
the Spanish Infantaes faction that feared him, and by all means sought his
destruction. And thus every man may see, that no man ever pleaded the Popes
cause with worse grace then Parsons, who obiecteth nothing to his adversaries,
but that which falls beside them, and reboundeth back on himself and his
friends.

In the places above mentioned, he endeuoreth also to sprinkle some suspicion
upon sir Francis and me, as if we had been privy to the Earls intentions. But
we were too far off to be partakers of his counsels, and too far different
from sir Chr. Blunt and other Papists to consort with them: and I may boldly
say, not so simple as to allow of such an action. Parsons therefore may do
well, either to forbear such foolish toys, or to take better information of
matters. He calls the Earl my master: but therein he is no less abused,
then in the rest. For albeit I have in diverse actions served under him; yet so
did diverse others Knights and Lords that never called him master.

Fol. 20. he gives out foolish words, as if some of our religion, which he
calls Puritanes, should intend to take some port or town in England. But
that, as it is a matter far from our doctrine and practice, so it is common
with the Papists, as may be proved by the example of such as came with the
Spaniards, an. 1597. and 98. for Falmouth, and of the (...) leaguers the Popes
blessed soldiers in France. Was not then sir Robert a wooden discourser, that
has no fault to object against us, which he can prove, and yet specifieth
diverse things, whereof his own consorts are most guilty?

Fol. 25. a. Taxing me for diverse faults, this masked O. E says he, showing
himself no less full of malice, and (...) hatred against Catholics, then
furious in heresy, falls from flattering her Majesty, to bloody
sycophancie and calumniation of Catholics, as though they hated her Majesty's
person. Whereto that I may answer according to Parsons own vain, I say that
this masked N. D. shows himself an-egregious Noddy, that charge men with
malice, poisoned hatred against Catholics, fury, heresy, calumniation and
sycophancy, and yet neither names who these Catholics are, nor brings one
letter to justify his furious accusation. I say further, that he is neither
Catholic nor honest man, but a furious sycophant, hired for crusts of bread to
calumniate honest men, and an irreligious apostate and heretic, and yet not
more wicked for religion, then damnable for his odious conversation. And where
I say that Papists, as many as were linked to Parsons and his packing consorts,
were enemies to her Majesty's person: their manifold plots and attempts against
her Majesty, and their continual adhearing to her enemies, do prove my saying
true. Parsons also has by diverse libels, and namely by Philopater, which he
denies to be his, and by the printing and publishing of Sanders book de
Schismate, and the libell which was partly made by him, and partly by Allen,
and by diverse practices against her life and state, proved himself to be a
dog in barking, and a poisoned enemy in conspiring against her. We will
only allege a few lines out of Allens libell printed by Parsons against the
Queen. She is (says he) a most unjust usurper, an open iniurer of all
nations, an infamous, deprived, accursed, excommunicate heretic, the very
shame of her sex and princely name, the chief spectacle of sin and
abomination in this our age, and the only poison, calamity, and destruction
of our noble Church and country. Now would I gladly know, whether those that
allow this (...) of writing, did not both hate and seek to hurt her Majesty.
Next, whether such as do allow such malicious railing and libelling, do not
concur with them in hatred, and deserve to be hated and expulsed out of all
kingdoms well governed, as lewd libellers, venomous serpents, and damnable
traitors.

Let any man read the first page of the Wardword (says Parsons) and then tell
me whether this minister have any forhead at al (though his head be great
enough) who says, I do not so much as go about to prove any such matter, that
he flattered the state. And this says he, forgetting his own brazen face and
forehead, and the blacksmiths his mothers husbands forked head, and his mothers
little honesty recorded in so many books of the secular priests, and spoken of
commonly in the country. Beside that, it is most apparent that he does not once
mention sir Francis in the first page ^f his book, save in the title, much
less prove him a flatterer. And if as he says, that was the but of his
discourse, then like a blind archer he missed the but, and shot wide and far
off. It appears also, that he was not in his wits, when he began thus to
exclaim and cry alarm.

Fol, 35. he imputes unto me idle babbling and calumniation: whereas all his
wast Warne-word is nothing but a fardle of idle words, and mere babbling, and
foolery, except where he adds some additions of knavery; and that not only in
calumniation and lying, but also in diverse kinds of villainy and treachery.

Fol. 36. he says, I flatter to get a bigger benefice. But if a man should
ask him, how he knows my mind, he will like a restie jade be at a stop. Only
he imagines me to be like himself, who caused a solemn supplication to be
presented to the King of Spain, subscribed with the hands of diverse base
knaves and whores for want of more worthy witnesses, declaring, that to uphold
the cacolike cause, it was necessary that Robert Parsons should be made
forsooth no less then a Cardinal. He made means also for the Kings letters
to the Pope to the same effect. And no doubt they had taken effect, but that he
had iugled too much above the board, and was known to be a bastardly, base,
refuse, ribaldicall, rascal fellow.

Fol. ^.speaking of sir Francis, like Scogan he scorneth, and like an impudent
companion accuses him, as not abounding in good works: whereas himself
abounds in all evil works, as for example, impiety, heresy, treachery,
filchery, lying, cogging, lechery, beastly filthiness, and all knavery. As for
sir Francis his piety and charitable dealing, the same is sufficiently known:
and greatly should I wrong him, if I should compare him with any of Parsons his
consorts, which was begotten on the backside of a smiths forge, in that cuntry
where sir Francis has an honorable charge.

In his second Encounter, ca. 13. such ruffianlike and ravenous companions
(says he) do possess, buy and sell Catholic benefices: forgetting that
himself wandered long up and down England and France, sometime in the habit of
a soldier, sometime like a ruffianlike Leno, sometime like a knitter of
thrummed caps, and that himself lived long by rapine, cosinage and knavery. He
forgot also how the Popes, Cardinals, and Mass Priests buy and sell benefices,
masses, indulgences, and such Babylonical wares, as I have heretofore showed.
As for Ecclesiastical livings, they belong to true Catholics indeed, and not
the priests of Baal, nor the limbs of Antichrist, nor to idolatrous Monks,
Friars, and such vermin: upon which kind of dogs we do not use to cast away
the childrens bread.

The rest of his charges and accusations being like to these, I should greatly
wrong the Reader if I should stand longer about them. Now then, that we have
answered for our selves, listen I pray you what we have out of this foolish
Warneword to object against Parsons. And first, because religion is a point
among Christians of special consideration, we will see how atheistical and
irreligious he has declared himself to be, like Prometheus sacrificing bare
bones covered with show of fat, and himself taking the best for himself, and
making a profession of the name of Jesus, and having a show of godliness, but
notwithstanding denying the 1. Tim. 4.
power thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Containing notes of certain speeches, arguing Robert Parsons his
impiety and atheism.
I Need not to insist much upon this point, the man being already convinced by
the testimony of the secular Massepriests his consorts, that have often helped
him to heave at the end of a Mass, to be a mere Machiauelian, an irreligious
person, and an Atheist. William Watson a famous fellow, (...). 8. art. 5.
calls him a beast, a devil, and a monopoly of mischief. But if any doubt of
it, these testimonies out of his VVarne-word, against which we dispute, may
assure him.

The holy Scriptures do every where use this word Minister of Christ, or
minister of the Gospel in good part: as for example in these words, Romans 15.
That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ toward the Gentiles. And 1. Cor.
3. Who is Paul then, and who is Apollo, but the Ministers, by whom ye
believed? And 2. Cor. 11. They are the Ministers of Christ. And Col. 1. He is a
faithful Minister of Christ. Is he not then an impious fellow, and does he not
declare himself the slave of Satan, that every where uses this word in scorn
and contempt, saying, fir minister, the minister, insolent minister, and giving
out, that a true minister, and false minister is all one to him?

In his answer to my Epistle, speaking of my request to have Creswell to
answer, he alludeth to Christ's words, Mat. 20. and Mar. 10. where answering the
sons of Zebedey, he says, Nescitis quid petatis. For making himself Christ,
and me one of the sons of Zebedey, he says, Nescis quid petis. So shameless
he is in taking upon him the person of Christ, and abusing Christ's words to his
scornful purpose. He should therefore rather have made himself a beareward,
and his seditious scholars beare-whelpes, and Creswel the crier of the game.
In the end of his wild observations upon my Preface, he obiecteth preaching
unto me, where in great reproach he calls me preaching Deane. Yet the Apostle
Romans 16. and 1. Cor. 1. teaches us, that preaching is the means to reveal
the Gospel, and to bring men to Christ. It is no marvel therefore, if this
limb of Antichrist do hate preaching, by which men are brought from Antichrist
to Christ, desiring nothing more then to keep his countrymen in darkness, and
to reduce them back into Egypt.

Fol. 22. he iesteth at Sir Francis Hastings, and says, He does imitate the
spirit of some hidden prophet. But what is more impious, then to use the name
of a prophet, and of Gods holy spirit to make up a jest?

He professes, that he handles controversies of religion, and yet fol. 33. b.
he calls his dispute an Interlude. Do you then think that this man deserves
credit, that of a Massepriest and Iebusite is now become a Comedian, and
seems to make a jest of religion? Eusebius liked not the Gentiles, De vita
Constant. lib. 2. c. 60.
that in their Theaters made sport with matters of Christian religion. What
then may we think of this counterfeit Christian, but that he is worse then the
Gentiles?

Fol. 29. he defends Panormitan and Hostiensis, that affirm, that Christ and
the Pope have but one consistory, and that the Pope can (as it were) do all
things that Christ can do, except sin. But therein he professes his own
impiety, rather the^ excuses theirs. For who does not acknowledge it to be a
matter impious, to compare a man to Christ in all things except one, and to
make Christ the author of the Popes sentences and judgments? Likewise it is
impious to defend the Gloss, that says, Dominus Deus noster Papa. c. Fol. 30.
cum inter extr. (...). (...). de verb. signif. as does Parsons. Nay, he goes
about to face down Sir Francis, that does reprehend it. Neither is it
material, that the name of God is given sometime to creatures. For that is by
a similitude, and not absolutely nor properly.

Fol. 38. he defends Steuchus and Pope Nicholas, that say that Constantine
called the Pope God, and held him for God: which was never uttered by
Constantine, nor can be spoken without blasphemy.

Fol. 40. he maintains the words of Cusanus, that said, that the judgment of
God changed. But S. James says, Jacob. 1.
Apud Deum non est transmutatio, there is no change with God. This was also an
opinion of the Arrians, Dei verbum posse mutari, that the son of God, which
is the eternal word, may be changed, as Athanasius tesrifieth decret. Nicen.
synod. contr. Arrian. Furthermore it is blasphemous, as he holds with
Cusanus, to say that Gods institution in the sacrament may be changed.

Fol. 42. he says, Sir Francis comes out with a decalogue of blessings,
answering perhaps to the ten Commandments, for whose observation the Jews
have many blessings promised: founding a scurrilous jest upon the ten
Commandments, and emplying, that among Christians there is no such reward for
performance of the law, as among the Jews.

Fol. 45. he places Trinitarians among heretics, as if it were heresy to
believe in the holy Trinity.

Fol. 60. and 61. he bears his reader in hand, that reading of scriptures in
tongues understood, is cause, that men fall into heresies: direct contrary to
the doctrine of our Savior, Search the scripture, says he: for in them ye
think to have eternal life. Thus he blasphemeth the sacred word of God with
his impure mouth.

Fol. 79. he makes a jest of the words of our Savior, Matthew. 5. where he
says, Our clergy may sing, beatipauperes spiritu. This I say is mere impiety.
For so should he sing too, (...) he were ot an Atheist, and had forgotten, that
these are Christ's words.

Fol. 81. he makes sport with words of Scripture, comparing Cadburie to the
ruins of Jerusalem: and yet this fellow is esteemed a worthy patron of
popery: such a patron, such a cause.

Fol. 101. he denies scriptures to be the rule offaith: which is as much, as
if he meant either impiously to overthrow the canon of scriptures, or else to
prefer uncertain traditions before them.

2. enconter c. 5. fol. 32. 6. he compares reading of scriptures, to excess
of apparel, spending much, and playing at dice: like a cheating companion
drawing similitudes from his own practice, to disgrace the word of God.

Chap. 6. encontr. 2. he will not confess his error, that said before Wardw.
p. 14. that the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3. make against reading of
scriptures. Who can deny (says he) but Saint Paul talking of scriptures, as
they were in the learned tongues, says of them, litera occidit? But to accuse
men for reading of scriptures is impious, and sauoreth of the error of the
Origenists, and Swenchfeldians error, that condemn the letter of the
Scriptures. Neither can he excuse himself, saying, that he meant rash reading.
For the Apostle where he says, that the letter kills; talks not of
reading, but of the effect that the scriptures work in men's hearts, showing
that the letter condemns those, which by grace are not moved effectually to
embrace the word.

Chap. 11. encontr. 2. most blasphemously he compares Christ's miracles to the
miracles of Thomas Becket, and his lying legend to the scriptures. For which he
deserves to be marked as a miraculous blasphemer. In the same place he says,
that material honor in worshipping saints, hurts not the devout, nor
diminishes their merit. Which is as much as if he should say, that those that
worship thieves and malefactors, as saints; offend not, but rather merit with
God. And that men may worship they know not whom, nor what.

Fol. 99. he maintains a blasphemous prayer, wherein papists desire to come
to heaven by the blood of Thomas Becket. And to mend the matter says, it is no
more then the Prophets did, mentioning Abraham, Isac and Jacob. And yet no
Prophet or godly man ever prayed to come to heaven by their blood.

2. encontr. c. 14. he defends those blasphemous verses, Hic des deuote,
caelestibus associo te, mentes aegrotae per munera sunt tibi lotae. Whereby the
papists teach, that men's sins are washed by alms: which is derogatory to the
blood of Christ, wherein our sins only are washed away, and we cleansed.

Fol, 114. 2. encontr. c. 14. cauilling with Sir Francis Hastings about his
inference made out of the words of Durand, that says, How that indulgences are
not found in scriptures; he affirms, that the illation of those that dispute
against the doctrine of the Trinity, and the consubstantialitie of the son of
God with his father, and baptism of infants, is as good, as that of Sir
Francis against indulgences. But it is most blasphemous to compare the doctrine
of the highest mysteries of our religion, which the ancient fathers proved, and
we doubt not but to prove out of scriptures, with the trash and (...) of
indulgences, that have neither ground in scriptures, nor fathers, nor reason.
As at large I have proved in my book De indulgentijs against Bellannine.

Our doctrine of faith justifying without works, Parsons Fol. 126.
calls an idle device and a mathematical illusion, the which touches the
Apostle as well as us. For he says, That by the Gal. 2.
works of the law no flesh shall be justified. It touches also the fathers,
that say works go not before, but follow after righteousness. The same also
touches the papists themselves, which confess, that our first justice is not
of works. But whatsoever Christians are to think of works, Parsons has no
reason to put any confidence in his own works, unless he hope to be saved by
iugling, lying, cogging, railing, cousening, committing treason and villainy.
Neither has he cause to talk of mathematical illusions, having himself
egregiously deluded all those, with whom he has dealt, and believing, as it
seems, no heaven but mathematical. If he hope to go thither by the Popes
pardons tied about his neck, like necklaces, and flying upward like a young
dragon; he is far deceived. That is no place for such dragons, nor are pardons,
wings to fly so high withal. We hope rather to see him sent flying to (...)
holy father with an (...) halter about his neck, and led (...) in a dongcart
to the gallows, as a due reward for his lewd works, and treasons.

Is it not then strange, that such an atheist should talk of religion? The
heathen Philosopher laugh edat Epicurus Cic. lib. 1. and. 2. de not. deor.
discoursing of God, whose providence he denied: and no man had ever reason to
endure to hear the atheist Diagoras disputing of divine matters. How then can
papists esteem of this man's idle Directories and discourses in religion, that
is declared an atheist, and a man all void of piety and religion? And yet is
he not more impious, then ridiculous, ignorant and malicious.

CHAP. V. Of diverse ridiculous, and childish errors, and mistakings of the
supposed great doctor Parsons.
IT is the part of hypocrites to epsy a mote in another man's eye, but they see
not the beams that are in their own eyes. This we may see verified in our
captious adversary. For albeit curious in espying faults in others; yet could
he not avoid gross errors in himself.

In the Epistle to the reader, he speaks of the author of the Wardword in the
third person, praising him as a Catholic man. And yet presently after
forgetting himself, he speaks of him in the first person, where he talks
of enlarging himself, and of his reioynder.

In his answer to my Epistle, fol. 3. b. he supposes, that these words, non
tam despectum, quam vexatum dimittam: are taken out of Tullies second
Philippicke. But the oration being read over, will discover the truants error.
For in all that oration there are no such words. It may be he had read some
such like words in Tullies oration, in Vatinium. But the poor idiot could not
hit upon it.

Fol. 5. b. he says, that this word maxim, the end of doing any thing is
first in our intention, and last in performance and execution, is taken out of
Aristotle. But the great doctor cannot tell where to find it. And when he
seeks it, he shall find, that he mistook later writers for Aristotle.

Fol. 13. b. he tells us, that Irenaeus lib. 2. c. 54. and lib. 4. c. 2. does
call heresy, pandoram: whereas he, lib. 2. c. 54. does not once name pandoram
and lib. 2. c. 55. and lib. 4. c. 2. where he has that word, he does not by
pandora understand heresy, but matrem spiritualis conceptionis: the mother of
spiritual conception: of whom and their Savior the Valentinians imagined
spiritual creatures to have their original, as may be gathered out of these
words Ireney lib. 4. cap. 2. Quem patrem volunt nos audire. Hi, qui sunt
pandorae peruersissimi sophistae? vtrum ne bythum, quem a semetipsis finxerunt,
an matrem eorum?

Fol. 14. b. he alleges Ciceroes book De Legibus: not knowing, that Cicero
wrote three books De Legibus, and not one book only, as Parsons imagines.

In the margent of the 15. leaf a. he alleges part. 29. of Augustines
Enarration in psalm. 80. Whereas that exposition is not divided into parts. He
does also cite Augustines Commentaries upon the 27. chapter of Iosue, where
neither that book has more then 24. chapters, nor Augustine ever wrote any
Commentaries upon Iosue.

He says further, fol. 15. a. That heretics are the proper idolaters of the
new testament, and that all other external idolatry is abolished by Christ's
coming. Wherein he abuses the terms of Gods testament, uttering words, as if
idolaters were suffered by Gods testament, and shows gross ignorance. For
not only Zigabenus in Sarracenicis, but diverse other histories do testify,
that the Sarracens are idolaters. The same also is testified by Benzo and other
writers of the Indians. And no man can deny, but that many hundred years after
Christ idolaters lived in Italy, and all other countries, as the volumes of
Baronius, if he look them, will testify. Finally, the papists that worship
the sacrament, the cross, the crucifixe, and the images of the trinity as
God, must needs be idolaters. But were papists no idolaters, yet had Parsons no
reason to show it by mentioning idolaters and heretics so intempestiuely, and
speaking of them so ignorantly.

Fol. 17. he says, John the first bishop of Rome, wrote a letter to the
Emperor Justinian, whose title is this: Gloriosissimo and clementissimo filio
Iustiniano Ioannes episcopus vrbis Romae. Likewise in other places he ascribes
this letter to John the first: and yet Platina testifies, that John the first,
Bishop of Rome, died before the reign of (...) the Emperor. And if he will
not believe him, let him read the seventh tome of Caesar Baronius his Annals,
and others, and he shall find, that Justinian did not begin his empire, before
the second year of Felix, that was successor to John the first. Beside this,
I have showed in my last challenge, that the law inter claras. Cod. de sum.
trin. and fid. cath. is scarce authentical. But were it so, yet does it rather
overthrow the Popes authority, then otherwise. For the prerogative of the
Roman church is there derived from Councels and Emperors, and not from Gods
word: and John calls himself Episcopum vrbis Romae, Bishop of Rome, and not
universal bishop.

Fol. 18. for Iustinianus he names Justinius, and for Eutyches, Euthyches: and
for Circumcellions, Circumcillians. But these are small faults in comparison of
that which follows, fol. 19. b. Where for Constantine Copronymus, he writes
Constantine Capronius: mindful as it should seem of his own capricious
tricks, who as his friends say, is Caper inter Capras. I speak to him that
knows the manners of Italians. For this fault therefore in stead of N. D. let
him have a mask (...), to cover his swynes snout for very shame, and for
Parsonius, let him be called Capronius. (...) Fol. 32. for sweet singing
Sirens, he writes sweet singing Syrienes: which makes us much suspect, that
some sweet singing Syrian, or Italian woman, or boy has so bereaved him of
his senses, as he is able to name nothing right. If he proceed on this
fashion, it is much to be feared, that he will forget his own name, if we do
not put him in mind of it.

Fol. 30. where the Canonists are charged with flattery, for saying, Our Lord
God the Pope, he says, the words are not to be found. Afterward for very
compassion he says, he will add a conjecture how sir Francis might be
deceived: and that is in supposing that D. D. noster Papa did signify Dominus
Deus. And like as if a man reading this superscription, To the right honorable
our good Lord the Lord Admiral, should suppose the second L. to signify Lady.
But in talking of D. D. he shows himself a double dolt, and a lewd Lozel,
sporting himself with his own foolish babble. For the place alleged is extant
in the gloss, inc. (...) inter nonnullos extr. Joan. 22. de verb. signif. the
words are these: Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam conditorem dictae
decretalis, and istius, sic non potuisse statuere, haereticum censetur. That
is, to believe that our Lord God the Pope, the maker of the said (...), and
this also, could not so appoint it, is accounted heretical. I doubt not
therefore but Robert Parsons, although a thick skinned fellow, when he reads
this, will blush, and his consorts take compassion of his ignorance. Less
certes they cannot do, then call him NODE.

Fol. 35. he disioyneth (as he says) the harms ensuing by change of religion
from her Majesty's government. As if her Majesty's government could be
considered without religion: or as if this traitor did not calumniate her
government, that reproves all her actions done for religion.

Fol. 45. he deuideth Paulus Alciatus into two. Which error he might have
corrected by Bellarmine in praefat. in 2. controuers.

Fol. 47. he names Marspurge, for Marpurge.

Fol. 71. he says it is contrary to Sophistry (he would say Logic) for
extremes to be in one subject But this shows that Parsons head was never any
subject for Logic. For else he might know, that extremes that are not immediate
may be in one: as for example, (...) in scraping, and prodigality in giving,
presumption and hypocrisy, albeit properly these are not extremes in respect
one of another, but of their mean virtues.

Fol. 90. b. alleging Cyrill, he cites his catechism, and quoteth him thus,
Ciril Hierosol. cate chis. 4. and 5. mistach. And so filing his mustaches, he
thinks he has spoken sprucely. But his unlearned quotation shows, that he
has scarce ever seen that father, who wrote not catechismes but catecheses,
and not mistachical but mystagogical. The writing of Ciin Ciril with an i, is
but a light fault of a lout, that understands no Greek: for which, for i,
Cardinals hat, let him have a mitre with two coxcombes.

Fol. 104. b. he says, that Valentinian mentioned in the title of the law
Cunctos populos, was son to Gratian. A most lamentable error. For histories do
all testify, that Gratian and Valentinian the younger were sons to Valentinian
the elder. And if he will not believe me, let him look Caesar Baronius tom. 4.
in the several entrances of Gratian and Valentinian the younger. What a lewd
fellow then is this, who not content to beget neuewes on his own sister, does
now make the brother to beget his brother?

Fol. 110. a. he says, when a man is chosen Pope, his rudeness is turned into
wisdom, his feebleness into fortitude, his infirmity into virtue. And yet
experience teaches us, that ordinarily they are as ignorant, as lewd,
unlearned and filthy as they were before. Clement the eight for all his
fortitude can scarce go without help. And very strange it seems to us here,
that the Popes chair should serve to cure men of all ignorance, infirmities
and diseases. And if this were so, it were to be wished that Robert Parsons
might sit some few hours in the Popes chair, that he might be cured of his
rudeness in railing, his ignorance in writing, and all other his scabbes and
infirmities. I for my part beleeus rather, that the rudeness of this rudent
and mad (...) would never be cured, although he were reboyled like (...). In the
leaf next going before, for acephali he writes a cheuali, showing himself to
be ignorant of Greek, and his head to be as gross as any capels head, rather
then our Church to be without head, who hold Christ for the sole head of the
universal Church.

To prove that Catholic men cannot receive their faith from the Catholic
Church, that is, a collection and communion of all faithful people: I think
that I needed not to use many arguments, the same being a matter so plain and
evident. For then should the (...) be no Catholics, nor should the Catholic
church consist of particular men. And finally, all the members of the Catholic
church should be agents to deliver, and all members to receive, and no
distinction should be between the giver and receiver. But I used only one
argument, drawn from a common principle of schoolmen, viz. that actions are
acted of singular persons, and not of the body collectiue: supposing that I had
had to do with a schoole-man, or a man at the least that understood logic.
But now I see I am fronted with an ass, and a fellow deuoyd of logic and
reason. For otherwise he would not have talked so idly of suppositum and
singular, and universal, nor derived his logic from Tolet, nor denied my
argument. For if in God the whole essence does suffer, and not the son of
God, or if the whole essence should be borne, and not the son of God, as
Parsons must grant, if he will have actions to proceed a toto collectiuo: then
does he fall flatly into the heresy of the Patripassians, and overthrows the
high mystery of the holy Trinity. Again, al his discourse about terms
collectiue and universal, makes against himself. For if, as Aristotle says,
(...) 1. Metaph. 1.
(...). If all actions and generations be indiuiduis, and singular persons, and
not in things universal, or bodies of commonwealths; then I say true, and he
false. He may also receive back his boyeries and fooleries, and keep them to
himself. That the universal Church does not properly deliver the faith, they
themselves also after a sort confess. For when they bring proof of their
faith, they go to this Pope and that Pope, this man and that man, and not to
the universal body of the Church. The same is also proved by the example of a
body politic. For if particular men do all actions that belong to the State,
and not all the commonwealth, how can the universal Church be said properly to
decree, to proclaim, to give out? Must all meet, and like a Chorus speak or
act a part? O mere dizardry! O pitiful ignorance, and that to be corrected
with many stripes! Nay himself in the end is driven to say, fol. 109. that
when Papists say, that their faith is delivered by the universal church, their
meaning is, that albeit particular (...), etc. deliver the same, yet for that
they do it not as of themselves, but by the order of the universal church,
that the universal church delivers it. So you see he comes like a resty
jade to the montoier, and says as we say in effect; and to help himself
belyeth his fellows. For I do not think that he is able to show any Papist so
sottish, as to say, that the universal catholic church delivers the faith to
private persons.

In his second encounter c. 3. in writing Bedes words he commits a gross
Soloecisme, where he says, Scientiam seruatur and confitetur, he should have
said, scientiam scrutatur and confitetur, but that his spectacles failed him.
His disciples therefore may do well to keep up their master, that has forgot
his Grammar.

In the same encounter fol. 37. he does ridiculously prove his Mass by the
Leuiticall sacrifice of Zachary mentioned Luke 1. and foolishly argues that
Papists may profit much by hearing Mass, albeit they understand it not. But
one great inconvenience he must take heed of. For if the example of Zachary
make for the Mass, then as the peeple were without when Zachary offered
within, so the people may be in the churchyard when the priest is at Mass. So
they shall neither need to hear Mass, nor see Mass.

Fol. 58. of the second encounter, the Patch confesses he fetches his
divinity from Thomas Aquinas. The Warder (says he) showed at large out of S.
Thomas. Whereby his doltish folly is proved at large, that alleges so brave
an author to us, that for Divinity is of equal (...) with Robert Parsons,
though far more subtle and better learned.

Fol. 65. answering to a place out of Paraleip. Vrspergensis he says he
finds it not. But that was either his great (...), or the thickness of his
spectacles. Let him therefore look that book in the notes upon the year
1518. and he shall find these words there recorded: Sic dicerem in scholis sed
tamen manet in aeternos. Diuersum sentio.

Fol. 67. for Petilian and Cresconius, he names Petilian and Crescentius;
showing himself well traveled in S. Augustins works.

Fol. 106. b. (...). encounter chap. 13. ignorantly he does so interpret the
words Primo mancipio Gehennae, in the chapter, si Papa did. 40. as if (...)
did call the Pope the chief bondslaue of hell. The Gloss does notoriously
convince him of ignorance. Mancipio says the author of the Gloss in cap. si
Papa did. 40. idest, diabolo quimancipatus est Gehennae. But howsoever it is,
the Pope is little beholding to Parsons, that calls him the chief bondslaue
of hell, and I doubt not, but if he take the bastardly (...) handsomely, he
will whippe the knave like a Mancipium gehennae or gally slave, until he have
recanted his words, and brought him out of hell. In the mean while the
wretched Papists may see their servile estate, that follow oftentimes either
the devil, as the Gloss says, or the devils bondslaue the Pope, as Parsons
the Popes slave of ignorance confesses.

Fol. 113. 2. encounter 14. he speaks false Latin, saying, Qui parce
seminit, parce and metet, putting seminit for seminat, and quoting the 2.
Corinthians 11. for 2. Corinthians 9.

Fol. 114. 2. encounter chap. 14. he distinguishes the doctrine of homousion
and consubstantialitie, as two several points of Christian Religion, whereas
the learned (out of which rank I blot Parsons) know that (...) in Greek is
nothing but consubstantiall. Fol. 115. in the same chapter he quoteth Durand
lib. 4. in sent. did. 2. for did. 20. A little after he cauilleth with me for
saying, that the Pope has power to absolve and pardon men that have lived most
filthily and abhominably: and says, that absolution belongs to the sacrament
of penance, and not to indulgences. But therein the ass bewrays his own
gross ignorance. For as some Papists say, indulgence is absolution, others say
it is absolutio and solutio, as Bellarmine disputes lib. 1. de indulg. ca. 5.
and might have taught the same to Parsons, if he would have looked on him. The
Pope therefore may do well to lash this ass, and to grant him no pardon, that
knows not the grounds and first principles of his own fool (or as some call
it school) divinity. Nay he remembers not the common forms of pardons.
Gregory the 13. anno 1578. granting a Meteran. hist. Belg.
pardon to those cutthrotes, that came with D. Iuan d'Austria into the Low
countries (for to such are his indulgences granted) gives them indulgence and
remission or absolution from their sins after confession and communion.
Confessione and communione peracta (says Gregory) impetretis omnium peccatorum
vestrorum indulgentiam. O holy Pope, that grants pardons to such cutthrotes!
O patch Parsons, that knows not the form of his holy fathers blessings!

Wherefore as the Apostle says of the idolatrous Gentiles, that when they
professed themselves wise, they became Romans 1.
fools: so we may say of the idolatrous heretic Parsons, that while he
professed himself a teacher of others, he has showed himself an ignorant
(...). Likewise as the heretics called Gnostici professed themselves great
clerks, Imperitiae suae nomen scientiae vendicantes: that is, challenging to
their ignorance the name and title of knowledge, as Hierome says in Isaiae c.
44. So the illuminate Iebusites profess arts and learning, and Parsons is as
arrogant as the best of them. But if he look down upon these so many and so
gross errors, committed within one of his volumes; whatsoever he thinks of
himself, I hope hereafter he will not contemn others.

CHAP. VI. Parsons his singular patcheries, and fooleries.
THis is but a base argument, may some suppose, to discourse of patcheries and
fooleries. But how can we do withal, having to deal against a (...) and base
fellow, who urges us to make a register of his (...)? Stultitia gaudium
stulto: that is, Foolishness causes a fool to rejoice, says Solomon,
Proverb. 15. But seeing this Patch would needs make a scorn of religion, and
the professors thereof, it was necessary to lay his notorious fooleries open.

First then he shows himself a notorious sot, to see curiously into others,
and not at all to look into his own faults. Est proprium stultitiae (says
Tully) aliorum vitia cernere, Tuscul. 3.
suorum obliuisci. But for men to accuse innocents, when them selves are
guilty, is not only simplicity, but also madness and impudency. Cum protuis
erubescere debueras, innocents Catholicos accusas: that is, when thou
should blush in regard of thine own fellows, thou accusest innocent
Catholics, says Optatus to Parmenian, lib. 2. In the Epistle to the reader,
he charge sir Francis Hastings with writing a most bitter and bloody
pamphlet, who only stirs up his countrymen to defend themselves and their
country against foreign traitors, and home-borne traitors: and yet himself
published, and as is said, help to write that bloody Exhortation to the
Nobility and people of England and Ireland, whereby Allen and he endeavor to
persuade all Papists to take arms against their Prince, and country, and to
join with foreign enemies. And this is the end of his own and his consorts
writings and practices for the most part. Neither can any write more moderately
then Sir Francis, or more immodestly and doggedly then himself. Likewise he is
not ashamed in diverse places to accuse me of malignity, intemperate writing,
and bitterness. And yet himself like a gull, casts out nothing but gall and
bitter reproaches. He charge us both with flattery, lying, falsehood, and
diverse other faults which are most rife in him, and not any way to be forced
upon us.

Most singular folly it is also for any writer to utter things that either make
against himself, or at least nothing for him: Quae nihil attingunt adrem, nec
sunt vsui, ea saepe profert Plauti Mercator.
aduerso tempore, says Plautus of a certain foolish fellow. But this is a
common fault of Parsons, and committed in his discourses. In his Wardword he
(...) to scrape a little favor of the late Queen, of the Lords of her
Council, and of his countrymen. And yet like a sot every where he endeuoreth
to disgrace her Majesty's proceedings, an^d commends foreign enemies and
traitors, and that not without great reproach to the whole State, and to the
English nation.

In the Warneword his purpose is to speak of the church and state of England,
and yet is he still running out into bymatters of France, Germany, and other
countries. Nothing can be devised more odious, then the tyranny, exactions, and
pillages of the Pope and his adherents: and yet is Robert Parsons still braying
out the canonists asinine commendations of the Popes kingdom.

Fools have their confidence in their tongues. Stultis thesaurus In Paenulo.
in lingua situs est, says Plautus. So does Parsous rely on his libels,
pamphlets, and discourses, and hops to pay us all our debt with evil
language. But come to try his words in the balance, they are as light as
feathers. In his Epistle to the Reader: A Spanish invasion (says he) was then
said to be upon the seas for England. But if he had not been a puppy, or at
least such a one as could not speak English, he would have said, that a fleet
was said to be on the seas with forces to invade England. (...) he might as well
say, that an invasion was marching on the land, as floting on the sea. But his
mind was so much upon invasions, that he forgot both the love and the language
of his country.

In the same place he says, he wrote a Ward-word, to a Watchword. Whereby a
plain Englishman would suppose, that he meant to send this Ward-word as a
letter, to a gentleman called a VVatch-word. Forasmuch as, to a Watchword in
good English does not signify against a Ward-word. Again we Englishmen think
strange to hear these strange words, VVarne-word, and Ward-word in our tongue,
and wonder that there should be an opposition betwixt watching and warding,
that are commonly joined together. But this forging Friar forgeth new words, as
fast as his putatiue father was went to forge horseshooe nails.

Talking of his brave books, which if they were all His answer to my Epistle.
bound together were not worth a leeke, he names his Epistle of Persecution:
which seems to be some new cut, and devise contrary to all forms of former
Epistles. But speaking English, we no more call letters of that argument
Epistles of Persecution, then we call discourses of Parsons his ribaldry, and
bastardy, Epistles of ribaldry and bastardy.

But nothing is more (...), then that he calls the Catholic church, the
squire and pole-starre of our faith. Before (says he) we had a direct rule,
squire, and polestarre Wardw. p 2, 6.
to follow, which was the universal Church: in which words he makes rule and
squire all one, and confounds the Church, which is ruled with the rule it
self. Such a lusty ruffler is Sir Robert, that he can turn rules into
squires, and make the workman and work all one with the rule.

He does also mainetaine, that the Catholic Church does properly teach. Which
speech, if it be proper; then we may say as well, that the Catholic Church
sings, or walks, or does any singular act. And then it would follow, that
particular actions may be done of general bodies. It would follow also, if the
Catholic church teach, that the Catholic Church is not taught, which is
absurd, and contrary to the rules of relation.

Having spent the uttermost of his malice in scolding, and scurrilous railing,
in the end of his answer he tendreth me an offer, that if I will go forward in
this contouersie, with Christian modesty, and convenient terms of (...), as
men professing learning ought to do, that he will be content to answer me with
the same style. But therein he shows singular simplicity, first confessing,
that himself has neither used Christian modesty, nor convenient terms of
ciuility, nor done as he ought to do, and next desiring others to hold their
hands, when he has done his worst, and fears return of blows. But the
fool must not think to escape without controlement, having shot forth so many
bolts against us, (...)? Let him therefore have patience to hear our answer
to his unchristian and uncivil terms, and then I will think him more wise in
making his offers, and will shape him an answer by his own cut, taking the
length of a wooden fellow with a crabtree measure.

It is also the part of a fool to praise himself. Neither do any fall into
their own extrauagant praises, but for want of wit. Yet does this fellow tell
us of his memorable works, and in the end of his answer to my Epistle,
talks of his own merit with God, and credit with all good men. I will
therefore remit him to be censured by an old grammar school author, that
borrows the name of Cato. Nec te Collaudes, nec te vituperes ipsum: hoc
faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis. And because he is a big burly and
tall fellow, I will say of him as one said of a fool of his pitch, quanta est
longitudo and profunditas, tanta est stultitia: that is, The man's folly
reaches as far, as he is thick or long.

Fol. 19. b. in his notes and observations he affirms very foolishly, That al
(...) from John the first, to Leo the tenth, were all of one religion. Which if
it were true indeed, then should all those popes be of no religion. Of John the
23. it is said, That he did affirm, and believe, that the soul of man died In
append. Conc. Constant.
with the body, like to brute beasts, and that men's bodies did not rise at the
last day. And this he confirmed with other articles exhibited against him with
his own hand, as is evident in ye Appendix of the acts of that Council.
Alexander the (...) was a man without religion. Humana iura, nec minus
caelestia, ipsosque sustulist deos: says one of him, that is, He took away
the laws of man, laws of God, and God himself. Leo the tenth did no
otherwise account of the Gospel, then as of a fable, as his words to Cardinal
Bembus testify. The like may be affirmed also of many impious Popes: Let
Parsons therefore beware, that he prove not his consorts to be infidels, and
himself a consort and slave of infidels.

Fol. 41. he says, D. Giffard has his Deanery by true adoption. Which is a
matter most ridiculous. For others have their Deanries by election, and not for
respect of kindred by adoption, much less for dealing against his country, or
for treason.

Fol. 43. he talks of chirping of sparrowes, cackling of hens, prattling of
dawes, chiding of women, and of a fool, that said to one, that had a great
nose, that he had no nose. Which argues, that the man had neither nose, nor
brain, nor good sense, cackling like a brood hen, chirping like a sparrow,
prattling like a daw, scolding like a butter woman, braying like an ass, and
barking like a curre.

Fol. 81. he talks of the patience of papists: which I wonder that any man
can read with patience. For neither do they teach patience, nor practice it,
if any occasion be given to the contrary. Was not this then a ridiculous sot,
to talk of the patience of Lombards, or papists?

Fol. 100. he affirms, That the sum and corpse of Christian doctrine was
delivered at the beginning by miracles. Now we confess, it was confirmed by
miracles: but how it can be delivered by miracles, Parsons will be much
encombred to show, without showing himself a wondrous wisard.

Fol. 106. he would have the acts of the wicked conuenticle of Trent
confirmed, and allowed by kings, as ancient Emperors confirmed the faith
published in the Nicene Council. But it is folly to desire matters so absurd,
and plain impiety to compare the heretical decrees of Trent with the faith of
the Nicene Council.

To prove the saintlinesse of Thomas Becket, in his 2. encontr. c. 10. he
alleges the Popes canonization. But what is more ridiculous, then to talk to
us of the Popes canonizations, who proceed commonly by (...), and without
party, and as it seems, for money would canonize a horse? Secondly, he
alleges for witnesses, Herbert Hoscan, John Salisbury, Allen of Teuxbery,
William and Edward Monks of Canterbury, Peter Bloys and others. But all these
witnesses are not worth a mess of Teuxbery mustard. For what avails it to
rehearse names of dumb idols, that pass by, and say nothing? Again if I may
be so bold, I will answer Parsons in his own terms. You see what cogging it
is, one of them to allege another.

Fol. 77. rehearsing the words of Th. Becket out of Houeden, Do you not seem
to hear in this place, says he, the voice of S. John Baptist, to his king
Herod? Where I may answer him with his own words, and say not unfitly: Do you
not see a fellow with a face as hard as a lopster, that does compare Th. Becket
and his cause, to Saint John Baptist, and his constancy: the first contending
for profit, and idle panches, the second for the law of God? Ridiculously also
he compares Thomas Becket to S. Ambrose, a holy doctor of the Church, the said
Thomas being nothing else but an idle preacher of priueledges prejudicial to
Princes, and not so holy, nor so learned as S. Ambrose by many degrees.

Where he is charged to have threatened us with broken heads, and Bastonadoes, a
logike very familiar with papists; he answers fol. 73. That he speaks
figuratively. But experience teaches us, that where they can do it, they do it
literally. It were therefore good to beware of the wooden daggers of these
wooden fellows.

Fol. 110. b. he affirms, that by indulgences, are distributed the treasures
of the Church. A matter of mere (...), of which may be said the saurus
carbones: that is, our treasures prove coals. For poor people hoping to
receive a treasure, receive mere cole dust, and yet for that trash wast Fl.
doct. c. (...) indulg.
great treasures. Josephus Angles, signifies that the Pope now and then
receives an hundred millions of ducats for an indulgence: which is no small
matter for such small wares.

In the same place he tells us of the Popes doctrine of indulgences, which is
nothing else but a fardle of foolery, as in my discourse against Bellarmine I
have showed at large. This Patch, if he had remembered himself, would have
proved somewhat, and not have told us a tale of the Popes tub full of mustie
indulgences, more nastie then an old mustard pot.

2. encontr. c. 15. fol. 117. I shall allege (says he) most authentical
testimonies, to wit, four books for the negative, written and printed at Lion
presently upon the fact it self, entitled, De iusta Henricitertij
abdicatione. But this allegatio^ serue^th us better then him, and is a most
authentical testimony of Parsons foolery, and of the Popes treachery. For what
is more repugnant to law, conscience and reason, the^ to believe a notorious
rebel and traitor declaiming against his liege sovereign, most trecherously,
and wickedly murdered by a louzie friar? And what is more intolerable, then
that the Popes of Rome and their adherents being advanced by Christian princes
should now be praised for deposing of princes and cutting their throtes? This
authentical testimony therefore might well have bin spared, wherein Parsons a
traitor produces his fellow traitor for a witness in discharge of his own
and his fellows treasons and villainies.

Fol. 123. he talks most foolishly of penance, repeating what he has said
before in his Wardword. But whatsoever he bableth of penance and satisfaction,
and passing through a needles eye; yet if a man can gain a plenary indulgence,
which for money is easy to be had, then al penance enjoined, and satisfaction
cease, and God is plainly mocked. If he had been wise therefore, he would
have for borne to talk of penance, the doctrine whereof by the Papists is
wholly corrupted and overthrown.

Finally, albeit he talks much of law, and of Catholic Religion; yet he
shows himself to be like those, of who^ the Apostle speaks, which would be
doctors of the law, and yet 1. Tim. 1.
understand not what they speak, nor whereof they affirm. And like old
heretics, which as Hilary lib. 8. de Trinit. says, although they lie
foolishly, yet they defend their lies far more foolishly. Cum stulte
mentiantur (says he) stultius tamen in mendacij sui defensione sapiunt.
Compare their doings with Parsons his foolish Warneword, and you shall see he
far passes them all in foolery.

CHAP. VII. Containing diverse false allegations, and falsifications of Fathers
and others committed by Parsons.
THere are diverse kinds of falsifications, as we may learn by the Roman laws
ff. adl. Corn. de falsis: by the cannon law, de crimine falsi: and by those
Doctors that have written Commentaries and glosses upon these titles. But to
know the diversity and nature of them, we shall not need curiously to look
either into the laws or commentaries of learned lawyers, seeing Robert Parsons
in his Warnword, which like a warning piece may serve all true men to beware of
his falsehood and treachery, does furnish us with particular instances and
examples of most sorts of them.

First he makes no conscience either to curtal his adversaries words, or to
add somewhat unto them, of which they never had so much as a thought. Fol. 6.
he says, that Sir Francis obiecteth unto him the seeking of the ruin of the
church and common wealth by his exhortation to peace, and mitigation in
religion: whereas the Knight obiecteth no such matter, nor has any such words.
He does also seem to charge him as enemy of peace, whereas the honorable
Knight never misliked peace, or any motion tending thereto, but rather
discovered the false practices of Papists, that anno 1588. talked of peace,
when their fleet was at the sea to cut our throtes being unprovided, and 1598.
made an ouerture of a treaty, when the Adelantado had great forces ready at
the Groyne and other ports of Spain to come for England.

Where Sir Francis prays for the prolonging of her Majesty's days, to the
holding out still of the Popes usurped authority: Parsons in his VVarneword
does so expound him, Fol. 8.
as if he prayed, that her life might hold out still. And this to the intent he
might run upon the Earl of Essex, barking like a Linkers curre at a dead
Lion.

In my Preface I say, that obstinate recusants for the most part are secretly
reconciled to the Pope, and in time past adhered to her maiessies enemies. But
Parsons to make the matter more heinous, turns obstinate recusants into Fol.
13. a.
recusant Catholics, and falsely lcaueth out these words, for the most part. As
if I had called them Catholics, which I never thought, or as if I knew not
that there is great difference between the factious reconciled papists, and
those that of simplicity and ignorance favor papisticall hereste and
superstition.

Again, where I say, that extraordinary favor, or rather remissness of laws
and justice toward disloyal Papists, has caused diverse rebellions both in
England and Ireland, and made them bold to attempt against her Majesty's life
and government, and given some of them courage to conspire with foreign
enemies, etc. and that by suffering of malcontents to practice, the sinews of
government have been dissolved: and that many think, that against persons
that are so (...) disposed, and so firmly linked to foreign enemies good
justice is most necessary: Robert Parsons iumbleth many words together, and
cutteth off that which I said of conspiring with foreign enemies, and the
attempting against her Majesty, knowing that many of his friends are the
Spanish kings pensioners, and have diversely attempted against her Majesty.
Further, he cutteth out these words many do think, and by a strange
metamorphosis changes disloyal papists into catholic recusants, making me to
say, that too much extraordinary favor and remissness toward Catholics has
caused diverse rebellions both in England and Ireland, and that it has
dissolved the sinews of government, and that it is more profitable to execute
laws then to pardon offenders: as if I had spoken generally against all
papists, and not singled those that conspire with public enemies, and attempt
against the State: and as if I had misliked all remissness and pardon toward
all papists. If Parsons body were so ma^gled as he has mangled and transformed
my words, we should not long be troubled with his wranglements. In this sort he
deals continually with us. And so he (...) also with other authors.

Fol. 14. b. The old Roman laws (says Parsons) do give general authority
to the body of the common wealth to punish particular offenders, and non e
contra, as Cicero signifies in his book De Legibus. But he belyeth impudently
the old Roman laws, and Cicero De Legibus. For both of them do authorize
particular Magistrates and officers, and not the whole commonwealth to punish
offenders. Magistratus (says Tully) nec obedientem and noxium ciuem multa,
vinculis, De Legibus. 3
(...) coercento. So likewise do old laws, as in the titles de poenis and de
publicis criminibus in the Pandects we may see. Further, common wealths or
states, do make laws, and receive not authority from laws. Finally, it is an
absurd thing to make the common wealth judge, or executioner of laws. For if
that were so, then should the hangman be ye common wealth, and contrariwise.
And by a good consequent, if Parsons should play the hangman, the commonwealth
might ride upon the gallows. The which is so great an inconvenience, that
rather then it should be granted, it were better that the Iebusite were hanged
upon the gallows.

(...) Fol. 15. a. citing Augustine de ciuitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 51. and
Cyprian lib. de unit. Eccles. and Hieron. in c. 8. Ezechielis, and in c. 11.
Oseae, and in c. 11. Zachariae, and in c. 8. Danielis. And Augustine enarrat. in
Psalm. 80. part. 29. and super lib. Iosuae cap. 27. he says that they out of
the 13. of Deuteronomy prove that heretics may and ought to be put to death,
which are the proper idolaters of the new Testament. But in citing of these
authors, the man seems neither to have eyes, nor judgment, nor honesty. For
Augustine lib. 18. de ciuitate Dei, c. 51. does neither mention the 13. of
Deuteronomie, nor prove that heretics are to be put to death. The like may be
answered to the testimony of Augustine in Psalm. 80. of which ridiculously he
cites the 29. part. Further, we find no commentaries of Augustine upon the
book of Iosue. Cyprian in his book De vnitate Ecclesiae, has no such matter
as Parsons supposes. Most falsely also does he cite the places out of Hierome.

In the same place he cites Augustine super lib. Iosuae ca. 27. Fol. 15. a. in
marg.
and de vtilitate ieiunij, cap. 8. Whereas he neither wrote commentaries upon
Iosue, nor any 27. chapter is to be found in that book. Beside that, the book
de vtilitate ieiunij is a bastard, and of the quality of Parsons, and none of
saint Augustines.

Fol. 17. translating the law Cunctos populos. Cod. de sum. Trin. and fid.
Cath. he cutteth out the words that contain the form of faith professed by
the Emperor, and that part that shows that the judgment and punishment of
heretics belonged to the civil Magistrate. The first, because it gives power
to civil Magistrates to publish forms of Christian faith. The next, because
he imagines that the judgment and condemnation of heretics belongs only to
the popish heretical Clergy.

Fol. 25. b. he affirms, that Tertullian lib. de praescript. aduers. haeret.
says, That it is impossible for two heretics to agree in all points. Let him
therefore quote these words, or else in this point we will note him for a
falsarie. Mentior (says Tertullian, speaking of certain heretics) si non
etiam a regulis suis (...) inter se, dum vnusquisque proinde suo arbitrio
modulatur quae accepit, quemadmodum de suo arbitrio ea composuit ille qui
tradidit. He says they vary among themselves from their own rules, and that
every one at his pleasure does modulate and temper the things he received, as
he that delivered them composed them at his pleasure. But this wants much of
Parsons words and meaning, as he wanted much of sincere dealing.

Fol. 29, he affirms desperately, that the great commission for the Popes
jurisdiction, is contained in the 16. of Matthew in these words, I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven etc. forging notoriously the Popes
letters patents. For neither is there any mention of the Pope or Bishop of Rome
in these words, nor does our Savior speak of any keys, or power of binding
and loosing, that is not common to all Bishops, which are the Apostles
successors. Furthermore, general words will not serve to carry half the Popes
power. Finally, if we will believe Bellarmine lib. (...). de Pont. Romans c. 10.
here is nothing given to Peter, but only promised to him.

Fol. 38. he alleges Pope Nicholas his Epistle, and Constantines donation,
both notoriously and impudently being forged, and by the forgeron or
blackesmiths putatiue son erroniously interpreted.

Fol. 39. speaking of certain words of Cusanus: This (says he) of the change
of Gods judgment, after the judgment of the Church, and of the supreme
Pastor, is a common saying of the ancient fathers upon those words of Christ,
Whose sins you loose on earth, etc. Anotorious lie. For albeit he allege
three, yet no one speaks of the change of Gods judgment, or of the Pope, or
affirms that Gods judgment changes with the Church. Beside that, it is one
thing to talk of binding and loosing, and another to say, that as the Church
alters the institution of the sacraments, so God alters his judgment.
Would not this fellow then have a garland of peacockes feathers for his
notorious cogging, and for his presumption in falsely alleging and belying the
Fathers?

Fol. 40. in the margent he says, that Hilary in Math. 16. has a worthy place
for the Popes authority. Yet can he not prove, that Hilary in that place
speaks one word, either for the Pope, or of the Pope: for he speaks only
of Peter and his authority. But what is that to the Pope, that neither in
doctrine nor life is like to Peter? For this worthy place therefore thus falsely
alleged, this worthless fellow is worthy to have a paper clapped to his head
for a falsary.

Fol. 62. b. he shameth not to affirm, that Augustine lib. 17. de ciuitate
(...), c. 20. says, that Christ has appointed his sacrifice of the Mass
among Christians in place of the Jewish sacrifices: whereas that father
speaks of Christ's sacrifice upon the cross, and not once mentions the
Mass. And so his words must needs be understood. For indeed his sacrifice upon
the cross, and not the Mass, is the (...) of the Leuiticall sacrifices, as
the Apostle declares in his Epistle to the Hebrews.

Fol. 63. a. he says, that Dionysius de (...). (...). c. 1. orig. hom. 5. in
Number. Basilius lib. de Spiritu sancto, c. 27. Chrysostom hom. 24. in Matthew. and
Gregory lib. 4. dialog. c. 56. and other fathers do teach, that it is not
convenient that al things which are handled in Church service, praesertim in
sacris mysterijs, should be understood by all unlearned people in their own
vulgar tongue. A shameless lie most impudently avouched upon the fathers
credit by this bastardly friar. For neither do they talk of vulgar languages,
nor seek to exclude the people from understanding of the tongue wherein God is
served. Gregory and Chrysostom have nothing to this purpose.

Fol. 66. a. citing Hieromes words, he leaves out these words, and vacua
idolorum templa quatiuntur, out of the midst of the sentence, least the Reader
should surmise he spoke against the temples of the Papists, where every corner
is full of idols.

In his second encounter, chap. 3. he corrupts a place of (...), lib. 1.
hist. Angl. c. 1. by his wicked translation, making him to say, that the Latin
tongue was then made common to English, Britons, Scots, Picts, and Latins: when
his meaning is, that the knowledge of religion is made common to them by
meditation of Scriptures in diverse tongs. His words are these: Haec in
praesenti iuxta numerum librorum, quibus lex diuina scripta est, quinque
gentium linguis, vnam eandemque summae Note that he says, they study (...) in
five tongues.
veritatis, and verae sublimitatis scientiam scrutatur and (...): Anglorum,
viz. Britonum, Scotorum, Pictorum, and Latinorum, quae in meditatione
scripturarum ceter is omnibus est (...) commmunis. He refers the relative,
quae, to the word Latinorum, or to linguis, which cannot be, and not to summae
veritatis, and verae sublimitatis, which both Latin construction, and the sense
will admit. The other cannot stand. For we may not think that all the English,
Britons, Picts, and Scots understood Latin. Neither does that make for the
Romanists, which in public service continue the use of the Latin tongue being
now not understood.

In his second encounter chap. 6. he does produce not only counterfeit homilies
of Basil in 40. martyrs, and Chrysostom in adorat. venerab. caten. S.
Apostolorum principis Petri, but also does allege them most falsely. Basil
prays not to the 40. martyrs, nor Ambrose in c. 22. Luc. to Peter, nor
Hierome to Paula, nor Augustine to Cyprian, lib. 7. de baptism contra Donat. c.
1. as impudently Parsons auoweth. Nor are the rhetorical speeches of Nazianzen,
or Hierom, or Chrysostom, or others such blasphemous prayers, as the Papists
use in their Missals and Breuiaries.

2. encontr. c. 6. he says, that Ireney does call Philip that baptized the
Eunuch Act. 8. an Apostle. But it is no Apostolical practice to belly Ireney.
He must therefore either bring proof, or confess that Ireney is wronged.

In the same place he would make us believe, that Tertullian lib. de
praescript. aduers. haeret. would exclude heretics from trial by scriptures.
But he (...) the meaning of that father that deals against heretics, which
neither allowed all scripture, nor would be tried by other scriptures, then such
as they had counterfeited themselves. Ista haeresis (says he) non recipit
quasdam scripturas: and siquas recipit, adiectionibus, and detractionibus ad
dispositione^ instituti sui interuertit, and sirecipit, non recipit integras.

Seeing therefore Parsons (like unto these (...)) either corrupts scriptures
by (...) senses, or else (...) alleges ancient authors, who will not
henceforth detect him as a notorious falsary? False expositions are as well
repugnant to truth, as the corrupting style, as says (...) de praescript.
co^tra haeret. Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum and corruptor
stilus. It is a trick of heretics to use matters of faith like to physitio^s,
that attemper themselves according to the diversity of men's affections,
altering them for their own best commodity. Verbis fidei more medicorum
(says Basil epist. 73. speaking of heretics) vtuntur, pro (...) aliter atque
aliter sese ad affectionum rationem ac varietatem attemperantes. And as says
Irenaeus lib. 1. aduers. haeret. c. 1. They go about to fit the word of God to
their idle fables: Aptare volunt fabulis suis eloquia Dei. What Parsons has
done herein, the particulars above mentioned do testify.

CHAP. VIII. That Parsons his testimonies and allegations make for the most
part against himself.
AS it is a gross fault in an Orator to use such an exordium, Cic. de Invent.
lib. 1.
as may also be used by his adversary, or turned back upon himself; so it is
a fault to begin with a sentence that may as well fit our adversaries as our
selves. But Robert Parsons little regards this observation, who fronteth his
book with this sentence of the Apostle, Tit. 3. Fly an heretical man after
one or two warnings, knowing that such a one is subverted, and sins damnably
against his own judgment. A testimony that may fitly be applied to him. For
he is an heretical man, and has been often warned of his faults, albeit we
see no amendment in him. He sins also, as may be guessed, against his own
conscience, allowing that which being in England sometimes he condemned, and is
utterly subverted and damned, if God do not in his great mercy recall him. If
he deny himself to be an heretic, let him show how he can hold all the
heresies of Papists, which in ancient time have been condemned, and yet be no
heretic. To us he cannot apply these words, seeing we hold nothing against the
scriptures, by which we are to judge most certainly of the faith of the
Catholic Church. Neither does Parsons allege this place against us
impertinently, but also falsely. The words of the Apostle are those, (...),
which emport thus much, And sins being condemned by himself: and not as
Parsons translateth: viz. And sins damnably against his own judgment.
Where this word damnably, and judgment, is added to the Apostles sentence most
falsely. For every heretic after once or twice admonition does not sin
damnably against his own judgment, as may appear by the Popes, their
Cardinals, and others, that think they do well percase, albeit noble and
notorious heretics. But rather every heretic does by his lewd opinions, which
he will not reform, sever and divide himself from the Church, and as the
Apostle says, sins, being condemned by his own act, or by him self.

Likewise do the rest of his testimonies and authorities serve fitly against
himself. In the beginning of his answer, fol. 1. he aymeth at the Apostles
words, 2. Tim. 2. Where he forbids us to contend about words, which profit
nothing, but to pervert the hearers. Robert Parsons turns the Apostles words
so, as if he should say, that contention of words tends to nothing, but the
subversion of the hearers. But the Apostle talks of contention about words,
and not of contention of words: and of the effect, and not of tending to an
end. But to omit his error in translation, I say that nothing could be more
fitly spoken against Robert Parsons, then this, which the Apostle here
utters. For what with his Wardword, and his Warneword, and his idle
contention about words, he has abused and subverted his simple and credulous
followers, that looked for better things at his hands. And therefore leaving as
much as we can, his brabling words, we answer that, which is most material of
his discourse.

In the same leaf, he adds another text out of the 26. of the Proverbs,
where the wise man advises us, to answer a fool according to his folly,
least he think himself wise. According whereunto we have shaped an answer to
Robert Parsons his Warneword, praying him very heartily to take it in good
part, and not to think himself over wise in his own conceit, seeing the
author of that piece could never have uttered such stuff, unless he had been
a three piled fool, and had attained to a higher degree, then a Cardinal in
the consistory of fools.

Likewise these words out of Ciceroes oration in Vatinium, which he like a dolt
supposes to be taken out of Tullies second Philppic, viz. vt vexatum potius,
quam despectum vellem dimittere, do fit us as well against Parsons, as may be
devised. For albeit he be but a base, bastardly, and contemptible fellow, and
almost spent out in railing and libelling, and discrasied in plotting of
treason and villainy; yet have I thought it better to send him away well
corrected, then to pass by him as a worthless and despised companion. Neither
do I doubt, but to return him as large a measure of bastonadoes, as he has
offered others, and so to handle him, that his friends shall say he is dressed
like a calves head souced in veriuyce.

These words of our Savior, John 3. He that does evil, hates the light, and
will not come to it, least his works should be reproved; he applies to me.
And why? For sooth because to answer Capt. Cowbuckes fencing Wardword, set out
under the name of N. D. I take the two next letters to make up N. D. a full
Noddy. For this cause he says, I entertain my self in some darkness for a
time, and expect my prey, under a ciphred name. And this objection pleases him
so well, that not only in the eleventh and twelth leaf, but also in diverse
others places he does inculcate the same. But against me these objections come
all too late. For albeit at the first I could have been content to have been
unknown in this foolish brable betwixt Parsons and me, and that not so much in
regard of any thing said by me, as in regard of the bastardly companion, with
whom I am matched, being an adversary, of any learned man to be scorned. And
not least of all, because such controversies would rather be handled in Latin,
then in English: yet being occasioned to renew my challenge, I have set my name
unto it, and declared, that I neither fear light, nor the fowls of darkness,
nor need to look for spoil, as this rauinous Iebusite pretends. Against
Robert Parsons this text and objection comes both fitly and timely. For albeit
he obiecteth ciphring of names to others, yet will he not discipher his own
name unto us. Nay, albeit we know his name and quality very well; yet will he
not bewray himself, albeit often admonished of his playing the owl. He has
long been plotting of treason, and therefore hates the light. He has for many
years gone masked like a vagabond up and down England, and in the day time
hidden himself in corners. He has long looked to divide the spoil of his
country with strangers. What then rests, seeing he will not be dismasked, but
that some of Bulls progeny do unmask him, uncase him, and trusse him?

Likewise fol. 12. he calls me Owl, and says, He will draw me to the light.
But this foul should have remembered that himself in a paltry pamphlet, which
he set forth to dissuade men from coming to Church, took on him the name of
John Houlet, as a fit name for such a night bird, and that this is one of his
own proper titles. Likewise, fol. 14. b. he calls me Owls eye, because I
borrow the two letters O. E. But if O. E. signifies owls eye, then does N. D.
(...) either a Nasty Dunse, or a North Island dog, or a notorious dolt, by as
good reason.

Fol. 18. to prove the Popes headship over the whole Church, his noddiship
alleges the law, inter claras. Cod. de sum. trin. and fid. catho. But like a
forging fellow he brings in counterfeit stuff. For that is made apparent in
my discourse of Popish falsities. Beside that, this law does quite overthrow
the Popes cause. For whereas the Pope claims his authority by the law of
God, this law says, That the Romish Church was declared to be head of all
Churches, by the rules of fathers, by the statutes of Princes, and the Emperors
favorable speeches. Quam esse omnium ecclesiarum caput, says the law, and
patrum regulae, and principum statuta declarant, and pietatis vestrae
reuerendissimi testantur affatus. Let him therefore beware, that the Pope do
not find him a traitor as well to himself, as to his country.

Fol. 23. speaking of the blessings mentioned by Sir Francis Hastings, he
says, They were freshly framed out of the forge of his own invention. But he
was not aware, that this belongs to Uulcane the blackesmithes putatiue son
Parsons, who from his infancy might in his putatiue father Cowbuckes forge
learn to forge, frame and invent nails to tacke the Popes triple crown to
his bald head.

Fol. 25. b. you shall perceive, says he, that saying of old Tertullian to be
true, etc. that it was impossible for two heretics to agree in all points. But
first, this place is not found in Tertullians book, de praescript. by him
alleged. Secondly, were it truly alleged, yet does it not belong to any more
properly, then to popish heretics. For if all the bangling Iebusites were
coupled together like hounds; yet would they sooner hang together, then agree
together. And that may appear both by the schoolemens disputes one against
another in all questions almost, and also by Bellarmines books of
controversies, and Suares his tedious fraplements, about school matters: in
which they are as much at variance with themselves, as with others.

In the same place he taxes us, for confused writing. And yet if you seek all
the sinkes of the Popes libraries, I do hardly believe, that you shall find a
more confused farrago of words and matters, then the Warneword set out by
Robert Parsons. For therein the man runs as it were the wild goodse chase,
and heapeth (...) a fardle of foolery like to nothing, unless it be to a
bundle of stolen tailors shreds, wherein frise, and carsey listes, locrome,
cotton, and soutage is bound together.

Fol. 43. out of Augustine lib. 4. contra lulian. c. 3. he tells us, that the
forehead of heretics is no forehead, if we understand thereby shamefastness.
And out of Tertullian de praescr. contra haeret. That lies hardly stand one
with another. Both which do exceedingly well fit Rob. Parsons. For neither has
the man shame, nor honesty, nor do his lies hang together, as appears by
this whole discourse.

Fol. 52. out of M. Knoxe he alleges as a dangerous position, (and so it is)
That princes may be deposed by the people. And yet that is his own traitorous
assertion in his book of Titles, set out under the name of Dolman. The title
of the third chapter, part. 1. is of Kings lawfully chastised by their common
wealths. That is like wise his and Allens drift in their treacherous libell
directed to the Nobility and people of England and Ireland: where they persuade
them to take arms against the Queen of England.

Fol. 53. he condemns in Buchanan that which he and Bellarmine and their crew
of rebellious consorts hold, viz. that if Christians deposed not Princes in the
Apostles times, it was for want of temporal forces: and for that S. Paul wrote
in the infancy of the church. That is also in terms holden by Bellarmine lib.
5. de Pont. Romans c. 7.

In his first encounter chap. 10. he goes about to prove that S. Bernard and
S. Augustine (...) with Papists in the doctrine of merits of good works. But
unless he show out of them, that works are meritorious, not by reason of
covenant, or promise or mercy, but for the works sake, as Bellarm. lib. 5. de
Iustif. c. 17. holds: and that there is a proportion or equality between the
work and reward merited, and that works are meritorious ex condigno, and that
charity differs not really from grace, as Bellarmine teaches, lib. 1. de
libero arbit. c. 6. and that men are able to prepare themselves to receive
grace, and finally prove the (...) de congruo and condigno, Parsons labors
but in vain. But this is contrary both to scriptures and fathers. He first
loved us, says Ioh. 1. Ioh. 4. And the Apostle says, We are saved by grace,
and not of works. Nullus (says Augustine in Psalm. 142.) vnquam bonu^ opus
fecit tanta charitate, quanta potuit and debuit. No man did ever perform a
good work with so much love as he could and ought. And 1. Confess. chap. 4.
Qui reddis debita, nulli debens: Thou which restorest debt, and yet owe to no
man. Bernard lib. de great. and lib. arb. promissum quidem ex misericordia
sediam ex iustitia persoluendum. Promised of mercy, but to be paid according to
justice. And in his first sermon de annunt. Thou can not (says he) merit
eternal life by any works, unless the same be also given freely or gratis.
And again, Men's merits are not such, that eternal life should be due for them
of right, or that God should do wrong, if he did not give them eternal life.

Fol. 75. he says, thieves and the worst sort of me^ do not suffer persecution
one of another: which is verified by the example of Parsons and his consorts.
For albeit like wolves they tear, and like thieves they steal and spoil
Christ's lambs; yet they do not always tear and spoil one another. Neither
would the kingdom of Satan stand, if it were divided in it self.

The words of S. Augustine contra Julian. lib. 1. c. 7. alleged by Parsons,
fol. 77. b. fall right upon his head. For both his ignorance and boldness is
intolerable. Fol. 80. b. he says, Calis was lost by heretical treason: which
cannot be true, unless Queen Mary and the Papists were heretics. For none but
they did lose that town.

Fol. 83. he talks of the chastity of Friars, Monks, and priests, which as
he signifies, have ghelt themselves for the kingdom of heaven. And yet (...)
Monk Heywood his true father was not very chaste when he begot him. Nor was
Parsons ghelt for the kingdom of heaven, when he begot children on his own
sister, as A. C. says, or when he got his hurts in Italy and Spain, which yet
stick to his rotten shins: nor are the Popes, and Cardinals, and Massepriests,
that commonly keep concubines, if not worse, very holy eunuchs. Of D. Giffard
and Weston, I shall have occasion to speak otherwhere. Furthermore, he is
often talking of great heads, always forgetting the branched head of the
black smith his putatiue father.

Fol. 84. and 85. he is not ashamed to talk of (...) wars, murders, and other
calamities in France, Flanders and other countries, when he cannot deny but
that the Popes bloody bulls, and the Iebusites the firebrands of sedition, and
their agents have been the beginners of all these troubles, and the principal
massacrers of innocent men. Was he then well in his wits, trow you, to talk of
his own dear fathers cruelties, and to accuse Christ's sheep, as cause of the
woluish Papists notorious murders and cruel executions?

Whereas Parsons asks Sir Francis, whether he has certainty of faith by his
own reading, or by the credit of some others: we may ask his friarship
likewise, or because he is but a doogeon dunce, of the Pope, who is, as it
were, an oracle of Papists, the same question. And if he answer, that he has
it by his own reading, then we shall much wonder at his impudency. For
Parsons knows that Popes read little or nothing, and for the most part are
ignorant of school divinity. If he say his Popeship has it by the virtue of
his close stool, then is the same but filthy learning, especially the Pope
being laxatiue, as was Gregory the fourteenth. If he say, he have it from his
Mass Priests and friars, then are they more certain oracles then he; and this
learning must come from the tails of (...), and not from the head of the
church. Parsons therefore to clear this doubt, fol. 110. says, That they do
not depend on the Pope as a private man, but as he is head and chief pastor of
Christ's universal Church. He says also, That his rudeness is turned into
wisdom. But that the Pope is the head of Christ's universal Church, is the
thing in question. That a man should be a sot, as he is a private man, and wise
as he is a public person, is ridiculous. That he is made wise and learned
being made Pope, is most false. So it appears, Parsons is ensnared in his
own question, and must confess that the faith of papists is nothing else but
the Popes private fancy, and grounded on the Popes chair, and most absurd and
sottish: which can not be objected to us, seeing we ground our selves upon
(...) Apostles and Prophets, who in matters of faith and salvation speak
plainly, and always the same things most constantly.

In his first encounter, chap 15. he spends much talk about the rule of
faith. But most of his words are direct contrary both to himself and to his
holy fathers profit. For in the Wardword, page 6. he said, the universal
Church was the squire and pole star, which every one was to follow: confounding
like an idiot the thing ruled with the rule. In the Warneword fol. 100. he
says, the sum and corpse of Christian doctrine delivered at the beginning by
the miracles and preachings of the Apostles, is the rule of faith. Which is
contrary to the Popes profit. For if this be true, then unless the Popes
determinations and traditions ecclesiastical were preached by the Apostles and
confirmed by mracles, they are to be excluded from being the rule of faith.

Parsons therefore is like to those, which dig pits for others, Psalm. 7.
but fall into them themselves. He has prepared weapons for us, but like a mad
lot has hurt himself with the same. Finally, Captain Cowbucke like a noble
woodcocke, is caught in his own springes.

CHAP. IX. A catalogue of certain principal lies, uttered by Robert Parsons
in his late Warne-word.
THe Spirit of God (as the Apostle says) speaks evidently, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed
unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, which speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have their (...) burned with a hot iron. Which prophecy, as in
other heretics, so especially in ye (...) we may see most plainly and
evidently to be fulfilled. For they departing from the ancient and Catholic
faith, taught by the holy Apostles and Prophets, and recorded in holy
Scriptures, have given heed to spirits of error, and believed the trash of
unwritten traditions, and lying legends, and thereupon have founded their
prohibitions of certain meats, and marriages, and such like doctrines of
devils, confirming their opinions with gross lies, uttered with seared
consciences and brazen faces, contrary to all show of truth. They take to
themselves the name of doctors and fathers, but are false teachers and unkind
traitors. And as Theodoret says In 1. Tim. 4.
of certain heretics, Christianorum sibi appellatione imposita aperte docent
contraria. Calling themselves Christians (or Catholics) Catholics) they
openly teach contrary. I could specify it by Caesar Baronius and (...), by
Sanders, Stapleton, and diverse other principal authors of the popish sect. But
I will not match any man of note, with so notorious a dolt, and so base a swad
as Robert Parsons is, of whom we are now to speak, though not much to his
commendation. The only example of Parsons, and ye in one of his fardles of
lies, which we are now to rip up, shall show them to be notorious and bold
liars. The devilish and erroneous doctrine of friars, we have touched before,
and shall have often occasion to mention.

In the front of his book, he promises the issue of three former treatises,
and in the second page talks of eight encounters. But he falsifieth his
promise, and lies grossly. For of the three former treatises, he touches
only two chapters, and of eight encounters, enters only upon two. Further,
he declineth the true issue of matters, and runs bias, like a warped bowl
of dudgeon, into impertinent and idle questions. Does he not therefore, as
Hierom says of one, Hiero^. epist. 61
make shipwwracke in the port?

In his Epistle to the Reader taking upon him to deliver the sum of the
controversy betwixt him and us, he wracketh himself like wise, thinking to
wreake his malice upon us, and begins with a gross lie. There happened (says
he) some few years past (he notes 1599. in the margent) as often also before,
a certain false alarm of a Spanish invasion then said to be upon the seas
toward England. Where I need not to note the idiotisme of Parsons speech, that
talks of a Spanish invasion upon the sea toward England, being elsewhere
noted: but only I will touch his impudency in lying, and denying, that about
this time the Spaniards were ready with forces at the Groyne for the invasion
of England. And the rather, for that this was the occasion that moved Sir
Francis Hastings to give warning to his country: and also because the same
shows that Parsons is very sorry, that any man is acquainted with the (...)
of the Spanish King, and that he could not take us sleeping, and so closely and
priuiliy cut his countrimens throtes. I say then, it is a lie most notorious,
to affirm that the alarm given upon occasion of the Spanish preparations anno
1598. for an invasion of some part of England, was false. And prove it first by
the words of the King, who recovering out of a trance, and coming to himself,
asked if the (...) were gone for England. Secondly, by the provisions of ships
and men, made at the Groyne and Lisbone, and which coming thence shaped their
course for England, albeit they were by wether beaten back. Thirdly, by the
testimony of one Leake a Mass priest, that was dealt with all to come for
England. Fourthly, by the testimony of the Secular priests in their reply to
Parsons his libell, fol. 65. and sequent. who directly charge Parsons to be a
solicitor of these pretended attempts, anno 1598. Fifthly, by Parsons his
letters from Rome to Fitzherbert, wherein he desires to understand the
success of the fleet, that anno 1598. was to go for England. Finally, by the
(...) proclamation made at the Groyne, and whereof diverse printed copies were
to be dispersed in England upon his arrival here. The which, for that it
discovers the pride of the Spaniard, and the malice of the English traitors,
I have thought it not amiss to set down the whole tenor of the proclamation
with some animaduersions in the margent.

Considering (says the Adelantado) the obligation which his This seems to be
Parsons his style.
catholic (...), my Lord and master has received of God almighty, to defend
and protect his holy faith, and the Apostolical Roman church: he has
procured by the best means he could, for to reduce to the Popish reli gio^ is
neither ancient nor true.
ancient and true religion the kingdoms of England and Ireland, as much as
possibly has bin in his power. And all has not been sufficient to take away
the Goodly pretenses of lewd ambition.
offense done against God in dommage of the selfsame kingdoms, with scandale
of whole christianity, yea rather abusing the clemency and benignity of his The
Popes vaslall.
Catholic Majesty: the heads and chief of the True teachers.
heretics, which little (...) God, have taken courage to extend their evil
doctrine with the oppressing of These (...) were traitors.
Catholics, martyring them, and by diverse ways and means taking from them
their lives and goods, forcing them by A manifest untruth and calumniation
against the truth.
violence to follow their damnable sects and errors, which they have hardly
done to the loss of many souls. Which considered, his Catholic Majesty is
determined to favor and protect these Catholics, which courageously have
defended the Catholic faith, and not only those, but Lurking and dissembling
Papists.
such also, as by pusillanimity and humane respects have consented unto them,
forced thereunto through the hard and cruel dealing of the said Catholics
heretical enemies. And for the execution of his holyzeale, he has commanded
me, that with Are not Spaniards the^ public enemies?
force by sea and land, which be and shall be at my charge, to procure al
means necessary for the reduction of the said kingdoms unto the S. Peter and
Paul did not by arms con uert men to the faith.
obedience of the Catholic Roman church. In complement of the which, I
declare and protest, that these forces shall be employed, for to execute this
holy What holiness can be in cutting Christian men's throtes?
intent of his Catholic Majesty, directed only to the common good of the
true religion and Catholics of those kingdoms, as well those which be already
declared catholics, as Note that all papists are to join with (...) enemies.
others who will declare themselves for such. For all shall be received and
admitted by me in his royal name, which shall separate and apart themselves
from the (...). And furthermore, they shall be restored to the honor, dignity
and possessions, which heretofore they have been deprived of. Moreover, every
one shall be rewarded according to the demonstrations and feats which shall be
shown in this godly enterprise. And who shall proceed with most valor, the
more largely and amply shall be

remunerated with the goods of obstinate Honest men destined to spoil and
slaughter.
heretics. Wherefore seeing almighty God does present to his elect so good an
occasion, therefore I for the more security ordain and command the captains
general of horse and artilerie, the master general of the field, general
captains of squadrons, as all other masters of the field, the captains of
companies of horse and foot, and all other officers greater and lesser, and
men of war, the (...) general, and the rest of the captains and officers of
the army, that as well at land as sea they They shall be used as traitors.
use well, and receive the Catholics of those kingdoms who shall come to
defend the Catholic The Infantaes title.
cause with arms or without them. For I command the General of the
artilerie, that he provide them of To fight against their country.
weapons which shall bring none. Also I ordain and strcitly command, that
they have particular respect unto the houses and families of the said
Catholics, not touching, as much as may be, any thing of theirs, but only of
those that will obstinately follow the part of Woe be to them that call good
evil, and evil good.
heretics: in doing of which, they be altogether unworthy of those favors
which be here granted unto the good, who will declare them selves for true
Catholics, and such as shall take To cut their princes throat.
arms in hand, or at least separate themselves from the heretics, against
whom and their favorers all this Note war.
war is directed, in Good words, foul purposes.
defense of the honor of God, and good of those kingdoms, trusting in Gods
divine mercy that they shall recover again the Catholic relgion so long agone
lost, and make them return to their ancient quietness and felicity, and to
the due obeience of the holy Primitive church. Moreover, these kingdoms shall
At the hands of enemies.
enjoy former immunities and privileges, with increase of many others for the
time to come, in great friendship, confederacy, and traffic with the
kingdom of his Catholic Majesty, which in times past they were wont to have
for the public good of all Christianity. And that this be put in execution
speedily, I exhort all the faithful to the fulfilling of that which is here
contained, warranting them upon my A goodly assurance.
word, which I give in the name of the Catholic King my Lord and master, that
all shall be observed which here is promised. And thus I discharge my self of
the losses and damages which God has (...) it otherwise.
shall fall upon those which will follow the contrary way, with the ruin of
their own souls, the hurt of their own country, and that which is more, the
honor and glory of God. And he which cannot take presently arms in hand, nor
declare himself by reason of the tyranny of the heretics, shall be He would
make the English traitors.
admitted from the enemies camp, and (...) pass to the catholic part in some
skirmish or battle: or if he cannot, he shall fly before we come to the This
Bragadocio never came in England, that here talks of the last encounter.
last encounter. In testimony of all which, I have commanded to dispatch these
presents, confirmed with my hand, sealed with the seal of mine arms, and
refirmed by the secretary underwritten.

This being the Adelantadoes proclamation anno 1598. let the world judge of the
impudency of Parsons, that lies wittingly, and says, the alarm was false.
Thereby it may appear also, what manner of man Parsons is, that brings
foreign enemies upon his country, and is consorted with them, and yet faceth
all down that shall say the contrary.

In his Epistle likewise he says, that the Ward word coming abroad, the
news was in most men's mouths, that the Knight disauowed the Watchword,
attributing the same to certain Ministers. Where, me thinks, I hear Thraso
say, Metuebant omnes me: All stood in dread of me. But that is not the fault
that I mean here to touch. For it is his egregious lying, that we are here to
talk of. Let him therefore either name these most men that he mentions, or
at the least some honest man, that gave out this report as from sir Francis his
mouth, or else we must say, that this lie came out of his own foul mouth,
that is now become a fountain of lies. He must show also how Sir Francis could
disauow a treatise subscribed and published by himself, or else it will be
said, that this report of Parsons is a lie, without show or probability.

Afterward he affirms, that a certain Minister wrote in supply of the
Knights defense. And again, fol. 1. he tells, how I perusing the reply of
Sir Francis, thought in mine own opinion to make a better defense. But how can
he prove that I perused the Knights answer, or once saw it? And whence does he
gather, what opinion I had of mine own doings? If he prove nothing, then will
it be an easy matter to gather, that he has made two improbable lies. The
same is proved also, for that my reply was made before the Knights Apology was
published or seen of me. For if I had seen it first, my labor might well
have bin spared, the same being more then sufficient for the refutation of such
a banglers babbling discourse.

In his observations upon my preface, fol. 11. b. he says, My project and
purpose of writing, is to irritate and stir up her Majesty, and the Council, to
ingulfe themselves in Catholics blood, and to spoil their goods, that I and
my crew might come to have a share. But first it is most false, that Papists
are Catholics. Secondly, no one word can he allege out of my whole book,
whereby it may be gathered, that I would have any rigor used against such
simple Papists, that are not factious nor mutinous. For all the harm I wish
them, is, that they were well instructed. Thirdly, if he mean those traitors,
that either came or meant to join with the Adelantado against their prince and
country: then are they no Catholics, nor true subjects. The same may be said
also of Parsons his consorts. Finally, it is a shameless untruth to say, we
desire either blood or spoil; all our actions tending only to resist foreign
enemies, and wicked traitors, which seek to shed their countrimens blood like
water, and to sacrifice it to the Pope, and to give the spoil of their country
to the Spaniards, as the factious Mass Priests and the Papists their consorts
have done diverse times, and namely an. 1588. and 1598. and since.

In his observations upon Sir Francis his Epistle, fol. 6. He obiecteth (says
Parsons) that I seek the ruin both of church and common wealth by my
exhortation to peace, atonement, and mitigation in religion. A notorious lie,
refuted by reading of Sir Francis his Apology, where there is no one word
sounding that way. Neither do we blame any honest man that talks of peace,
but scorn, that traitors that have war in their hearts, should talk of
peace, and that idolaters and heretics should prate and talk of religion,
when they mean nothing but to erect idolatry, and to establish popish errors
and superstition.

Fol. 16. speaking of me, He blusheth not (says he) to affirm that which all
his fellows have denied. And what is this, trow you? Forsooth, that
blasphemous and scandalous dogmatizing heretics may be put to death. But where
he says, that all my fellows have denied this, he shows him self a
shameless lying companion, and the devils fellow in forging lies. For none of
my fellows ever denied that which I affirm, but only would not have ignorant,
and peaceable, and simple heretics, that neither blaspheme, nor dogmatise, nor
are offensive to the State, punished with death. Likewise they condemn the
cruel and bloody Papists, that burn and massacre men, women and children, for
denying or contradicting any one point of their filthy, abominable, and
erroneous doctrine.

Fol. 18. he says, The Emperor in a certain edict beginning, reddentes: Cod.
de sum. Trin. and fid. Cath. professes his due (...), and of all his empire to
the church of Rome: which is a notorious and an impudent ly. For in that law
there is no one word to be found, that imports subjection either of the
Emperor, or of the Empire to the Church of Rome, much less to the Pope of
Rome. Nay, at that time the city of Rome belonged to the Emperor, which
lately the Pope has usurped, excluding the Emperor from thence. But were
there any thing contained in that law, which may seem spoken in favor of the
Roman Bishop, yet is the same proved counterfeit in my late treatise concerning
falsities of the Romish synagogue.

Fol. 19. a. speaking of the Emperors, They professed (says he) the Bishops of
Rome to be the heads and chief leaders of this universal and visible
Catholic Church: as before has been showed by the examples of Gratian,
Valentinian and Theodosius to Pope (...), and of Arcadius, Honorius and
Theodosius the second, and of Saint Augustine to Pope Innocentius primus, and
of Justinian to Pope John the first. This he says boldly. But in these few
words, a cluster of lies is packed up close together. For neither do Gratian,
Valentinian, and Theodsius write to Damasus, as the title of the law, cunctos
populos Cod. de sum. trinit. does show, nor (...) they say, that Damasus was
head and leader of the universal visible Church. Nor do Arcadius, Honorius,
and Theodosus the second talk of any such matter to be due to Innocentius the
first. Nor can it be proved out of Augustine, or Justinians decree, inter
(...). Cod. de sum. trinit. that this title was given to Innocentius the first,
or John the first, or second. For beside that the law inter claras, is
counterfeit, the interpreter does corruptly translate (...), that is, the head
of all priests, the head of all Churches. Nay hardly will Parsons be able to
show, that any of these did speak of the universal visible Church, where they
speak of the bishops of Romes authority. These therefore are palpable, if not
visible lies. And that which he says of John the first, is a ridiculous lie.
For he was dead, as Chronicles teach, before Justinians reign.

He thinks it lawful to lie all manner of lies of Calvin. And therefore
boldly says, He was a priest, and that he said Fol. 20. 2.
mass. Both which are denied by those which wrote his life, which say he
departed out of France before he received any orders. The same may be proved,
for that his name is found in no bishops records, and for that he begun to
write his Institutions before 24. years of age. Of which we gather, that he
hated the popish priesthood, before he was of years to be made priest.

Fol. (...). b. he makes Sir Francis to say, that we have changed old religion
into Protestancy: not changing therein his old fashion of cogging and lying.
For neither does he, nor any of us acknowledge popish religion to be ancient,
nor do we call our religion protestancy: although his dealing gives us often
occasion to protest against his wicked and false dealing.

Fol. 23. a. he affirms, that Sir Francis talks of nothing but fears,
frights and terrors. But he might do well to cease talking, if he tell nothing
but lies. In the place mentioned Sir Francis talks neither of fears,
frights, nor terrors. Nor does it follow, because Parsons and his consorts are
still packing underhand, and dealing with the Spaniards, that we are terrified.
For we have neither cause to fear treason, nor public force, unless we will
trust traitors, and wilfully throw away our arms. Neither have Papists cause
to begin to stir, unless they be weary of their lives, of peace, of ease,
and of their native country.

Fol. 25. a. he boldly avouches, that I count it a blessing, to have Catholic
rites and service abolished: whereas in truth I desire nothing more, then that
Catholic religion may be restored, and speak only against the filthy
abominations of popish mass, the idolatrous worship of saints and idols, the
tyranny of the Pope, and such like: which none but the slaves of Antichrist can
endure, and will affirm to be Catholic.

That Iouinian and Vigilantius held some errors, we will not deny. But that
Hierome called them heretics for the same points that we hold, concerning
virginity, prayers to saints, and lights at martyrs tombs, as Parsons fol.
27. affirms most falsely, will not be proved. For Hierome does rather excuse
those, that lighted candels at noone day, then condeinne those that thought
contrary. Neither did he ever place perfection in forced virginity, or teach
prayers to saints, or allow those, that worshipped false relikes, as the
papists do. This therefore which Parsons says, is to be scored up among the
relikes of his leasings.

In the same leaf he adds another gross lie, saying, That Jewel (writing)
against Harding, and Fulke against Allen and Bristow, do often call Saint
Hierome borne papist and scolding doctor. For neither the one term, nor the
other is found in their writings. Nay we should greatly wrong Saint Hierome, if
we should call him either papist, or borne papist, seeing that in his time
neither the monster of the mass, nor other popish abominations, were either
borne, or conceived. Unless therefore he quote B. Jewels, and M. Fulkes words;
as he was borne a bastard, so we will hold him by condition for a lying
accuser, and a scolding companion, and a fellow borne to tell lies.

Fol. 28. b. he tells loud lies of Panormitane, saying, That he in the chap.
licet. de electione, expounding these words of Hostiensis, Cum idem sit
Christiatque Papae consistorium, quasiomnia potest facere Papa, quae Christus,
excepto peccato: shows the meaning to be, that in matters of jurisdiction,
and spiritual authority, for government of his Church upon earth, Christ has
left so great power unto his substitute Saint Peter's successor, as he may do
thereby, and in his name and virtue, whatsoever his master and Lord might do in
his Church, if he were now conversant among us upon earth. This I say, is a
loudlye, consisting of two or three branches. For neither does Panormitan
expound the words of Hostiensis: nor does he affirm, that which Parsons
writes in his name. Nor is he so shameless to write that which Parsons
affirms. A second lie is also avouched by the forger of lies Parsons, where
he says, That all both divines and canonists do agree, that all Christ's power
of government is left to the Pope, except only his power of excellency,
according to that great commission in Saint Matthew, I will give unto thee, the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. For neither all, nor any ancient father
does agree to this conclusion, albeit we may boldly call them better divines
then the schoolmen: nor do all, or most of the Canouists speak of this power
of excellency; nor do the words, Mat. 16. belong to the Pope, or contain any
such commission as is pretended. And that without alleging further proofs,
the Popes own doctors will confess. For Bellarmine lib. 1. de Pontif. Romans c.
10. shows, that Peter had nothing granted in the 16. of Matthew. but promised
only. And with him also diverse others are consorted. But suppose any thing had
been granted to saint Peter; what makes this to Clement the 8. and (...) Popes
that are liker to Nero and Heliogabalus, then to S. Peter?

Likewise fol. 29. b. he says, That Panormitan and Hostiensis uttering these
words, Papa potest facere quasi omnia (...) Christus, excepto peccato, do
explicate the comparison of Christ, not as he is God, but as he is man. Which
shows that Parsons takes pleasure in lying. For else why should he say, that
they explicate the comparison of Christ, not as he is God, but as he is man,
when they have not one word sounding this way?

In the same leaf, he belyeth the same man again, telling us, That
Panormitan, de electione c. venerabilem, says, that Hostiensis founded his
doctrine upon the commission given to the Pope, Matthew. 16. Whereas Panormitan
has no such words, nor does in that place mention Christ's words, Matthew. 16.
nor has one word of any commission given to the Pope by Christ.

Fol. 36. b. speaking of Cromwell and bishop Cranmer: The first of them, says
he, was principally employed in the said Queens condemnation and death, as
appears yet by public records, and the second was used for her defamation
after her death, as is extant at this day in the foresaid statute it self,
where Cranmers sentence is recorded iudicially given by him. This says he, but
so impudently and falsely, as the same may convince him of most shameless
lying. For first there is no such sentence, as is here mentioned, recorded in
the act, as any man may see, that lists to read it. Secondly, what needs a
sentence of divorce against her, that was now put to death, that diuorceth all
marriages? Thirdly, no man ever grieved more at this act, and at that Queens
death, then the Lord Cromwell. So far was he off from being a stickler in it.
Finally, not only printed statutes, but the acts of the tower also do convince
this fellows most shameless reports. Do you then think that he blusheth to
say any thing, that is not ashamed to lie against public acts and records?

Fol. 37. a. he says, Cranmer carried about with him his woman in a trunk. An
impudent popish fiction, for the (...) the inuenter and reporter deserves to
be cased in a clokebag. The truth is, that the reverend bishop fearing the
Kings displeasure, about the time of the six articles, sent his wife away into
Germany unto her kindred. But if he had been disposed to have kept her with
him; yet nothing is more ridiculous or improbable, then that she should be
carried about in a trunk. And if Parsons were to be put in a trunk, he would
say it were impossible to live in it. He says also, that for gain of living
or favor, or quietly enjoying his living, Cranmer would say or unsay any
thing: and for proof he quoteth Sanders de schismate. But lawyers may tell
him, that such domestical witnesses are not worth a rush. Hierome also says,
That the testimony of friends or fellows is not to be accepted. Si amicus pro
te dixerit (says he) non testis aut iudex, sed fautor putabitur. This Sanders
was a railing traitor, like to Parsons, and both of them hired to speak shame
against the professors of the truth. If then a these is not to be credited,
speaking for his fellow (...), nor a traitor testifying for traitors: then let
us hear no more of this renegate rascal traitor, that died in action against
his country, consorting himself with the rebellious and theeuish Irish.

Fol. 40. They are wont to say (says he) that S. Bernard was no flatterer. But
because the man is wont to lie, no man will believe him, unless he bring forth
the parties that have so said. For to call the Pope Abraham, these, and
Christ, as Bernard does, sauoureth of the flattery and darkness of those times.

The fourth, fifth, and (...) chapters of Parsons his first encounter, are
nothing else but a pack of lies, either received from others, or devised and
cogged by himself. He affirms first, that Carolstadius, Oecolampadius, and
Zuinglius were Luthers scholars. Secondly, that they were opposite to Luther.
Thirdly, that there were infinite opinions among them that denied the real
presence. 4. That the Anabaptists rose out of Luthers doctrine. 5. That there
was a potent division betwixt Melancthon and Illyricus. 6. That Calvin and Beza
issued from Zuinglius. 7. That Seruetus was Caluins colleague, and that he and
Valentinus Gentilis and other heretics came from Calvin and Beza. 8. That we
admit no judge of controversies, and laugh at Councels. 9. That Zuinglius was
condemned in a synod. 10. That out of our synods at Marpurge, Suabach, and
Smalcald we departed with less agreement then before, as Lauater and (...)
testify. 11. That Melancthon to prove the Zuinglians to be obstinate
heretics, gathered together the sentences of the ancient fathers for the real
presence. 12. That Zuinglius died in rebellion against his country. 13. That
Oecolampadius was found dead in bed by his wives side, strangled by the devil,
as Luther holds, lib. de priuata missa, or killed by his wife. 14. That great
wars arose between Lutherans and Zuinglians, as he calls them. 15. That
Luther was the first father of our Gospel; which he calls, new. 16. That
Stankare was a protestant, as he calls him. 17. That Chemnitius in a letter
to the Elector of Brandeburg, does censure the Queen of England, and the
religion here professed. 18. That there are wars and dissentions in England
in most principal points of religion. He does also rehearse diverse other
points, which are all utterly false and untrue. For first, Oecolampadius and
Zuinglius were learned men, as well as Luther, and taught truth before they knew
him. Carolstadius also taught matters never learned of him. Secondly, except in
the exposition of the words of the Lords supper, in which the Papists do differ
more then any others, all consented with Luther in most things, and in this did
modestly dissent from him. Thirdly, those imagined different opinions among
them that dissallow the real presence cannot be proved. Let Parsons show,
where they are now maintained, and by whom. 4. It is apparent, that Luther
taught always contrary to the Anabaptists, as his writings show. 5. It cannot
be showed, that either Melancthon condemned Illyricus, or contrariwise. 6.
Calvin and Beza had their doctrine from the Apostles, and not from Zuinglius.
7. Seruetus was a Spaniard, and a Papist, and an heretic, and no colleague of
Calvin. Nay by his means his heresies were first detected and refuted, and he
punished. 8. It is ridiculous to say, that we admit no Judge, and laugh at
general Councels. For we esteem them highly, and admit the censure of any
judge proceeding by the canon of scriptures. 9. The condemnation of Zuinglius
in a synod, is a mere fiction. The 10. lie is (...) by Lauater and Sleidan.
Sleidan says, they (...) at Lib. 7.
Marpurge, That seeing they consented in the chief points, after that they
should abstain from all contention. Quandoquidem in praecipuis omnibus
dogmatis idem sentirent, abstinendum esse deinceps ab omni contentione. The 11.
lie is refuted by Melancthons whole works: where it is not found, that ever he
called his brethren heretics, or went about to prove them so. Nay, his
principal study was unity and peace. 12. Zuinglius died accompanying his
countrymen of Zuricke in the battle against other Cantons of Suizzerland: and
standing for his country, not against his country. 13. Oecolampadius died in
peace, neither did Luther ever write of him, that which the Papists have
reported. 14. The names of Lutherans and Zuinglians we have detested: and if
any contention were betwixt those, that favored Luther or Zuinglius, yet was
it rather private then public. 15. Our religion we claim from the Apostles,
and not from Luther, and so do other reformed Churches. 16. Stankare we
condemn, as an heretic. 17. The letter supposed to be written by (...)
against the (...), is too ridiculous to proceed from him. The same does rather
savor of the blackesmiths forge of papists. 18. In England there are no
public contentions; nor do private men, such specially as are reputed among us
as brethren, contend about matters of salvation. As for those contentions, that
have been about ceremonies, they by the kings wisdom are ended, to the great
grief of Parsons, and other enemies of our peace. Wherefore unless Parsons
can bring better proofs then Rescius, Stancarus, Staphylus, and such like
barking curres of his own kennell; both he and they will be taken for wicked
and shameless forgers of lies and slanders.

Having belyed us before, in the seventh chapter of his first encounter he
tells lies also of himself, and of his own consorts. First he says, If
Papists were idolaters, that this error was universally received among them.
But that follows not. For all Papists have not one opinion of Saints, of
relikes, of images of Saints. The second, Nicene council denies, That Latria
is due to images, or that the images of the godhead are to be made by
Christians. Some hold, that not the image, but the thing signified is to be
worshipped: many hold contrary. All give not divine worship to the cross, nor
pray to it in one sort. Finally, Bellarmine in his books, de imaginibus, and
de Sanctis, does confess, that there are many different opinions among the
worshippers of images. Secondly, Parsons denies, that Papists are idolaters.
But Lactantius lib. 1. instit. divine. c. 19. and other fathers show, that all
are idolaters, that give the worship of God to creatures, as the Papists do,
honoring the sacrament, the cross, and images of the Trinity with divine
worship. This point is also fully proved against the Papists in my last
challenge, chap. 5. Thirdly, he says most falsely, That all Friars and Monks
professed one faith without any difference in any one article of belief. The
falsehood of his assertion I have showed by diverse instances heretofore.
Fourthly, he says, The Papists may have a ministerial head of the Church, as
well as we have a woman for the head. But it is a greater matter to be head of
the universal Church, then of one Realm. Again, we call the King supreme
governor, for no other cause, then for that he is the chief man of his
Realm, and chief disposer of external matters. But they give one consistory
to Christ and the Pope. Furthermore, in matters of faith, we say, all princes
ought to submit themselves to the Apostles, and their doctrine. The Pope will
be equal to them, if not above them, and determine matters of faith, as
absolutely, as Christ Jesus. Finally, he says; Difference of habites or
particular manner of life breaks not unity of religion. But the Apostle
reproves those, that said, I hold of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas. And
Hierome says; (...) you Aduers. Lucifer.
shall hear at any time those which are called Christians, to take their names
of any but our Lord Jesus, as for example, the Marcionists and Valentinians,
know that they are not the Church of Christ, but the synagogue of Antichrist.
This therefore is direct against the Dominicans, Franciscans, Benedictines and
Ignatians. And proves, Ignatian Parsons, a lying person.

Fol. 66. b. he says, That in S. Hieromes time the Roman faith was accounted
the general Catholic faith. And that this Island has had twice participation
of the Roman faith. Both manifest lies. For as well might the city of Rome be
called the world, as the Roman faith, the general Catholic faith. Again,
it is false, that in old time we received the Roman faith, that now is
professed and declared in the conuenticle of Trent. For we received the
Christian faith, which not these Romans, that are a collection of the scumme
of the world, but the old generouse Romans professed.

Fol. 69. he denies, that the Apostle teaches, that public prayers should be
in a known language: where boldly he gives the lie to Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and other fathers, that show, that the Apostle speaks of public
prayers, in a known tongue.

To justify the use of the Latin tongue in reading of scriptures, he makes
two loud lies, as I must needs tell him in English. First he says, That Joan
Bourcher by reading scriptures in English, learned that Christ had not taken
flesh of his mother, and that a tanner of Colchester learned, that Baptism was
worth nothing, and that others fell into herefies by reading scriptures. And
secondly, That every man lightly understands somewhat of the Latin tongue.
Both utterly untrue. For neither do the vulgar people among the French or
Italians understand Latin: nor do Christians rather now fall into error by
reading vulgar scriptures, then the old Greeks and Romans, that read
scriptures in Greek and Latin. But rather therefore did they err, for that
they did not read them diligently or reverently.

Fol. 71. he says we teach that good works are perilous. Let him therefore
name those which have committed this fault, or else acknowledge himself to be
a perilous liar.

Fol. 79. he cannot be content to lie, where he talks of matter of charge,
but will needs have me testify matters which I never thought. I might as well
make him speak all villainy against the Pope: but I wilt not now use the
testimony of so bad a fellow.

That which he (...) of the Popes exactions out of great Encon. 1. c. 11
benefices only, and of his employments of money against the Turks, are mere
leasings. For he takes by one means or other both of great and little, and
rather destroys Christians then Turks.

Fol. 89. he exclaimeth and says, What will you say to this man, that makes
all his ancestors for so many hundred years together, and the ancestors of
her Majesty, her father, and grandfather, and the rest mere infidels? I
answer in his own form. What will you say to this beast, that lies as fast
as a dog can trot? My words that he sets down refute him. For I speak not
of all, but of the most part of Christians of former times: and of their
ignorance I have brought sufficient proof. If then those that lie, deserve
cudgelling, as he says: it is not half a load of wood that will serve for
the bastonading of this brutish and senseless beast.

Fol. 99. By which words it is evident (says Parsons) that his rule consists
of the consent and establishment of certain men in England, what to believe,
which is a different matter from scriptures. But whatsoever he thinks of the
rule of faith, he keeps no rule in speaking untruth. For albeit the rule of
faith, which every private man in England is to follow, was established by
consent of the synod of the Clergy of England: yet I say not, nor does it
follow of these words, that the consent of men is our rule of faith. For the
canon of scriptures is the general rule, that all the Church ought to follow,
and because every private man understands not all points of himself,
therefore the Church, to help the weakness of the ignorant, has gathered the
sum of faith out of scriptures, and proposed the same as conclusions, thence
deduced for private men to follow.

Fol. 105. like a shameless beast he says, The Emperors (in the l. cunctos.
Cod. de sum. Trin. and fid. Cath.) remit themselves to the Roman religion, and
to Damasus the Popes belief, and that they determine nothing of religion: both
which assertions are matters utterly false. For first they remit men, not to
the Roman faith, or to Damasus his belief, but to the faith of Peter. Next
they determine, that men shall follow that faith, and declare what the faith
is. Cunctos populos (say they) quos (...) nostrae regit imperium, in tali
volumus religione versari, quam diuum Petrum Apostolum (...) Romany religio
vsque adhuc ab ipso insinuata declarat, (...) pontificem Damasum sequi claret,
and Petrum Alexandriae Episcopum, virum Apostolicae (...): hoc est, vt secundum
Apostolicam disciplinam, Euangelicamque doctrinam, Patris, and (...), and
Spiritus sancti vnam deitatem sub pari maiestate, and sub pia Trinitate
credamus. But were any to follow Damasus his belief, what is that to later
Popes, that scarce believed in God, and are more like to the grand Turk, then
to Damasus?

In the same leaf he tells also many other gross lies: as for example, That
the Roman religion was received by Peter: whereas the Emperors in the former
law, say, that Peter delivered Christian religion to (...) Romans. Secondly,
that the Emperors law declares the Pope of Rome to be the chief governor of
Christian religion, and that the Emperors accounted him for their head. And
thirdly, that Siluester confirmed the decrees of the Council of Nice. Matters
most sottish, and bluntly and falsely affirmed. For in that law there is nothing
of the Popes general headship. Neither needed the acts of the Nicene Council
any confirmation of Siluester.

In his second encounter chap. 2. it seems he has put on his vizour of
impudency, telling lies upon reports without all shame or proof. In King Henry
the eight his days, he says, that a certain Catholic man in Louth in
Lincolnshire was put to death, being baited in a bears skin, and that the fame
thereof is yet fresh in Louth. Matters very false, as all the old men in Louth
will testify upon their oaths. Further the same is so improbable, as nothing
more. For neither can the party that was so put to death, nor the judges, or
executioners, or parties present be named. Nay it cannot be proved, that any
was put to death at Louth at that time: albeit some of Louth were in danger for
the rebellion, as is yet remembered. Parsons also must tell, how any durst put
men to death contrary to law, and who they were, knowing ye the very rebels
were not executed without trial. Another like lie he fathereth upon Sir Edw.
Carew brother to the Lord Chamberlain, who is said to have reported, That
certain Nobles or Gentlemen baited a certain cacolike man with spaniels. But
what if the Lord Chamberlain had no brother called Sir Edward Carew? What if
none of his brothers ever said any such thing? Again, what if none was ever
baited with spaniels? Does not Robert Parsons deserve to be baited by all the
dogs in Rome, for telling us such fables? In the mean while, how does this
agree with Verstegan, that tells, how in Dover certain cacolikes were baited
with bandogs? And in what case are the Papists, that worship Saints baited in
bears skins, that never were in the world? A third lie he would father upon
Thomas of Walsingham. But it cannot be gathered out of him, that either the
lying Friars in king Richard the second his time were followers of Wicleffe, or
that any corruption of manners grew in his doctrine: although Robert Parsons
boldly avouches both these lies.

In the second encounter, cap. 3. he says, Thomas Arundell permitted and
appointed vulgar translations of scriptures. But the truth is, he forbad them.
The rubrike of the constitution, Statuimus de magistris, is this, Scriptura
sacra non transferatur. And if it be translated (which he appoints not, nor
permits) he forbids all exposition of it, until it be (...). Let Parsons
then show, where he appointed or permitted vulgar translations of scriptures,
if he will not show himself a liar.

In the same encounter, in setting down the state of the controversy, in
reporting the acts against Husse, the proceedings of Luther, Grinaeus, and
Bezaes disputations, he does nothing but cog and lie. And for his witnesses he
cites Aeneas Syluius, Dubrauius, Cochlcus, Genebrard, Surius, Claudius de
Saints, and a rabble of other lying rascals, not worth a cockle shell. What
then does he deserve, but a crown of fox tails, counterpointed with
whetstones for his labor? Popelliniere in is seventh book of the history of
France, shows, that the Papists could never be brought to join issue, do
they of the religion what they could: which is quite contrary to his shameless
narration.

2. encounter, fol. 39. he says, The Council of Trent gave liberty to all
protestants (so he calls our Doctors) to dispute their fill. A most notorious
untruth. For two only going thither, escaped hardly with their lives, and were
peremptorily denied license to dispute publicly, albeit they desired to be
heard.

2. encount. c. 9. he denies that the Papists meant to keep their Indexes
expurgatorie secret, and says, that they were devised to purge books
corrupted by heretics. But experience does prove both to be lies. For under
this color, they have corrupted the fathers: and this deceit was not found,
until by Gods providence one copy came to Iunius his hands. And this God
willing shall be proved by particulars if God grant us life.

Fol. 93. he tells a story, as he says, or rather diverse lies of Monks
making hatchets to swim, raising dead men to life, multiplying milk, and
talking of monks mules, and doing other strange miracles. Which if Parsons do
compare with the miracles of the prophets and Apostles, he blasphemeth, if he
believe as well as the miracles of the Bible: he adds no credit to monkish
miracles, but most wickedly makes legends and fables comparable to holy
scripture.

Fol. (...). he says, Sixtus 4. did leave it free for every one to think what
he would. viz. in the article of the conception of our Lady in original sin.
But that this is false, it appears, first, in that he did excommunicate all
those that spoke against the feast of our Ladies conception. And secondly, for
that he gave indulgences to such as prayed to her, as borne of Anna without
original sin.

Fol. 103. he denies that Sixtus Quintus compared the execrable murder of the
French king Henry the third, to the mysteries of Christ his incarnation and
resurrection. But the Cardinals that were in ye Consistory, when first the
news were brought to Rome, can convince him of lying and impudency. Likewise
a French Papist, that wrote a discourse against Sixtus Quintus, called La
Fulminante, will testify against him. Speaking in an apostrophe to Pope
Sixtus, Tu appelles (says he) ceste trahison un oeuure grand de Dieu, un (...)
P. 40.
pur exploit de sa providence, and la compares aux plus excellens mysteres de
son incarnation, and de sa resurrection. He charge him further, That he
accounted this murder as a miracle, and P. 42.
honored James Clement as a martyr. Dieu, quelle piete, qu'un suiect, qui tue
son Roy, est a Rome un martyr, and son assassinat un miracle! Parsons seems
also to deny that Henry the third was excommunicate, and will not acknowledge
that the same was cause of his death: both which points are testified in the
discourse, (...), La Fulminante, which Parsons not seeing, roueth he (...) not
at what. Tu as proclaim (says he, speaking to Sixtus Quintus) un ban sur la
vie, and conuie tous ies parricides a sa mort. How then can these words uttered
by a papist, inueying against Sixtus Quintus, with any probability be denied?

Fol. 104. he charge us with setting forward the Gospel, which he calls
New, with forcible attempts. But if he show not where we have taken arms for
this purpose, these words will testify against him, that he sets forth
lies, and is a lying companion, whose mouth is full of slander. In France (...)
men have been forced to take arms for defense of their lives against the Popes
ministers, but they never sought the life or hurt of their King, as the
rebellious leaguers did, who trecherously murdered their sovereign Lord and King.

Fol. 105. 2. encount. c. 12. he denies, that papists hold it sacrilege to
dispute of the Popes doings. And fol. 107. That albeit the Pope lead
innumerable souls to hell, yet no man may say to him, Sir why do you so? The
first lie is (...) by Baldus in l. sacrilegij. Cod. de crimine sacrilegij.
where in plain terms he affrmeth, that it is sacrilege to dispute of the Popes
power. The second is convinced by the words of the chapter, si Papa, did. 40.
where it is said, That although the Pope carry with him innumerable souls to
hell, yet no man may reprove him for his faults. The words are plain: Huius
culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nemo. The same words also which
Parsons denies, are found in diverse Canonists, and that not understood in
beneficiary causes only, as he would insinuate, but absolutely. Per omnia
potest facere, and dicere Specul. de legate. 6. nunc ostendendum nu. 89.
quicquid placet (says Durand) auferendo etiam ius suum cui vult, quia non
est, qui ei dicat, cur it a facis? There also citing his author, he says,
Vicem non puri hominis. sed very Deigerit in terris. Likewise did. 3. de
poenit. c. quamuis, where the text says, Quis audeat dicere (...) quare etc.
parcis? The Gloss says, Vel Deo, vel Papae. The like sayings are found in
Baldus in (...). fend. Col. 12, and in l. fin. Col. 1. (...). extr. cod. sent.
rescind. Jason consil. 145. c. 2. v. 2. Aemil. Mar. (...) (...) cap. ad
Apcstolatus de concess. praebend. 'extr. (...). in verbo continetur.

Fol. 106. he says, That many of us and other our friends do make princes so
absolute in temporal and spiritual affairs, as they may not be judged by any
mortal man. And to this purpose he cites Bellay. But first, Bellay is none of
our friends. And next, he cannot show any of us that teaches this doctrine.
Let him name the parties, or else we will name him, and all will take him for a
cogging companion. For neither do we make Kings above general Councels, nor
exempt them from all censures: although not to that effect, as the Romanists
teach.

Fol. 113. 2. encount. c. 14. he affirms boldly and blindly that the
grieuances of the Germain nation, was a complaint of princes called
protestants, and that it was endited by Luther, and (...) against the Popes
pardons at a Council at Noremberg. But therein he lappeth up diverse foul
lies. First, the matter of the Popes pardons was but one matter of many, and
therefore not the sole subject of their complaints, as Parsons pretends.
Secondly, if they had not been Papists, they would never have fled to the Pope
for reformation, nor given him such reverent terms as they do. Thirdly, it was
never heard of till now, that Luther was the enditer of these grieuances
exhibited to the Popes legate anno 1522. Finally, this meeting at Noremberg an.
1522. was no Council, but a diet, wherein the princes desired reformation
rather of abuses, then the dissolution of the Popes authority.

He denies also, that any pardon is sold for murder of children, Fol. 116. 2.
(...).
fornication, adultery, incest, and such abominations. But let him look once
more upon the penitentiary tax printed at Paris, wherein the price of the
pardon for every one of these offenses is set down. If he find not these
matters in the penitentiaries tax, let him look the fees for the Popes bulls,
for every of these points in the Popes Chancery. He shall also find in my
treatise against (...), proof for the sale of pardons. Let him therefore either
search more diligently, or lie less confidently, or hear himself taxed
patiently.

Fol. 117. (...). encount. c. 15. he affirms, that James Clement conferred
with no man living before he killed the French king Henry the third, and that
he had no absolution before he committed the fact. Two lies most desperately
avouched: whereof the second concerning his absolution, is (...) by the
confession of Jacques Bourgoin his confessor executed for absoluing him, and by
the common practice of Iebusites that (...) such as go about such murders, as
is proved in the fact of Walpoole that absolved Squire, that promised to
empoyson Queen Elizabeth; and of Holt that did the like to York and Williams,
that undertook to murder her, and by diverse like facts of others. The second
is refuted by the memorials of the league, by the author of the Iebusits
Catechism, and by John de Serres in his Inventory. In the memorials of the
league, we find that the young friar was induced by the Jesuits (...). Ne
furent ils accomplices (says the author of the Iebusites (...), page 203.)
d'auec le Iacobin del assassinat du feuroy? Were not they (says he, speaking
of the Iebusites) accomplices to the Dominican friar that murdered the late King?
He says also, that the murder was suborned by the Iebusites and leaguers, and
that he was drawn to it by promises of paradise, and that he was assoyled for
it, and almost sainted beforehand. John de Serres in his Inventory says, That
James Clement communicated his resolution with Doctor Bourgoin prior of his
convent, to Commolet and other Iebusites, and the heads of the league, to the
principal of the sixteen, and forty of Paris, and that all encouraged him to
this happy adventure, promising him rewards in earth, and in paradise, if he
should be martyred in the execution of his purpose, a place above the Apostles.
Ainsi resolu (says John de Serres) il communique son affair au docteur
Bourgoin prieur de son couuent, au pere Commolet, and autres Jesuits, (...)
chefs ae la ligue, aux principaux de seize and de quarante de Paris. Tous
l'encouragent a cest (...) dessein. On luy promet abbayes, eueschez, and s'il
auient, qu'il soit martyrise, rien moyns qu'vne place en paradis au dessus des
Apostres. May we not then rightly conclude, that Parsons is a notorious and
most impudent liar, and that the Iebusites are Kingkillers and notorious
traitors? No question. And I doubt not but they shall be so reckened of all
posterity, notwithstanding the barking of such dogs against such reports.

I do therefore marvel, as Athanasius says of the Arrians, That without
abomination and horror of lying, they could utter such lies, seeing the devil
is father of lies, and liars are strangers to him that calls himself truth.
Miror (...) sine vlla abominatione and horrore (...) it a falsa, etc. (...)
dicere, cum mendacia patrem diabolum habeant, ijque qui mentiuntur, alieni sint
ab (...) qui (...), (...) sum veritas. And well may I conclude, That if all
lies ought to be far removed from religion, and those positions which for
religion are taught and learned, (as Saint Augustine says) lib. de Mendacio ad
Consentium. cap. 10. That then it is not religion, that Parsons does maintain
with so many lies, nor can his lies stand with the grounds of religion.
Finally, I say to the deceived Papists, as Constantine Eusebius vita Constant.
lib. 3 cap. 62.
said to heretics of his time: Cognoscite (...) mendacijs vestrae doctrinae
inanitas teneatur. Behold by what lies the vanity of your doctrine is
maintained. And if they believe not me, let them hearken to Parsons himself,
that in his answer to my Epistle affirms, That he that lies is not to be
trusted in any thing he says, or writes.

CHAP. X. An answer to Parsons his immodest railing and behavior throughout
his whole Warne-word.
HArd it will be for me to recount all the scurrilous and railing terms which
Robert Parsons of his choleric liberality bestows upon Sir Francis Hastings
and my self. It appears, he is of the race of those wicked men, of which the
Prophet, Psalm. 14. speaks, Quorum os maledictione and amaritudine plenum est,
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. And well may I apply to him,
that which Hierome said to Ruffin: Tanta confingis, quanta non diceret de
latrone Apolog. aduers. Ruffinnm.
homicida, de scorto meretrix, scurra de Mimo. You devise so many villainies, as
a cutthrote would not utter against a robber, or a common whore against a
harlot, or a scurrilous Scoganlike mate, against a Vize. Which I do the less
wonder at, because I understand, he is descended of a scolding whore, and was
begotten by a (...) Monk, and has been of late among cutthrotes and robbers,
that came against his country. But if I do not touch all, yet will I give you
a taste of some, that by a few you may understand the fellows disgustful
humor in many. In the front of his book, for fear of loosing time, he draws
out his Copiam verboru^ scurrilium, and without further aduisement calls me
Insolent and vanting Minister. Terms well fitting a bastardly scurrilous and
scuruy friar, and evil applied to a minister of Gods word, whose state is as
honorable, as the vocation of a Iebusite is odious, antichristian and
damnable. As for the terms of insolency and vanting, they rather belong to
him, that insolently has taken upon him to convey the crown of England unto
the Infanta, in his book of Titles, which like a falsary he has put upon an
(...) mass priest called Dolman, and has also vanted to the Pope, that he
will subdue England to the Popes erroneous religion.

Again, fol. 1. he terms my Epistle vain and arrogant. And yet never did I
vainly and arrogantly desire a Cardinals hat, as Parsons has done, nor does
my Epistle contain a supplication for some preferment, as did certain letters
procured by Parsons. What a vain man then is Parsons thus (...) to talk of
vanity and arrogance.

In his Epistle to the reader, he says, Sir Francis is known to be one of the
Puritan crew: and, as if he were a blind harper, he is still harping upon this
string of Puritanisme. But I must tell him that, which he will be much grieved
to hear: that the contention about ceremonies and government of the church
raised by some more zealous then wise, and set forward by the enemies of the
Church, is by the Kings great wisdom now ended. As for the term Puritan, it
will far better agree with the pharisaicall Papists, then with any of our
communion. For they hold that all men, if they will, are able to perform the
whole law, and that the precepts of God are easy. Of which it follows
necessarily, that a man may be without sin. For he that transgresses not the
law, is without sin. But to hold that, is Pelagianisme and true Puritanisme.
Verum ne Lib 1. aduers. Pelag.
est, says Hierome in the person of one Atticus, to one that defended
Pelagianisme, quod a te scriptum audio, posse hominem sine peccato esse,
sivelit, and facilia esse Deipraecepta? Is it true, that I hear you have
written, that a man may be without sin, if he will, and that Gods
commandments are easy? And in the beginning of his third book against
Pelagius, he shows, that it is Pelagianisme to (...), That after baptism,
Christians have no sin, and if they are without sin, that they are just,
and when they are once just, if they work carefully, that they may persevere
in justice, and eschew all sin. In my last challenge also, I have showed by
diverse other authorities and arguments, that the Papists are flat Pelagians,
and true Puritans. Hoping that Robert Parsons will hereafter the rather
forbear to talk of puritans, himself being an impure puritan, and Iebusites
being nothing else, but right puritan Papists.

In the same place he says, My volume is more intemperate and malignant, then
that of Sir Francis: railing fastest, as his fashion is, upon him, that is next
his hand. But what if my book be more temperate, then his Wardword? Will he
yet still call it Intemperate, calling his Wardword temperate? This therefore
by indifferent men is to be judged, and not by such an intemperat malignant
mate. Again, seeing I dispute against the malignant rabble of Antichrist, and
against Parsons and such like malicious rakehels that seek to bring their
country into bondage under the Pope and Spaniard, he has no reason to talk
of malignitie, being himself especially a malignant traitor.

In the answer to my Epistle, he calls me contentious minister, and
afterward, formal noddy. But if it be lawful for him to strive against his
country, and against religion, he must give me leave to contend for my
country against traitors, and for truth against falsehood. We ought all to
contend to please God as the Apostle did, 2. Cor. 5. and (...) to please
Antichrist. Furthermore, seeing the Apostle Paul disdaineth not to be called a
Minister of Christ Jesus: this Romans 15. and. 1. Cor 3 and 4.
squib Friar, that is of the number of (...) spoken of Apocal. 9. would not
scorn the title, but that he would declare himself to be a slave of
Antichrist. As for the title of formal Noddy, I doubt not but to remove it
from my self to him. His material and gross foolery is so palpable, that if
Cardinals had been chosen of formal Noddies, he could not have missed the
Cardinals hat with an appendix of a coxcombe and a bell.

In the same place, possessed with a pang of railing he calls me Terentian
Thraso, and Philistian Goliath. And because these words did not answer his
swelling conceit, he adds Behemoth, and Leuiathan, and says, I challenge
like a giant. But all his bombasted words will not make me swell so big, as
Loadlike Parsons with his (...), who albeit, he has sometimes played Thraso and
called himself Captain Cowbucke, yet is indeed nothing, but a cowbaby, and
the whore of Babylons Ballio.

Afterward, he says, That under a vizard, I play the Vize: as if (...) in
England played with vizards. But in Italy every Mountbanke and Zanni plays
with a vizard. This therefore may better fit Parsons, who since he came into
Italy, has never ceased to play the (...), now taking the vizard of Howlet,
now of Philopater, and lastly, of N. D. alias a noble (...), deserving to be
called Noddy and Zanni. He wants nothing but his boxes of drugs and serpents,
to be a perfect mountebanke, standing now in the state of perfection of
dizardry.

Speaking of my style, he calls it, a vain style of scolding and scurrility:
belike, to prevent me, that I should not object scolding and scurrilitie to
him, that has the same both by the fatherside and motherside, and imployeth it
most vainly for the defense of the whore of Babylon his second whore mother.

In his observations upon Sir Francis his Epistle fol. 6. he touches him with
terms of bloody Sycophancie. But he does himself and others wrong, to give
his own ornaments to those that little deserve them. For who so will look into
the livels set out by this bastardly barking curre, he cannot choose but give
him the garland of Sycophancie before all his fellows. And certes no man
knows his plots for invasion, for conueying the crown of England to
strangers, and other stratagemes, but he will rather take him to be the son
of a bloody butcher, then of a blackesmith.

He rayleth also against M. Crane, M. Sipthorpe, and M. VVilkenson, calling
them doctors and Rabbis of the puritanicall presbytery: and biting like a mad
dog, or at least barking against all honest men, that come in his walk. But
compare them with his rakehell Jebusites, and Romish priests, nay with the
consistoriall Cardinals, and we shall see, that he that allows the consort
and combination of Cardinals, has no (...) to speak against those virtuous
and learned men. Neither are the names and conditions of Romish priests such,
as that this evil favored companion may despise the names of these men in
respect of the other, that deserve no favor either for their titles or
qualities.

Fol. 11. b. in his observations upon my preface, he says, It is spiced with
poison and venom. But all honest men are to like it the better, being misliked
of Parsons and his viperous consorts, who as they poison men's souls with false
doctrine, so do they by poison and practice seek to murder all, that are
opposite to their wicked purposes, spicing Objected by the secular priests.
the cup, so as Cardinal Allen, the bishop of Cassana, Sixtus Quintus,
Throkmorton, and diverse others never throue after they had tasted it. Parsons
also has so spiced his books with calumniations, that he may well be master
of the devils spicery.

Fol. 12. Does not our Minister, says he, show himself more then Bizarro,
that is, as he expounds it, light and fantastical headed. And yet the heavy
and beetleheaded block shows no sufficient reason of his speech. Will it then
please him to take this word, and to bestow it upon the head of the Romish
Church, who claiming to be Peter's successor, and being most unlike to Peter,
seems to be, if not Beatissimo, yet Bizarrissimo padre, and to want both wit
and brain. The 13. leaf is all farsed with reproaches, but has no more taste
then his Italian porredge made of coleworts. Let him therefore take them
himself, and bestow them at his pleasure, being a hungry mastif curre, a
cunning companion, and a cosiner of such as trust him; a notorious firebrand,
that has long sought to set his own country in co^bustion; a sycophant, ready
to detract basely from honest men, by words and libels, and a shop, or rather
to speak of his putatiue fathers occupation, a forge of treachery and knavery.
For this he voluntarily gives to us, but we give it him upon credit and
warrant of his own consorts. And to requite him for his courtesy, let him
take from us the choice of the best titles that are to be found in the
hang-mans budget.

Fol. 14. He shall have a K (says he) for the first letter of his title: which
is a favor more then I desire. Notwithstanding, because he is so liberal, I
would be loath to be unthankful: let him therefore take both yt K. and the rest
of the word, and an addition of p. p. in honor of the Pope, and so all will
make a pild po. k.

Fol. 17. Let us (says he) learn the subtle shifting of this shuffling
Minister. And yet himself presently falsfieth the law Cunctos populos. Cod. de
sum. Trin. and fid. Cath. leaving out that form of faith which the Emperors
commend in their law. It appears therefore, that Parsons and his consorts be
a pack of cards, that neither shuffled nor vnshuffled are worth any thing, but
to make sulferous matches to light candles to the devil.

Fol. 2. he talks of my companions, and callcth them A rude rabble of
pyraticall companions: railing at men of honor and service, that have both by
sea and land served their country against all foreign enemies, set on by a
pack of renegate traitors, and which shall always be able to withstand the
practices of all bougerly Popes, and Cardinals, and all their adherents.

Fol. 26. he terms me pedling merchant: but without all reason. For I have
with all my force withstood the Mass priests, who like pedlars come from the
Pope with a pack of hallowed grains, beads, Agnus deis, pictures and such
trash, being sorry they cannot sell their Masses, and make traffic of men's
souls, as they were wont. But percase he despises all petty pedlars,
himself like a montbanke offering to sell the crown of England.

Fol. 39. But ho sir swashbuckler, says he, forgetting his swashing when he
played captain Cowbucke, and when an. 1588. he was swashing and swaggering
among the Spaniards, that he meant to bring to cut his own countrimens throats.

Fol. 41. he raileth like a lunatike friar, and fol. 58. and in other places
calls me Oedipus, himself playing Dauus, and like a daw cackling at every
one that comes in his way.

Fol. 97. b. where I say, that the Church of England professes the doctrine of
Christ Jesus, according to the rule that was established by common consent; and
that they that digress from this rule are not to be accounted of our society.
Mark (says Parsons) the giddy head of this gagling goose. But what aileth
this frantike fellow thus to rail? For sooth because he imagines that I join
them of France, Germany and Suizzerland, which he in his drunken fits calls
Lutherans, Zuinglians and Caluinists, with us in unity of faith, and as he
believes, cut them off presently again. But the congerheaded Noddey deceives
himself, if he think I cut them off. For in matters of faith, I doubt not but
to show that we al agree as touching the substance. And that is proned in the
harmony of our confessions.

Fol. 115. What atheism does this martial Minister, and this devils Deane
bring in? says Parsons. And why? Because I deny that the Churches of France or
Germany differ from us in matters of substance. Yet shall this be justified
always against this devils agent. Neither does it therefore follow, that we
have no lawful ministry, as this swaggering friar newly dropped out of the
hangmans budget supposes, and as this wicked atheist and sworn slave to Satan
infers.

Fol. 116. Oh (says he) that Luther were alive again to canuas this arrogant
barking bastardly whelpe of his. But if he wish him alive once, the Pope and
the rest if he were alive, would wish him often dead, both alive and dead being
a dreadful enemy to the tyranny of Antichrist, the false doctrine of friars,
and a scourge to all those hungry curres that are now barking against him, and
casting forth al manner of villainy against the truth. As for me, I speak of
Luthers opinion, as some grossly understand it, and not as it may be
understood, his words being favorably construed. Parsons therefore (...) this
cause had no reason to rail and scold in his mothers language. But if he would
have railed, yet it sits not well for bastards, and barking hel-hounds, and
proud peacockes, to object either bastardy, or barking, or arrogance to others.

Fol. 116. he says, a Minister and a minstrel, a preacher and a pirate, a
Bishop and a bitesheepe, a Deane and a devil are all one. To answer him, I say
they are as like as a Pope and a puppet, a friar and a frying pan, a company
of Cardinals and a pack of coat cards, a Massepriest and a mustardpot. O
noble Parsons, yt only ministrel that makes us this mirth. And as the
Quodlibetist says, not only a pirate and a bitesheepe, but a devil incarnate,
begot by some Cardinal devil.

Encounter 2. c. 6. he calls me whirleheaded Minister, and says my reasons
are circular. But the error was in the whirling head of this quadra^gular or
rather four elbowed sot. For I do not remit men from Christ to the Scriptures,
nor from scriptures to interpreters, nor back again as he supposes, turning
like a dizard in a morice dance: but say that the doctrine of Christ concerning
salvation is apparent in Scriptures, and there I would have all to rest. Albeit
for understanding scriptures, we are to use all ordinary means of study,
tongues, conference of places, interpreters, prayer, and the rest.

Fol. 104. he charge me with malepart sauciness, and calls me prating
Minister, and that only because I am bold to reprove the Pope and his consorts
for their murdering and empoysoning of Princes, for their (...) and rebellion
against Magistrates, and for troubling the Christian world for the maintenance
of their pomp and superstition. But if they will not cease to do leudly, they
must not think much to hear their lewdness disciphred. The world cries
shame against their empoisonments, assassinous murders, rebellions, trecheries
and villainies, and if we should not, the stones would proclaim their
wickedness. Let this hackster therefore hold his prattling, and forbear his
saucy censures, or else in my next he shall hear of more of their trecheries.

Fol. 116. 2. enc. c. 14. he talks idly of filthy and licentious life, of
pyracie, of buying and selling of benefices, of ruffians and rauinous
companions, and I know not what, railing like a scolding queen, and running
upon us like a mad dog with open mouth. Further, it appears he has sold
himself as a slave to Antichrist, for the defense of al his abominations. But
seeing he was determined to give his tongue the reins to all scurrilitie; (...)
reason me thinks might teach him two things: (...), not to rail without all
show of reason and proof: and next, not to object to innocent men such crimes,
as himself and his consorts are guilty of. If he will not learn of others,
yet shall he find that I object neither treason, nor libelling, nor theeuery,
nor lechery, nor cosinage, nor villainy, nor knavery to him, but I prove ye same
either by his own treacherous writings, or by the acts of Bailiol college, or
by the testimony of the secular priests his consorts, or other good evidence
and presumption. I do also object his own proper faults. But he like a wild
scolding whore, talks he knows not what, obiecting other men's faults to us,
without proof or probability. Nay, when I have by testimonies convinced (...)
Romish prelates of notorious (...) and symony: yet does the sot talk of the
same against us, answering like an echo, or rather like a cuckoe.

Fol. 119. 2. enco^. c. 15. he runs with open mouth upon M. Fox, a man most
pious, virtuous, and honest, taxing him for malicious and wilful false
dealing, and railing upon him with full mouth. But as Parsons wants much of
his honesty and virtue, so he comes far behind him in virtue. His quarrels are
vain, and such as rather touch the workman that made the stampes, then him.
But Parsons shall never wipe away his own faults with railing upon others. And
thus we see how many railing words, and how ilfauoredly hanging together, and
how (...) against us he has uttered. Verba maledicentia (as says Epiphanius
haeres. 71. of Photinus) neutiqua^ consistere valentia euomuit. These are the
engines of heretics, that is of your masters (Dmiserable papists) that being
co^uinced of perfidiousnes, they turn themselves to railing. Istae machinae
haereticoru^, idest magistrorum tuorum sunt (says Hierom to Ruffin apol. 2) vt
conuicti de perfidia ad maledicta se co^ferant. We say therefore to papists, as
Hierome said to some in his time, epist. 78. Quid male dictorum pannos hinc
inde consuitis, and eorum carpitis vitam, quorum fideire sistere (...) valetis?
Why do you of al sides frame whole webs of malicious and railing words, and
carp at their lives, whose Christian doctrine you cannot resist? Do you think
to prevail with words, when your works are so lewd, your doctrine so false and
worthles. (...) for us, we account our selves happy, because men will revile
us, and persecute us, and say all manner of evil against us for Christ his sake,
most falsely. For Christ has assured us of his blessing, albeit me^ do curse
us. Apud Christianos non qui (...), sed qui facit contumelia^ miser est, says
Hierom, epist. 77. ad Marcum. Among Christians he is wretched, not that
suffers reproach, but that speaks reprochfully against others. 1 Finally we
say to Parsons, Quid gloriaris in malitia, qui potens es in iniquitate? Tota
die (...) iniustitiam lingua sua. Sicut nouacula acuta fecisti dolu^. Why do
thou boast in thy malice, that art able to do mischief? All the day long his
tongue has run upon mischief. As a sharp razor he has dealt deceitfully.

CHAP. XI. Parsons his vain clamors and idle objections rejected.
THis chapter might very well have taken up most of Parsons his idle
declamation. For as Hierome says, Epist. 53.
Quicquid amens loquitur, vociferatio and clamor appellandus est. That is,
Whatsoever a mad and brainsicke buzzard talks, it is to be termed bauling and
crying. But we will only put here his notorious outcries and railing clamors.

Where Sir Francis Hastings having promised to answer all the Wardworders
cauillations, leaves him to his hanging ward: Lo (says Parsons) threats that
go before arguments. And then he says, that no sencers, nor swashbucklers, nor
cutters of Queene-hiue, or other kilcowes, could ever follow the fray upon
Catholics more sharply then he and Topclisfe. But what needed all this cry
upon so small occasion? Can he not abide to hear of the hanging ward, himself
taking the name of a fencing warder? Again, why should he talk of threats,
when Sir Francis does rather prophecy what Parsons will come eo by his
treasons, then threaten to follow him for them? Finally, why does he run upon
M. Topcliffe with a rabble of railing words, the man being not once mentioned
in this place, and being more grave and honest then the chief inquisitor of
Rome for all his scarlet robes? This belike is his round answering,
distinguished (as he says, fol. 6.) from railing. But if his round answering
be no better, he shall declare himself to be a stale hackster with his ale-pot
terms, and neither good disputer, nor witty iester, in disputing, intitling
traitors Catholics and Martyrs, which is denied. And in testing like a hollow
rocks echo, retorting his adversaries words, and vomiting out nothing else
but (...) slanders, and outworne terms of king Henry the eight his days.

Fol. 8. he cries out of two apparent abuses, calumniation, and flattery. And
why? Forsooth because Parsons is accused to rejoice that her Majesty's years
grow on so fast, and because Sir Francis does pray for the prolongation of her
days to the holding out still of the Popes authority. As if it were flattery
to pray for her. Majesty's long life, and not lawsull so to do. Or else, as if
all the world knew not that Parsons by publishing Sanders de schismate, and
diverse libels has sought her disgrace, and both by wars and treasons to the
uttermost of his power procured her destruction. But (says Parsons) it may be
presumed that the Essexian assault would have abbreuiated this still. Where I
pray you note, that besides the slander of this noble Earl, he confesses,
that if that action had taken effect, the Popes authority would not have been
still holden out. By which it may appear, that by the treachery of some hollow
hearted Papists, this noble Earl was brought to destruction.

Fol. 9. (...) impudently he affirms, that nothing is answered to his
discourse of Emoluments of tolleration of popish religion, and of the hurts
that have come of alteration of religion. As if popish religion being proved
false, idolatrous and disastrous to all kingdoms, all his discourse did not
fall to the ground. But this is the fashion of such combatants, to cry victory
when they are beaten out of the field. Likewise he cries out manifest
untruths, because Sir Francis says, he was first called into the field by
Parsons. But as well may the these say, that the peaceable traveler that
gives warning to all to beware of thieves, provoked the these to set upon
him. The (...) were ready to come for England. Sir Francis gives the alarm.
Out comes captain Cowbucke like a cutthrote, and sets upon him in his
Wardword. Is it not he then that begins this (...)? And does not he in
favor of public enemies make himself ready to cut our throtes?

Fol. 11. he says, my Preface tends wholly to bloodshed. But this grievous
accusation required some more proof then he brings. Notwithstanding let us
hear what he alleges. His first persuasion (says he) is by extolling
exceedingly her Majesty's extraordinary clemency. As if the praising of a
Princes clemency were a persuasion to cruelty. Or as if Parsons commending
Pope Clements clemency, persuaded him to rigor. Who ever heard such a
witless speak? Another reason he imagines me to have drawn from the
meanings of papists. But like an unskillful archer, he neither hitteth my reason
nor intention. He is therefore to learn, that my purpose was to arm her
Majesty against Parsons and his consorts treasons: and rather to secure the
State, then to use violence to any, but such as by all means oppugned the
State, and sought by treachery to undermine the State.

Where I show that heretics, idolaters and traitors are to Fol. 14.
be punished, and therefore factious papists: he says, thus to reason at
rando^, is much like to boys argume^ting in sophistry. And yet he with all his
logic shall never answer this argument, considering that I have proved Robert
Parsons and his consorts to be heretics, idolaters, and traitors. Nay W. R.
Ibidem.
in his clear Confutation confesses so much, not answering any of my
arguments. But (says he) show me one example from the beginning of
Christendom, that ever man or woman in any age was punished as an heretic, by
the Christian (...) wealth, for sticking to the religion of the Pope of Rome.
As if I had not showed, that Angelikes, Carpocratians, Marcionists, In my
Challenge.
(...), Prince-killing circumcellions, and Assassins, Pelagians, Collyridians,
crosse-worshippers, and diverse others holding the same points which now the
Pope professes, have been condemned and punished for heretics.

Fol. 15. he cries out folly and impudency, in proving that idolaters and
heretics are by laws to be repressed. But he dissembleth cunningly whatsoever
is otherwise brought by me, to preue Papists to be idolaters and heretics. He
passes by also two Greek sentences, taken out of Euripides and Aeschines: for
to him Greek is of hard digestion. Finally, whatsoever is said of the Papists
for railing against the Queen in the book De schismate Anglicano, set out
under Sanders his name, and in other libels, Parsons does wholly omit, and yet
he makes a show as if he would answer all, writhing his face like an old ape
swallowing pills.

In the same place he notes, as he says, a contradiction betwixt Sir Francis
and me. But the contradiction was in his understanding, and not between us. For
neither would I, nor he have simple Papists punished with death: which is the
opinion of S. Augustine concerning simple heretics. Nor does Sir Francis
deny, but that factious, dogmatizing, and obstinate heretics ought to be put
to death: which both S. Augustine and I my self affirm.

Fol. 16. b. he gives out, that the words of Paul (Romans 16. where he would
have such marked diligently as caused division and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which the Romans had received) make directly against us, and not
against the Papists. But then he must show, that we have forsaken the doctrine
preached to the Romans, and they not. He must, I say, show that S. Paul
taught, that (...) the eight is the spouse and rock of the Church, that there
are seven sacraments, that Christ's body is corporally under the accidents of
bread and wine, and in as many places as is the sacrament, that the accidents
of bread and wine subsist without their substance, that a Christian may live
without sin, that latria is due to the cross, that we are to pray to saints
after the fashion of the Romish church, and such like points of popish
doctrine. Or else he shall make a direct lie, where he says these words make
directly against us.

Having rehearsed the law Cunctos populos. Cod de sum. Fol. 17.
Trin. and fid. Cath. he cries out, and wills us to tell him, whether the
same touch not us. But if we (...) him true, it will make little for his
comfort. For we neither refuse to communicate with the Church of Rome, nor the
Church of Alexandria, that was in Damasus his time. Nor do we digress from the
faith mentioned in that law, which Parsons like a falsary cut out, seeing it
made not for his purpose. But seeing true Christians do not communicate with
the Church and Bishop of Alexandria that now is, why should Christians
communicate with the Pope and his sect, seeing they have embraced a number of
novelties and heresies, and (...) them in the Conuenticle of Trent, which were
unknown to Damasus, and to the Church of Rome long after his time?

Fol. 20. he complains of injuries offered by the Watchword, as a famous
libell, as well to great foreign princes and nations, as to honorable,
worshipful, and honest subjects: whereas whosoever reads the book, shall find
that Sir Francis speaks only against foreign enemies, and notorious
traitors. If then Parsons put his consorts among them, it is marvel they spit
not in the rascals face and defy him. Again, if Sir Francis be reprehended
for writing against foreign enemies, and domestical traitors: what does
Parsons deserve, that has set out Sanders de schismate, Allens wicked
Exhortation to the Nobility and people of England and Ireland, and diverse other
libels to the disgrace of his liege sovereign and nation, and has taken upon
him the defense of public enemies and traitors?

Fol. 24. he would make us believe, that the Knight flies the true combat, and
that he runs behind the cloth of Estate. But in the first he shows
himself a false accuser; in the second, a vain bangler. For the controversy
arising about Sir Francis his discourse, what was required at his hands, but
the defense thereof, and the answer to (...) his vain cauillations? Again,
seeing his purpose was to rehearse the principal blessings that God has
bestowed upon this land through her Majesty's government, how could he
satisfy men's expectations, unless he touched matters of state, as well as
religion? If then Robert Parsons sever the inconveniences ensuing from the
change of religion, from the rare good parts both in nature and government
(...) Majesty as himself confesses fol. 25. then does he like a cowardly
fellow run out of the lists, and fly the combat, and not we. For we have
proved, and always offer to prove, that both Robert Parsons and his treacherous
consorts have most shamefully railed against her Majesty's person and
government, as may appear most evidently in diverse slanderous libels published
by them, and namely by Cardinal Allens letters to the Nobility and people of
England and Ireland, made, printed and published by the help of Parsons, by
Andreas Philopater, and Didimus Veridicus his libels forged by the black smith
of hell Parsons and Creswel by Sanders his book De schismaete, translated into
Spanish by the procurement of Parsons and diverse others. If then Parsons
renounce these libels, and now fall to praise her Majesty's person and
government: then he confesses his own most traitorous behavior, and
yields the bucklers to his adversaries.

Fol. 32. he triumphs as if Sir Francis had yielded in the matter of
controversy concerning the blessings of this land, where he confesses, that
the life of religion, Queen, and country is at the stake. He says also, that
the example of Josias includes an evil abodement toward her Majesty's
person. But unless his arguments were better, he shows himself a vain man
to mount so high upon so small advantage, and to enter into his triumphant
chariot. For albeit Parsons, and other such assassins and empoysoners, have our
country and religion upon one stake, and have diversely attempted to destroy her
Majesty, and to betray their country to the Pope and Spaniard: yet are they
still loosers. For God does still protect this country from all violence and
treason, as a harbor of his Church, and does not cease still to continue his
favor toward this land. Again, albeit anno 1588. the Spaniards came against
England, thinking to murder our (...), as the Egyptians did Josias: yet has
she ended her days in happiness, and left her subjects in peace. Let the
Spaniards therefore beware, that they come not to fight against us any more
under the Popes banner, thinking to speed, as did the Egyptians against Josias
under Pharo Nechao, least they be turned home like wandering Gypseyes, and sent
back to the Pope to complain of their false prophet Parsons, who has often
told them that they shall undoubtedly conquer England.

Where I say, he does not once go about to prove flattery against sir Francis,
he cries out and says, Read the first Fol. 34.
page of the Wardword. He says also, That it was the but of his discourse. But
this shows that he was a bungling archer, that shooting wide mist the but.
For who so list to read the place by him noted, shall indeed find that he
applied nothing to sir Francis, but passed by in a general cloud of words
concerning flattery. He cries out also of impudency, but unless he bring
arguments to prove that hurt has ensued by alteration of popish religion, to
others, then to the merchants of Babylon, who howl like dogs seeing their
gain lost, he shall get more by crying green sauce, then by crying out of
impudency, himself being a pattern of impudency and foolery, and a vain
crier of the Popes commodities.

Fol. 35. he finds fault, that I allege no one word out of Harpsefeld,
Sanders, Rishton, 'Ribadineira, and Bozius. But he would therefore have yielded
me thanks, if he had not bin a thanklesse wretch. For the more that is
rehearsed out of these lying libellers, the more hatred would have redounded to
the Papists. He shows himself also a vain cauiller, to ask a testimony of
slanderous dealing against the Queen, when the subject of their accusation is
slander, and when Parsons himself was an actor in the publication of diverse of
those libels.

Where I say, the Popes adherents in England never ceased until they had
brought her Majesty's most innocent mother to her end, which the King much
repented afterward, and show the rage of that bougerly Pope Paul the 3.
Guicciardini histor.
and the bastard Clement the 7. against the Queens mother and her marriage: he
cries out of temerity and indiscretion, and says, I bring in odious matters,
accusing both king Henry the eight, and all the State. But the temeritie was in
those wicked Popes, that dissolved lawful marriage, and prosecuted men that
belonged not to their charge, and not in him that reproves their usurpation
and lawless tyranny. Again, I accuse none, but excuse Queen Anne, that was
condemned upon false informations and witnesses. But (says he) whether matters
passed so long agone with public authority may be called now in (...), etc.
by such a petty companion as this is, let all the world judge. As if Parsons
himself like a petty saucy scuruy companion, did not call in question the act
of parliament an. 28. Henr. 8. c. 7. as much as concerns the marriage of the
Lady Katherin prince Arthurs wife, and her issue, which he contrary to that
statute deemeth lawful. I may say therefore to him, that his own mouth and
tongue condemns him. As for my self, I do only clear the innocent, and lay
the fault on Winchester, and other wicked priests of the synagogue of Satan,
who for hatred to the religion which she professed, laid this plot for the
destruction of that innocent Queen: which is also partly insinuated in the act
of the 28. of Henry the 8. where they are pardoned, that solicited and urged
the dissolution of Queen Annes marriage.

Fol. 37. b. he exclaimeth against cousenages and knaueries: and all because in
the margent he found Augustine Steuch. Contr. donat. Constant. alleged, whereas
by the fault of the Compofitour these words in Vallam de: slipped out. Which
advantages, if he take; then must he also answer, why fol. 130. b. for
Augustine Steuchus Eugubinus, he alleges S. Augustine Stechus Eugobinus.
Again, this cogging knave must show, why he alleges a cogging Epistle set
out under the name of Nicholas, and that sottish donation, that is published
under the name of Constantine, being (...) a counterfeit and forged thing, as I
have proved by diverse arguments in my answer to the cauillations of a base
mass priest, called E. O. He will also needs have these words, Audis summum
pontificem a Constantino Deum appellatum habitum pro Deo, to be spoken by
Constantine, and not by Augustine Steuchus in his book Contr. Vallam de donat.
Constant. But the words following hoc viz. factum est, which no doubt are
Steuchus his words, proving Constantines donation, and not the words of
Constantine or Nicholas, do plainly testify against him. If then these be his
words, and be annexed to the former without division, then both must be his.

Fol. 65. he cries out, Mark the fraudulent manner of these men alleging
fathers. And yet Hielome in Prol. 2. in comment. in Galat. and Augustine in
Psalm. 99. do well prove, that the people praying, did in time past and ought to
understand the language of their public prayers: which is the thing against
which he cries. Where I argue thus, that the Pope and his agents have been the
stirrers of all the wars and troubles, that of late have happened in Europe
for the most part, and therefore not we, that have always desired peace: he
cries out fol. 88. That the devil has taught me to make this malicious
consequence. But the devil, as I suppose, owes him a shame to deny it, and
he shows himself a dolt to give me occasion so often to touch his own and
his consorts deuilish practices. The consequent is most true, and necessary.
For that which is done by these bloodthirstie wolves, is not to be imputed to
us, whose only labor is to resist their malice. Nay it appears that Pius
Quintus was cause of the wars of France, and the low countries, and that he
stirred sedition both in England and Ireland. The diabolical Iebusites also
were the instruments to stir the rebellious leaguers in France, and have
always done their best to trouble Suethland, England, and Ireland. The angels
of Satan possessing the heads of Iebusites and mass priests, wrought the
massacres of France, and troubles of Flanders. Anno 1588. the Spaniard and Pope
sent a fleet against England, and not we against Spain. Finally, all stories
almost testify and declare, that the consistory of the Pope, and his agents
heads are the forges to frame mischief and trouble.

Fol. 90. and 91. he cries out oflyes and impudencies. But for my part, I say,
shame take him that lies. For first it is notorious, that in the Romish
Church, although the adversary would deny it, there is, and has been great
variety in their liturges, as the missals and formularies of Toledo, Seuil,
Sarum, Paris, Rome, York and Millan do show. Neither has Parsons any thing to
answer, but that in the substance of the sacrifice they agree. As if that were
all, or the most part of the Romish service: or as if I had not showed that
this is most false, in my books De Missa. Secondly, it is true that the
Conuenticle of Trent has abolished diverse old missals and formularies, as the
bull prefixed before them show. Thirdly, it is true that Iustine and Dionyse
describe the form that Christians used in their Liturgies, as Iustines second
Apology, and Dionyse his books of (...) hierarchy testify. Fourthly, the
instruction of the Armenians was no act of the Conuenticle of Florence, but of
some odd Mass Priest that used that conuenticles name. It is no lie
therefore, notwithstanding this instruction that the Conuenticle of Florence
did not by any canon establish seven sacraments. Fifthly, the Conuenticle of
Lateran under Innocentius the third, does mention penance, but gives the name
of sacrament, as I said most truly, to Baptism and the Eucharist. Finally it
is most true, that the popish sacrifice of the Mass was not known of the
ancient fathers: and I have proved it in my third book De Missa against
Bellarmine. Which if Robert Parsons confute, I shall be content that the Pope
bestow on him a Cardinals hat. But if he be not able to answer, and yet will
needs cry out famous falsehood, I will bestow on him a pointed cap with a bell,
and a capons feather, to let all the world know, that at that house dwells a
sot. Ignatius, Irenaeus, and other fathers that he does mention, speak not of
the body and bleud really offered in the Mass, but of an oblation made in
commemoration of that sacrifice. Our writers, albeit they mislike the fathers
in some things, yet no where do they yield, that they speak of the popish
sacrifice of the Mass, offered after the damnable fashion of the synagogue of
Satan.

Fol. 107. he calls for two real differences between papists in the points
of faith. And therefore I count my self bound to show him not two only, but
many more. It may please him therefore to read what I have said before, and to
answer to every point particularly: and then I hope he will cease his harsh
and currish bawling. He must also show, that his consorts differ not in matters
of moment, or in any thing, if he will defend their union.

Fol. 111. he cries out, and in his dogs voice says, If this woodcocke, or
any of his crew can show any one novelty, as an article of faith in our
religion, etc. And again, If O. E. or his mates can show any one heresy,
taken for an heresy by the general Church. What then? forsooth he says, He
will (...) in the rest. Which I would pray him to remember. For if I do not
make him in this point a foot length of nose like a Curliew, let the Pope, if
it be his pleasure, make him king of the Canaries. Nay I have already showed
diverse both novelties and heresies to be contained in Popish religion, and no
Popish woodcocke yet has thrust out his beak to answer, showing themselves
by their wits to be woodcockes, and by their silence Codfish. Only one
woodcocke of Rome under the mask of W. R. alias Walphoole, or wicked Richard
flusheth forth with his long bill. But his answer is such as confirms my
challenge very much: the man being not able to answer any one argument.
Parsons also touches the heresy of ye Collyridians, which among many other, I
objected to him, and answers, that Papists differ from Collyridians
manifestly. But it is not enough to show a difference, unless he also show,
that his consorts hold no one point condemned as heresy in the Collyridians.
But that the congerhead cannot do. For like to the Collyridians they pray to
the Uirgin Mary, and offer in her honor. This answer therefore shows him to
be of the lignage of woodcockes. But of these matters we shall talk else where.

In his 2. enconter c. 2. he cries out, o cogging, o cousinage: and all
because Sir Francis reports, that the blood of a Ducke was worshipped, as the
blood of Hales, and that D. Bassinet confessed his ignorance, and that the
archbishop of Aix called the Pope God on earth, and spoke foolishly. But what
if all this were true? May not we then with more reason say, O coggers, O
cosiners, O Scogans, O cods-heads! But that appears plainly. For the
imposture about the duckes blood was openly detected, and the rest is reported
in the acts of Bassinets examination. Neither is it unlikely, that unlearned
prelates should speak unlearnedly, or that schoole-doctors should be ignorant
in scriptures, seeing all their divinity is grounded upon Thomas his fardle of
questions and answers. But, says Parsons, how (...) a duckes blood be
discerned from others blood after so many years? As if it were not detected
also by the confession of the false priests, that from time to time they
renewed that blood, as they do other false relikes in many places. Here
therefore Parsons shows himself to have a shallow capacity: and the Papists
are declared to be miserably seduced by cogging and cousening priests, and
carried away most simply and idiotlike to the worship of idols and false
relics.

Fol. 43. b. of his second encounter he cries out, Who shall be judge? Meaning
to convey the highest authority in judgment, concerning matters of
controversy about the interpretation of scriptures, to the Pope. But that is a
shameless and most absurd course, to place a beetleheaded, ignorant and
impious Pope above al learned holy fathers, and Councels. Beside that, the
Popes sentence is always uncertain. For what can one Pope do, that his
successor cannot (...)? Tertullian he shows, that scriptures are to Lib. de
resurrectione carnis.
be interpreted by scriptures. Si quid pars diuersa turbat, etc, That is, If
the contrary part do trouble us in any thing by pretense of figures or
aenigmatical speeches, those places that are more manifest ought to prevail,
and the certain to prescribe against uncertain.

Encontr. 2. c. 8. where he should answer my objection out of Hosius, he
cries out of deceitful, fraudulent, and shameful shifts, and notorious
cousinages. But the matter being examined, I doubt not, but to lay the shame
upon his doltish ignorance. In my reply I allege two places out of Hosius his
confession, the first, where he says, That ignorance is not only worthy
pardon, but reward also: the second where he says, That to know nothing is to
know all things. These places I say, as he uses the matter, are Hosius his
own, and not Hilaries, or Tertullians. For Hilary lib. 8. de Trinit. where he
produces the like words, speaks of the ignorance of the meaning of these
words, Ego and pater vnum sumus. And Tertull. lib. de praescript. aduers.
haeret. where he says, That to know nothing, is to know all things; speaks
of curious knowledge beyond the rule of faith. But Hosius imagines, that these
words do prove, That it is sufficient to believe, as the Catholic church did;
which neither of them ever thought. To this purpose also, lib. 3. de author.
sacr. scripturae: Hosius abuses a place out of S. Augustine contr. epist.
fundam. c. 4. thinking, because he says, That simplicity in believing, and not
quickness of understanding does secure us, that who so believes the Catholic
Church, is safe, albeit he understand nothing else. But this is no part of S.
Augustines meaning, but Hosius his own lewd collection, and Parsons his
idiotisme and patchery, that could not discern it.

Fol. 60. 2. encontr. he says, The Lnight talks as fondly, as if he had
talked of the breeding of young geese. And why? Forsooth because he says, The
Papists breed up their children in blindness and ignorance. And is not this
manifest, when they debar them from reading or hearing scriptures read
publicly in vulgar tongues, and forbid them to argue of Christian religion?
Inhibemus (says Alexander the 4. c. Quicunque. de haeret. in 6. ne cuiquam
laicae personae liceat public, vel priuatim de fide Catholica disputare. Qui
vero contra fecerit, excommunicationis laqueo innodetur. Nauarrus in Enchirid.
in 1. praecep. c. 11. says, It is mortal sin for a lay man knowing this
law, to dispute of religion. And Charles the fifth as Neteranus reports,
expressly forbad it. Hist. Belg.


Fol. 62. he complains of abusing a place of Chrysostom homil. 13. in 2. Corinthians. and says, We use legierdemaine in every thing. But if both his
translation, and that alleged by Sir Francis, be compared with Chrysoftomes
words in Greek, which begin thus; (...), etc. the same will easily discharge
us of legierdemaine, and charge Parsons with doltish ignorance, and idle and
vain cauilling, because the words were not to his humor, nor translation.

Fol. 118. 2. encontr. chapter 15. where we say that king John was poisoned by a
Monk of Swinestead Abbey, and that the Monk was before hand absolved of his
Abbot: he cries out, that this example is more gross and absurd then the
former, viz. of king Henry the 3. of France. But in the former example we have
showed, that there is no other grossness, or absurdity, but that such a
wicked sea as the Iebusites, should be permitted to live on the face of the
earth, under the protection of Christian kings, seeing they seek to murder all
of them, that are excommunicate by the Pope. The history which we report of
king John is neither absurd, considering the hatred of the swinish rabble of
polshorne priests, nor untrue. Caxtons Chronicle says, he dyed of poison given
him by a Monk. Polychronicon lib. 7. c. 33. and Polydore virgil deny not, but
that this was a common speech. (...) that mention not poison, say that he dyed
of a surfeit. Now who knows not, that surfeits and poison have often the same
symptoms and effects? The absolution given him is proved by the common
practice in those cases. As for the allegations made to the contrary, they are
like Robert Parsons, that is, absurd and ridiculous. Polydore (says Parsons)
affirms, that he dyed of heaviness of heart. Radulphus Niger, that he dyed
of surfeting. Roger Houeden, that he dyed of a bloody flixe. But all this does
rather increase the suspicion of poison, then otherwise. John Stow is a poor
author, and sauouring as much of Popery, as of his pressing (...) and Taylery.
What then if he should endeavor to clear an old suspicion, that makes against
Papists? Much less then should Parsons stand up on his testimony, if he name
neither Monk nor poison. Monks and Papists ordinarily suppress all things,
that tend to the disgrace of their kingdom: and more credit is to be given to
one or two witnesses affirming a truth against their will, then to twenty lying
Monks or Friars, or pelting Popish writers, that write for affection, rather
then for truth.

Wherefore, albeit he cry loud, as the (...) did against John. 19.
Christ Jesus, and stand much upon his stout arguments and objections, as
Sophisters use to do; yet nothing is more vain, then his clamours and
outeryes, nor more feeble then his objections. Nazianzen epist. 31. shows us,
That often times it falls out, that those that are wronged, are also accused.
Iideminiura afficiuntur, and accusantur, says he. And experience shows us,
that then Robert Parsons cries loudest, when his cause is weakest. As for his
disputes and obicctions they are more easily overthrown, then brought into
form. Multo (...) est nosse, quam vincere, says Hierome of Iouinians
discourses. The same we may see of Parsons his patcheries. For more hard it was
to bring them to a form, then to refute them.

CHAP. XII. Parsons his poor shifts, and fond and (...) answers examined
SOmetimes, silence makes fools seem wise. So says Proverb. 17.
the wise man. Stultus si tacuerit, sapiens reputabitur. But Friar Parsons
could neither speak wisely, nor yet modestly keep silence. Cum loquinesciat,
tacere non potest. In my Epistle to his Noddiship I object: First, that he
published certain chartels against his friends in Oxford. Next, that he was
the author of an infamous (...) against the Earl of Leicester. Thirdly, that
he made a libell entitled, A Confutation of pretended fears. Fourthly, that
he holp Cardinal Allen to make that railing discourse, which he directed to
the Nobility and people of England and Ireland. Lastly, I say, he made four
other books of like quality. Now observe, I pray you, what the wizard answers
to all this. For the first Fol. 2. b.
four, says he, I never heard any man of notice and judgment VVarneword
ascribe them to him before, and if I be not deceived, other particular authors
are known to have written them. He dare not deny them, being known to be his,
least his own friends should cry shame upon him; nor dare he confess them,
because such infamous writings have no grace among honest men. What does he
then? Forsooth he answers that which every man may take as he list. Afterward
he makes a face, as though he would deny the other four books to be his. But
in the end passes by them in silence.

Where I do signify, that the letters N. D. do stand for To. Parsons, and that
he was the author of the Wardword: he answers nothing, but in sad silence
passes by, only reporting my objections, and saying nothing unto them. But
where I am mistaken, he uses not to conceal my error. Answering then no
better, was he not a beetlehead block, think you, to request his reader not
to believe me in any thing? For why should not others believe me, as well as
himself, that dare not contradict that which I say? Such answerers with us are
hissed out of schools.

Where I say, that Thomas Harding obtained a bull from the Pope anno 1569. to
exercise Episcopal jurisdiction in England, to dispense with irregularities,
and to receive all Fol. 12. b.
that would be reconciled to the Pope: he answers, That it was never heard of
before, that D. Harding after his departure out of England to Louayne, in the
beginning of her Majesty's reign, came home to live in England again, or to
exercise Episcopal jurisdiction therein. As if he might not obtain a bull
from the Pope, without coming into England, and putting the same in execution.
Or as if he might not come into England, unless his coming were every where
noysed abroad. Or as if he might not come hither, unless he came. to live here
again. He answers further, That there were bishops here in England, and that
every ordinary priest has power to reconcile men to the Pope, and to dispense
with irregularities. But he knows the bishops in England were deposed, and
committed to prison, so that the Hope might well send some others over with
Episcopal jurisdiction, notwithstanding any thing they could do. Furthermore if
he were not ignorant of the cannon law, he might know, that neither priests,
nor bishops can without special faculty dispense with irregularities, and
reconcile such as the Pope condemns for heretics, as the canonists teach
him. 11. (...), 3. si quis damnatus. and extr. de sent. exccum illorum. And
speculator (...). 1.. de legato. and diverse other places, where they write of
cases reserved. But what a ridiculous fellow is this to deny, that Harding had
a bull, for the purposes above written, when the same is extant under the Popes
hand and seal, and follows in these words?

Noueritis quod anno, die, mense and pontificatu infrascriptis, in generali
congregatione etc. pro part reuerendorum Th. Harding, and N. S. and T. P.
Anglorum fuit porrectum memoriale and supplicatio, quae lecta fuerunt, etc.
Annis abhinc tribus, etc. Concessit Th. H. etc. Episcopalem potestatem, in foro
conscientiae absoluendi eos qui ad ecclesiae gremium reuertentur. Huic
potestati, quia multi non credunt, petimus vt in scriptum aliquod authenticum
redigatur. Ac etiaem vlterius monente nos temporis necessitate, humiliter
petimus, vt eisdem concedatur in causa irregularitatis dispensandi potestas,
exceptis ex homicidio voluntario prouenientibus, seu deductis in forum
contentiosum. Quibus auditis and intellectis praelibatus sanctissimus dominus
noster decreuit, quod praenominati absoluere possint in (...) conscienti.e
Anglos tantum, prout petitur, etiam ab irregulatitate incursa ratione haeresis,
and ab ea dependente, emergente, and annexa, dummodo absoluendi abstineant per
triennium a ministerio altaris. In quorum fidem and testimonium etc. anno 1567.
die Iouis 14. Augusti, etc. Afterward the Notaries subscription and form of
absolution is set down. Where was then Robert Parsons his honesty to shift off
things so notorious?

In my Preface to the reader, I say, that obstinate recusants are for the most
part reconciled to the Pope, and adhere to foreign enemies: and yet
notwithstanding do enjoy their lands and goods. And gladly would To. Parsons
answer somewhat. But neither can he deny, that they are reconciled (for then
the mass priests would not communicate with them) nor that they adhere to
foreign enemies (for then in vain should the Adelantado presume of their
help in his proclamation penned as it seems by English traitors) nor can he
deny, they enjoy lands and goods. For that is notorious. What then does he?
Forsooth he talks idly of the enjoying of my benefices, and of the
testimony of certain mass priests. Of the which two, the first is nothing to
the purpose. The second is leudly rejected without color, seeing every man's
confession is strong against himself, and these men's confessions being in
record, are not lightly to be refused. In the same place I say, that Parsons
defends public enemies and traitors, and seeks the disgrace of the country
and nation. To all which he answers nothing, but by telling a tale of
prosecuting Papists, which he terms Catholics. As if such may play the
traitors, and join with public enemies openly and lawfully.

The Papists being charged for mainteining the, words of Hostiensis and
Panormitane, that say, That the Pope is able to do almost all things, which
Christ can do, except sin: he thinks to shift off the matter by speaking
with Panormitan, Fol. 29 b.
That the Pope can do al things with the keye of discretion, that erreth not.
But this is nothing else, but to presume, that the Pope has discretion, and the
keys of the Church; and that in the determination of matters of faith he
cannot err: whereas all the world sees, that the Pope comes into the Church
not with keys, but with (...), and iron bars: and that he does not so much
use the keys, as swords and clubs; and that also without discretion or reason,
killing all that speak against his triple crown.

Where I say, that such English as are reconciled to the Pope, have renounced
their obedience to the Queen: he tells us of the subjects of the king of
Spain, France, Poland, Fol. 13.
and of the Emperor, that have not renounced their obedience to their Princes.
But his shift is most ridiculous. For the Pope was enemy to the Queen of
England, and not to them. But if at any time the Pope happen to excommunicate
any of these Princes; then is it clear, that such subjects as follow the Pope,
cannot by any means adhere to their lawful Princes. Unless Parsons can show,
how a man can please two contrary masters, and can himself serve both God and
the devil.

Fol. 28. and 29. he runs out into a large exposition of these words of
Hostiensis and Panormitan: Quod Papa potest quasi omniafacere quae Christus,
excepto peccato: but all to no purpose. For he should show, that these fellows
do not flatter the Pope, and not tell us a tale of their fooleries, which as
they are exorbitant, so are they unpleasant.

In the same place he says, it is no more adsurditie to say, That the Pope can
do almost all that Christ can, except sin: then if a man should say, That the
Viceroy of Naples can do all that the king of Spain can do in that kingdom,
except being free from treason. But first the words of Hostiensis and
Panormitan, importing that Christ can sin, are blasphemous; albeit they
meant, that except avoiding sin, the Pope can do all, that Christ can do.
Secondly, it is a simple shift to make the king of Spain like to Christ, and
the Viceroy of Naples like the Pope, or else to compare these two speeches
together. Finally, it is absurd to say, that the Uiceroy can do all things that
the king of Spain can. For he can neither move war, alienate the territory,
nor do infinite other matters else. Beside that, there is greater difference
betwixt Christ Jesus, that is God and man, then between man and man. Here
therefore Parsons talking of the Uiceroy of Naples plays the Uize, and
'sheweth that he has the Neapolitan scabbes in his brain.

Fol. 30. the canonists being charged for calling the Pope their Lord and God.
He answers, That he cannot find it. As if it were not to be found, because
his nodyship cannot find it. Or else, as if a Cardinals hat were not to be
found in Rome, because Parsons could not find it. Let him therefore look the
gloss in c. inter nonnullos. extr. Joan 22. de verb. signif. And it may be,
with the help of his spectacles and a draught of greek wine, he may find it.
Oh, may his brother say, that he could as easily find a Cardinals hat.

Of five places alleged by Sir Francis for proof of the flattery of Popish
parasites, he touches only two, being not able to justify either of them to
be (...) of flattery. Three places he passes over in silence; which it may
please him to answer in his next. One says, That no less honor is due to the
Pope then to Angels. Another, That the Emperors majesty is as much inferior
to the Pope, as a creature to God. The third, That the Pope is (...) secundae
intentionis, compounded of God and man. If then he mean to answer; let him
show, how these speeches are void either of flattery or blasphemy, if he
purpose to show himself void of dizardry.

Where I bring examples, and instances of notorious Fol. 37.
flattery out of canonists, he says, They are the same for the most part which
Sir Francis brought before, and are before answered: matters most false, and
poorly shifted off. For neither are they the same, nor has he answered any
thing unto them. Nay of five that Sir Francis brought, he answers only two,
and them very leudly, loosely and insufficiently; and of a doozen brought by me
touches scarce two. Would not he then be turned back with a doozen stripes,
to turn over these doozen places? And would he not be discarded for a knauish
answerer, that says nothing to that, which I say of our deliverance by the
Queen (...) the captivity of the Pope, as the Israelites were delinered from
the ca^ptiuitie of Iabin, and the Cananites by Deborah?

That which I say of the flattery of Giffard and Parsons concerning their
flattering of the king of Spain, he slippeth over with a few words concerning
the largeness of the Indiaes. But what makes that for the Kings greatness,
unless he held that country with more assurance and better title? Concerning
the flattery of (...), Bellarmine and others, which I object in the 10. page of
my Reply, he says nothing. No ape could better skip over the chain, then
Parsons skippeth over all our objections.

For maintenance of the rebellious attempts of the leaguers in France, and
other popish disloyalties against Princes, he tells us, 2. encon. c. 13. that
when the Apostles preached against the Jewish magistrates commandment, it
seemed to the Jews disloyalty, but was not. But this is a most poor shift.
For the Papists have not only preached against the Princes commandment, but
also have murored them, and prosecuted them with arms: which the Apostles
never did, or thought lawful. Was not this Iebusite therefore a false Apostle,
to pretend the Apostles examples for maintenance of rebels and traitors?

Fol. 104. he shifteth off this argument, The Pope is to be obeyed as Christ,
therefore if he command blasphemies: by saying, that it follows not, and
that this folly is no less ridiculous, then if one should say, The Neapolitans
profess obedience unto their Viceroy, as to the King of Spain, crgo he is to
be obeyed if he command treasons against the King. But his answer is so
learned and wise, that Parsons for the same does deserve to be Uizeroy, or
rather a Uize in the kingdom of fools. For first no man will affirm, that the
Uiceroy of Naples cannot err. But that is denied in Christ's Uiceroy the Pope.
The case therefore is unlike. Furthermore, Papists will obey the Pope, if he
command heresy or blasphemy, because they take his judgment to be
infallible, albeit the Neapolitans will not follow their Uiceroy in his
rebellions. Likewise does he absurdly shift off the objection concerning the
absolute obedience required of Christians by Boniface the 8. He says also,
that it stands with Gods providence to preserve the Church from error. As if
the Pope were the Church, and not rather Antichrist, and the enemy of Christ
and his Church: or as if the church could not stand if the Pope were dead, and
Parsons hanged by him to bear him company, and to lead him through purgatory,
being not able to walk of himself, being troubled with the gout.

Fol. 113. 2. encont. c. 14. he says, That Parry in his letter to Gregory the
thirteenth, discovered no intention at all of any particular enterprise he had
in hand: and thereby would shift off our objection concerning the intelligence
the Pope had of his purpose to kill the Queen. But his shift is very simple.
For albeit he said nothing, yet the letters of credit included from some great
man, to who^ he imparted the secret, disclosed all. Now it is evident by
Cardinal Comoes letter, that the Pope received Parries letter together with
the letters of credit included. La santita di N. S. (says Cardinal Como)
havedute le lettere di V. S. con la feed inclusa. By this then it appears,
that the Pope granting a plenary indulgence to a murderer, that went to kill an
innocent Queen, was also a most execrable murderer, and no shepherd: a limb
of Satan that was a murderer from the beginning, and not the head of the Church;
a wolf, and no Christian Bishop. Yea but (says Parsons) this indulgence took
effect, if Parry were contrite and confessed of his sins. As if these wicked
murderers did not account it an act meritorious to kill a Prince excommunicated
by the Pope. So it appears, that in this respect rather he obtained this
indulgence. Nay if Chapter P. say true, Robert Parsons was also acquainted with
Parries particular treason, so that this will not only remain as a perpetual
blot of indulgences, but also of the (...) treachery both of the Pope and of his
bastardly proctor that set on this cutthrote to murder an innocent Lady.

Does it not then plainly appear, howsoever closely Parsons would seem to
carry matters, that he does confess more in shifting and concealing, then he
does deny disputing? Ita opertus, ac tectus incedis, (says Hierom to one,
epist. 6.) vt plus confitearis tacendo, quam renuas disputando. This we may
truly say of Parsons, that his shifts and answers which he brings to cover
the wounds of his cause, do make the matter far more suspicious then before.
What then are we to think of such a shifting and iugling fellow? Will you hear
Parsons give sentence in his own cause? If he do, I hope you will say, we do
produce no witness, that will deal partially in favor of our cause. But he in
his 2. encon. c. 9. fol. 62. says, that he which uses a trick of legierdemain
but once of known and set malice to deceive, is never to be trusted again.
What then remains now, but that such a shifting and treacherous companion be
rather trussed then trusted, haltred then harbored, baffulled then believed?

CHAP. XIII. Parsons his patcherie in begging things in controversy discovered.
THe very name of an adversary, and often mention of controversies, if nothing
else, me thinks, might have moved Robert Parsons to look better to his
proofs, and to have presumed less of his begging. For albeit he be of the
Ignatian sect, and by profession a mendicant friar: yet has he no reason to
beg of his (...), nor to take as granted, things that hang in controversy. Nor
have we cause to maintain of alms such vagarant sturdy roging beggars, as yt
laws judge worthy of hanging. It may be he will stand upon terms, and swear
like a hackster, that he is no beggar, Testified by the secular priests in
diverse of their treatisea.
bestowing many thousands of crowns upon spies and cutthrotes. But the truth
will appear by the sequel of his doings.

Fol. 1. b. he accuses me of deportment against all kind of Catholic men,
though never so learned, virtuous, worshipful or honorable. But he should have
proved himself and his traitorous consorts, which are ye men that I do mean,
to be both Catholics, and learned, virtuous, worshipful and honorable. We of
the plainer and simpler sort could yet never learn that it was a thing either
honorable or commendable to betray his prince or country, or to take part with
Italians or Spaniards against his own nation.

Fol. 7. talking of priests put to death in England, he calls them and others
servants of Christ, and says, they suffered for ancient religion. But we
looked for proofs, and not for bare and beggarly affirmations. For the
servants of Christ came never to depose Princes from their thrones. Nay our
Savior Christ says plainly, that his kingdom is not of this world. But these
Massepriests, as appears by records, and by their confessions, and the Popes
faculties granted to them, came for that purpose. Secondly, we have proved in
our challenge, that their religion, as it differs from the faith which we
profess in England, is neither Catholic nor ancient. Lastly, we have there
also declared them to be culpable of treason, and to have died for that, and
not for their religion, though otherwise very louzy and beggarly vellacos, and
as beggarly defended by this begging and (...) companion.

In the same leaf also he affirms, that Christ is the Mass Priests captain
and master, and that he (...) them on his honor and power, that no one hair
of their head shall perish In the end he doubts not to call the^ martyrs. But
to prove his matters, he alleges neither testimony of scripture, nor sentence
of fathers. Nay where ye (...) Church teaches, that no man can be certain of
his salvation without special revelation; yet this disciple of Antichrist
affirms, that Christ upon his honor has assured Campian, Ballard, Babington,
(and I think Lopez too) that they shall not perish. For of these I think he
speaks. To show them to be no martyrs, I have alleged diverse reasons. Reason
then would, that if he would have won credit, he should have either answered
our reasons, or proved his own cause by argument.

In his observations upon my Preface, and in diverse places of his book, he
gives the name of Catholics to papists. And yet he knows that this is a
maine controversy betwixt us. What punishment then does he deserve, that
wittingly and wilfully will beg, or rather steal that which belongs not unto
him?

Fol. 14. most impudently he gives the title of the Catholic Christian
church, and the universal body of Christ's commonwealth unto papists, that are
neither the whole church, nor part of the Church. Unto us he gives the title
of Protestants, Puritanes, and Lutherans: which we renounce, professing only
the faith of Christ Jesus. He does also match us with Arrians, and other
sects, which we detest. But these are points in controversy to be proved.

Fol. 17. he says, that the Council of Trent was gathered by like authority,
as that of Chalcedon was. A matter utterly denied by us, and not any way proved
by him. Nay it is most absurd to compare that reverend synod assembled and
moderated by the Emperors authority, and proceeding according to scriptures, to
a conuenticle of slaves sworn to Antichrist, and assembled by his writ, and
doing all according to his pleasure.

Fol. 20. a. he says, It cannot be proved that any one Pope impugned his
predecessor in matters of faith. As if al our pleading were not that the later
Popes do impugn and overthrow the faith of the first bishops of Rome.
Themselves also deny not, but that Agatho condemned his predecessor Honorius
for a Monothelite. In the same place also affirming, that all the Popes and
Bishops of Rome from John the first to Leo the tenth, held one faith: he says,
that this demonstration is as clear, as that three and four make seven. But
this seven and seven year he shall never prove that, which with a light fingar
he takes as granted, and is clearly false. For the instruction given to the
Armenians in the synod of Florence, and the decrees of the Conuenticle of
Constance were never holden of Popes before them. Nor did former Popes believe
the doctrine of the Conuenticle of Trent.

Fol. 77. b. he takes as granted, that a hundred have been put to death for
being priests, and for being ordained to that function beyond the seas, and for
defending the faith belonging to that function: and that great numbers are
daily apprehended, arraigned and condemned for standing in their fathers faith,
and resisting novelties. Both which are notorious untruths. For neither in the
arraignement of priests or others, is any question made of faith: nor is that
louzy patched religion that Papists hold over and above our faith, the faith of
the Apostles or Fathers: nor are priests executed simply for being priests, but
because they come from foreign enemies, and are combined with them: which
always has been accounted treason.

Fol. 80. he talks idly of sending money out of England for defense of
heresy: for he beggeth of us that which he shall never obtain, that popery is
religion, and true religion heresy, and that we maintain heresy.

Fol. 104. he says, Our Belief is different from the rule of faith, received
before throughout Christendom, and that our religion has no ecclesiastical
authority for her establishment, beside the parliament: matters taken up upon
credit by this bankerout friar, that shall never be able to prove the least
part of them. For we make no question, but to prove against him that our faith
is Apostolical and Catholic, and the popish faith not, and that it has been
(...) not like the louzy superstition of Papists, by lies, dreams, legends,
and the Popes decretals, but by the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets.

What alms then does this impudent begging friar deserve? forsooth a motley
coat with four elbowes, and a square motly bonet in stead of a cardinals hat.
For nothing is more odious nor foolish, then that any under fair shows and
good terms should cover evil deeds, Asserentes Antichristum (as Cyprian
says) sub vocabulo Christ's: that is, striving De simplic. praefat.
for Antichrist under the name of Christ. In school, Geometricians desire
their scholars to grant them certain plain propositions, that from them they
may proceed to demonstration of further matters. But to take as granted,
matters false, and to beg at the hands of adversaries things plainly denied,
is rather a practice of fools then of schools.

CHAP. XIIII. Parsons his pride, both in praising of himself, and threatening
and despising others, is noted.
NOt he that praises himself, says the Apostle 2. Cor. 10. but he whom the
Lord praises, is allowed. How happens it then, that Parsons is so busy upon
every occasion to praise himself? Are his actions so memorable, and worthy to
be praised? Certes no. For nothing can be devised more odious, the man
employing himself wholly either in treacherous packing against his country, or
lewd libelling and railing against honest men. Further, he shows exceeding
contempt in speaking of others. In ore (...) virga superbiae, says Solomon: In
the mouth of a fool is the rod of pride. Proverb. 14.
What then shall we think of his lewd and presumptuous speeches? Shall we
suppose that any is disgraced by them? We should then assuredly greatly wrong
them. Falsae sunt, diffluxeru^t, somno similes extiterunt impioru^iactationes.
The vants of wicked men are false, and vanish away being like to sleep, as
says Gregory Nazianzene orat. 2. in Iulianum. And yet it shall not be amiss to
note this Thrasonical fellows vain, proud, and contemptuous speeches.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he calls himself a Catholic man, and yet is
he nothing but a barking curre. Again, he says he wrote a temperate Wardword:
preventing his neighbors, that should have praised him: and calling his bedlem
fits temperate words. Afterward praising his own doings, he says, the
Wardword seemed to touch the matter too quick. And yet all indifferent readers
will confess, that it is a dull and dead piece of work, and like the
droppings of a stond of old ale, wherein he shows that he and his consorts
are combined with public enemies: a matter (...) that may touch him and his
consorts. But the same no way can hurt us.

He vanteth, that he ended the whole answer (to that which was said against his
Wardword) in few months. And yet like a bankerout writer, he has only sent
us, and that after long expectation, a simple piece of an answer unto two
encounters only, and so euilfauouredly peeced together, that his friends have
need of a packthreed wit, to make matters to hang together.

Speaking of us, he says, we handle matters of religion confusedly, and with
little order, sincerity or truth. But Athanasius apol. 2. says, That the law
of God permits not an enemy to be either judge or witness. Lex Dei inimicum
neque iudicem, neque testem esse vult. Furthermore, how can he without
blushing, talk of religion, and order, and truth, that has neither dram of
religion, nor grain of truth, nor uses any sincerity or good course in his
writing?

In his answer to my (...), he says, That albeit I challenge like a giant, yet
when I come to gripes, I show my self one of the poorest and weakest worms,
that ever lightly has come to combat in these affairs. And afterward he
threatens, that I shall be soundly beaten. But if he be the giant, and I so
weak a creature as he gives out, why does he encounter none of my books
written against Bellarmine? Why does he not set forth some what in Latin? Why
does he give his railing libels written in English to be turned into latin by
others? As for mine own doings, I admire them not. I refer the^ to other
indifferent men's censures. I challenge none but such as Parsons and his paltry
mates that have challenged us before. But yet before he and I part, I doubt not
but he shall have small cause to triumph for his beating of me. Now he is upon
his own dunghill, and may crow at his pleasure.

Speaking of Creswel fol. 3. b. he gives out, that he will ouermatch me, and
crush me. And yet I hear of no great matter come from this crusher of men, and
ouermatcher of women rather then men, unless it be the libell of Andreas
Philopater turned into Latin, or some such like pamphlet. If he be so heavy as
Parsons makes him, we shall hear of him percase hereafter. In the mean while
let this heavy fellow take heed, that he sway not in a halter: and let Parsons
of all men beware of him, that he be not crushed himself by him, being puffed
up with vanity, and blown up like an empty bladder, and rotten with cankers,
and easily broken and crushed together.

In his observations upon Sir Francis Hastings his Epistle, fol. 10. b. he
vanteth of his heroical acts and exploits against him, as if his reputation
were not only crased and shaken, but also quite overthrown, and that by his
terrible Warneword. Afterward he talks vainly, as if he had not only
battered and beaten, but also broken and shiuered his credit. But it seems the
man when he uttered these great words had swallowed too much Greek wine, and
was in some distemper. His friends do wish, that he had as much skill in the
Greek tongue, as he has delight in Greek and Spanish wine, not doubting but
he would then speak good Greek. But now (God wot) his wits are wind-shaken
with the fume of wine, and his brain discrasied with conceits of his Iaponian
kingdom. As for his battering, beating, breaking and shiuering, we do not much
fear, seeing his shins are shiuered with rottenness, and his wits broken with
idle conceits. Only let him take heed, that he come not forth with his wooden
dagger, least it be beaten about his buzzardlike coxcombe.

In the same observations, fol. 6. he will not have any man judge of his
matters, but her Majesty's most honorable Counsel, to whom he remitteth
himself. But if he come into England, he must have other judges: and if he
will write, he must submit himself to every readers censure. As for the Lords
of the Counsel, they are no favorable judges to traitors, that seek to bring
in foreign enemies, nor are they at leisure, to read such paltry and confused
pamphlets.

In the end of his answer to my Epistle he talks of his exceeding gain both
in merit with God, and credit with all good men: which shows, that he wants
not only modesty, but common reason. For if he had but had one grain (...)
either, he would not have talked thus vainly, being for his treasons,
Atheismes, and villainies hateful to God and man: nay hateful to his own
consorts.

Fol. 20. a. he threatens to shake me out of my clouts. But let him leave of
crowing before the victory, if he will not be condemned for a doctor of
clouts. For so many holes I find in his Warneword, that all his clouts will not
serve to mend them. No not if he should piece them with the skarlet he sent
for, as it (...), to make himself Cardinals robes.

In the same leaf, he talks of beating the sturdy minister back and side,
and threatens to give him wide blows. But all these threats are nothing, but
as if an idiot should beat the wind with his wooden dagger. As yet he has not
tried my strength. But we have seen the uttermost that this sturdy bragging
Friar can do, and therefore referring all to indifferent judges, I will, to
help him forth in his imagined triumph, wish him for a crown of Laurel, a
garland of goose feathers, pointed with horseshooe nails, in token of his
noble parentage.

Fol. 26. he vanteth, That he will bring every thing to method, and
perspicuous order: being the most disorderly writer, false packer, dark and
cloudy clouter, that ever took pen in hand for the defense of the Prince of
darkness and his darling the Pope.

Fol. 41. he braggeth of D. Gifford, and his doughtie deeds, that he will do:
and although there has been great quarrels betwixt them, yet is he there
content to call him his friend. But neither do we regard their threats, nor
Lib. 2. pro. Athanasio.
their combination. For as Lucifer says of one, He had not bin so well beloved
of Parsons, unless he had bin like to him in wicked qualities: Neque enim illi
amantissimus, nisi quia sit sceleratus. Both have sought the life of the Prince
by treason, both are combined with foreign enemies. Yet of the two Parsons is
much the worse.

In the 3. chap. of his 2. enconter, he braggeth of great numbers of Bishops,
Abbots, Doctors, and Noblemen, in the conue^ticle of Constance. But he forgot
to add the numbers of whores, fiddlers, barbers, and such baggages, as are
reckoned up and numbered among the ornaments of that assembly, as we may read
in the additions to Vrspergensis.

In the same enconter c. 4. he talks of his challenges of disputation,
refusing altogether to procure us liberty to dispute in Spain and France. But
if any disputation be performed, I assure my self, Parsons will be none of the
party, being ignorant of tongues, slow of capacity, and shallow in all
learning. I will therefore say to him, as Optatus lib. 2. contr. Parmen.
against the Donatists. Fecit vos superbos impietas vestra, sed accusat vos de
coelo prospiciens iustitia. Your impiety makes you proud, but justice from
heaven accuses you. And so for his pride I give Parsons a crown of pecockes
feathers, and leave him to be enstalled kard-foole at Tyburne.

CHAP. XV. Of the flattering and lying, as well of Parsons, as other Papists.
STrange it is, that Parsons and his mates should accuse others, either for
flattering, or else for lying, whereas we are clear of these faults, and they
most guilty. But what will not impudency attempt, if words may be taken for
payment? Frons meretricis facta est illis. They have hardened Ierem. 3.
their foreheads like a whore, and will not blush.

Robert Parsons takes up Sir Francis, as he says, fol. 23. for a false and
flattering Prophet, by these words of Isay 3. My people, they that say thou art
blessed, are those that deceive thee. But first, the Prophet talks of
deceiving, and not of flattering. Look then how far deceit differs from
flattery, so far shot Parsons wide from the scope of the Prophet. Secondly,
the words of the Prophet do rather touch the Sodomiticall priests, and that
filthy generation, then us. For he speaks in that place of such, as laid open
their sins, as did the people of Sodom: Qui peccatum suum quasi Sodoma
praedicauerunt. Which is the case of the Romanists. For albeit the whole world
cries shame upon them for their corruptions in doctrine and abominations in
living; yet with them all Sodomiticall filthiness is holiness, and all truth
heresy, and many corrupt points of doctrine, religion. Thirdly, it is no
flattery for Christians to commend religion, or good subjects to like well of
good government. Which being the case of Sir Francis, how is he accused of
flattery? Finally, this patch has forgotten his Thomas Aquinas, who 2. 2. q.
115. art. 1. does define flattery to be immoderat praise for hope of (...).
Why then does not the wizard convince Sir Francis, and show, that for gain he
has falsely and immoderatly praised the Queen, or (...) others, as he and his
consorts use to commend and (...) the Pope, and such as they like, and take to
be of their faction?

Likewise fol. 35. he charge me to be a famous flatterer. But his argument to
(...) it does excuse me. For it is no flattery, to report what Ozorius and
(...) has said of the Queen. Neither did they say more then is true, or
speak for hope of reward. As for my self, so far am I from hope of
receiving of a good fee, (albeit Parsons (...) so much unto me) that I look
for nothing but hatred, loss, and persecution for defense of truth. Parsons
himself may look for a Cardinals hat, and Bellarmine and Baronius have gotten
Cardinals hats for lying. But for us here be no such rewards proposed. Unless
therefore he bring better proofs, and can show, that we have praised the Queen
above her desert, and that for hope of gain, his friends will confess, that he
might have done better to have chosen some fitter (...), then this false
accusation of flattery.

But the (...) for hope of gain and preferment have both immoderatly and (...)
set out the praises of the Pope and his adherentes, as infinite particulars do
show. First some call the Pope their Lord and God, as the gloss upon the chap.
Cum inter nonnulos. Extr. Joan 22. de verb. signif. cred (...) Dominum (...)
nostrum Papa^ conditorem dictae decretalis (says the gloss) and (...), non
potuisse statuere, prout statuit, haereticum (...).

Pope Nicholas c. satis. did. 96. says, That the Emperor Constantine called
the Pope God. Augustine Steuchus, in (...) de donat. Constable. lib. 2. c. 67.
likewise allows well the name of God given to the Pope. Audis summum
pontificem (says he) a Constantino 'Deum appellatum, habitum pro Deo: that is,
Thou may hear the Pope called of Constantine God, accounted a God.

Baldus in l. fin. Cod. sent. rescind. and Decius. in c. 1. de constitut. and
Card. Paris. Cons. 5. nu. 75. say, The Pope is a God in earth. That is also the
saying of Felin, in c. ego N. in 1. col. in text. ibi canonice. de iureiurand.
Others teach, That the Pope is Gods Vicegerent in earth, c. 1. 2. (...) 3. de
transl. (...). de re iudicat. c. ad apostolicae. and Clem. 1. and ibi Card.

Papa (says the Gloss) in (...). Clem. id est, admirabilis, and dicitur a
Pape, quod est interiectio admirantis, and vere admirabilis. So it appears he
deriueth the Popes title of wonderment.

Others call the Pope Christ's Vicar, as if Christ had left him to rule the
Church in his stead. Bonauenture in (...) calls the Pope the only spouse of
the Church, and Christ's vicar general.

Panorinitan in c. licet. and c. venerabilem de electione, (says) That Christ
and the Pope have but one consistory, and that the Pope can do, as it were,
whatsoever Christ can do, except sin. Likewise holds, (...) c. quanto. de
translat. episcop. Papa and Christus (say they) (...) vnum consistorium, it a
quod, excepto peccato, potest Papa quasiomnia facere, quae potest (...). Nay
Panormitan in the chap. venerabilem, without qualification says, Quod possit
facere quicquid Deus potest. And he alleges this for a reason: alias Christus
non fuit diligens paterfamilias, si non dimisisset in terra aliquem loco sui.

Gomesius writing upon the rules of the Popes Chancery, says, That the Pope is
a certain divine power, and shows himself, as a visible God. Papa est
quoddam numen, and quasi visibilem quendam Deum praese ferens.

Stapleton in his dedicatory Epistle to Gregory the thirteenth, before his
Doctrinal principles, does adore him and call him Supremum numen in terris:
that is, His sovereign God upon the earth. Hoping percase that his supreme God
would look down upon a terrestrial base creature, and bestow upon him some
great preferment.

Bellarmine does bestow Christ's titles upon the Pope, calling In praef. in lib.
de Pon. Romans
him the corner stone of the church, and a stone most precious and approved. In
his second book De Pontif. Romans he titleth him the foundation, the head and
spouse of the church.

Caesar Baronius his huge volumes contain most huge and many flatteries of the
Popes of Rome, the man contrary to all law of story setting forth their
praises, and concealing their errors and faults. It would require a great
volume to comprehend all, and where so many examples are contained, I should
diminish his fault if I should set down but few.

Simon Begnius a great doer in the conuenticle of Lateran directing his speech
to Leo the tenth: Ecce (says he) venit Leo de tribu Judah. And again, Te Leo
heatissime saluatorem (...). He calls Pope Leo a lion of the tribe of Judah,
and his savior.

Certain rimes in the Gloss upon the proeme of the Clementines, call him the
wonderment of the world. Papa stupor mundi. And again say, that he is neither
God nor man, but as it were, neuter between both. Nec Deus es, nec homo, quasi
neuter es inter vtrumque.

Innocentius the third, in cap. solitae. de (...). and obed. says, the Pope as
far excels the Emperor, as the Sun excels the Moon. That is, as the
Gloss does there calculate seventy seven times. He compares also the Pope
to the soul, and the Emperor to the body.

Tantu^ sacerdos praestat regi, quantu^ homo praestat bestiae. Quantum Deus
praestat sacerdoti, tantu^ sacerdos praestat regi. Qui rege^ anteponit
sacerdoti, is anteponit creaturam creatori, says Stanislaus Orichouius in
Chimaera. That is, A priest does so much excel a king, as a man does excel a
beast. As much as God is better then a priest, so much is a priest better then
a king. He that prefers a king before a priest, does prefer a creature
before his creator.

Ioannes de (...) calls the Pope, King of kings, In sum. de eccles. lib. 2.
c. 26
and Lord of lords. And Herueus will have him to be a king.

The gloss and Canonists in c. ad apostolicae de sent. and re iudicat. in 6.
hold, That the Pope has power to depose princes, and Emperors, and this is
now a common conclusion of the Iebusites.

Clement the fifth, in the chapter Romani Clement. de iureiurando, does
determine, That the Emperor swears (...) to the Pope.

Boniface the eight, affirms, That it is a matter of salvation for all men to
subject themselves to the Pope. c. vnam sanct. ext. de mayor. and obed. The
Canonists teach, That the Pope is not tied to law. in c. proposuit. de concess.
praebendae.

Baldus in c. 1. in vlt. col. de confess. affirms, That the Pope by reason of
his authority is doctor of both the laws. And commonly his flatterers
affirm, That he has al laws within the chest of his breast.

Ioannes Andreas and Panormitane in cap. per venerabilem. Qui filij sint legit.
say, that the Pope has power to dispense in marriages within the degrees
prohibited by Gods law.

Petrus Ancharanus Cons. 373. says, That the Pope has power to license the
nephew to mary his uncles wife.

Panormitan in c. fin. de diuort. writes, that the Pope for a special great
cause may dispense against the new Testament.

Papa potest permittere vsuras populis and Iudaeis, and eas tolerare: that is,
The Pope has power to permit and tolerate usury to Jews and other people, as
says Alexander de Imola in Consil. 1. part. 2. and Card. in Clem. 1.. fin. 27.
quest. de vsuris. And experience shows, that he permits usury to the Jews
of Rome: and Paul the fourth, and Pius the fourth, set up public banks of
usury called falsely monti di pieta. The Popes they are also made to believe,
that they may permit public stews in Rome; and of that permission they make
no small revenue.

Likewise it is the custom of papists to flatter Princes, hoping thereby to
allure them to defend their sect. Some they call most Christian, some
Catholic, some great Dukes. Baronius in his Epistle dedicatory before his
third tome of Annals, calls King Philip the second of Spain, regum maximum,
the (...) of kings, and Christianorum regum maximum decus and ornamentum. The
glory and ornament of Christian Kings. He says also, that greater things may
be spoken of him, then Xenophon wrote of Cyrus, and seems to compare him, or
prefer him before Constantine. Likewise does he grossly flatter the French
king in his Preface before his ninth tome of Annals.

Thomas Stapleton has given immoderate praises to Thomas Becket, and Thomas
More, perhaps for name sake rather then for virtue.

Sanders, Rishton and Bozius, albeit they profess to write histories, yet do
they intend nothing more then to advance their own favorers, and to disgrace
their adversaries.

This is also a great part of the argument of their lying legends, to set out
the praises of Monks, Friars and such like superstitious Papists.

Likewise without cause does he accuse us for lying. M. Fox understanding his
error concerning the execution of Marbecke, did correct the same. Yet when he
said Marbecke was burned at Windsor, he lied not, speaking that which was to
him reported, and like to be true, considering that the party was condemned.

Neither does M. Fox set down Wickleffe or others in the Calendar, to the
intent to make them martyrs (for that passed his reach) but to declare the time
of their death or sufferings.

Parsons does further threaten, to show out of M. Fox, and others of our
writers, infinite doctrinall lies. But he threatens always more then he can
perform. In his second encounter, chapter 2. where he gives out these brags,
himself lies notoriously. For most false it is, that either the rebels in
king Richard the second his days, or else the friars, whom Thomas Walsingham
called liars, were Wickleffes scholars: albeit this shameless friar affirms
both. For Ball a Massepriest was a principal ringleader of the rebels: and
the friars were murderers, sodomites and traitors, as the rebels said of them.
Let us (said the rebels) destroy these murderers, and burn these sodomites,
and hang up these traitors of the King and Realm. And this they said of the
friars. But Wickleffe always (...) and spoke both against such abominations,
and such rebellions.

It is a common trick also of Papists, to prove their doctrine with lies and
fables. To prove transsubstantiation, they make a (...) to speak these words,
Been de me scripsisti Thoma, Thou have written well of me Thomas, when shall I be
able to requite you for your pains?

To prove the real presence, they make tales of blood appearing in the
sacrament, and sometimes they say Christ appeared like a little child: which are
toys to mock children withal.

To prove purgatory, they tell us tales of S. Patrickes purgatory, of souls
complaining and crying for more masses, of apparitions of Angels, devils and
souls. The same lies they abuse also to prove prayer for the dead.

For the justification of their doctrine concerning the worship of saints and
their images, they tell lies of images moving, talking, working, walking, and
of wonderful apparitions and miracles done by them. Our Ladies image is said
to speak to Hiaciullyus. Goodrike saw a boy come out of a crucifixes mouth, as
Matthew Paris relates.

Finally, the Popes and their agents, without lies and notorious forgeries
cannot maintain their cause: as by infinite lies of Bellarmine, Baronius,
Parsons, yea and of the Popes themselves I have justified. Does (...) not then
appear, In the Challenge.
that in lying they have set up their rest? And will not the world see the
abominations of popery, that cannot be maintained but by lying, forgery and
force? God grant that truth may once appear, and open the eyes of all
Christians, that they may see that which now lies hidden, and come to the
perfect knowledge of truth.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER, CONCERNING FOUR OTHER INFAMOVS Libels lately
diuulged and sent into England by Parsons, Kellison and Walpoole.
BEfore the former answer could be finished and published, there came to my
hands four other books, all penned by our malicious adversaries, and sent
over from Rome and other places into England, to disturne simple people from
the love of the truth: of which I have thought good (most Christian Reader)
here at the end of this work briefly to advertise thee. I hope also, that the
same advertisement will serve for present satisfaction to those which percase
expect a speedy answer to such hasty calumniations, and most wicked libels.

The first is set out under the name of T. F. alias Thomas Fitzherbert, a man
evil reported of by his own consorts; and therefore no marvel if hateful to
all men well affected to their prince and country. Long he has been a spy,
and pensioner of the king of Spain. But now perceiving belike that the trade
is become odious, and grows out of request, he is turned Mass priest, and
set to sing for the souls of his friends, after three farthings a Mass. And
least he might forget his old art of spiery, he is now set to spy for his holy
father, if by any good adventure he can see Christ's true body lurking under the
accidents of the Masse-cake, his blood by a necessary concomitance, as they
say, being not far off. This fellow as a Mass Priest was thought a fit
person to speak for the Mass, and as a spy and renegate English man to
speak shame of his country, and to defend traitors. And yet the poor man is
as fit to dispute of the massing religion and popish subtilties, as an ass to
play an antheme upon a pairs of organs. The true author of the book, as his
style declares, and the dealers in the edition must needs witness, is Robert
Parsons, an old hackster in (...) quarrels, and a great dealer in matter of
conversion of England, and one that uses at his pleasure to borrow other men's
names, now calling himself Captain Cowbucke, now Dolman, now John Houlet, now
N. D. or Noddy, now T. F. or Tom Fop, now Robert Parsons. Under the name of
Dolman he set out his traitorous and seditious book of succession, in disgrace
of the Kings title. Under the name of John Houlet he published certain idle
reasons of refusal: himself never refusing to attempt any mischief against
the State. Under the title of N. D. he set out his VVardword and VVarneword,
stigmatizing his manship with the perpetual note of a Noddy, implied by those
two letters N. D. And this course he took in T. F. his Apology.

The second is entitled A treatise of three conuersions of England: and was set
out by Robert Parsons also under the old stamp of N. D. whose signification
every child now knows to be Noddy. But why he should write of the conversion
of his country to religion, we can see no reason, seeing we have known him
always more studious of the subversion, then of the conversion of England, and
his consorts the Mass priests do testify that he is a Machiauelian packing
fellow, void of religion and honesty. The turnings of the Mass, or turning of
iackets, had been a more fit subject for him to handle, seeing he turns and
skippeth so often about the altar, like an ape dancing about a maypole, and has
turned his coat so often from English to Romish, from Scottish to Spanish,
from all to French, that some of his friends fear, unless he turn Cardinal,
that he will turn Turk.

The third is called A Survey of the new religion: and was devised by a
renegued fugitive Englishman, who has surueyed diverse other countries, and yet
never found any settlement in his brain or habitation. Like Caine he has bin
long a vagrant fugitive fellow: Vagus and profugus in (...): and seeks, if
not to kill, yet to (...) his countriment and friends, imputing unto them most
horrible opinions and crimes. It rests then, that we set upon him a mark as
upon Caine, that every man may know him for a suppost of Satan: although herein
we need not much to (...), seeing the first letter of Kellisons name, who
fathereth this monstrous (...), is K. and the man is noted among his companions
for a great quareller about his commons. The poor fellow is but a kettle
doctor, or rather a Tinker of broken school distinctions, and a professor
rather then a performer of any (...) learning. The fellow talks idly of new
religion, but neither does he know what is new, nor what is old, nor what
belongs to religion, that takes popery for religion, and esteems the mass
and decretaliue doctrine, which this Church of England refuses, to be
ancient: and the apostolic faith which we profess, to be new.

The fourth is termed A brief and clear confutation of a new, vain, and
vanting challenge: and is directed against a treatise set out some two or three
years agone by me; wherein is proved, that the Mass Priests and their
adherents are neither Catholics nor good Christians. But so learnedly and
wisely has the author of this braggard (...) handled the matter, that his good
friends are sorry to see so worthy a work misnamed. For if he had done me right
he should have called his pamphlet A confirmation of my challenge, for so in
truth it is, the author answering nothing to the purpose, and rather by silence
consenting, then by good answering contradicting our arguments. The most of his
discourse stands upon bitter railing, vain talking, and childish (...) about
serious matters. If any man doubted whether popery were heresy before, I doubt
not but that this weak discourse, that yields no satisfaction to any
indifferent Reader may resolve him. The author of this devise, as we are
credibly informed, is VValpoole, the ruler of the kitchen or porredge pot of
the college of young English popish traitors in Rome. In Italian they call him
Padre ministro, or padre de minestra, or Lord chief steward of the scholars
porredge. The same man is that Walpoole that gave poison to Squire, and
corrupted him by promises of great rewards, both in this life and the life to
come, if he would undertake to empoyson Queen Elizabeth, and the late Earl of
Essex: and having gained a promise at his hands, swore him upon the sacrament
to perform the same. The fellow is recorded in public act books for these
infamous (...), and known to be a notorious traitor and an atheist. We are not
therefore much to marvel, if this wicked Iebusites libel be full of bitterness,
atheism and poison, proceeding from so impious an atheist, and so cunning a
master in the art of empoisoning. If any thing wanted in Walpool, whose wits
are gross and muddy, like a standing poole or sink of villainy: yet was the
same bountifully supplied by Robert Parsons the Rector of the quire of Romish
conspirators. You may then imagine what a load of leasings, calumniations and
fooleries such two coach horses were able to draw out of their miry inventions.
Much are the simple papists to be pitied, that liste^ to such wicked traitors,
and suffer themselves to be abused by such notorious and infamous impostors.

Unto all these libels there are several answers in making. If they be not
presently answered, marvel not. They are of too large a block to be read over
hastily. My countrymen think, if the whole impressions of these four books
might be had, that they would well serve to paue Shaftsbury causy. There would
only be this difference, that for cobble stones and rough slates, we should
have cobbled books and rough hewne libels, as fit to be trodden upon as read
over. Others think, because they are in form octagonall, and for the most part
as thick as long made like brick-bats, that they would finely serve, seeing the
holy father is said to be the foundation of the Pope-holy church, to lay upon
him, for the rearing up of the walls of some Romish synagogue: and so it would
be, like foundation, like walls. As soon as such huge and thick volumes may be
run over, they shall God willing receive an answer (...) such indiabolated
authors, and such wicked and railing stuff,

In the mean while receive this censure of them al. First they are such as
need no long coargutio^. It is a sufficient course of conviction of them to
declare their perfidious falsehood. So writes Hierome in an epistle to Marcella
of like stuff. Haec sunt, quae coargutione non indigent: perfidiam eorum
exposuisse, superasse est. Big they look, if we respect the bulk: but nothing
is more frivolous, if we respect the matter. Out of great heaps of chafe,
there is no corn to be gathered: neither can we expect better substance out of
these fardles of wast paper, which like chafe may be blown away with any
little blast of reason and discussion.

All of them are of like argument, and for the most part repeat the same
things. Parsons he plays the part of that frivolous pleader, of whom
Augustine speaks in his 86. epistle. Eadem atque eadem saepe dicit, non aliud
inueniendo quod dicat, nisi quod inaniter, and adrem non pertinens dicit. He
inculcateth the same things often, finding nothing else to say, but that he
repeateth matters vainly, and which are not to the purpose.

The authors spread abroad shameful rumors against most honest and innocent
men, and that which proceeded first from themselves, they pretend to have heard
of others, being themselves both the authors and amplifiers of those rumors.
Such fellows Hierome in his Epistle to Furia de vid. seruand. does rightly
describe. Hirumores turpissimos serunt (says he) and quod ab ipsis egressum
est, id ab alijs se audisse simulant, ijdem (...) and exaggeratores. The
Papists give out most shameful reports of Luther, Calvin, Beza, nay of kings
and princes. Afterward, they cause such sycophants as Bolsecus, Staphilus,
Cochleus, Sanders, Ribadineira, and such lunatical barking helhounds to write
them: and so every odd companion takes hint from them, and in time the rest
shame not to diuulge and increase these lewd reports themselves.

The most of the witnesses alleged by these fellows, are men suborned by
themselves. Such are those which already I mentioned. Such is Surius. and such
is that cogging and lying writer of legends and lies Caesar Baronius and his
felfellowes. (...), as Euripides says in Andromacha, (...), that is, Emperors
and Caesar's for lies, and rare enginers to devise mischief. But as Hierome
says ad (...): That is an authentical testimony, that had no cause to shift
matters by untruths. (...) est testimonium, quod causas non habet mentiendi.
But the Papists without lies and forgeries cannot long maintain their (...)
cause.

The authors strive against the truth as much as they can. So says Tertullian
of Marcion, (...). 2. contra (...). Non poterat aedificare (...) sine
demolitione veritatis. He could not build up his lies without the overthrow of
the truth. But what religion in the mean while is this, that cannot stand
without such gross calumniations and lies? Cui veritati patrocina^tur, qui eam
a mendacio inducunt? How is it likely that they maintain truth (says
Tertullian de (...).) that seek to establish it by lies?

In sum, look how broad, thick and long these libels are so full are they of
villainy, lies and fooleries. Their arguments are loose and misshapen, their
authorities impertinent, their reports false, their shifts sottish, their whole
discourse either lewd or impertinent. S. Augustine epist. 86. says of one,
that he brought many testimonies of scripture, but all of little value. Subijcit
testimonia de scripturis (says he) ad causam quam suscepit nihil valentia.
Such are ye testimonies of our adversaries: their arguments are much worse.

T. F. or rather Robert Parsons enfrocked in that asses skin, in his apology or
poor defense for the cacolike cause, talks much of the conversion of our
country. But yet has nothing which is not tediously repeated in the treatise
of three conuersions, of which you shall hear anon an equal censure. In the
mean while, I think him an unfit man to talk of conuersions to religion,
that is but newly turned from a spy to a spider-catching Mass Priest.

He brings some reasons to prove the sacrifice of ye mass. But all his
arguments are but fragments and testimonies borrowed by reuersion from (...),
whose books without respect to his Cardinals hat, rest refuted in my books De
missa, and are yet left bare and without defense.

To talk of the antiquity of Romish religion T. F had little reason, having as
yet scarce learned to say mass, and being nothing else but a poor nouice in
Romish religion, and no way read in Ecclesiastical histories, and incapable of
school subtilties. Nay Robert Parsons shall have much ado to answer our
proofs, by which the Romish religion stands convicted of (...).

Gladly would he defend traitors, and disgrace good subjects. But therein the
(...) declares himself rather a traitor, then a good subject. If it be no
treason to fly to foreign enemies, and to conspire with them against their
Prince and country: he (...) make other laws, and not only alter treason,
but common reason also.

Uery bitterly he (...) against rack-masters, and judges in the cause of (...).
But what if (...) were never showed the rack? Does he not rack his (...) to
write such notorious lies? The fellows cause with his foolish exceptions
cannot be cleared. Nor with all his eloquence shall he be able to purge
Walpoole charged to be the contriuer of that horrible treason, which (...)
intended for the empoysonment of our late dread sovereign. He was convicted by
his own confession, by a sufficient witness, by letters sent out of Spain,
and devised by the consent of VValpoole to bring D. Bagshaw within the compass
of that foul treason. Matters so plain, that even the papists themselves
acknowledge the same, and are much ashamed in the behalf of Walpoole and his
consorts. It is said, that (...) (...) his confession concerning the accusation
of Walpoole. But the truth is, he never had any thought of any such (...). Only
he said, that he never (...) to put the treason in execution, which
notwithstanding before he had confessed.

Finally, his discourse is so wise, that unless we believe him on his own
bare word, and take public records, confessions, depositions of witnesses, and
sentences of Judges to be may-games, and suppose that Squire was hanged in
sport: we cannot choose but condemn both Walpoole and Parsons, and all their
adherents in this business, to be both traitors and empoysoners.

The treatise of three conuersio^s is divided into two parts. The sum and
scope of the first is comprised in these few words: England has bin thrice
converted to Christian religion by preachers sent from Rome: ergo England is to
submit it self to the Pope, and to accept of that religion which he
recommendeth unto us. This Robert Parsons does suppose to be a good
consequence. For else he should but trifle in his whole discourse, and then
especially where he talks of our obligation to the sea of Rome, and of S.
Peter's chair. Neither does he doubt but to prove his triple conversion, and
that in honor of the Popes triple crown. But if we do well examine his grounds
and allegations, we shall find, that under the title of S. Peter's chair, and
apostolical doctrine, the man does seek nothing else but to recommend unto us
the Popes close stool, with a decoction of his decretaliue doctrine, and most
beastly abominations.

The grounds of the whole discourse are false, and the inference made out of
them, most weak and evil concluding. First, most false it is that Britannie,
or as Parsons says England, was thrice converted by preachers sent from Rome.
Of Peter's preaching in Britain, whereupon the first supposed conversion
stands, the obliuious fellow is but lately advised. For in his Wardword,
wherein he makes the best ward for Rome that he can, he could not find any
more then two conuersions: and those he rather fancieth then proves. His
proofs for S. Peter's preaching in England, stand wholly upon the testimony of
Simeon Metaphrastes, a lying pedant full of fabulous narrations, whereto the
adversaries themselves make conscience to give credit: of Surius a Carthusian
Monk, and a great eater of stockfish, and a codshead parasite hired to speak
for the Pope: and upon a forged lying decretal set out under the name of
Innocent the first, wherein notwithstanding we read nothing specially of
Britains conversion.

Those that were sent from Eleutherus bishop of Rome, to the Christian King
Lucius of Britannie, seem rather to have bin Britans then Romans, as the
names of them set down by Galfridus, by (...), and other writers of British
histories do report. Lucius (...) had no reason to crave baptism at the hands
of Eleutherus his mandataries, unless he had bin well instructed in Christian
religion before. Beside that the Romans in these times ruling in most part of
Britain, it may be a question, how far the kingdom of Lucius did extend it
self. Suppose then (...) this history is authentical, which may well be
doubted, the same being only found in legends and fabulous writers, all the
glory of this conversion must needs stand upon weak surmises and fabulous
legends.

As for the Monk Austine, he could not speak one Saxon or British word, but
was feign to bring interpreters with him out of France, then called Gallia. How
then could he convert them, which understood not one word spoken by him? We do
not read, that he preached to the Saxons or Britans, but only that he
baptized. And very likely it is that he holp only to baptize those, whom
either the Britans always remaining among the Saxons, and submitting the^
selves unto them, or the interpreters, which Austin brought (...) him from
Gallia, which then had a tongue common to both Gauls and Britons, had before
converted. But suppose that either himself speaking British or Saxon, or by
some interpreter, should have converted some few: yet all that amounts to
nothing, and is scarce worth the speaking of it.

Secondly, suppose some Britans or Saxons had been converted to Christian
Religion by preachers sent from Rome in ancient time, when religion was pure
and sincere: yet Parsons has no reason to make any great clamor upon so small
advantage. For first, all those that are converted to religion, are not to
subject themselves to those churches from whence those came that did convert
the^, or else to yt bishops that sent them. The church of Rome acknowledges no
subjection to the Church of Jerusalem or to the Bishop thereof. Neither does
Friseland or Germany, that was converted by Saxons that came out of England,
acknowledge our Church or Bishops to be their superiors. But were Rome
beholding to Jerusalem from whence her first preachers came; yet do not the
Romanists now turn Turks, because Turks preside at Jerusalem. Suppose then
we were beholding to Christian Romans; yet what is that to Antichristian
Romans, that have declined almost into as gross impieties as Turks, and
worship idols, or as they (...) them images, so grossly, that the Turks do
condemn them, and may justly rise up too against them in judgment. Again,
suppose we had been beholding to the ancient Romans, yet this makes nothing
for the modern inhabitants of Rome, that either are a race of Goths and
Lombards, that were enemies to the Romans, or else a collection and Ramasse of
other nations nothing like to the Romans. Finally, if we ought to embrace that
religion, that was either taught by S. Peter, (...), and Austin, or by other
Christian Bishops in their times; then are we to renounce the decretaliue
doctrine of Popes, together with the philosophical mixtures of school
divines, both which have bin brought into the Church long after the ages
wherein they lived. Furthermore, the idolalatrous worship of the cross with
latria, of the saints with dulia, of the blessed virgin with hyperdulia, the
doctrine of Papists concerning the carnal eating of Christ's body,
transsubstantion, half Communions, private Masses, reservation of the
Sacrament, purgatory for temporal pains after the guilt remitted, popish
indulgences and other popish trash might be packing. It would also be time for
the Pope with his triple crown, two swords, guard of Suizzers, Cardinals,
Monks, Mass Priests, and Friars, to trusse up his trinkets, and to make
himself ready for his journey into some far country beyond all
Christianity. For never shall Robert Parsons prove, albeit he could convert
him self into all shapes, that Britain was converted to any such religion as
this, or that the Church then had such a form, as now we see in Rome. Page
103. he alleges two proofs, whereof the (...) he calls negative, the
second affirmative, and thereby hops to show, that the modern Romish
Religion is all one with the ancient Christian Religion. But his negative
ridiculous proof is denied. His affirmative is rather a bare affirmation then
a proof. For first against his negative we offer to prove, that not only the
points of Romish doctrine, which the Church of England refuses, are brought in
long after the Apostles time, but also that they are contrary to the Apostles
doctrine. But suppose we knew no original of some of the (...) heresies, are
they therefore no heresies? Is idolatry no idolatry, because the first
beginning thereof is not known? Or are the Angelikes, Archontikes,
Crosse-worpers, Nudipedals, Monothelites, and diverse other heretics true
Catholics, because the Papists cannot show who first broached these heresies?
Secondly, albeit the Magdeburgians and some other learned men, find fault with
some terms used by the fathers, as of sacrifice, altar, priest, purgatory,
(...)-will, and some other: yet that shows not, either that all the fathers
used these terms, or that any of those that used them, consented with the
(...), which from new terms are grown to new and strange doctrine. Beside
that, Parsons disputes ridiculously, which ascribes the particular and
private (...) of some one or few among us, to the whole Church. He himself,
albeit he affirm many things desperately, will not yield us this point against
his own (...). So we see Parsons his whole treatise of three (...), easily
(...) in three words, and with the (...) of a (...).

The second part of Parsons his treatise, wherein he pretends to make search
for the religion professed in England, is wholly without the compass of his
title of three conuersions. So simple was he in his choice, that he could not
choose a title to fit his fantastical work. Beside that, he seems to be
blind that could not find our Religion in the ancient Church of Christ for a
thousand years after Christ, and long after. For there is no point or article
of faith taught by the Apostles, and received by the consent of the whole
Church in any ancient and lawful Council, but we receive it and embrace it.
Nor do we profess any thing in the Creed of the Apostles, or of the Nicene,
and other ancient Councels, which the ancient fathers did not also together
with us receive and profess. While therefore the lightheaded friar ran
poasting through all ages, and (...) to enquire for news of our Church, which
he might see if he would, in all places: he resembles much that wise fellow,
that could not see wood for trees. Neither is it material that in ancient time
he finds no opposition made against the Popes primacy, or universal power,
or to the Mass, or to the doctrine of transsubstantiation, the carnal
presence in the Eucharist, the sacrifice of the mass, the 7. sacraments,
purgatory, indulgences, and such like. For who sees not, that it is most
ridiculous to make search for opposition against popish doctrine and heresy,
before the same was extant in the world? But as soon as any began to challenge
the name of Ecumenical, or universal Bishop, Gregory the first challenged him
for it, as the forerunner of Antichrist. The worship of images, allowed after
a sort in the second Council of Nice, though not in such gross manner as now,
was oppugned in the Council of Francford in the time of Charlemaine. The
carnal presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, was not believed by Gregory
the 7. as Beno reports, and was both the^ and afterward disliked by many.
Transsubstantiatio^ was disputed against by the schoolmen. All the Eastern
Church spurned against the Popes headship, his purgatory and indulgences.
Neither since the time of the first beginning of these corruptions, did ye
Albigenses, Valdenses, Wiclephians, and Bohemians, as they are called, together
with diverse others, cease to exclaim against these popish abuses. But (says
Parsons) these did not in all things agree with us. Yet if he speak of matters
of faith, he wrongeth them and us. If of ceremonies, it is not necessary that
al churches should agree in all points. Furthermore, if the adversaries had not
calmniously laid diverse imputations of heresies upon them, which they never
held; the variation would not have seemed so great as they pretend. Wherefore if
Robert Parsons seek no better, it is not like that he will find a Cardinals
hat, which, as his friends charge him, he has long sought.

This is the (...) of that which is material in Robert Parsons his treatise of
three conuersions. The rest is nothing else but froth of the man's fury and
foolery, and contains only certain idle inuectiues against M. Fox, that good
man, and against M. Bale, and other honest Christians, together with certain
fond tales of king Alphreds dreams, and S. Cutberts apparitions, and such like
wooden and popish stuff drawn out of lying legends. He forgot not also to
rail against our noble Queen lately deceased, and to call her old persecutor,
and to lay an aspersion of slander upon the State, as if the same did
persecute Papists for religion: a matter of which the secular Mass Priests are
ashamed, and stick not to clear those, whom this conuertible Proteus most
unjustly charge. Finally, his fardle of wast papers contains diverse
corruptions and deprauations of holy Scriptures, miss-allegations of Fathers,
weak collections, gross errors, rebellious positions, notorious lies and
calumiations, which in a large treatise herafter are to be discovered.

K. Kellisons Survey, if any man list to survey and peruse a certain
slanderous and railing companions libell, entitled Caluinoturcismus, and with
hatred more then Turkish to christian religion set out by Gifford of Lile, will
be found to be wholly stolen out from thence, albeit he yields no thanks to
those from whence he borrowed, or rather stole his invention. This Plagiary
therefore needs no other answer, then that which is already made to Giffords
Turkey work called Caluinoturcismus. It seems yt man is at a stand. For
albeit Gifford hate religion like a Turk, yet he answers no more, then if by
virtue of Parsons his three conuersions, he were turned into a mute Turbot.
This K. also of his own has added a glozing and flattering Epistle to the
King, a certain preface concerning inanimate and unreasonable creatures,
percase like the Arcadian beasts of Doway, and certain fragments and old ends
of diverse stale declamations, made (as it seems) at the drinking out of a pot
of Kenish wine. His scholars (I hear) gape and wonder at his horrible
eloquence. But yet the wisest of the^ see, that they have no affinity with his
purpose, and only serve to fringe his chapters, like as mustie ends of mockado
serve to stitch his lacket of perpetuana. All the whole amounts to nothing,
save to declare the man to be a perpetual railer, and a most sottish declaimer.

The idle fellow in all his scuruy collection, which he like a surueyor without
commission has made to lttle purpose, does neither show wisdom, nor
modesty, nor learning. If the fellow had been wise, he would not have touched
any matter of novelty or absurdity. For therein he gives his adversaries
just occasion, not only to justify their religion to be most ancient and
consonant to holy scriptures, but also to declare his popish religion refused
by us, to be a pack of novelties, and a mass of gross absurdities. For who
knows not, that the Komish Church consisting of a triple-crowned and
crosse-slippard Pope, with his guard of Suizzers, a consistory of purple
Cardinals, that has near affinity to the purple whore of Babylon, a rabble
of rakehellike massepriests, filthy monks, friars, and nuns, with a people
worshipping idols, and believing the decretaliue doctrine of Popes, and the
decrees of Trent is new, and never seen before until of late. Who does not
understand, that both the grounds of popery, and the doctrine thereon built is
new? For neither can R. show, that the ancient Church was founded upon the
Pope and his decretals, or upon traditions allowed by the Church of Rome, or
that the Church was tied to such senses of scriptures, as the Romish Church
allows, or bound to follow the old Latin translation of the Bible. Neither
can he prove, either out of fathers or ancient writers, that Christ's true body
is both in heaven and earth, and in every pixe at one and the same time, or
that his body is invisible or impalpable, or that there are just seven
sacraments, and neither more nor less, and that Christians receive Christ's
flesh with their teeth and mouth, or that the Pope is the head and spouse of
the Church, or that he has two swords, or that any images are to be worshipped
with latria, or that devils torment souls in purgatory, or that the Popes
indulgences deliver souls from those torments, or such like points of popery.

Now what I pray you is more absurd, then to believe that a man can eat
himself, as the Mass Priests say Christ did at his last Supper, nay that a
dog or a hog can eat Christ's body, or that a spider can be drowned in his
blood, which saves all, destroys none, that can receive it? Again, what is
more senseless then to adore crosses and dumb images, which neither see, nor
hear, nor move, and whose honor is not seen or known of those saints to who^
they belong, for ought we know? Thirdly, what is more inconvenient then to make
a blind Pope, that is ignorant of all matters of religion for the most part,
supreme judge of controversies of religion? Can blind men judge of colors, or
ignorant atheists of religion? Fourthly, what is more blasphemous then to
teach, that the Scriptures to us are not authentical, unless the Pope
consigne them unto us? Shall not truth be truth, unless it please the Pope to
say it? Finally, seeing faith ought to be most certain, and built upon grounds
most certain; the popish religion must needs be an absurd faith, and a false
religion, that is built upon traditions as well as Scriptures, of which
traditions the papists can yield no certain proof, but are driven to allege
either lying legends, or old motheaten missals, or uncertain customs. It were
an easy thing to allege infinite such like absurdities, of which this
surueying K. has very foolishly offered us occasion to discourse at large.

He does also very simply talk of the sacrifice of the Mass, Survey li. 4.
c. 2. For if Papists say truly, that Christ's body and blood is really offered
in the Mass, and that every external sacrifice requires a real destruction:
then it follows, that these masse-mongers (...) really destroy Christ's body
and blood. Bellarmine lib. 1. de missa. c. 2. (says) that an external
sacrifice does require a real destruction. Requirit realem destructionem. Was
then this fellow wise trow you, to talk of this brave sacrifice? Further do we
think him wise, that in a book offered to the king, does rail on the kings
religion, saying, That it leads unto atheism?

Finally, it is a note of desperate folly to affirm, That our religion leads
to Atheism for want of a Pope, or for want of the Popish mass or sacrifice.
The contrary hereof rather is to be gathered against the Popish religion:
wherein, as we may collect out of the adversaries own confession in c. si Papa
did. 40. the Pope may lead with him thousands of souls into hell. The mass
also is a mass and sink of superstition and idolatry. Neither is any thing
more repugnant to Christ's only sacrifice, then the priesthood and sacrifice of
the mass.

Modesty he shows none, with a face as hard as a lopster, affirming, That we
teach, that God is the author of sin: That we despoyle Christ of his divinity.
That we wrong him in his office of redemption, and bereave him of his title of
lawgiuer and priest: And doubt not to say, that Christ dispaired. Now what
greater impudency can be imagined, then to ascribe that to us, which we utterly
deny and disclaim? Nay, we pronounce him accursed, whosoever shall hold any of
these points. But the Papists in some things rub very near upon these rocks,
and namely, where they give to every man power to satisfy for the temporal
pain of his sins, and yield, that others beside Christ may be called
redeemers, and make the Pope a lawgiver, able to bind men's consciences, and
give power to the priest to intercede for Christ's body and blood, that God
would be pleased to accept it, as he accepted the sacrifice of Melchisedech.

Impudently also he belieth us, and raileth upon us, saying, that we make every
private man's spirit supreme judge of controversies; and that we (...) Fathers
and ancient Councels, and overthrow all religion and worship of God.

Neither does he only rail upon us, but also upon scriptures, where he says,
that founding our selves only on scriptures, we open a gate to all heretics
and heresies. As if the Fathers and ancient Councels which founded their faith
upon holy scriptures only, opened a gap to all heresies. Or as if this could be
spoken without disgrace to holy scriptures, that he that relieth upon the word
of God delivered in scriptures, does open a gate to all heresies.

Finally, he takes upon him the title of the legate of the great monark of
heaven; being but a base, fugitive, renegued companion, set on by Antichrist
and his supposts, to rail at religion, and the professors thereof, and lying
without rule or order.

His want of learning does every where appear throughout his whole Survey.
The Scriptures he cites very rarely. The Fathers he mistaketh and
misalleageth. In Ecclesiastical histories he is but a nouice. Nay, albeit he
talks much of our Religion, yet he understands not what we profess, what
we reject. Finally, although the fellow be but a poor translator and collector
of other men's slanders, yet could he not well relate that which is translated
out of others. His principal witnesses are Staphilus, Cochleus, Bolser, Nicol
Borne, Stapleton, Surius, and such like railing and base authors. Was it then
likely that he should show learning, that is wholly conversant in these (...)
authors, deuoyd either of learning, or else of all religion and honesty?

And all this, God willing, shall by many particulars be verified, by those who
already have undertaken to control his Survey, and to examine every article of
this lewd libell. Not that such an asses head deserves any curious washing,
but because such a barking cur dog would be silenced with a sharp censure.

It rests now, that I speak a word or two more of Walpool and his
co^futatio^. The man is a special friend of mine, albeit upon very small
acquaintance: a cunning triacle seller also, a (...), and a master empoisoner,
as before is declared. This only I forgot to tell you, that his brain is full
of (...), his memory like an old leather budget, his crown like the posterior
parts of an ape, and his head like the knop of the handle of a gittern with two
strings. If you meet any such fellow in the kitchen of the Romish college of
English boys, commend us to him, and tell him that we have at leisure perused
his (...) all confutation, and therefore now he may bestow it upon the cook to
stop his bottels. The style biteth like pepper, and therefore may do some good
service there. Only thus much I must tell him, ye his words are too high for
such a low subject as he handles. Every where he raileth like a man beside
himself, and calls me mad man, sycophant, frantic fellow, lunatike,
satanicall, iugling minister, dolt, fool, noddy, foolman, irreligious atheist,
idiot, ass, drowsy heretic, and such like names, and these are the common
flowers of his dogged eloquence. Yet I assure him, that I am not offended with
his rough style. For although he give me very hard words, and raileth like a
tal fellow of his tongue; yet I thank him, he is well content to pass by all
my arguments in sober silence, and to confirm as much as I affirm by his cold
denial. Now what greater argument, I pray you, can we bring to prove that
Walpoole and his consorts are neither Catholics, nor members of the true
church, nor hold the ancient religion of Christ Jesus, but rather are a pack of
heretics, idolaters and traitors, then that our adversary, that takes upon
him their defense, has nothing to answer in their behalf? It was not modesty
certes that made him silent, but mere imbecility of his cause, and want of
just defense.

Will it please you to take a taste of his insufficiency, before we broach the
whole barrel of his foolery. In the preface of his book, he vanteth that he
has spent his time in exact study of Divinity, and with particular care read
the Scriptures, Councels and Fathers. O happy youths, that hear so exact a
spender of his time in study of Divinity! O hard adventure for us, that are to
encounter this giant, that has devoured so many Councels and Fathers! But in
the mean while Parsons was much too blame, that put him to it thus impudently
to praise himself. We for our parts do admire his singular folly and
arrogance, who praises himself with such impudency. His great reading to us
is invisible, his great ignorance in all manner of learning, and not only in
theology is every where apparent.

Fol. 2. he tells us how Heraclitus affirmed that the snow was black. But
unless he produce his author, his friends with Heraclitus may weep, to see
his pitiful ignorance. We have heard such a thing of Anaxagoras: but this of
Heraclitus is ridiculously forged. In the same place he writes also, how Zeno
taught, That it was impossible for any thing to move. A matter very
stupendous. But this he finds, that has read exactly the fathers. Would he
name his author, he will make a Stoicke to laugh.

Fol. 8. he says, that Christ's body has a being in the sacrament, like to a
soul. But our Savior (Luke 24.) shows a notorious difference betwixt a body
and a spirit. Out of his reading of the fathers, he never learned that Christ
had a body unlike to ours.

Fol. 16. he compares Christ's body to God, that is in diverse places. A matter
that tends to the destruction of the article of Christ's incarnation, and much
repugnant to scriptures and fathers. Unto these words of Hilary, lib. 8. de
Trin. Of the truth of the flesh and blood of Christ, there is no place of (...)
left: he adds diverse words, falsifying them in this sort, Of the true
presence of the flesh and blood of Christ in the blessed sacrament, there is no
place of doubting left. Belike his great and exact study of divinity, and
particular care in reading, will bear him out in it. Yet Hilary talks of
Christ's true incarnation, and not of the presence of Christ's body and blood in
the sacrament.

Fol. 31. he says, That our bodies are nourished with the body and blood of
Christ. But the holy fathers teach us, that Christ's body and blood is food for
the soul, and not for the body. Cyprian De Coena Domini, says, We sharp not
our teeth to bite. And Augustine tractat. 26. in Joan. says, We are not to
prepare our teeth, viz. when we receive this holy sacrament. Here therefore
this (...) followed his fathers the Capernaites, and not the fathers of the
Church.

Fol. 174. he distinguishes Peter Martyr from Vermilio, whereas this is Peter
Martyrs surname. He tells us also that Flauianus taught, that God was the
author of all sin. But if he produce not his author, it will be an easy
matter to show, that he belyeth Flauianus, and mistaketh one for another
through pitiful ignorance.

To belly and falsify the fathers with this bastardly Iebusit, is but a
peccadillio. Fol. 18. he avouches boldly, that Gregory speaks not of
satisfying for the guilt, but for temporal pain. But ye words of Gregory do
plainly convince him of this falsehood. For in him these terms and subtilties
are not to be found.

Fol. 23. he is very bold with Lactantius, and makes him to assign three
notes, by which heretics may be discerned from true Christians. But this is
more then ever Lactantius spoke or thought. He does also give suspicion by his
corrupt translation, as if Lactantius had spoken of popish auricular (...), and
penance thereon enjoined, which was never the authors meaning.

Fol. 25. he writes ye Cyprian demonstrated Peter to be the head and root of
the church. Which if Walpool had had a true tongue in his head, he would never
have affirmed. Beside that, what a ridiculous toy is it, to translate Peter's
prerogative to the Pope, that is liker to ye Calipha of Babylon then to Peter?

Fol. 27. 31. and 34. he corrupts Irenaeus most grossly, making him in the
first place to speak of those traditions of which he never thought, and in the
2. to maintain the universal power of the Pope, which he never knew. In the
third place where Irenaeus has imaginibus, he blotteth out ye word, and
puts in ye word magia, least he might seem to speak against images.

Neither does he only belly the fathers, but his adversaries also. Fol. 114. he
says that Aurifaber, Snepfius, Heshusius, Vergerius, Beza, Musculus, Socinus,
and other ministers in this agree, that the ancient fathers are against them,
and for the Papists. A matter neither agreed upon by all, nor in these terms
confessed by any. As for Socinus, he was an Italian heretic, cast out and
condemned by our church. Why then is he ranked with honest men? Does this rank
fellow in this multiforme lie, think it reason to range together men of such
disformitie? In another place he affirms boldly, that Luther, Calvin, Peter
Martyr, and Melancthon make God the author of sin: not considering, as it
seems, what a sinful act it is to calumniate and belly honest men. That they
are desperately belied, their words and writings, where they profess and
declare the contrary of this which Walpoole affirms, do manifestly
demonstrate. But this monster has filed his tongue to speak untruth.

Fol. 157. speaking of popish (...) and limbus patrum, he says, they were
taught by all antiquity. Alie most notorious, and which shall make him famous
to all posterity. For neither is this word Limbus patrum, nor the popish
distinction of the parts of hell, nor the popish doctrine concerning Limbus
patrum and purgatory, held by any one, much less by all the ancient fathers.
And thereon I join issue with this disioynted companion, requiring him to
answer that which I have written De Purgatorio, and contra limbum patrum
papisticum, to this purpose.

Of his great skill in Latin, his words fol. (...). b. will give testimony. For
there he has Vnae (...) sole, for Vno ecclesiae sole, as Hierome has, or at
least Vnius ecclesiae sole, if he would have spoken in any congruity. Of his
skill in the Greek, we find good proof, fol. 54. b. where in two words he
makes three faults. First he deuideth this word (...), and makes it two
words. Next he writes (...) for (...): and thirdly, he puts an accent of
aspiration in the midst of a word. If he had been put to use much Greek, we
should have had good stuff, that find him so faulty in this only one Greek
word.

To conclude with our party for this time: neither in (...) against his
adversary, nor in defending himself, his consorts and his cause, does he
acquit himself in any tolerable sort. Unto me he obiecteth, that I understand
not the state of the question. A matter ridiculous. For he himself cannot deny,
but I report the adversaries meaning and words truly. He charge me also with
untruths. Yet is it no untruth that I say, that Stapleton denies the
scriptures to be the foundation of religion. For I cite his words truly. And
every man that reads his book, entitled (...), shall find that scriptures are
excluded out of the number of Principia doctrinalia. With the like facility I
shall clear all the rest of his (...) objections.

Where I bring many arguments, all concluding that papists are no true
Catholics, as maintaining rather particular then catholic doctrine, this wise
confuter, or rather confounder of himself, (...) out like a wild (...) into a
long discourse of the name of Catholic, and the causes of the (...) of the
Church, matters (...) questioned betwixt us. He does also lode us with sacks of
authorities of the Fathers, concerning the (...) of the Church, which are not
to the purpose. But in all this discourse he does not once attempt to answer
any thing said by us. Likewise in the Challenge, wherein Papists are declared
(...) to be the true Church, he flies al encounter, like a foolish combatant
fighting with his own shadow. And this we do not doubt but to declare shortly
in a larger answer most fully.

In the mean while thou may easily perceive the (...), falsehood, forgery and
insufficient dealing of our adversaries. Parsons in his book set out under the
name of T. (...). does most grossly and impudently praise himself. In his book
of three conuersions he (...) Ado Treuirensis, for Ado Viennensis, and often
mistaketh one for another. Both his and their other faults I have before
briefly noted. The rest if thou (...) have patience with us, God willing thou
shall receive shortly. Now I could bestow no more time in polling these
Arcadian fellows. The Lord, if it be his holy will, discover all the (...) of
heretical Papists, and grant that the (...) of his most glorious Gospel may
shine in all men's (...) to the utter (...) of the seat of Antichrist, and the
(...) of the kingdom of Christ Jesus.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

