The Examination and Confutation OF A certain scurrilous treatise entitled,
The Survey of the new Religion, Published by Matthew Kellison, in disgrace of
true religion professed in the Church of England.

Matthew. 5. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
speak all evil of you falsely for my names sake.

Psalm. 59. In the evening they shall go to and fro, and bark like dogs, and
go about the City. They shall run here and there for meat: and surely they
shall not be satisfied, though they tarry all night.

LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Richard Serger and Edmund Weauer, and are to be
sold at the great north door of S. Paul's Church. 1606.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir Thomas Fleming Knight, Lord chief Baron of his Majesty's
Court of the Exchequer.
I Do here present your Lordship with a small Treatise. Small, I say, in
respect of my labors (for what should I need to labor in answering so
frivolous and triuial matters) and not great in respect of the volume, for that
few words might serve to clear all doubts, that stand upon our adversaries
bare words. Yet I hope, it shall not be esteemed either untimely or
unprofitable, if we regard the argument. For it contains a necessary defense
of our Christian faith, and of the professors thereof against the wicked
calumniations of a railing Mass Priest called Kellison, and a sober answer to
his virulent, and per case vinolent inuectiues, by him entitled a Survey of the
new Religion.

The reasons that moved me to direct this discourse to your Lordship are
diverse. First your deep judgment and skill in matters of this nature. Next
your piety and zeal for the cause of Religion. Thirdly your place in this
Christian Commonwealth. And lastly those honorable favors, which it has
pleased your lordship to show to me in particular, and to Gods Ministers in
general. For if the same were approved by a man of such authority and
judgment, I doubted not, but it would receive grace the rather in the common
estimation of others. And being published in defense of piety and Religion, I
presumed it would receive good intertainment at the hands of every man
studious of truth and piety. Furthermore if any false companion should take
upon him, either to give out false particulers of his Majesty's lands, or to
make a survey of them without warrant, or judgment, it belongs to your place
in this state, to reuew and control his indiscretion, and to punish his
presumption. Much more therefore behooves it you, considering your function
and eminent place in this Christian state, to concur with us in censuring
this mad Surueyor of Religion and controlling his indiscreete and ranging
discourse having in so many particulers wronged the King of Kings, and his
eternal truth.

What the end was of this his Survey we may easily conjecture. As the Priests,
Scribes, and Pharisyes by railing against Christ and his Apostles sought to
draw the peoples affection from them, and to allure them to like their errors;
so this Priest of Baal by his slaundrous imputations laid upon Christian
Religion, and the professors thereof seeks to disturne me^ from the love of
truth, and to draw them to Popish errors. It may be also, that seeking to
defame others, he thought to qualify the enormities of his own co^sortes, and
their wicked Heresies. The Donatistes, as Optatus in lib. 1. aduers. Parmen.
testifies, went about to defame other men's lives, that they might cause their
own faults to be passed in silence. Vt crimina in silentium mitterent sua,
vitam infamare conati sunt alienam.

What substance is in this worthless work it appears plainly by his
tedious preambles, idle discourses, false collections, weak conclusions,
forged allegations, and his other fooleryes too common in every Chapter. The
whole volume of his sycophanticall Survey is nothing else, but a composition of
diverse old ends of childish declamations, mingled with a decoction of stale
calumniations against particular men many times, and in diverse Books rejected
by us, and now again brought forth by him, thereby to empoyson his credulous
folowers, if they happen to taste so unpleasant a potion. This Book he had
little reason to call a Survey of Religion. For therein he neither observes
rules of Religion, nor of common ciuility. It might rather have been titled a
surfeit of a mad Masse-priestes malice, degorged out of a corrupt stomach
fraught with undigested humors of Popish calumniations and Heresies. Quod
descriptionis dedecus? says Hierome Lib. 1. contr. Iouinian. That is, what a
shameful Survey is this? But better may we apply these words to this Survey.
For it is both shameful, and harmefull, and seems to savor rather of a
mad-mans malice, then of a Doctors learning and sobriety. As Epiphanius says
of Photinus haeres. 71. Verba maledicentiae neutiquam consistere valentia
euomuit. He has degorged against us many railing terms, but they have
neither ground, nor coherence.

I need not insist long to tell your Lordship, what manner of man this Kellison
is. Let his Book and our answer speak. He calls himself a Doctor. But as
Hierome epist. 61. speaking of a certain Bishop doubts whether ludio an
episcopus loquitur, so I may doubt of this Doctor, whether he was an Italian
mountebancke, or a Doctor of Doway. Some say it is not long since this great
Doctor was my Lord Vauxes Butler. And the rather I believe it, for that he has
set us a broach a Butte of his own errors, lies, and fooleryes. His friends
suppose, that as his heart is become Spanish, so he has better grace in
drawing of Spanish wine then in talking of Religion.

Little did either the man, or his matter deserve answer. But yet for the
instruction of the simple, and confirmation of the weak, I have bestowed some
labor in examining the particulers of this Survey. Weak men, and such as have
no strength often are overthrown by weak adversaries. In pugna pug^lum et
gladiatorum says Tertullian lib. de praescrip. aduers. haeret. plerunque non
quia fortis est vincit quis, aut quia non potest vinci, sed quoniam ille qui
victus est, nullis viribus fuit.

If by our labors either the weak be confirmed, or the strong emboldened, and
stirred up to contend more resolutely for the truth; they are in part to
ascribe the same to your Lordship, by whose protection I have the more firmly
withstood the malice of such, as went about to stop the course of my studyes,
and to whose Patronage I consecrate this my brief censure of a malicious
adversaries survey. It should have come forth long since, if either my
troubles had given me leisure, or my means ability, to publish it. But I
thank God, that the same encumbrances do not hinder it still.

Vouchsafe therefore, my good Lord, to accept of this small discourse, as a
memorial of my dutiful affection toward your Lordship, and a testimonial of
my grateful acceptance of your love and favor toward me. And as you have
always professed the true Christian and Apostolic faith, and detested all
errors and abominations of Popery; so still endeavor zealously to maintain
the same truth against all the calumniations and treacherous practices of all
such, as audaciously and impudently oppugn the faith and seek to draw men
into errors God will honor those that seek his honor unfeignedly, and such as
carry themselves as lukewarm, shall be cast out of his mouth, and deemed
unworthy to rest in his holy Mountain. Thus relying upon your favor, I commend
this Treatise to your Lordship, and your Lordship to the Almightyes protection,
beseeching him to bless you and yours in this life, and in the life to come to
give you a crown of glory promised to all those that shall persevere to the
end, and manfully and seriously contend for the maintenance of truth, and the
setting forth of Gods Glory.

Your Lordships in all dutiful affection Matthew Sutcliffe.

The Contents of the Book.
THe Preface to the Reader, wherein Kellisons two Epistles or preambles are
censured, and diverse points noted in the title and front of his Book.

Chapter 1. Kellisons fond conceit and error, concerning the foundations of our
religion, is noted, and diverse errors of his first book refuted. Chap. 2. The
foundations of Popish religion discovered to be most weak and foolish. Chap.
3. The motives to Popish religion mentioned by Kellison compared with the
motives of true religion. Therein also the true motives to Popery are
expressed. Chap. 4. Of the marks and propertyes of heretics. Chap. 5. An
answer to Kellisons calumniations against the doctrine professed in the Church
of England concerning Christ his person, and his two natures. Chap. 6. A
collection of certain absurd and blasphemous assertions of the Papists
concerning Christ his incarnation, person, natures and offices. Chap. 7. An
answer to Kellisons calumniations, charging us, either to have no religion at
all, or a graceless religion. Chap 8. The Surueyors calumniations against our
doctrine, concerning God, refuted. Chap. 9. That our doctrine gives due
obedience and respect both to Princes, and to their laws. Chap. 10. That our
doctrine leads men to virtue, and deterreth them from vices. Chap. 11 A
rejection of Kellisons slanderous accusations, imputing in his 8. book,
Atheism, and contempt of religion to the professors of true religion in the
Church of England.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER: Containing a brief Censure upon the Title and the
front of Kellisons Survey, and his two liminare Epistles and Praeambles.
THe Devil, as we read Job 1. is said To compass the World, and to walk
through it, and experience teaches us, that he is a very busy and curious
Surueyer. We are not therefore to think it strange, if his children do
immitate their father, and prove great compassers of the world, and contriuers
of plots and surueyes, to bring men within the circle of their own errors.
Among the rest, one Kellison a copper kettle Masse-preist, has showed
himself a great compasser of sea and land, to win proselytes to the
Synagogue of Antichrist, and a busy and captious surueyer to espy motes in
our Christian faith: and for this end has set out a large volume, called The
Survey of the new Religion.

But first we say to him, as Christ said to a man of his quality. Hypocrita,
primu^ eijce trabem etc. Hipocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye,
and then thou shall more easily see to take a mote out thy brothers eye. So we
pray him to discharge his Romish religion of the just imputation of novelty,
and then he may with more reason tax others for maintayning new religion. As
for our Religion, it is unjustly and absurdly termed new. For as Ignatius said
in his Epistle to the Philippians, Christ is our antiquity. And in religion
that is most ancient, that is from the Apostles, as Tertullian does signify.
If then our Religion be from Christ, and is grounded upon the holy Scriptures,
and not upon late Decretales, and the opinions of Popes, Schoolmen and
Canonists: how is the same reputed new? does not Kellison remember, that the
sum of our whole desire is, that Popish novelties, and the late Tridentine
doctrine being abolished, we may return to the ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic faith?

Absurdly also he and his consorts repute the Romish modern religion to be
ancient, seeing the same, as it differs from the religion professed in the
Church of England, is nothing but an hochpot of heresies, and erroneous and
corrupt doctrine, either derived from late Schoolmen, or first established by
the late Conuenticles of Trent, Florence, Constance, and Lateran, or by little
and little confirmed by corrupt custom. The Popish Mass (as it now stands)
is but a late patcherie. In the old ordinall of Rome it appears, that
neither private Masses, nor half Communions, nor Transubstantiation, nor the
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood contained under the accidents of bread and
wine, for quick and dead, nor the adoration of the Sacrament with latria, nor
prayers to Saints, and for the dead, were in use in ancient time. The Fathers
do no where teach, that brute beasts receiving a consecrated host, eat
Christ's flesh, or that Christ's flesh is received down into men's bellyes: nay
they teach quite contrary. The Bishops of Rome for many years used not the
temporal sword; Neither was the Pope Lord of Rome until the time of Boniface
the 9. Gregory the first condemned both the universal authority of one Bishop
over the rest, and the adoration of Images. Never was it imagined before the
time of the Conuenticle of Trent, that every pield Mass Priest, as often as he
said Mass wrought three miracles. The necessity of auricular confession, was
first decreed by Innocent the third. The number of 7. Sacraments albeit before
talked of idly by Schoolmen, was not by any public authority received before
the Conuenticle of Florence. Finally, it is easy to show, that the Popes
doctrine concerning Indulgences, Purgatory, the worship of Saints, and Images,
extreme unction, and other points of religion in controversy betwixt the
Papists and us, is lately brought in, and more new then that religion which we
profess, and which by Kellison is lewdly and falsely called new.

Many wonder also, why he should call his Treatise A Survey of the new
Religion: seeing the points which he handles, are neither matters of
religion, nor professed by us, nor proved against them, upon whom they are
fathered by Cochleus, Staphylus, Genebrard, Bolsec, Stapleton, Sanders, and
such like lying parasites.

He professes himself a Doctor, but his Discourse declares him to be in the
number of those of whom the Apostle speaks 1. Tim. 1. Which would be Doctors
of the Law, and yet understand not whereof they speak, nor whereof they
affirm. If he have no more knowledge, then he has showed in this Survey, he
is a Doctor and professor of Divinity of a low price. Little certes does he
understand, what that profession means, that could not distinguish his own,
and his fellows calumniations from the grounds and articles of our religion.
And evil does he deserve the title of a Doctor, and professor of divinity,
which so often speaks against Scriptures: and lib. 1. cap. 2. calls the
proofs grounded upon them bare: and rather deriueth his divinity out of the
sinkes of Schoolmen, and corrupt puddles of Philosophers, then out of holy
Scriptures. Lib. 1. cap. 3. he calls the working of Gods spirit a fancy. Lib.
7. cap. 7. he blusheth not to write, that justification by faith in Christ
without works, is a doctrine opening a gappe to all sins. Against Christ's
Priesthood, this priest of Baal talks profanely, as if the same were
imperfect without the addition of Romish Masse-priestes. And with Christ's
Sacrifice he compares, nay he equalleth the sacrifice of the Mass. Of
Christian liberty he discourses freely, but very fondly, and falsely denying,
that the same consists any whit in the deliverance of men's consciences from
the curse of the law, from the yoke of Jewish ceremonies, and humane
traditions. Against the assurance, that Christians have of Gods favor, and of
their own salvation, he runs out and reuelleth, as if it were a dangerous
point of doctrine, and a cause of diverse inconveniences: all which do argue,
that he is but a kettle-doctor of divinity, and a professor like to those, of
whom the Apostle speaking Romans 1. says, When they professed themselves wise,
they became fools.

In matters in Religion and Divinity, he tumbleth himself, as the old
Proverb says, Tanquam Asinus in vnguento, that is, as an Ass smeared with a
costly ointment. For although the profession of divinity be honorable; yet it
fitteth this Beeredrawer or Tapster, that calls himself a Doctor and
professor of Divinity, no better, then it fitteth an Ass to be perfumed with
Musk and Ciuet.

For his devise he chooses these two Se^tences, Do men gather Grapes of
thorns, or Figs of thistles? and, They shall prosper no further, For their
folly shall be made manifest to all. The first being taken out of Mat. 7. and the
second out of 2. Tim. 3. and both serving us to conclude against him and his
consortes, whose discourses are rather like bundles of thorns, and thistles,
then like Grapes and Figs. It seems when he framed them, he shook his
lips like an Ass cropping of thistles. From a man of such a distemperd
humor we are not to look for better fruits. And certes no marvel, if such
lying and railing courses prosper not. Mendacia non diu fallunt says Cyprian
lib. 1. epist. 3. That is, Lies do not long deceive, neither does darkness
continue, when the day begins to appear. Now their lying and cogging, and
all their fooleryes are daily more and more made manifest. Euripides in
Andromacha speaking of the Spartans, calls them Kings of lies and sowers of
mischief. And Athanasius ad Constantium speaking of the Arians: Miror (says
he) eos sine vlla abominatione aut horrore mendacij ita falsa etc. potuisse
dicere. I wonder how without horror and abomination of the fact, they could
devise things so false! But with far better reason we may say this of Kellison
and other our adversaries, who in lying and aequiuocating, pass both Spartans
and Africans, and lay plots of mischief never heard of in any age before.
They make no Conscience what they swear. We may not therefore think it
strange, if he speak any thing sounding to our disgrace most falsely. As
Tertullian lib. contra Hermog. says of that heretic, so we may say of
Kellison. Loquacitatem faecundiam existimat etc. He thinks babbling to be
eloquence, and impudencye to be constancye. And these are the fruits and
effects of Kellisons labors.

It rests the^, having spoken of the Title and front of his work, that we
do our endeavor to make this man's folly appear most manifestly in the rest
of his Survey, and that we prescribe some Triacle to such as otherwise might
percase taste of his poisoned discourses. But before we pass any further, we
are first to examine his two praeambular Epistles; whereof the first is directed
to the King, the second to every other Reader.

Unto Kings, men of discretion use not to present trifles, or else matters not
pleasing their humors, or not sorting with their royal Majesty's excellency,
endeavoring as much as in them lies, to make their gifts correspond with
their greatness. But Kellison respected all this nothing. For albeit this
Survey be a most idle devise, and most unworthy to be presented to so wise,
learned, pious and famous a King, as containing nothing else but a fardle of
lies, calumniations, and fooleryes, and certain odd fragments of old
declamations euaporated with age: Yet no inferior person could satisfy him,
then our King; such was his arrogancye and impudency. Nay albeit he plainly
perceived incongruitie, yet could he not forbear to prease into the Kings
presence, and there to offer up a sacrifice of his Survey, a fitter offering for
Vulcan, then for any man of note or dignitye.

He supposes, that therein he has committed only three inciuilities. But if
he would have spoken plainly, he should have named them three gross
absurdities, as indeed they are. For first, what is, or can be devised more
absurd, then for a bald idolatrous Mass Priest, to presume to present himself
before a religious and Christian King, enemy to all Idolaters, and Priests of
Ball? for a sworn slave of King-killing Popes, and a teacher and a maintainer
of their wicked and disloyal doctrine, to presume to appear before a King,
whose life, he and his consorts have sougnt to take away, and whose Royal
authority and Honor, all Papists do empaire, and whose Crown all
Masse-priestes seek to deliver into the Popes hands? For a fugitive and an
enemy to his Prince and Country, boldly to speak to so mighty a King, and so
kind a Father to his Country and subjects? Secondly, might such an idolatrous
Saltpeter-priest and a fugitive Traitor be pardoned for his arrogant and
presumptuous boldness, daring to come into a Princes presence, that is so
hardly pressed with the great weight and multitude of the affairs of state, as
himself confesses? yet modesty might have taught him, if any spark of
modesty had been in him, and we may not forbear to tell him, that it is too
great rudeness, for fugitives to thrust in among the Peers of the Realm, and
for base companions to appear without commission among the Ambassadors of
great Princes, as he has done. Thirdly if needs he would press into the
Kings presence, and like a Kettle-maker stand among great men with his present,
then he should have thought upon some thing, that might be more grateful,
then this scurrilous Libel, containing nothing but calumniations, inuectiues,
and declamations against that Religion, which both the King and his people
professes, and shall always be justified to be most true and Apostolic,
against him and all his partakers. At the least, if he had nothing to offer,
that might please so great a Prince, yet should he have forborne to offer that,
which both to him and all true Christians cannot choose, but be most ungrateful
and odious.

Beside these absurdities, our surueyor has run into diverse gross errors.
For first he compares the King to an Idol, where he makes him like a Neptune
Lord of the Ocea^ Sea. So he is not only a worshipper of Idols, but also would
gladly make an Idol of the King. Secondly, in setting forth the Kings
praises, he speaks contraries, now representing his majestye sitting in a
Throne of terror: and not long after calling him the myldest Prince in Europe.
But what is more contrary, then terror and mildness? and what Sect in savage
cruelty can be compared to Papists, that of late have attempted by fire and
Gunpowder to destroy him, whom they confess to beethe myldest Prince in
Europe? Thirdly, he takes from the King all authority in Ecclesiastical
causes, which he reserueth to his holy Father, and his dependants: and although
in terms he do not abridge the Kings right in his Te^poralities; yet every
one knows, that Papists make Kings the Popes subjects, and give to the Pope
power to censure and depose Kings: which none can maintain, but such as are
disloyal to Princes, and slaves to Popes. Fourthly, most cunningly he does
insinuate, that Kings and Princes are beholding to Priests for their
Kingdoms; because they receive of them (as he says) their consecration,
Crowns and Scepters. So this prating Mass Priest does not only treacherously
subject Kings to the Popes sword and censures, but also absurdly tyeth their
right and inheritance to the Crown, to the rite of consecration. Finally, not
content to debase the Kings Royal state, and to deminish his right, he
compares himself in his Priesthood most proudly to Christ himself, and his
holy Apostles. But none but the disciples of Antichrist make themselves in
priesthood comparable to Christ, nor do any but false Apostles make the
Apostles sacrificers, and aequall themselves to the Apostles.

Now these errors he acknowledged not, nor can excuse. His inciuility he would
gladly excuse and defend. But his defense is worse, then the offense it self.
For the first (says he) Adrian the Emperor will excuse me, who commended unto
Minutius his proconsul of Asia, as a thing of importance: Ne nomen
condemnaretur sed crimen. He makes also along discourse, relating unto us, how
wrongfully Christians were hated for the name. But what affinity is there
between the names of Christians, and the names of sacrificing Mass Priests?
Again, how can the cyclopicall priests of Baal pretend to be successors either
of the Apostles, or of ancient Bishops? Did ever any ancient Bishop or other
Doctor of the Church say, that the priest did swallowe down Christ's body
whole into his belly? again, if that which is offered be consumed, as the
Papists themselves teach; How can this priest K. defend, that he offers up
Christ under the accidents of Bread and Wine, unless like the Jews, he murder
Christ, or at the least devour him? Furthermore, Adrian in his Epistle to
Minutius Fu^danus has not these words, ne nomen condemnaretur, sed crimen. as
it is evident by the words of this Epistle reported by Iustine Martyr in his
second Apology. Finally we do not oppugn Mass Priests for the name of
priests, as this dreaming survey or imagines, but for because being made
priests beyond the Seas, they are always ready at their creators the Popes
command, to attempt against Princes, to trouble his state, to raise sedition,
as the late attempts of Watson and Clarke, of Pearcy and his mates, set on by
Priests and Jesuits to blow up the whole Parliament, and to make a general
massacre, and Rebellion, do plainly declare.

For the second he tells us, that he is come from the great Monarch of heaven
to salute the King; and that he is Gods Legate, and therefore not to be denied
audience, when the Ambassadors of the Kings of the earth are heard with so
favorable a countenance. But if he come from the Monarch of heaven, why does
he not show forth his warrant, and prove his heavenly and angelical mission?
If he be Gods true Legate, why does he hide his false face? If he will be
respected as earthly Ambassadors, then must he show forth a Commission, as
earthly Ambassadors do. Otherwise he will be taken for the Legate of Satan,
set on by the Pope to write heretical discourses and scurrilous Libels, to
infect the peoples minds with a distaste of truth, and with superstitious,
heretical and disloyal humors, and not Gods Ambassador sent to the King, to
declare his will. God certes never gave any man commission to persuade the
Popes tyrannical authority, the sacrifice of the Mass for quick and dead,
the 7. sacraments, the worship of Saints and Images after the Romish facion,
and such like doctrines. Further he adds That the lowest Subject may cry,
Viue le Roy. But what makes that for him, that held himself for no subject
of our late Queen being excommunicate by the Pope, and thinks it not lawful
to subject himself to the King, that now is, if the Pope should take Arms
against him, and excommunicate him? Furthermore such as he is, are rather to be
reputed tall and stout Traitors, then low or lowly subjects, crying not viue
le Roy, with any true heart, but as Judas cried, al hayle to Christ, when he
betrayed him: or as Squire, that was sent by the Jesuit Walpoole to empoyson
the late Queen, cried God save the Queen, when he put poison on the Pommell
of her Saddle. If then the Pope shall once begin to display his Banner and
thunder out his excommunications against the King; then we are not to doubt,
but as now Kellison cries, God save the King, so then he would cry, down with
him, down with him, and with all that follow him, and take part with him.
For such as meant to blow him up with Powder not being exco^municat, would not I
think, spare him being made subject to the Popes thundering censures.

For the third, he answeareth first, that it does agrandise a Kings greatness,
to accept of little presents. And next, that he offers himself as his
Majesty's faithful servant. Lastly he stands on stilts of high terms, and
tells us, that he offers the worship of God, the salvation and safety of
the King and his subjects, and the peace of his people. But neither is his
Book a little present being a large fardle of wast paper, nor can so big a
lubber pass for a small gift: although in truth both be of so low a price,
that he might much be ashamed to make offer of either to so judicious a Prince,
but that he wants both shame and judgment. Beside that, it may be a question
how he can give himself to the King, that has already given himself body
and soul to the Pope, whose mark he carries on his shaven Crown. A faithful
Servant, certes, he cannot be to the King, seeing no man can serve two
Masters. Pearcy promised as much as he. Yet sought he the destruction of the
King and State, being persuaded thereto by Jesuits, and led into treason by
the rules of Popish Religion. As for the Mass and Doctrines of Popery, which
he brings with him, they lead to destruction, and not to salvation; they
teach idolatrye, and not Gods true worship; error and Heresy, and not true
Faith. The Popes obedience is a yoke in supportable. His laws are snares, of
men's consciences. His Priests and Friars are the Locustes come out of the
bothomlesse pit of Hell. His Religion is neither Catholic nor ancient, but
rather a mixture of new and old Heresies. Neither can the King look either
for safety or peace so long as he suffers a generation of viperous Priests
and Friars depending on an Archpriest to live within the bowels of the State,
and a pack of Papists to uphold the authority of his opposites under color of
Religion. Take away the Gun powder Papists, and such as had rather serve
Antichrist, then Christ, to bow their knees to Baalim then to worship God, and
then you remove the hopes of our enemies, that seek to disturb our peace, and
the firebra^ds of troubles, that are the likeliest means to set all on a flame.

To such as demand why he dedicated this great bale of blotting paper to the
King, he gives this answer, that he cannot want an answer, because he
cannot want a reason. And no doubt, but he imagined, that therein he did
pindarize, and speak very eloquently. Yet many want answers, that have far
more reason and honesty then he, and diverse want no ready answers, that
proceed without reason. Whatsoever he pretends, little reason had he to
offer this bundl e of papers to the King. For albeit learned men present their
Books to Kings, supposing nothing to be well begun, unless after God the
King favor it, as Vegetius affirms: yet this is nothing to this rude piece
of work, that is so fraught with calumniations and idle discourses, that
neither God nor man can well seem to favor it. Further although the King
delight in Books, and has set forth diverse rare monuments of his rare wit and
learning: yet does he not take pleasure in such scurrilous surueyes. Nor may
we think, that a man of such judgment and learning can like or allow such
base stuff. Thirdly we confess that the King is indeed, the protector of
Religion, the Champion of the Church, and defender of the Faith. But little
does this avail Kellisons cause, who pleads rather for jdolatrie and
superstition, then Religion; for the sinagogue of Antychrist, rather then for
Christ's Church; for the errors and abuses of Popery, rather then for the faith
of Christ. Fourthly it is not to be doubted, but that all the Kings true
friends did triumph and make Bonfires at the Kings happy entrance into the
Kingdom, and at his Coronation. But that shows that the Jesuits,
Masse-priestes and their adherents are not the Kings true Friends. For they
triumph but a little at the Kings prosperity, and many of them of late have
sought insteede of Bonfires, which this K. calls Feux de Joy, to set the
City upon a fire, and to blow up the Parliament house and places adjoining
with Gunne-powder. Other their consorts are more desirous to burn the bones
and bodies of Gods saints, then to make bonfires, when they understand of the
Kings prosperous success. Fifthly, we acknowledge that God by his providence
has reserved the King for the Crown of England, and quietly possessed him of
his Crown. But we know also that the Papists have of late sought to deprive
him of his liberty, life, and Crown. And Parsons and the Jesuits of long time
have oppugned the Kings Title, both of them resisting not only the Kings
right, but also Gods providence. Finally if for all these favors God expect at
his Majesty's hands, that he imploye himself in some honorable service for
the Catholic Church, and Christ's true faith, and for the deliverance of his
Realms from Aegiptia^ captivity, and the restoring of his subjects to the
Catholic faith, as Kellison desires; then is he to take a resolute course
for the removing of al idolatrous Masse-priestes, which seduce his Subjects,
and turn them from the Catholic faith and their allegiance, to embrace
humane traditions and the decretaline Doctrine of the Pope, and to prefer the
Pope before their King. Then is he further to overthrow the groves of the
jdolatrous Priests, and to provide that his Realms be not again entangled
with a yoke of bondage, and ouer-whelmed with ignorance, and Aegiptian
darkness. Lastly he is to see, that Heresies and false Doctrines be not
received under the color of Romish Religion.

Most grossly therefore has this Romish Legate failed in the proofs of his
presumptuous attempt, in presenting his worthless and trifling discourses to
the King. But having once passed the limits of modesty, he passes himself in
impudency, afterward aduenturing to prefer a suit to the King for liberty to
Papists, and for tolleration of Popish Religion. A matter, that with modesty
cannot be mentioned to so pious a King, and by rules of Religion and state may
not be granted: For it is impious, Idolatrous, and heretical. And therefore may
not be admitted of christians. It is factious, rebellious and derogatory both
to ye prerogative of Princes, and liberty of Subjects. And therefore not to be
endured in any well governed state. Finally themselves admit no Religion
contrary to their own false grounds, if they can do withal. Why do they
then require that of others, that they yield not to others themselves? if he
deny any point of these, he shall find them justified in diverse answers framed
to the importune supplycations of Papists, and we shall always be ready to
prove the same again, as often as the matter shall come in question.

But had he reason to come to the King, yet he has no reason to rail on the
Kings predecessor Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, as he does, charging
her first with raising a storm of persecution, and next with the ruin of the
Catholtke faith. Nay most falsely he charge a most clement and merciful
Queen with persecution, and a Christian Prince of singular pyetie, with hatred
of Catholic Religion. Most falsely I say, for all her acts, and laws do
argue an excellent moderation in her proceedings, against such as most
violentlye prosecuted her: and so far was she urged to do that she did,
that the secular Priests not only excuse her for proceeding against Papists,
but also to their uttermost defend her. Furthermore no christian Prince in our
time showed more zeal in the defense of true Catholic Religion, then she.
True it is, that she favored not Popish errors. But nothing is more different
then Popery and Catholic Religion. Neither shall this K. ever prove the
contrary.

Having ended his idle discourse concerning the dedication of his book, he
makes bold to begin his suit for a tolleration of Popery. But his proceeding
is sottish and intolerable. He comes to the King as he says, armed with
hope, and constrained by necessity in the name of the Kings Catholic
subjects, in the name of the Catholic Church, in the name of all Catholic
Princes, and of all the Christian world, nay in the name of the great King of
heaven and earth. But as the common Proverb is, The hills travail, and out
comes a ridiculous Mouse. For first what hope can this armed fellow pretend,
to obtain favorable audience either of the King, or State, that not only
rayleth on true religion, and the Kings true subjectes, but also pleads for
such, as of late sought to destroy both the King and State? Again how can he
and his consortes talk of coming armed with hope, when Catesbie and his
followers came armed with iron, to cut the Kings throat, and to take away our
lives: and when his arms are not hope, nor arguments, but bitter Inuectiues,
darts of slander, and malicious fictions? Thirdly, no man is compelled by
necessity to play the Vice, and that without all color or vizor of modesty.
For what is more Vice-like, then for such a pild compagnion, to pretend the
name of all the Christian world, and all Catholic Princes, being not able to
show commission, either from any Prince, or any part of the Christian world?
Fourthlye, not only all the Catholic Church, but also all Catholic Princes
do disauow this presumptuous fellows pretended Commission, renouncing his
impious doctrine concerning the faith and Sacraments, his treacherous opinions
concerning the Popes usurped authority in deposing and killing Christian
King's, his wicked defense of the worship of Saints and Angels, and all his
idle declamations, lewd lies, heathenish impostures, and false doctrines and
heresies. Fifthly, the Papists of England (for the most part) do evil deserve
the name of subjectes. But were they ranked among subjectes, yet are they not
to be ranked among Catholics, seeing they receive the errors of the modern
Synagogue of Rome, and err in the faith. How-soeuer they think of themselves,
they have no reason to allow their pild Proctors pleading for others, who
puts them among thieves and murderers: and concludes; that Papists are to
have a tolleration of their opinions, because Thieves and murderers are now
pardoned. We say his conclusion is weak and simple: For faults once
committed, are more easily pardoned, then a license granted to commit faults
ever heer-after. Further, offenses against our brethern, are more easilye
remitted, then offenses, that are directly committed against God. Sixthly, if
Princes that live under the Pope, and are his vassals, would prefer any suit to
the King, they would commend it to wiser Agents, and not to such a balde
compagnion. Seventhly, it is a gross conceit of a raw divine, to think, that
the Christian world ever believed in the Popes triple Crown, or guard of
Switzers, or embraced the doctrine of the Conuenticle of Trent and Schoolmen
concerning Traditions, Sacraments, Purgatory, Indulge^ces, worship of Saints
and Angels, and such like points of Popish says. Finally, if this counterfeit
Legate do not show his Commission under Seal, and plainly prove the Popes
Decretales, the doctrine of the Conuenticle of Trent and Schoolmen, the Popes
two swords and all the trash of Popery; he is to be rejected as a frantike
forger of new Commissions, and disauowed by his clyents, as a foolish and
simple pleader.

His reasons for tolleration of Popery, are either grounded upon false
positions, or else want form of good conclusions. That which he says of the
Kings Predecessors, that with Crown, Scepter and Sword, they mainteyned the
modern doctrine, of the Romish Church, is utterly false. For they never
believed, that the Pope had power to take away their Crowns, or that
Christians (like Canibals) did eat Christ's flesh with their teeth, and
swallowe it down into their bellyes, or other modern Romish errors, heresies
and impieties. But did any ancient Princes maintain errors, that binds not
their posterity to continue therein. We are not to follow the steps of our
parents, where themselves tread awrye. Constantine left the Paganism of his
ancestors. The ancient Kings of Spain were Arians, yet do the later Kings
of Spain detest Arianisme. False it is also that the people of Scotland in
time past were of the same faith, which this Kellison teaches at Doway. It may
be they built Abbeyes, worshipped Saints, and used some popish ceremonies more
then christian religion required. But K. must prove, that they believed the
doctrine of the Co^uenticle of Trent, and all the Popes decretales, and offended
in jdolatrie, as grossly and obstinately, as the Papists do now, or else he
trifleth out time in vain. Thirdly he speaks not only falsely but also
absurdly, where he promises honor to such Princes, as embrace Popery. For
what can be more dishonorable, then for Kings to become vassals, to lose half
their Subjects, half their authority, half their revenues? does Kellison
suppose it honorable for Kings to be controlled, deposed, killed? or can any
free English man endure to be subject to Italians and strangers? Fourthly,
vainly does this declaimer promise felicity to the Realm, declyning to
popery. There can be no greater bondage, nor misery for men's souls, then to
be entangled with popish laws, traditions and censures. Base it is to endure
the Masse-priestes extortions and pillages, grievous to see the land devoured
by Caterpillars. Fifthly we confess, it is honorable to conquer Heresy; but
this honor belongs not to Princes blinded with popery: which is nothing else
but a mass or compendium of diverse heresies. Contrariwise if Mass Priests
were rooted out, and Gods true Religion in every quarter sincerely received;
then should we neither fear the wrath of God threatened against jdolaters and
contemners of Religion, nor the enmity and opposition of men having no means
to hurt us, but by the practices and mutinies of Papists. Sixthly, neither is
the Religion professed in England new, nor is popery old. And therein I will
join issue with this Surueyor, if he dare maintain the contrary. He
braggeth much, but the surfeit of popery has distempered his wits. Seauenthly
it was honorable, we confess, for Constantine to restore Christian Religion.
But what makes this for popery, which was not in the world in the days of
Constantine, nor many ages after? Furthermore when Kellison shall be at any
leisure, and not troubled with his Gunpowder plots of high treason, then we
will show and prove to his teeth, that popery is a corruption of faith, and a
declination from Christian Religion to errors and heresies. Finally, to secure
the Kings life, and the peace of the State, this wise Orator offers oaths.
But Christian people are too well acquainted with the practices of Papists to
trust them either upon oaths, bands, or pledges. Of late while they were most
forward to offer oaths, and all security that could be devised, then Pearcy
and his mates were sitting powder under the Parliament house, and laying a plot
for a general massacre of all true Christians, and for a Rebellion of al
discontented Persons, and Papists. Further they teach that oaths are not to be
performed to Heretics, and easily does the Pope dispense with them. Who then
is so patient as to endure this simple fellows foolish prating? these
cut-throate Priests will murder honest men, and their souls shall sue them for
perjury! is not this (trow you) a goodly device?

Whether he speak for his own cause, or against us, his idle talk is not
much to be regarded, that either affirms matters nakedly upon his own bare
word, or brings no better witness then Nicol Borne, Genebrard, Baronius,
Thomas Aquinas, and such like, or alleges Scriptures impertinently and
falselye, or else belyeth his adversaries shamefully. Against Calvin he
brings a place out of his Institutions, as if he taught, that by religion men
might disobey Princes laws: a matter neither taught, nor ever thought upon by
him. To what end then brings he allegations out of Scriptures and Fathers, to
disprooue this rebellious position? would he have all the world to see, that
Papists disobeying Princes upon the Popes warrant repugne both to Scriptures
and Fathers?

His skill in Divinity we may easily conjecture not to be singular. For first
he prefers the will of man in his conversion, before Gods grace. Religion
says he, is not transfused with flesh and blood, but infused by God, with
consent of our will, and operation of grace. Secondly, he makes man's blood an
oblation for sin, and a mediation of others conversion. Thirdly, he assigns
Aureolam martyrum, that is, a degree above the common glory of Gods Saints, as
a reward due to Martyrs for their passion. Fourthly, he says Many Virgins
have lived in the flesh like Angels. But to say that man can live without
sin, is P^^gianisme. Lastly, his grounds are out of Tho. Aquinas, and the
Schoolmen. Is it then like that his Babylonian building will long stand?

His notable simplicity is every where apparent. For seeking king the Kings
favor, he rayleth on Religion professed by the King. Pleading for the Pope, he
overthrows the authority of the Pope. For if the authority of Kings be from
God, then cannot Popes discharge subjectes from their duty and obedience to
Princes. Showing himself unable to write or to dispute, yet most simply he
chalengeth us all into the field, offering to dispute with us. Lastly, wanting
other means, he makes the King a petitioner unto himself.

His honesty cannot be great, that rayleth against the dead, flattereth such as
are able to favor him, belyeth both the living and dead. By Popes says he
always Countries have been converted. Yet for many years have they given
over preaching, and lately have suffered the Turkish religion to eniambe and
get ground upon Christians. He says further, That our Church began but
yesterday, that our teachers want authority, that our doctrine has the marks
of heresy, that we pull at Christ's divinity, make him no redeemer, spiritual
Physician, lawgiver, Priest, nor Judge, but make him ignorant, desperate and
damned. He charge us further that we have neither Priest, Sacrifice,
Sacrament, nor Prayer: matters impudently and without all color of truth
auowched, as shall plainly appear by our answer. If, when he comes to
dispute, he bring no more truth, Children will ^isse him out of Schools for an
impudent and lying compagnion.

These being the principal points and whole sum of this rude Orators
pleading before his Majesty, wherein no dout he has made the fairest show he
could of such base wares; We may easily imagine, that his speech to the common
reader is more rude, harsh, and disioynted. In the beginning of his epistle, he
runs out like a wild discourser, into a long senseless, and unreasonable
speech concerning inanimate and unreasonable creatures. But it must needs be a
dull, dead, and unreasonable cause, that has such dead and unreasonable
advocates to plead for it. He turns the Sun into a Cock, and a Candle, and
birds into Carpenters, and brute beasts into hearbists. But whereto tends
this brutish discourse, void both of the light of the Sun, and of the light
of reason? does he place his consortes among feathered fools, or else among
brute beasts? from senseless creatures (in which rank we may place a good
part of this Surueyer and his consortes) he leapeth to brute beasts, and from
brute beasts to man. And yet nothing he writes, that may beseem a sensible
creature, much less a reasonable and discreet man. The end and mark of all
his wild vagary is this, to show, that because God has given us a will wholly
bent to good, and an understanding naturally inclined to truth, and auerted
from all untruths, he has therefore made an exact Survey of the new Religion,
as he says. But first these things hang no better together then if he should
say he would to Rome, because Totnam is four miles from London, and Doway is
turned Spanish. For man may have an understanding and will, and yet frame no
such false surueyes. Nay if this surueyor had either had any understanding, or
good purpose, he would never have employed his labor in such a lewd piece of
service. Further neither does man's will desire any good thing tending to
eternal life, or understand any such thing, so long as he is unregenerate by
Gods grace. The words of the Apostle are clear. There dwells no go^d thing
in my flesh. And again, the natural man understands not the things that are
of God. Thirdly, if man's will and understanding had been so inclined, as he
pretends; then would Kellison never have lived under the yoke of Popery, nor
believed the absurdities of popish Religion: of which we shall speak God
willing, particularly hereafter. Fourthly so far is his survey from
exactness, as a surfeit of foolery from sound understanding and reason.
Finally, nothing shall this K. be able to allege in our Religion, that
abhors either from reason, or rule of good understanding. The mission and
calling of our Bishops and Ministers shall be justified against all the barking
of Masse-Priestes and Jesuits. The marks of Heretics shall be wiped from our
selves, and deeply imprinted upon our adversaries. Our Doctrine shall be cleared
from the unjust imputations of our adversaries, and every indifferent man
satisfied, that we neither empayre Christ's honor, nor deny his Preesthood. But
contrariwise the Papists communicate Christ's honor to creatures, and his
preest-hood to Masse-Priestes. We shall also prove by plain evidence, that we
uphold the authority of Princes and their laws, which the Papists ouerthowe
and despise. We doubt not further to demonstrate, that none of us ever taught,
that God is author of sin, or cruel, or tyrannical in his proceedings.
Finally, we should be much ashamed, if vices and all impieties were not better
censured and punished in England, then in Italy, Spain, and other popish
Countries.

These matters which Kellison vanteth, that he will make good against us, have
been not only formerly objected unto us by William Raynoldes and D. Gifford in
their railing volume entitled Caluino-turcismus, but also answered by us in a
Treatise called Turco Papismus. And that so sufficiently, that D. Gifford
rests either satisfied, or silent. If then this new surueyor would needs
renew their slanders and vain objections, he should for his credit sake have
done well, either to have replied to our answer, or to have held his peace, as
his betters have done. Again if he had been so wise and circumspect, as he
pretends to be; he would have been well advised before he entered this
course, least he might give us occasion to rip up the deformities, fooleries,
absurdities, Heresies, impieties and other abuses of Popery, of which I doubt
not, but his best friends, when they are laid open, will be much ashamed.
Himself being but a new vpstart Doctor, and lately crept out of my Lord Vauxes
Buttery, will be much puzzled to make any probable defense for them.

Thus much may serve for answer to the front of his Survey and his two
liminare Epistles. For the rest, I shall not need to say much in this place.
Only this, I thought good to signifye unto thee, good Reader, that thou look
not for any curious or long answer hereafter: to wit, that the whole volume
is nothing but a new pack of old calumniations and lies. The form of his
discourse is trifling, the Subject railing. Such declamations, it should seem
he was wont in the time of his butlerage to make over a can of Beer. His
proofs are fancies and bare conceits. His witnesses, fellows of a low
price. His conclusions weak collections. It may be, either need and hunger,
or else hope and promise of reward made him so talkatiue. How be it least he
might grow proud of his own prowess, I have undertaken to shape him a short
answer. In the mean while, concerning his objections and proofs, this he
may learn of me for his instruction. First that it is a foolish thing for a
man to object that to others, whereof they are clear, and he most guilty:
and to survey other men's estates, when his own can abide no survey. Secondly
that the bosom and domestical testimonies of Cochleus, Genebrard, Bolsec,
Stapleton and such like are little to be esteemed. Fidele est testimonium quod
causas non habet mentiendi. That testimony says Hierome ad Saluinam, deserves
most credit, that has no causes of fiction. Be not then moved with the
largeness of Kellisons volume, nor with his manifold leasings. Common barators
are wont to put in longest bills, when they have least matter: and shallow
waters make most noise. To such lewd and long lies, this our short answer
will be more then sufficient. Vouchsafe therefore to compare both our
discourses together, and to read them with indifferency. And so thou shall
soon discover the vanity of his accusations, and give sentence for our
innocence.

THE EXAMINATION and Confutation of Kellisons scurrilous Survey of the new
Religion, as he terms it.
Chap, 1. Kellisons fond conceit and error, concerning the foundations of our
Religion.
IF it be the part of a wise builder to lay a firm foundation, as our Savior
Christ Math. 7. teaches, and common experience proves most evidently unto
us; then we may well collect, that Kellison our adversary, in his Survey, has
showed himself neither wise builder, nor wise man, who in his first book
going about to build the Toure of his Romish Babel does wholly mistake his
foundations, laying the frame of his work either upon the Pope, whom he
supposes to be a visible Judge of all controversies, or upon the mission and
preaching of Romish Mass priests. Furthermore, talking of our Religion, he
does grossly err in the foundations of it, supposing that it relyeth, first
upon the authority of our Preachers, then upon their allegations out of
Scriptures, thirdly upon men's private spirits, fourthly upon credible or
probable testimonies, and lastly upon some visible Judge: matters (certes)
rather devised by him self, then taught by us. The visible Judge, and
authority of Priests, is laid as a foundation of faith by Stapleton in his
book of doctrinal principles. That which he talks of private spirits, and the
allegatio^ of Scriptures out of men's own humors, is an imputation of Papists
laid upon us and that most unjustly. For we build the Church upon the Prophets
and Apostles. Jesus Christ him self being the chief corner stone, as the
Apostle teaches us Ephesians. 2. And the Scriptures we receive, not as they are
interpreted by the Massepriests, or any man's humorous fancy, but as they
proceed from the spirit of God by the ministry of his Prophets and Apostles.

Wherefore mistaking the foundation of the work, we may well imagine, that his
discourse, that is a work raised either without foundation, or beside the
foundation, is most vain, idle, and absurd. The first Chapter of his first
book, he begins with a long declamatory narration, proouing, that no man is
to intrude him self into the function of the ministry of the Church without
mission. But what is that to the foundation of religion, which is the subject
which he promised to handle? Does he suppose, that the principal foundation of
his Massing religion is laid upon the preaching, or rather not preaching and
mission of pol-shorne priests sent out by the Pope to say Mass for quick and
dead? if he do, then like as his gunpowder consortes went about of late to
blow up the King and Sat, so does he go obout to blow up the Popes Chair
together with all his Cardinals, Friars, Monks, and Masse-priestes.

For, first the Pope shall never be able to prove his mission. Ephesians. 4. we
read, that Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and Teachers. But the Pope is none of all these. His state is too
great to be contained within this small and weak number. Further he is no
successor of Peter. For he rather kills, the^ feeds Christ's sheep. Thirdly
he rather medleth with Swords, then Keys; and if he handles the Keys of the
Church, yet can he show no Commission for it. Fourthly he is absurd, if he
claim the right of a Bishop. For he does not the work of a Bishop. Lastly the
Apostles Successors, and Preachers sent from God proceed according to their
Commission and Instructions received from God. But the Pope proceeds
according to his own Decretales and the rules of his own Chancery. Out then
must he go, and all that pretend to come from him as mere intruders, if we
follow the Apostles rules.

The Cardinals are but of a late standing. S. Peter had no Cardinals about him.
Nor were the parish Priests of Rome that assisted the ancient Bishops of that
City so gallant fellows, as these new Cardinals are. They neither preach nor
Baptize as Cardinals. And therefore cannot pretend right of succession, either
from the Apostles, or from ancient Bishops or Priests. In the holy
Scriptures, albeit some allege the words Cardines terrae, there is no
mention of them. Finallye the Fathers knew them not. If then the Popes
decretales warrant them not; these Cardines terrae, or rather terren and
carnal Cardinals, may go in vltimos fines terrae, that is into the vtmoste
ends of the earth to seek for their mission.

The Monks and Friars are no where mentioned in Scripture, unless it be
Apocalypse. 9. Where we find, that Locustes did issue out of the smoke of the
bothomlesse pit, whereby is signified, that by their smoky traditions they
should obscure the light of the Gospel. They succeed not Pastors and
Teachers. For their profession is poverty, chastity and obedience to monkish
rules, and not to teach or administer Sacraments. Hierome and all antiquity
put monks after Priests, and range them in another order. Friars entered but
lately into the Church under the conduct of Dominicke and Francis. Their
authority is wholly from the Pope: and other commission can they show none.
Masse-priestes are not sent to preach and administer the Sacraments, but to
sacrifice Christ's body and blood under the accidents of bread and wine, for
quick and dead, as appears in the formal words of their ordination. But
such a mission is no where found in Scripture. For our Savior instituting the
Sacrament of the Eucharist said, accipite, edite, bibite. That is, take, eat,
drink, and not, sacrificate pro viuis et defunctis, that is, Sacrifice for
quick and dead. True it is, that he says, hoc facite that is, do this. But
hoc facere does no where either in Scripture or profane Authors signify
sacrifice this. Virgil is alleged, where one says cum faciam vitula. But if
they bring no better proofs, the Mass Priests will prove themselves as wise
as Calves. For it is one thing to say, facere vitula, and facere hoc. Beside
that, Virgil yet was never esteemed a good interpreter of Christ's words. To
omit Scriptures, this sacrificing Preest-hood of the Romanistes, has no
proof out of Fathers. For no where in any authentical writing of theirs is
any mention made of such an ordination. Nay it is apparent, yt the same was
first talked of by idle Schoolmen, and authorized after a sort by the
conuenticle of Florence under Eugenius the fourth. Finally, neither do
Scriptures, nor Fathers mention any such real, carnal, and corporal sacrifice
of Christ's body and blood made in the Eucharist under the accidents of bread
and wine for the sins of the quick and dead, as I have fully demonstrated in
my Books de m^ssa against Bellarmine. Nay, the Canon it self does signify,
that the sacrifice of the Church is offered as well by the people as the
Priest, as these words declare, qui tibi offerunt. But the Papists will not say,
that ye people offers up Christ's body. Further the Mass Priest prays that
God would be pleased to accept the sacrifice: but it is absurd to make a
Mass Priest mediator for Christ's body and blood. If then they be false
Prophets, Thieves, and Robbers, that come without missio^ or sufficient
warrant; then are the Popes of Rome, Cardinals, Monks, Friars and
Mass Priests false Prophets, Thieves, and Robbers. And that may in part also
be proved, by the confession of our adversary. For if, (as he says) all
are to be reputed such, that can neither show ordinary calling from the
Apostles, nor extraordinary from the spirit of God; then are they to be
shunned as false Prophets and false teachers, and punished severely, not only
as men lately besmired with Gunne-powder, but also as false Thieves and
Robbers. For extraordinary calling they pretend none, and ordinary calling
authorized by Gods word, they have none, as has in part been proved. Further
we say, that whereas two things are to be respected in ordination of Bishops
and Ministers of Gods word, viz. the rite of ordination, and the substance of
the function, whereto they are ordained; in the popish Church, our adversaries
have neither of these two lawful. First they have no impositio^ of hands by
Bishops. For they have no lawful Bishops, and allow ye impositio^ of hands of
Abbots. Further their Bishops are no successors of ye Apostles, but ye popes
creatures, yt is rather a temporal prince, then a Bishop. The Monks and Friars
are rather called to do penance then to preach, when they are shorn.
Secondly their Priests are not called to preach and baptize, which was the
form and substance of the mission of the Apostles and their successors, but to
sacrifice Christ's body and blood under the accidents of bread and wine for
quick and dead: which form and function, neither Kellison, nor all the rabble
of Romish Priests and Friars, shall ever prove to be ancient, lawful, or
authentical.

Against our Bishops, Priests and Deacons, no such matter can be excepted. For
first it cannot be denied but that our Bishops were lawfully ordained by
imposition of hands of other lawful Bishops. The Ordination of Bishop Cranmer
and other Bishops then living, the Papists themselves cannot deny to be
lawful. But from them other Bishops following received the rite of
consecration. Bishop Parker was consecrated by the imposition of hands of
Bishop Barloe, Bishop Couerdale, Bishop Scory, and two Suffragans, mentioned in
the Act of consecration yet to be seen: which not only had succession from
such Bishops as our adversaries account lawful, but in deed were lawful
Bishops. Our brethren in Germany and Zuizzerland had imposition of hands from
Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer and others: in France from Farel, in
Scotland from Knox and others, whom the Papists cannot deny to have been
lawfully ordained Priests, at the least if their own forms were lawful. And
from these men and their successors, al other Pastors and Ministers of the
Church, have received ye rite of impositio^ of hands, or ordination to the
Ministry. Neither is it material, that the first preachers of the Gpspel in
these Countries were not Bishops, and so called, as it was in England. For
suppose no Bishop would have renou^ced the heresies of Popery, nor have taught
sincerely: should not inferior ministers teach truth, and ordeine other
teachers after them? Furthermore, they wanted nothing of true Bishops, but the
name and title. Finally the rite and imposition of hands by such as are called
Bishops is not so necessary, but that in a defection of Bishops of a nation,
and in case of other extreme necessitye, Ministers may lawfully be ordained by
other Ministers: which is proved first, for that generally the Presbytery or
Ministry of the Church has right to impose hands, and next for that the
Keys are called Claues Ecclesiae, and not Claues Episcoporum: and lastly for
that necessity admits not the observance of all ceremonies. As for example,
admit a multitude of Christians should go into the Indiaes without ministers,
it is not to be supposed, but they have power to appoint Ministers among them
selves in this case of necessitye.

Secondly it is certain, that the Bishops and Ministers of reformed Churches
have been sent to preach and so administer the Sacraments, by such as had
authority in the Church, and that they have executed their function
accordingly. Why then should any deny them to be truly the Apostles successors?

Finally, the defection of ordinary Priests in the Romish Church being
extraordinary, we may not imagine, that all ordinary rites and forms were to
be observed in the vocation of such, as by the instinct of Gods holy spirit
were stirred up extraordinarily to restore the decayed parts and ruins of
Gods Temple.

But says Kellison page 9. If their Preachers be sent by an ordinary mission,
let them show their succession. And here he alleges Tertullians words
lib. de praescript. aduers. haeret. concerning the orders of Bishops, and
succession from the Apostles. And two places out of S. Augustine, in Psalm.
contr. part. Donati. And contr. epist. fund. where he speaks of the
succession of Bishops. Again, he urges us, if any thing were extraordinary in
those, which first reformed the Church, to prove their mission by miracles;
and runs into a long discourse of the visibilitie of the Church, of miracles
and prophesies. To which we answer first, that if the succession of Bishops
were the only proof of an ordinary mission, the Papists themselves were in
bad terms having no proofs of their succession of popes so much bragged of,
but the testimony of Anastasius, Platina, Naucler, Sabellicus, Onuphrius,
Genebrard, Baronius and such like hungry parasites of the Pope iarring and
contending one against another like mastye Curres about a bone. Secondly the
Greeks, Antiochians and Aegiptians, pretend to this day succession of Bishops,
and yet are grossly fallen from the faith, and want true Bishops. Thirdly,
Tertullian and S. Augustine speak of succession of Bishops, but neither of the^
denies the^ to be Bishops or pastors, yt are not ordained by a Bishop, who
was not ordered with al sole^nities. Fourthly, we show such a succession of
Bishops, as ye Papists themselves cannot control, deriuing the^ concerning
order and external forms from Bishops allowed by our adversaries, and
concerning succession of Doctrine from the Apostles, Fathers and ancient
Bishops of the primitive Church. Fifthly the question concerning the visibilitie
of the Church is diverse from that, which concerns succession. For I hope K.
will not say, that he ever saw the succession of Romish Bishops, or that any
Apostle saw his successors. Lastly we allege that the old Prophets were sent
extraordinarily, and yet wrought no miracles. Diverse apostolical men likewise
have been raised up by God at diverse times, and yet we read not, that either
all of them prophesied, or wrought miracles.

This being our answer, of which Kellison could not be ignorant, but that he
is either ignorant of matters in question, or else void of honesty and good
dealing; what is it, I pray you, that he is able to allege against the
vocation and mission of Gods ministers in our Churches? First says he, Page.
11. They say, that the Apostles which were the first Bishops and Pastors had
for a time their lawful successors, but that at the length the church failed,
and the Pastors with it. But while he talks of mission he lies shamefully
and without all commission. For first we distinguish both Bishops and
ordinary pastors from Apostles. So does the Apostle also, Ephe. 4. Secondly we
deny, that Christ's Church ever has failed. Thirdly we teach, that the
Apostles have always had some successors, albeit neither in one place, nor
without all interruption. If then he have not failed in true dealing, let him
set down the authors names, that have affirmed this which he reports, and
relate their words sincerely.

age. 13. he adds, that Luther disobeyed the Pope and the Church, and devised
a new Religion to cloak his villainy. But first the Pope and the Church are
evil yoaked together. For Christ's sheep hear not the voice of strangers.
Secondly these words of villainy come out of his shop of malice. Lastly never
shall this K. prove that Luther devised any new Religion. For he only
impugned late errors, and sought to bring Christians back to the ancient
Catholic faith.

Thirdly he shapeth an other answer for us Page. 14. and makes us to say,
that we had predecessors, but they were invisible. But this abuse with he
offers us, is too gross and palpable for neither do we make our
predecessors invisible. Nor do we deny, yt the ancient fathers and holy
Bishops of old time, as they taught the Catholic and apostolic faith, and no
more, were out predecessors.

Fourthly he tells us, that such as pretend extraordinary sending run
unsent. But he takes upon him too too arrogantlye to limit Gods power, and
seems plainly to contradict Gods word. S. Paul Ephesians. 4, mencioneth
Evangelists without limitation either of times or places, and Saint John
Apocaly. 11 foresheweth, that God will give power to his two witnesses
preaching against the Kingdom of Antichrist, and the abuses of their times.
Neither does either Optatus or Cypria^, or ye Apostle speak any word against
us herein. Optatus L^b. 2. contra parmen. speaks of some intruding donatists:
and Cyprian, of certain presu^ptuous Nouatians, which as the Arch-priests and
Jesuits and Mass Priests do in England, thrust themselves into the
ministry in Africa without warrant. The Apostle Ephesians. 4. leaves out the Pope
and therefore overthrows our adversaries cause. But he says not one word,
why Pastors and teachers may not sometime either he sent extraordinarily, or
furnished with extraordinary power. Finally albeit the Church be built upon a
Rock, yet particular Churches and Cities may fall into errors, and hardly can
be reformed without some extraordinary helps.

Fifthly he affirms Page. 19. that extraordinary mission is always to be
proved by extraordinary signs and tokens of Prophecies or miracles. And to
this purpose he feyneth that both Luther and Calvin endeavored to prophecy and
to work miracles. But the first is disprooued by the examples of the prophets
and Apostles. For neither do we read, that all the prophets wrought miracles,
nor that all the Apostles prophesied. Furthermore the Godly Martyrs of old
time, and the ancient Bishops were often endued with extraordinary graces:
yet did they not all work wonders and prophecy. The second is disprooued both
by our Doctrine and practice. For neither do we now practice miracles, or
stand upon prophecies, nor do we teach, that the Doctrine of truth is to be
confirmed with miracles or prophecies. To convince us, this K. produces the
testimonye of Cochleus, Surius, Staphylus, Genebrard, Fontanus, Bolsec, and
such like fellows. But their testimonies are not worth a Nut-shell, being
hired to speak shame of the popes adversaries. He is very light of belief,
that gives credit to the words either of enemies, or hired parasites.

Finally he concludes Page. 28. that we have no assurance of our Religion by
the authority of our Preachers, being able to say no more then false Apostles
for proof of their authority. He doubts not also to affirm, that both
Brownists, and those of the family of Love, may as well allege Scriptures,
and pretend to be sent of God, as Calvin and Luther. But first he shows
himself a simple Doctor of Divinity, yt teaches, that the authority of
preachers is a sufficient assurance for Christians to build their Religion and
faith upon. As for us we believe them no further, then they tread in the
steps, and continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets of God.
Secondly it is not sufficient to allege or pretend Scriptures, but they must
be truly alleged. Neither is the private fancy of every capriecious head
to be equalled with the determinations of grave men, and well experimented in
Scriptures. Lastly, there is no comparison between learned men called and
allowed by the Church, and fantastical fellows, that rashly presume to leap
into the ministerial function without either calling, allowance, or qualities
fitting for such a calling.

In his second chapter he shameth not to say, that those which ground their
Religion on Scriptures, (which he like a bad and bare fellow calls bare) set
the gate open to all Heretics and Heresies. Thus our adversaries aduauncing
the Popes decretales, and the uncertain tradisions of the Romish Church,
detest the holy Scriptures, and open their mouths against God. But we are
rather to believe Christ and his Apostles, then such blasphemous gapers and
speakers against holy Scriptures. The Apostle Ephesians. 2. says the faithful are
built upon the Apostles and prophets. Ephesians. 6. the word of God is called the
sword of ye Spirit. And 2. Tim. 3. The scripture is commended as profitable to
instruct and reprove, and able to make the man of God perfect. But neither may
the ground of faith be termed a gate set open to Heresies, nor is the sword of
the spirit a means to breed errors. Further how can the same be a gate set
open to heretics being able to make the man of God perfect? certes if the
allegation of Scriptures were a way to error, our Savior Christ would never
have sent his hearers to search scriptures. Neither would the ancient Fathers
have termed Scriptures a canon of faith, if they had been any gate set open to
Heresies. Irenaeus in his third book against Heresies, says the Apostles
first preached the Gospel, and afterward delivered the same to us in
Scriptures, that it might be a foundation and pillar of our faith. He shows
also, that it is the property of Heretics, when they are convinced by
Scriptures, to accuse the Scriptures, and to speak evil of them. Origin in
Math. tract. 25. shows, that Scriptures are to be brought for proof of all
Doctrines. Neither need we to doubt, but that of themselves, they are very
sufficient. Our Savior Math. 4. by Scriptures only overcame the Devil.
Neither did the ancient Fathers by other weapons prevail against Heretics.
In general councels of old time not the Popes decretales, but the holy
Scriptures were laid before the fathers. Lastly if the word of God cannot be
received, it is far more unlike, that Heretics will respect the traditions
or wrightings of men. Neither is it material, that Heretics cauil against
Scriptures, and detort them to contrary senses. For such cauils and
deprauations may easily be refuted by scriptures, and to such abuses the
wrightings of men are much more subject, then holy scriptures.

But says Kellison, The Devil has always affected to be as like as may be,
to Christ and his Apostles in allegation of Scripture. He makes also a long
and lewd narration of heretics alleging Scriptures. But first most false it
is, that the devil always affects to allege Scriptures. Nay he alleges
traditions, customs and humane devises more often then Scriptures. False it is
also, that heretics more often allege Scriptures, then the testimony of
traditions, Fathers and other reasons. But suppose that heretics should often
allege Scriptures; yet we are not to refuse that, which by others is abused.
Neither do wise men refuse meat, because gluttons do thereby surfeit, or
forbear to drink, for that drunkards abuse wine to excess. If then Kellison
will needs follow heretics in calumniating scriptures, and not forbear (as the
devil did) to abuse Scriptures to contrary sense, then must he give Christians
leave to follow Christ and his Apostles in alleging Scriptures, and not
presume to condemn those, which prefer Scriptures before traditions, and Gods
word before the Popes decretales.

Page 33. and 34. He runs out into a large field concerning the possession
of Scriptures, which (as he says) belongs to Catholics, and not to
heretics. But what may this make for Papists? whom by many reasons we have in
our Challenge convinced to be heretics, and not Catholics? Furthermore, the
question, which he proposes here, concerns the sufficiency and authority,
and not the possession of Scriptures. But this is this Surueyors pleasure to
abandon matters in Controversy, and to trifle about needless questions.

Afterward he shows, why heretics aledge Scriptures, and mentions the
decrees and writings of the Pope and the Church. He endeuoreth also to prove,
that Scripture is not easily to be understood. Matters much stood upon by him,
but yet very impetinent in this place, where the question is about allegation
of Scriptures, as an Argument of it self only sufficient. Furthermore, what if
heretics deprave and wrest Scriptures, shall not true Catholics rely upon
them? Thirdly the Popes bulls and blundering decretales are not of such
qualitye, that they ought to be compared to Scriptures: or mentioned, where
they are in place. Lastly, Scriptures in matters necessary to salvation, are
plain and easy. But what if some places were difficult? should we therefore
abstain to allege Scriptures? nay rather we ought diligently to study them,
that by understanding of them we may resolve our difficultyes. Tertullian
alleged by him page 37. does not refuse flatlye to dispute with heretics by
Scripture, or count such disputation lip labor, as this impudent compagnion
falsely affirms. For his common course was to convince heretics by
Scriptures. But if he thought it frutelesse, at any time to allege
Scriptures, it was against such only as denied the Scriptures.

Of holy Scriptures the profane fellow speaks, if not blasphemously, yet
basely and contemptibly. page 35. he compares them to colors used by foul
women, and to sweet odours used by sluttes. page 39. he calls them bare, and
compares them to a nose of wax, and allows the saying of one, that compared
them to Aesops Fables, especially understanding the bare letter of Scriptures.
Finally, he shameth not page 41. to say, that the word of God with a false
meaning is the word of the devil. Matters deserving rather corporal
punishment, then verbal censures. We may not therefore marvel, if he rail at
Luther and Calvin belying them without all shame or conscience. First he says
Luther dissaloweth S. James his Epistle. He only makes it inferior to other
Canonical Scriptures, as not esteemed to be his. Secondly he charge Calvin
and Luther with Misconstruing S. Paul's Epistles. He should rather prove it
then falsely affirm it. Thirdly he says Luther does discanon Job, jest at
Ecclesiastes, and contemn all the Gospels, but S. John's, the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and that of Jude. But his writings do refute these slanders, and
nothing does K. bring to justify them. Lastly he says Calvin and Luther will
have the bare letter, or joined with their voluntary exposition to be Judge of
controversies: matters utterly untrue and improbable. For neither do we
admit the letter without the sense, nor do we allow voluntary or private
expositions.

Page 46. he falsifyeth the testimony of Scriptures, where he says Her self
confesses her own obscurity. For S. Peter 2. Epist. 3. does not say that the
Scriptures are obscure, as this K. pretends: but only that certain things
in S. Paul's Epistles are difficult. And psalm. 119. the Prophet compares Gods
word to a Lantern, and to light. Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum says he,
and lumen semitis meis. If any obscurity and difficulty be attributed to
Scriptures by Fathers, it is only in such points, as are not necessary to
salvation.

Finally, he recites the words of Luther concerning the plainness of
Scriptures partially, and obiecteth unto us the testimony of Osiander about the
differences concerning man's justification by Christ. But neither is Luther to
be blamed, if he reprove those, that call Scriptures obscure: nor is any
credit to be given to Bellarmine citing Osiander, nor to Osiander, where he
writes against those that differ from him in the Article of man's
justification. Long may he declayme against Luther and Osiander and others. But
nothing does his reasoning or rather railing against reading of Scriptures
effect. For who will not rather follow the exhortation of Chrysostom exhorting
laymen to get them Bibles, and to read Scriptures, then regard the babbling of
this Popish parasite, that calls readers of scriptures Biblists, and says we
hold, that to be the true meaning of Scriptures, which every ones private
spirit imagines?

In the third chapter of his first book, he disputes against those which make
their own private Spirit supreme judge in earth of the interpretation of
Scripture. The which as it lanceth the Pope deeply, whose private and
satanical spirit is the supreme judge, whom all Papists are bound to follow;
so it touches not us at all. For albeit we refuse the Pope and his adherents
for judges; yet we rely not upon our own private spirit in expounding
scriptures but upon the spirit of God, yt either speaks plainly, or
expounds himself in some other place, and for atteining the right
understanding of Scriptures, use the hope of tongues, the exposition of fathers
and all learned men, the discourse of histories, and all other good means.
Neither did Luther think, or proceed otherwise. Why then does noth this
superlunaticall Surueyor declare, who they be, that do attribute the public
and judicial interpretation of Scriptures to every man's private spirit, and in
what place? why does he forge to himself an absurd opinion held by none, that
I know, save the Papists, who in matters controuersed hold the Popes private
definition, for a supreme resolution? would he therein show his triumphant
eloquence? if this were his purpose; let us see, I beseech you, what he
performs.

First he says self love is a good, as guilding, and then talks of the
goodmans Cow, Pans pipe, Appolloes harp, painting of women's faces, Hens and
Chickens, and such like fooleries. But his horrible eloquence declares him to
be the Chicken of a Buzzard, and a blind Harper, that cannot discern
between self love, and private spirits. His reader also may see, yt he has
as much skill in painting of faces, as in expounding of scriptures. And yet all
his Cow eloquence will not serve to cover the deformities of the painted whore
of Babylon, of whom he is a devout servant, and upon whom he bestows
much complextion to no purpose.

Luther regards it not, albeit some of the Fathers should speak against a
point of faith: neither would he submit his Doctrine to be judged by the
Romish antichristian prelates. But that shows not, that he preferred himself
before any, but rather that he preferred the Scriptures and articles of
Christian faith before all. And to them he exhorts all to submit
themselves, ascribing nothing to his own opinion. But what if Luther should
have spoken out of square? what is that to the new Religion, he speaks off?
does our religion depend upon every word of Luther? certes no more, then the
faith of the Church of Rome upon the idle discourses of Kellisons Survey. As
for Calvin he refers nothing to his own spirrit, but to the rule of Gods
word, to which he submits his interpretations, as well of these words, hoc
est corpus meum, as of other places of Scriptures else where interpreted by him.

Finally, we neither reject Fathers, nor Councels, nor godly pastors. The
skip-iacke surueyor therefore, that calls Luther and Calvin Skip-iacks, and
like a skip-iack running from matter to matter, makes so long a declamation
against self love, and ouer-weening a man's self, did herein seem to love
himself, but too much, and much to offend in ouer-weening and surcuydrie, that
pleased himself in this Chapter, that is so far from the purpose, so false
in respect of us, and so contrary to himself, and his own cause.

His fourth Chapter he begins, as his manner is, with a pedanticall
declamation against Parricides, showing how strangely they were punished, being
sowed into a sack with a Cock, a Viper, an Ape, and a Dog. But to what
purpose is all this? does he think, that it is no less, then the crime of
Parricide, to reject some Fathers? why then, the Pope and his agents by the
confession of this K. are all parricides, and for their dogged and viperous,
apish, and cockish natures, deserve to be sewed in sackes, as Vrbane the sixth
did deal with certain Cardinals, and with ye beasts of like nature to be
thrown into the sea. As for us we reject no Fathers, that consent one with
another, and with holy scriptures in matters of faith, but rather the
bastardlye writings of falsaries, and of such as take upon them the names of
Fathers, or else such, as hold singular opinions, or vary from the Doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles of Christ.

Luther had no reason in matter of the Sacrifice of ye Mass to disclaim the
fathers, which all with one voice, as I have justified against Bellarmine, make
against the carnal sacrifice of the Popish Mass for quick and dead. But if
he or Calvin, or any other speak against Fathers, it is not against all, nor
against the Books, which are certainly known to be theirs, but against
counterfeit fellows, and some particular opinions.

If Calvin should call the men of Trent, Hogs and Asses, he did them a
special favor. For they showed themselves to be worse, being open enemies of
the Christian faith, and most obstinate oppugners of the truth. But they are
none of our Fathers, nor of the Fathers of the Church. Nor is the synagogue of
Rome maintaining the abuses, which we refuse, our Mother, but the Mother of
fornications, or as Petrarch calls her, the Mother of errors, and the great
Whore described Apocalypse. 17. Gregory ye first wants much of ye learning of
former Fathers; yet is neither he, nor his messenger Austen so bad, but that
his successors were far worse. Furthermore, we do not believe, that so wise
a man as Gregory the first is reputed, would write so foolish Books, as the
dialogues, that go under his name, and are so full of old wives tales, and
fabulous toys.

But should Luther, Calvin, or others ouerlash in speaking of Fathers; yet to
do this K. favor, I am content to join with him upon this issue, that the
Fathers of the Church in their authentical writings in the greatest
controversies betwixt us and the Papists are for us and against them. And of
this he could not be ignorant, but that he is only a School pedant, and an
ignorant broacher of new opinions, and not versed in the writings of the
Fathers. Against us he alleges the most reverend and learned Father Toby
Matthew most worthy Bishop of Durham: but he does offer him singular wrong, as
that reverend Bishop will always testify. Afterward he brings in Genebrard
a professed enemy, whose deposition is no more worth, then if this ketler
should out of his malice speak it. Luthers scruples grew not upon doubt of the
Fathers doctrine, but of the long approbation of the Mass, and other abuses.
In freewill for substance of doctrine we doubt not of the Fathers favor
against the Papists.

Finally he says, The Fathers have the infallible assistance of Gods holy
spirit in exposition of Scriptures, and that those which reject them, reject
also the councels of the Church, and the authority of Pastors, by which the
Church is directed: And finallye open a gate to all Heresies. But here are
many absurdities hoodled together without truth or order. For First he
supposes most falsely, that all the Fathers are rejected by us. Secondly he
confirms the exposition of Fathers to be equal to the determination of the
Pope, which neither his holy Father, nor his own consortes will grant.
Thirdly not every one that rejects Fathers in some things, does therefore
reject councels or all the pastors of the Church. Finally albeit diverse late
Councels were rejected, and the testimonies of fathers not admitted without
choice; yet the definitions of Councels, which are apparently deduced out of
Scriptures, and the Fathers authentical expositions, consonant to the rule of
faith might be approved by those, which have authority in the Church, which
every private man is to follow, unless by some equal, or greater authority
that resolution be reuersed. But if Kellisons Doctrine were confessed; then
might the Pope go shake his ears. For what should we need to go to him, if ye
Fathers have Gods holy spirit infallibly assisting them in the exposition of
Scriptures? again if denying of the authority of Fathers were ye opening of a
gap to all Heresies, the^ did the Popes open gaps to al Heresies, who in their
decretaline expositions of hoc est corpus meum, and feed my Sheep, and drink
ye all of this, and infinite such like textes of scriptures decline quite from
the common interpretation of Fathers, and nothing regard their authority.

The fifth Chapter is partly a Scholastical exercise concerning the motives,
that may enduce men to believe the Christian faith, and partly an inuectiue
against us, for that we admit not the rinegued Masse-priestes sent us hither by
the Pope, and their counterfeit miracles. And thereupon he would conclude, that
we want those probable means to enduce reasonable men to be of our religion,
which the Papists have. But first his dispute concerning probable motives to
the faith, is nothing else, but a vain discourse of his own foolish motions,
disioynted opinions, and improbable fancyes. For not only the Pagans of old
time, but also the Turks now may better allege antiquity, consent, authority
of mission, the subduing of the world to their religion, miracles and such
like motives, then the Papists, seeing Popery is nothing else, but a
corruption of Christian religion, that is neither so ancient, as Arianisme,
nor so largely spread abroad as Paganism and Turcisme. Neither are the
Papists for learning comparable to the ancient Philosophers. Secondly
whatsoever this K. speaks of mission, it makes against the Masse-priestes,
that come both without authority, and without any message delivered by Christ,
or his Apostles unto them. For never shall he prove the Popes usurped
authority, though he should live to the worlds end, nor that Mass Priests are
to sacifice for quick and dead, and to cut the throat of Princes, which be the
principal points of their mission. Thirdly we offer to prove, that we have
not only those probable motives, which he speaks of, as miracles, consent,
antiquity, and such like, to enduce men to like of our religion; but also the
word of God, the testimony of the ancient apostolic Church, and many sure
grounds, which our adversaries want. Neither needed this K. to brag much of
Bellarmine or Suarez, seeing their positions stand refuted without answer, but
that he which can say little him self, must needs rely on others. Fourthly
nothing has this babbler to object either against the authority of our
teachers, or their doctrine; which is not more unsavory, then Colewortes twice
or thrice sodden. Where he calls Boy Masse-priestes old teachers, and their
doctrine also old, and our teachers and doctrine new; he like a poor
disputer beggeth that, which he cannot by argument effect or convince, and
like a foolish pleader, talks of matters prejudicial to him self. Nay, when
he shall come to trial, he shall find, that the Fathers in all points of
faith are for us, and not for the Pope, whose triple-Crowneship, and
decretaline doctrine they never knew. Fifthly where he (like a curre) barketh
at the memory of the renowned Father Bishop Jewel, and snarleth at the most
famous learned man the Lord of Plessis Marlj, as if they had corrupted and
mis-alledged Scriptures and Fathers, and by untruths and weak proofs abused
they readers; the first is justified by master Whitakers against all the
barkings of his malicious enemies: the second has verified his allegations
against al his accusers, by the original words of the authors by him alleged,
in a late edition of his book, and both these verifications stand without
reply. But if we should go about to collect all the lies, slanders,
impostures, corruptions, falsifications, errors, fooleries, fond conclusions,
absurd assertions without ground, and imperfections of Bellarmine, Baronius,
Suarez, Harding, Saunders, Alan, Stapleton and their mates; they would fill
Cart-loades of volumes. Finally all this long discourse is as far from the
purpose, as Kellison is far from learning and honesty. For here he should
reason against the grounds of our Religion. But grounds are one thing, and
motives another: those being certain, these probable, and oftentimes not
concludent. But were he not a beetle-headed Surueyor, as he is a polshorne
sacrificer of Baal; he would have forborne to touch this point of motives. For
what motive can any man have to believe, yt an unlearned, bougerly, blind and
wicked Pope is supreme judge of Religion, that an obscure and infamous Italian
has power to depose the King of England; that Christians are not to believe
the articles of our christian faith, nor Scriptures, unless they receive them
from the Popes chair; that Ecclesiastical traditions, of which the authors
and defenders are not yet resolved, are equal to holy Scriptures, that the
old lattin vulgar translation of the Bible is authentical, and the original
text not, or that Dogs do sometime eat Christ's body, or that Christ's body
and blood is sacrificed in the Mass, although the same at the same instant be
in heaven, and is not consumed, as is the manner of sacrifices; and infinite
such absurdities?

In the end of the first Chapter he cites diverse slaundrous reports of Luther
and Calvin, and talks Idely of the good life of Papists, or rather excuses
their lewd life notorious to the world. He does also allege the number,
antiquity, miracles, and other qualityes of such as taught his religion.
Afterward he runs back to talk of the succession of Popes. Finally by a
tale out of Josephus of the Jews and Samaritans Temple he douteth not, but he
should win the victory, if he were to plead against us. But if he plead no
more wisely, then he does in this place; his auditorye should have good reason
to hiss him from the bar. For first his slanderous reports against Luther
and Calvin are matters devised by Cochleus, Staphilus, Bolsecus, and other
popish parasites hired of purpose to devise slanders against the^: of which
Bolsecus in public synod revoked his malicious libell. But the matters we
object to the Popes, and their adherents, are matters recorded in publik acts
and authe^tical histories, the authors whereof were men favoring popery.
Secondly this Lobster-faced fellow would blush to talk of the lives of the
Italians and other the popes adherents, but that he knows their lewd acts
are concealed from the people of England by the remoteness and distance of
their Country. And yet all that know Italy, and the nations subject to the
Pope, will say, he has no reason to stand much upon their pietye or honestye.
Thirdly never shall he show, either that the modern Popes are the successors
of the first Bishops of Rome, or that the Popish Bishops, yt are now ye marked
slaves of Antichrist, are the true successors of Austen the Monk and his
fellows. Nay the Doctrine that we profess, being taught by them, and the
decretaline doctrine yt we refuse, being unknown to them, it must needs
follow, that not the popish Wolves, but our Bishops are their successors,
Finally the tale out of Josephus does little fit this K. purpose. For neither
has the modern Church of Rome any affinity with the temple of the Jews, nor
can this K. do any such feats as he imagines.

Was not then this surueyor both idle, and unadvised, that runs through so
many impertinent matters to his particular purpose, and so adverse to his
general cause?

The last Chapter of his first book is yet more extrauaga^t, then al ye rest.
For therein he speaks not one word of the grounds of our Religion, which are
the things which he propounded for the subject of his discourse; but of the
Pope, whom we take to be the head of Antichrists Kingdom, and to be so
rightlye called, although he would gladlye prove him to be the supreme judge
in matters of Religion. And his reason is, for that every Kingdom has his
King, every Dukedom a Duke, every City a Major or Bayliffe, every Army a
general, every village almost has a Constable, etc. he proves the same
also by Gods order both before the Law and after, and by the example of Saint
Peter and of the Bishops of Rome, who, as he says, were ever called the Vicars
of Christ, and successors of S. Peter. And in the end having run himself out
of breath, he concludes, that we have no judge in matters of Religion, and so
open a gap to all Heresies. But if he come into his Country and reason no
better, the Constable of the parrish where he landeth, if he be a man of any
understanding, may do well to set him by the heels. For First he reasons
absurdly from politic bodies to Christ's mystical body. Secondly if any
argument might be drawn from thence; yet would this similitude overthrow the
Popes monarchy. For albeit, every Kingdom, Army, City and Village has his
governor; yet it were absurd to make one King over all the world, one
commander over all armies, one grand Mayor or Constable over all the Majors and
Constables of the world. Thirdly, neither was there one supreme judge of
matters of Religion before the law, under the law, or in the time of the
Gospel, as I have at large proved against Bellarmine in my Books De
po^tifice. Romans (which are to hot for such a tender fingred Surueyor to handle)
nor are we now to conform our selves to the law, but to Christ's institution.
Fourthly, for one thousand years after Christ, shall not this ranging fellow
prove, that the Bishops of Rome were called Christ's Vicars. The title of
Peter's successors is common to all true teachers succeeding Peter, and
imports no general command over the whole Church. Fiftlye, Theophilus
Bishop of Antioche Lib. 2. Autolicum is grossly belyed. So like wise is
Chrysostom homil. 34. in epist. 1. ad Corinth. Finally, he wrongeth us, where
he says we have no judge of matters of Religion. For the only supreme judge
that determines infallibly is God speaking in Scriptures. If any variety be
about his determination, the supreme judge of all the church upon earth is a
lawful general council proceeding according to Gods word. In the mean while
every nation is to stand to the definition of a national council. And to this
judge do we submit our selves. As for the Papists they submit themselves to
a blind Pope, that sometime believes not, and seldom understands the
Articles of the Christian faith. Kellison therefore, that dreameth of such a
fellows infallible judgment, has little reason to talk against the
proceeding used in the Church of England, for deciding of matters of Religion.
Further he has need to beware, that the Constable of one parrish or other,
take him not within the sphere of his actiuitie, least he place him in the
supreme hole of the Stocks, for his supreme idiotisme in matters of judgment
concerning religion.

Chap. 2. The foundations of Popish religion discovered to be most weak and
foolish.
THus we have seen how much this K. has mistaken the grounds of our religion,
and how little he has to say against them. Let us therefore now consider his
supposed grounds, and the common foundations of the popish religion, and what
Christians are to think of them.

Kellison where he talks of ye grounds of our religion, discourses first of
the mission of our Preachers, and Lib. 1. cap. 1. concludes that no man is to
hang his salvation on these new Ministers. Which argues first, that he
supposes the mission of the Pope and his sha^^^ Masse-priestes to be a
principal ground of religion, and next, (...) ^he papists are to hang their
salvation upon them. But this (...)nely a mere foolery, and most gross
impietye, but also an open way to all superstition and Heresy. The same ground
is also overthrown by Kellisons own positions. Mere foolery it is to build
our faith upon a blind ignorant and wicked Pope. Neither can we esteem it
other then impiety to add a foundation to that, which is already laid, which
is Christ Jesus, and to believe the Popes determinations, as the word of God.

Furthermore, this being granted, then will it follow, the Pope teaching
Heresy, that all Papists are to follow him, and that when he goes to hell
for teaching errors, according to the Chapter si papa. did. 40. that Kellison
and his consorts are to go after him. Kellison supposes, that he cannot err.
But this shows, that his faith is built upon supposals, yea such supposals
as by evident demonstrations are declared to be false.

Finally this ground of the mission of the Popes, and their adherent
Masse-priestes is overthrown by Kellison his own discourse. For if the Popes
be not S. Peter's or the first Bishops of Romes successors; then are they, as
Kellison says, intruders and false Prophets, nay thieves and Robbers.

But Saint Peter's successors they cannot be, having First no vocation to be
Apostles. Secondly, taking on them an Office that S. Peter never had, to wit,
to manage both the swords, to dispose of kingdoms, to cut christian men's
throats, that will not receive their mark, and leaving S. Peter's office in
feeding Christ's sheep.

Neither are they the lawful successors of the first Bishops. For first they
are no Bishops, as neither having lawful election by the people and Clergy,
but only by certain new vpstart electors called Cardinals, nor preaching or
doing the work of a Bishop. Secondly, they have devised a new Doctrine and
faith, diverse from that, which the first bishops of Rome taught, as their
decretales show. Thirdly, they have taken upon them an universal power both
in temporal and ecclesiastical matters, which the Christian Bishops of Rome
in times past never had nor challenged.

The Mass Priests consequently being authorized by the Pope cannot pretend any
lawful calling or mission. But were they clear of this exception, yet can
they not justify their mission. For first they are called ad sacrificandum pro
viuis et defunctis, yt is to sacrifice for quick and dead. But of such a
calling there is neither ground nor memorial in the holy scriptures, or
ancient fathers. Secondly, they teach not the Doctrine of the Apostles and
their successors, but of the Popes decretales, and of the Schools Sophisters.
Lastly, they are the market slaves of Antichrist having their crowns shaven,
and their hands anointed with his oil, and with him they fight against the
Saints of God. Of their abominable villainies, I will say nothing at this time,
although I have just occasion being provoked thereto by the unjust slanders of
this greasy Mass Priest against master Luther and Master John Calvin of
reverend memory. That part of my defense shall be reserved to a greater volume.

Secondly, this K. excludes scriptures from being a foundation of religion.
Wherein he has great reason if we respect the doctrine of Papists. For how can
they admit scriptures for a foundation, yt rail against them, fly from them,
and cannot stand, if their authority were most eminent, and to be preferred
before all human devises? but this shows, ye Kellison is a better Mason to
build Babell, and the synagogue of satan, which is vpholden with humane
traditions and the Popes sword, the^ the Church of God, which is built upon
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone.

His third foundation, as it seems, is laid upon Councels and Fathers. For of
them he talks much Lib. 1. C. 4. but neither does he name what Councels, nor
what Fathers, nor what writings of Fathers he means: matters of very
important consideration. For foundations must be certain. But among the
councels acts, and writings of Fathers, there are many things never
established by councels, nor taught by Fathers. Furthermore the Fathers
themselves will not have their writings taken for canonical, or authentical
scriptures, as may be proved by infinite testimonies. But I will here only
allege one or two. Quamuis sanctus sit aliquis post apostolos says Hierome
in Psalm. 86. quamuis disertus sit, non habet authoritatem. He says plainly,
that no Father after the Apostles time has authority. The same Father
shows, that only Scriptures are the foundation of the Church: and Augustine
lib. 2. Contr. Crescon. c. 31. has these words: literas Cypriani, non vt
canonicat habeo. The like he says epist. 19. ad. Hieronymum, and epist. 48.
showing that there is great difference betwixt scriptures, and the writings of
Fathers. Finally diverse Heretics have pretended councels and Fathers.

His last and most authentical foundation is the supreme judgment of the
Pope. But that shows, that popish religion is rather from man, then God, and
that the Papists are rather the synagogue of Antichrist, relying upon his
decretales, then the church of God, that is built upon also plainelye declare,
that there is no certainty in popish Religion, standing upon the humor of a
man, whose opinions are repugnant to other popes, and whose mind may change,
and cause him to utter contrary Doctrines. Thirdly, it shows, that Popish
Religion is absurd, being grounded upon the opinions and sentences of ignorant
and impious men. Finally, grant this, and then the Papists, if the Pope deny
Christ, must all go to hell with him.

Likewise Stapleton handling of purpose this argument in the preface of his
book of Doctrinall principles, delivers unto us these seven principles and
foundations of faith, First the Catholic and Apostolic Church, Secondly, the
power of the same church in teaching and judging matters of faith infallibly,
Thirdlye, the persons, in whom this power does reside. Fourthly, the means by
which they proceed in teaching and judging. Fifthly, the chief heads, about
which that power is conversant. Sixthly, authority to interpret Scriptures
infallibly: and lastly, power to deliver Doctrines not contained in Scriptures.
But if he had been bound in statute staple, I do not think he could have
spoken more absurdly, or impiously, and falslye. For First if he talk of
principles demonstratiue of the christian faith, then should he not have talked
of single words, and terms, as he does, but of propositions or Scriptures
containing the primarye propositions of the Christian faith. Secondly if the
rude fellow had but had one grain of piety, he would not have left out the
holy Scriptures out of the number of christian principles. Thirdly, the Church,
to speak properlye, is built upon a foundation, and is not the foundation of
the Church, unless he will have both a building without a foundation, and a
foundation beside ye building. Fourthly, it is an absurd course to separate ye
power of the Church, and the persons in whom the same consists, from the
Church. Fifthly, what more ridiculous, then to call a form of proceeding, a
principle of Christian Doctrine? Sixthly, all Articles of the faith may be
called heads, but it is mere foppery to think that Christian Religion has as
many foundations, as several Articles. Finally it is most absurd to believe,
that either the Pope, or the Church of Rome does interpret scriptures
infallibly, or has the power to add Articles not contained in Scriptures to
the Christian faith. If then Stapletons meaning be, that all traditions not
written, and all interpretations of the Pope and his adherents, and all the
Popes determinations and decretales, and the sayings of the fathers and
Councels allowed by the Pope are the foundations of faith, then does he endeavor
to build Babylon, and not Jerusalem, fantastical devises, and monstrous
chimeraes, and not the true faith; the kingdom of Antichrist, and not Christ's
church. Nay if these were foundations of faith; then would it follow First,
that the foundation of the Romish faith is not yet fully laid. For as yet all
their decretales, and determinations are not fully published. Secondly we
should not know where to find this faith, these traditions, and
interpretations and opinions of Fathers, all of them being not yet resolved.
Thirdly, the Romish faith should be a mere humane devise standing upon humane
fancies. Finally it should be contrary to it self, and to scriptures: for such
are the Romish traditions and interpretations and allegations of fathers.

Canus in his Book de Locis Theologicis, lays down ten grounds, from
whence all arguments in controversies of Divinity in his opinion are derived.
The first is holy Scripture, The 2. tradition, The 3. is the authority of the
Catholic church The 4. is the authority of general councels. The 5. is the
authority of the Church of Rome. The 6. is the authority of the holy Fathers.
The 7. is the authority of Schoolmen and Canonists. The 8. is natural
reason. The 9. is the authority of Philosophers, and civil lawyers. The last
is the authority of humane histories. But first it is no small wrong to join
with holy scriptures, not only ye writing of Fathers, but also the writings of
Schoolmen, canonists, and profane writers. Secondly, it is the overthrow of
faith, to found the same upon uncertain and unknown traditions. Thirdly, it
appears hereby, that the faith of Papists for the most part is an humane
opinion being grounded upon men, nay upon humane reason. Finally, his grounds
are not only changeable for the most part, but also contrary one to another.
That is proved, not only by the mutability of the decrees of councels, and
Doctrine of councels, Schoole-diuines, Canonists, and profane authors, but
also by traditions themselves, of which diverse are abrogated and ceased. This
may be demonstrated by traditions, by testimonies of Fathers, acts of
Councels, the doctrine of Thomistes and Scotistes, Canonists, civil Lawyers,
and profane writers. For not only profane writers have showed themselves
ignorant of matters of faith, but both Schoolmen and fathers have held
contrary opinions, as shall be proved when need is by diverse particulars.

Bellarmine in his Preface in lib. de pont. Romans is not ashamed to apply these
words of the Prophet Isay, Behold I will put a Stone in the foundation of Sion:
unto the pope. There also he avouches the Sea of Rome to be the foundation
of the Faith. Likewise in the end of his preface de verbo dei, he seems to
hold that the sense of Scriptures is to be fetched from the Popes See, and
senseless decretales. Lastly the same man does as confidently allege the
Pope decretales, as Saint Paul's Epistles.

Gelasius in the Chapter Sancta. did. 15. ordeineth, that the Histories of
Martyrs and their sufferings are to be received. And commonly the Romish
Church does prove her traditions partly out of such legends, and partly out of
their missals, porteses, and other rituall Books.

Kellison therefore, when he looks upon the ruinous foundations of the Romish
faith, has little reason to talk against the foundations of our Christian
faith. For First we all agree, that the writings of the Prophets and Apostles
are the principles and foundations of our faith: and thus both Scriptures, and
Fathers do teach us. But the Papists, as may appear by that, which I have
alleged, do one differ from another.

Canus does not once mention the Pope among his theological places: which to
Stapleton and Bellarmine is the principal foundation of the work.
Contrariwise Stapleton leaves Scriptures out of his reckoning of principles of
faith, which Canus confesses to be a most solid foundation of faith. Canus
again numbreth diverse foundations, and places theological, which others do
not once mention.

Secondly albeit we do not build our faith principallye, either upon the acts
of councels, or testimonies of Fathers, further then they build their Doctrine
upon holy Scriptures, yet in the interpretation of Scriptures we do not
neglect the authority of councels and Fathers. But the Papists, albeit they
seem to found their faith upon the authority of councels, and Fathers, yet
regard them not one straw, if it be the popes pleasure to determine contrary
unto them.

Thirdly, our faith is built upon the rock Christ Jesus, but the faith of the
Romanists is built upon the straw and stubble of popish traditions and
determinations, and as they say; upon the Pope, who to them is the supreme
judge, and pole-starre of faith shining out of his papal Chair.

Fourthly our faith is the Christian faith, being built only upon the word of
God. Theirs is a decretaline, and an humane faith, being built upon the Popes
decretales, and humane inventions.

Fifthly, our grounds are immoouable, and agree well one with an other. But
their grounds are mutable, and contrary one to another.

Sixthly, they cannot deny our grounds, unless they will blaspheme against
holy Scriptures. But upon their own grounds they are not yet well agreed. We
do generally refuse them, and antiquity was ignorant of them.

Seventhly, our grounds are safe and sure. But he that follows the Pope, or
believes all that is written in the Breuiaryes and Missals, cannot assure him
felfe, that he is in the right.

Finally, it is a thing most ridiculous to believe, that whatsoever an
unlearned Pope, or a man void of religion determines in matters of faith, is
to be holden as a matter and firm Article of faith. For as well may a blind
man judge of colors, as a blind and irreligious Pope of matters of religion.
But we are assured, that the Prophets and Apostles have truly declared unto us
the whole counsel of God.

Open your eyes therefore dear Christians, and suffer not your selves to be
abused by the impostures of Masse-priestes. You see they are not resolved in
the foundations of faith. And do you think that these men entend the
edification of Gods Church, who ^rre in the maine principles and foundations of
faith, and cannot stand, unless the Pope, who has manifestly declared
himself an enemy of religion, may sit judge in his own cause?

Chap. 3. Kellisons Motives to Popish religion compared with the Motives, that
may enduce men to embrace true Christian religion. Therein also the true
motives to Popery are touched.
KEllison in his first Book and fifth Chapter, talks of Motives to Christian
religion: but so coldely and barely, as if his cause wanted life and motion.
First, he tells us page 106. that our Savior Christ proved his Mission by
prophecyes and miracles. Among other miracles he talks of the strange
conquest, which the Apostles made of Idolatry. Secondly, he says we want
reason and authority to persuade men to our religion, being not comparable
either to ancient Fathers, or to Bellarmine, Suarez, and such fellows, in
wit, or learning, or good life, or antiquity, or number, or dignity. Thirdly,
he talks of consent and succession. But First the example of our Savior
Christ, and the conquest made by Christ's Apostles over Idolatrye makes against
the idolatrous papists. For neither can the Pope prove his universal Monarchy
by Prophets, or by miracles; nor has any Christian man reason to adhere to
papists, that want confirmation of their Popes, and Masse-priestes Mission,
and yet bring into their Churches heathenish idolatry, and much false and
erroneous doctrine, and namely concerning the 7. Sacraments, the sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood in the Mass for quick and dead, Popish purgatory, and
teaching that man by power of free will is able to work his own salvation,
that we are to make vows and confessions to Saints, and to offer sacrifice in
honor of them, that we are to satisfy for sins (whose guilt is remitted) in
Purgatory, that the Pope has power to deliver souls out of Purgatory by his
Indulgences, that his Chair is the foundation of the church and such like
doctrines of devils.

Secondly, ye ancient Fathers are wholly against the papists in these points.
As for the Popes of Rome and their parasites Bellarmine, Suarez, and the rest,
they are not such, as are to be bragged upon, either for learning, wit, good
life, or any virtue.

Thirdly, neither are the papists comparable in number to the Turks and
Pa^a^s, nor have they either true succession, or consent, or antiquity, yt
makes for them. Nay if the papists would stand to these motives; they were
clearly gone. For neither have they prophesies or miracles for them, Nor can
the Pope, or the Mass Priests prove their mission by miracles, nor does
antiquity make for them. As for good life, this K. may be much ashamed to
speak of it, the filthynes of Popes, Cardinals, Masse-priestes, Monks, Nonnes
and Friars, being so notorious to the world, and recorded in so many stories
and acts of Councels.

What then is the reason, that so many adhere to papists, and what are the
motives, that enduce so many to like their religion? Forsooth first Fire and
Sword. For they kill all, that will not receive the Popes mark, or that once
mutter against their idolatrous religion.

Secondly, secret and treacherous practices against all that shall once dare to
profess the truth. Masse-priestes brewe treason and rebellion, Jesuits set on
assassinors. The Pope has his Agents with all Princes. Neither does he, or his
Agents omit any occasion to stir up Princes to make war against them that
profess the truth, and to persecute them to death.

Thirdly, exco^municating, and killing, and poisoning of Kings opposite to the
Popes tyranny. By the Popes practice K. Henry the 8. and Queen Elizabeth were
often in danger here in England. By the treachery of the Leaguers King Henry the
3. was slain, and Henry the 4. wounded and brought to great extremity in
France. Henry of Lucemburgh was poisoned by a Dominican Friar. Frederic the 2.
was empoysoned, and in the end murdered, as Matthew Paris does signify: and
this no dout by the Popes practice.

The 5. of November anno 1605. a train of gunpowder was laid by certain
Papists under the upper house of Parliament, purposing to destroy the King,
the Queen, the Prince, the nobles and commons there assembled; and by their
destruction to replant popery in England The treason discovered, they broke
forth into open rebellion.

Fourthly, slaundrous Libels; as the inuectiues of Alan and Parsons against
Queen Elizabeth and the State: of Saunders against Her, and her Parents and
Counsel: of the Leaguers and Jesuits against King Henry the 3. and 4. of
France, and the railing discourses written against Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin,
Beza, Knox, and all godly men declare.

Fifthly their impudent lies and fables in setting forth their own Religion,
and discommending the truth, and such as either now, or in time past professed
it, as the fabulous tales of Iacobus de voragine, Surius, Baronius, and diverse
writers of popish Histories will testify.

Sixthly, their publishing of counterfeit books, under the names of Fathers, and
the corrupting of Fathers by their expurgatorie indexes.

7. Their impudent falsification of ancient Fathers, and other writers, as may
be proved out of the allegations of Bellarmine, Stapleton, and other popish
Proctors.

8. Their false imputations laid upon others, and their impudent denials of
things done by themselves.

9. The diligent suppressing of the Books of holy Scripture, and all Books
written in vulgar tongues, concerning matters of religion.

10. The prohibiting of Christians to dispute reason, or question of matters of
faith.

11. The ignorance and blindness of christians, that know nothing, but only
such matters, as the false Friars and Masse-priestes tell them.

12 The impudent clamors and raylings of this generation in Pulpits, lying and
slaundring all, that profess the Gospel sincerely.

13. The rigor of auriculer confession, by means whereof the Popish faction
understands all men's secrets.

14. The bloody cruelty of the popes agentes, executioners and inquisitors.

Finally, the rewards and praises that are given to those that travail either
by writing, or practice to maintain the Popes cause. Without these motives all
the motives mentioned by Kellison were to no purpose.

As for us we have two principal motives to hold us in the truth, which would
also move others to draw unto us, if they knew them. The first is the truth
and justice of our cause. The next is the impieties, blasphemies,
abominations, fooleries, absurdities, injustice of Popery. For the truth of
our Religion we^ offer to bring Scriptures, councels, Fathers, antiquity
consent, true succession, law, reason and all other proofs required in the
justification of Religion.

The reasons to deter men from Popery, we shall God willing deduce at large in
a particular discourse. Thus much may serve to requite Kellisons discourse of
motives to Religion for the present.

Chap. 4. Of the marks and properties of Heretics.
THe name and nature of Heresy being so odious, it is not to be marvelled, if
the Patrons thereof disguise themselves in their terms, names, and titles.
The Valentinians, as Tertullian in his Book against them testifies, did color
their most vain and filthy devises, with holy names, titles and arguments of
true religion. Sanctis nominibus and titulis and argumentis verae religionis
vanissima atque turpissima figmenta configurantes. So likewise do Papists
under color of Catholic religion present to their followers their heretical
D^^trine concerning the being of Christ's body in many places,
transubstantiation, the carnal eating of Christ's flesh with the mouth, the
devouring of Christ's body by brute beasts, and the merits of congruitie.
Under the title of Gods true worship they commend the service of the blessed
Virgin, the adoration of Angels, of Saints, and of their images; under the name
of the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving they shadow the abominable idol^
of the Mass: and under the name of succession, the grievous yoke of the Popes
Tyranny. But as Wolves muffled in sheep clothing are discerned by their
Woluish qualities; so Heretics are discovered by certain marks and
heretical properties. The which if Kellison would or durst have set down
truly; then would it have appeared, that Papists, and not we, are Heretics
For first Heretics are they, that teach new Doctrine in the Church. Haerest
deputatur says Tertullian Lib. de praescript. quod postea inducitur. But such
is the decretaline and Trent doctrine of traditions, justification, Sacraments,
purgatory, indulgences, worship of images, Angels and Saints.

Secondly, they fly the light of Scriptures and speak evil of them.
Therefore Tertullian calls them lucifugas scripturarum, and Ierenaeus Lib. 3.
aduers. haeres. c. 2. says, when they are convinced by Scriptures, they fall
to accuse Scriptures, as if they stood not well or wanted authority, or were
to be wrested to diverse senses, or else as if truth could not be sound by
those, that are ignorant of tradition. Cum ex scripturis arguuntur, in
accusationem conuertuntur ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant neque
sint ex authoritate, and quia vary sint dictae, and quia non possit ex his
inueniri veritas ab h^^, qui nesciant traditionem. And do not the Papists fly
the light of Scriptures, forbidding them to be read publikelie in vulgar
tongues, and punishing such as have Scriptures translated into their mother
tongue without license? do they not also say, that Scriptures are like a nose
of wax, or as Kellison says waxy, and that they depend upon the Church, and
that the truth cannot sufficiently be known without tradition?

Thirdly, Heretics teach otherwise then the Apostles did. Therefore the
Apostle. 1. Tim. 1. gave order to Timothy, that he should charge some, that
they should not teach otherwise. Vnde extranei and inimici apostolis haeretici
says Tertullian de praescript. adu. haeret. nisi ex diuersitate doctrinae,
qua^ vnusquisque de suo arbitrio aduersus Apostolos, aut protulit, aut recepit?
Whence are Heretics strangers and enemies to the Apostles, but by reason of
the diversity of Doctrine, which every one of his own head either devised,
or received contrary to the Apostles? This quality is also incident to the
Papists, that not only teach otherwise, then did the Apostles, but have also
added to the Apostles doctrine all that trash, which we desire to be scoured
away, as being contrary to the apostolic form of doctrine.

Fourthly Heretics stand much upon false miracles and prophesies, as the
examples both of Montanistes, and Seuerians do show. There were also certain
Heretics called mirabiliarij, confirming all their Doctrines with miracles.
Tertullian de praescrip. aduers. haeret. Shows that Heretics shall commend
the authority of their teachers, in raising the dead, curing the weak, and
fore-prophecying things to come. adijcient multa de authoritate cuiusque
doctoris haeretici, illos maxima doctrinae suae confirmasse, mortuos
suscitasse, debiles reformasse, futura significasse. In which points the
Papists do follow them at the heels, bragging of the miracles of Dominic,
Francis, Ignatius, Xauerius and other their Romish Saints, and making miracles
and prophecies, marks of their Church, and motives to enduce men to like of
their Religion.

Fifthly, Heretics commonly stand upon traditions, as we may read in
Irenaeus. Lib. 3. c. 2. And because Christ said, he had many things to say to
the Apostles, which they could not the^ bear; imagine, that their devises were
contained in these concealed Doctrines. Omnes etiam insipientissimi haeretici
qui se Christianos vocari volunt, audacias figmentorum suorum, quas maxim
exhorret sensus humanus, says Augustine tract. 97. in Joan. bac occasion
euangelicae sententiae colorare conantur, vbi dominus ait, adhuc multa habeo
vobis dicere, sed non potestis portare modo. The same humor is likewise in the
Papists, and diverse of them use these words of our Savior, to that purpose,
albeit S. Augustine calls them therefore most foolish Heretics.

Sixthly, our Savior Christ shows, that false Prophets shall come unto us in
the habit and clothes of Sheep, but are inwardly ravening Wolves. The same we
find partly verified in the Arians, and Donatistes, but most expressly in
the Papists. For albeit they will be called Catholics and Christ's sheep;
yet they devour true Catholics, like Wolves, and massacre all, that once dare
open their mouths against their idolatries, and heretical imaginations. Their
inquisitors tribunals are full of blood of innocents, and their garments are
red with blood, and carry evident marks of their cruelty. In France they
have massacred old and young, men and women, and spared none, that came in
their way, far passing in cruelty, both the Donatistes and Arians.

7. To defend their perverse and erroneous Doctrine, Heretics are wont to
detruncate, and by false expositions, to pervert holy scriptures, Tertullian de
praescript. says of marcion, that to fit his purpose, he cut the Scriptures at
his pleasure: ad materiam suam caedem scripturarum confecit. Hierome in epist.
ad Galat. c. 5. says, he may be called an Heretic, that understands the
Scriptures otherwise, then the sense of the holy Ghost requires, albeit he be
not yet departed out of the Church. So likewise the Papists abuse the holy
Scriptures most shamefully in their allegations, cutting them, and forcing
them contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost. The old Latin translation of
the Bible cutteth off and adds to the original text and yet will they needs
have it authentical. These words of Isay ecce ponam in fundamentis Sion
lapidem, etc. in praefat. in lib. de pontif. Romans Bellarmine most impudently
detorteth to the Pope. Likewise do the Papists abuse these words Hierem. 1.
ecce constitui te hodie super gentes, to prove, that the Pope is made head of
nations. These words bibite ex hoc omnes: they conster, as if none of the
communicants, but the priest, were to drink of the chalice.

8. Heretics conceal diverse of their false and lewd Doctrines Iraeneus lib.
1. c. 23. says yt they hold, that they are not to deliver publicly their
mysteries, but in silence to co^teine the^ in secret. Non oportere says he,
omnia ipsorum mysteria effari, sed in abscondito continere per silentium.
Tertullian also says, they hide their mysteries in secret, ne margaritam
porcis, and sanctum canibus iactarent: that is, least they should cast Pearls
to swine, and holy things to Dogs. So likewise the Papists pronounce their
Canon in secret, and will not, that lay men shall dispute of matters of faith,
and think it is not fit, that holy Scriptures in vulgar tongues should be read
either publicly or of all Christians, without restreint. Some also add the
same reasons which Heretics abusing Christ's words, do bring, viz. least
pearls should be given to Swine, and holy things to Dogs.

9. Clement of Alexandria Lib. 7. Strom. tells us, that Heretics being
convinced do oftentimes deny their Doctrine. So likewise Papists openly refuse
to profess that the pope has power to command the Subjects, to cut their
Kings throats, and will not grant that images are to be worshipped with
divine worship. Yet to their followers in secret they doubt not to propound
these points without scruple of conscience.

10. Heretics denying their faith to God, seldom keep faith to men, as the
example of the Pricillianists does plainly declare. Herein therefore ye papists
do plainly show, whom they follow, teaching that faith is not to be kept
with Heretics, and dispensing with oaths most easily. The Rhemists in their
annotations upon the 23. of the Acts, do expressly teach their followers, to
break their oaths, and to run into wilful perjury.

11. The lives of Heretics are very lewd and loose, libera sunt illis omnia
et soluta, says Tertullia^ de praescr. Theodoret lib. 1. haeret. fab. in
praefat. says their obscenity is such, that the Stage Players would be ashamed
to speak or hear it. And what he says not, we may imagine by ye popes of
Rome, whose abominable beastliness modest ears refuse to hear. Publikelye
they maintain Stews, and nothing among Masse-priestes and Friars is more
common, the^ unnatural lust The Pope and his laws they fear; of Scriptures
they speak irreverently; God they fear not.

12, They far excel all men in pride, and will not have their doings or
doctrine^ examined. Herein they resemble Mahomet who would not have any
question made of his law. But the pope excels both Mahometans, and all other
Heretics. He will be honored as God. If he should draw innumerable souls
with him to hell, yet will he not be taxed for it, as appears by the Chapt.
Si papa. did. 40. His determinations, as his folowers hold, are in fallible.

Finally, by our adversaries discourse and by their own confession, they may
also plainly be convinced to be Heretics. For first it is the property of
Heretics says he, Lib. 2. cap. 1. To go out of the Church, and to depart
from ye faith. He might also have added, teaching Doctrines of Devils, and
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from certain meats, and then
the matter would have been very clear. For most wickedlye they disgrace
marriage in ye Chap. proposuisti. did. 82. As if married folks lived after
the flesh, and could not please God, and forbid their priests, Friars and
irreligious orders to marry. They do also restreine their Monks from eating
flesh, and forbid laymen to eat it upon certain days. But albeit, he has
concealed these words from us, yet has he said sufficient. For teaching a new
faith never known to the Apostles, nor taught by them, the Papists are
clearly gone from the faith: and having received a new head of their Church,
and new foundations of their Doctrine, and strange forms of sacraments, they
are closelye departed out of the Catholic church, and embrace the particular
faith of the Pope. Neither can this their departing be denied or concealed, for
as Arius by denying of Christ's divinity and equality with the Father, and
Nestorius for making two persons of Christ, and other Heretics for teaching
singular points of Doctrine contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles were
said to depart out of the Church, and so to abandon the society of the
faithful, although they might pretend succession, and still claymed the title
of the Church, and of Catholics; so the papists, if they teach any new Article
of faith, not taught by the Apostles and ancient Church, they are departed out
of the Apostolic and Catholic church.

Secondly he says, that later standing and novelty is a mark of Heretics.
And this he goes about to prove by Scriptures, and Fathers. But he might well
have spared his labor, for we do not deny it. Nay upon this ground we
profess, that we are able manifestly to demonstrate the Papists to be
Heretics. For such a society as the Pope and his adherents are, was never
seen for a long time after the Apostles. If Kellison say contrary; let him
leave his peda^tery, and show his triple-crowned Pope with two swords treading
upon Princes necks and cutting their throats and ruling the world, his purple
Cardinals, his shaven Masse-priestes, his Monckes, Nonnes and Friars, and their
retinue to have continued since the Apostles times. Furthermore the doctrine of
the carnal eating of Christ's flesh, of transubstantiation, of the subsistence
of accidents in the eucharist without their substa^ces, of the communion under
one kind, of the popes universal headship, of purgatory, of indulgences, and
other points decreed in late conuenticles, would be showed and proved.

If Kellison can derive these Doctrines from the Apostles, his holy Father will
give him his blessing: if not, by his own confession his own consortes are to
be anathematized as Heretics, and the Pope for the head of them.

In his third Chapt. of his second book, he says, that particular names taken
from Sect-maisters are notes of Heretics, which is also a third argument to
prove him, and his consorts Heretics, being al called of their grand sect
master the Pope papists, and some of Benedict being termed Benedictines,
others of Francis and Dominicke, Franciscans, and Dominicans, and of Ignatius
Ignatians, and some of Thomas and Scotus, Thomistes and Scotistes. Nay leaving
the common name of Christians and catholics, they will be called Catholic
Romans. Against them therefore the word^ of Hierome contr. Lucifer. may aptly be
turned, out of which we may conclude, that they are not the Church of Christ,
but the Synagogue of Antichrist. Neither does Iustine speak any thing against
the Valentinians and Marcionistes, or Cyprian against the Nouatians, concerning
the imposition of their names, but the same may be applied against the Papists.

In his fourth chapter he makes it a property of Heretics to renew old
Heresies. Which although it be not incident to all Heretics; yet it is a
very eminent quality in the papists. For from the Simonians they have borrowed
their practice of buying and selling ecclesiastical matters, and the use of
Concubines; from the Carpocratians they have taken the worship of images; from
the Collyridians the saying of Mass, or offering their wafer Cakes in honor
of our Lady; from the Marcionistes the baptism of Christians by women, and
their limbus patrum; from the Valentinians and Manicheies their opinion of the
being of Christ's body in the Sacrament without soliditie; from the Pelagians
the denial of original sin in the blessed virgin, the perfection of
justice, and impeccabilitie of Christians. Finally they have derived diverse
other branches of old condemned Heresies from other Heretics, as at large I
have showed in my late challenge.

His fifth mark of an Heretic is want of succession. A simple mark, if we
do well consider it. For neither in the beginning of the world, nor in the
time of Aaron, was there any succession of known priests in the world.
Likewise neither our Savior Christ, nor Peter did succeed the priests of the
Law. For Christ was a priest after the order of Melchisedech, and Peter was by
Christ designed an Apostle, having none to go before him. But to confess
succession to be a mark of the Church, and want of succession a mark of an
Heretic; yet would this one property of Heretics much blemish the Romish
See. For neither are the Popes Bishops, or Peter's successors, nor can the
Papists derive their Doctrine of ye popes universal power, of his two swords,
of his espousals with the church, of his indulgences, of ye carnal eating and
champing Christ's flesh with ye teeth, of Tra^substantiation, of the Communion
under one kind, of adoring the Sacrament and the Cross with divine worship,
of making vows, confessions and prayers, to Saints, and such like points of
decretaline Doctrine from the Apostles, or any Apostolic men, which, as
Tertullian shows, is a necessary point in succession. Ego says he, sum
Here Is Apostolorum, sicut cauerunt testamento suo, sicut fidei commiseru^t,
sicut adiuraueru^t, ita teneo. As if he should say, none can be ye Apostles
heirs, but such as keep ye doctrine contained in their testament. The same
father in ye same place excludes heretics, as strangers and enemies holding a
contrary doctrine to the Apostles. Furthermore the pole-shorne Mass Priests
sacrificing Christ's body and blood really in the Mass for quick and dead,
and diverse purposes cannot derive their pedigree either from the Apostles, or
from the Priests and ancient Doctors of the church. Finally this form of
government and Doctrine, which is now in the Church of Rome, cannot be
confirmed by any succession of Bishops and Priests. Nay that rotten succession
of Popes, whereupon the cause of Papists, does hang as upon a third of a
Spiderweb, has no other ground and certainty, then the testimony of
Anastasius the Popes blind bibliothecary, Martin Polonus, Platina, Sanders,
Genebrard, Illesca and such like base fellows which no Christian, I trow, will
admit for the Basis, and foundation of his faith.

His sixth mark of heretics is dissension in Doctrine. and this he proves in
a long and tedious discourse. But with this mark he brandeth his own consortes
for Heretics. For they dissent, not only from the ancient Fathers. But one
from another most manifestly. That is aparent, by diverse treatises written of
controversies. This is proved by the differences of Thomistes and Scotistes,
and of all Schoolmen one from an other. Neither do they differ in small
matters, but in the highest points of Religion, as namely whether the holy
Ghost proceed more principally from the Father, then the Son, about the divine
notions, about the atributes of God, about Meritum Congrui, about the cause of
predestination, about the thing designed by the word hoc in these words, hoc
est corpus meum, about the conception of the blessed Virgin, and all matters of
divinity: as the treatises of Schoolmen do plainly show.

Bellarmine also does in most controversies no less earnestly dispute against
his own consortes, then against us. Neither is it material that all of them
profess themselves willing to abide the Popes determination. For until he
determine somewhat, their contentions are endless. And albeit they then cease
to contend, yet their differences in opinions appear nevertheless.

The seventh chapter of his second Book, discou^seth of a seventh mark of
Heretics, and therein he endeuoreth to prove al to be Heretics, that follow
a particular sect. Now who sees not, that this touches the Papists in
general, that restreining themselves within the Romish Church follow the
Popes sect. And are bound by their Doctrine to follow him, although he lead
them with him to the pit of hell. The Monks also and Friars, follow the heads
and rules of their several sects, without looking whither they lead them.

The eight mark of an Heretic says he, is to be condemned by the church, or
else as he says afterward, by general Councels. which does no less touch his
holy Father, then the rest. For contrary to the form of ye Nicene council. c.
4, He gives liberty to Abbots to consecrate Bishops, and contrary to the 5.
Cannon absolueth those, that are excommunicated by other Bishops Contrary to
the 6. Canon he inuadeth the dioceses of other Patriarchs contrary to another
order he separateth Priests from their wives. With Eutyches condemned in the
council of Chalcedon he believes, ye Christ has a body, neither solid nor
palpable, nor like to ours. For such is that body which he supposes to be in
the Sacrament. Likewise all the old Heresies, which he holds, are condemned
by the whole Church. Lastly all true Christians, do inwardly abhor Popish
impieties, idolatries, and Heresies.

Finally the Papists generally in the Chapt. ad abolendam. de haeret. condemn
them for Heretics, that teach contrary to the Doctrine of Christ's Church,
concerning the Sacraments. But this does notoriouslye touch themselves. For
where the Scriptures mention only baptism, and the Lords supper, as seals
of Gods grace, they increase the number of Sacraments, and make seven Where
Christ said, take and eat, they say, offer, heave, hang up, and carry about.
Where Christ ordained, that all communicating one kind should also receive the
other, they sacrilegiously deprive the people of the cup. Finallye they
teach, that Christians are justified by confirmation and extreme unction, and
that all their Sacraments have like effects.

Thus we see, he has marked his own consortes with the marks of Heretics.
But he shall never be able to fasten his marks upon us. In the beginning of
his second Book, he talks after his declamatorie manner of the devils
disguising himself in the habit of a young gallant (like percase to the young
Iebusites and Masse-priestes, that going about to seduce simple souls attire
themselves like gallants) or of a Friar. He assures also his disciples, that
he is discryed either by his staring eyes, or stinking savor, or horned head,
or forked feet, or base voice. But first we would gladly know of him, why the
devil should rather speak in a base, then in a mean voice, and next how he
comes so well acquainted with him, that he knows his whole description
from his horns to his cloven feet. And lastly how it happened that speaking of
the Devil in the first part of the period, he forgot himself in the second,
and speaks of some member of the Devil, and of an Heretic? what? are
Heretics discerned by their staring eyes, and forked feet, and such like
parts? he tells us also of the pecking of Birds, and the counterfeting of
alchymistes, grauers and Heretics, putting grauers of idolatrous images nere
to Heretics, as they do well deserve. But what is that to us? if heretics be
such, as counterfeit religion, and yet are gone out of the Church, then
concerns it us nothing. For with our mouth we profess, and with our heart we
believe all the Christian and Apostolic faith, and dissent not from the
Apostolic church in any one article of faith professed publikelye for a
thousand years after Christ. Nay we do only relinquish the Papists, as
Christians in old time left the Arians and Donatists and as some now leave the
Mahometans, wherein they have forsaken Christ and his truth. Either then must
this K. show, that as former heretics have done, we broach some doctrine
contrary to the ancient faith, or else he talks idelye of going out of the
Church. Master Luther he left the Papists having once followed their opinions,
but not in any point of faith, but rather where they taught contrary to the
faith.

Secondly never shall he prove, either that the professors of our Religion are
of a later standing, then the modern Papists, or that our religion embraces
novelties. For Luther is not our founder, nor any of late time, but the
Apostles of Christ Jesus, whose doctrine left in deposte to the church we
embrace, detesting all profane novelties of Papists. Neither do we bring in
any new faith, but reject the popish later Heresies, and corruptions, though to
some they seem old. But says Kellison, the faith has never increased in
substance, but only in explication, as if their Doctrine of traditions, of
Romish interpretations, of the latin vulgar translation, of the 7. sacraments,
of justification by orders and extreme unction, of transubstantiation, of ye
carnal eating and cha^ping with the teeth of Christ's flesh, of ye sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood in the Mass, under the accidents of bread and wine,
for quick and dead, and the Popes universal Monarchy were matters of no
substance; or else, as if the substance of these Articles had been ever
believed in the Church. This he would insinuate, but the novelty of them is so
apparent, that his consorts are much puzzled, when they come to search them in
ancient writers.

Thirdly we neither call our selves Lutherians, Caluinistes, Zuinglians, nor
any such particular names. Neither is it material, that the Papists do call
us in scorn by these names. For who does credit the malicious terms of
enemies? nay in this point we are more clear then the papists, that call
themselves, some Franciscans, some Dominicans, some by other names; which we
do not.

Fourthly we renounce all old Heresies condemned by ancient Councels, and
pronounce Florinus, that held God to be the author of sin, Anathema. The
like we say of Eunomius, Pelagius, and their consortes. Neither was Calvin of
other opinion, but that his malicious enemies do falsely impute unto him, that
he should teach, that God is the author of sin. We do not say with
Iouinian, that all sins are equal, nor deny to the bodies of Christians
decent burial. Nor did Hierome writing against Vigilantius allow prayers to
Saints departed, or the merits of Monkery, or teach as the Papists do, of
vigils or lights set up in churches at noone time. But suppose he should hold
opinions contrary to the truth; yet are not his words a rule of Heresy. The
second synod at Nice allowed a certain reverence done to images, but nothing
so much as the Papists now give to them. But whatsoever that synod decreed in
that point, the same was reproved in a synod at Frank-ford, and never
generallye received either in the East or West Churches. Aerius was reputed an
Heretic for Arianisme, and not for finding fault with superstitious oblations
for the dead. Whatsoever his opinion was it touches us nothing, that do allow
the orders of the Church established among us. Finally we anathematize the
Heresies of the Simonians Menandrians, and others (whom he ridiculously
surmiseth to have been condemned for denying the real presence) of the
Messalians and Caians, (whom he imagines to have been accounted Heretics
for denying the sacraments to contain grace, as the Papists hold it) of the
Nouatians, that denied repentance to public sinners, of the Gnostikes,
Manichees, and Encratites (whom he ignorantlye surmiseth to have been
condemned for denying marryage to be a Sacrament) of Heluidius, Rhetorius and
all other ancient condemned Heretics. If then this Heretic will object
Heresies to us, he must both set down the words of the Heresy condemned by
the Catholic Church, and prove, that we hold such an Heresy.

Fifthly, we want no proof of our Religion, which may be drawn from true
succession. For we do not only communicate in matters of faith with the
Apostles, but also with the ancient Bishops of Jerusalem, Antioche,
Alexandria, and Rome almost for a thousand years. We succeed also to the
Bishops of England before Bishop Cranmer in all things, which they taught well,
and according to the Catholic faith. But could we show no line of succession;
yet if we agree in doctrine with the Apostles and first Bishops of the
Christian Church, it is sufficient. Ad hanc formam prouocabuntur ab illis
ecclesiis says Tertullian de praescript. aduers. haeret. quae licet nullum ex
apostolis, vel apostolicis authorem suum proferant, vt multo posteriores, quae
denique quotidie instituuntur, tamen in eadem fide conspirantes non minus
apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae. He tells us plainly,
that they are Apostolic Churches that teach the same Doctrine, albeit they
were not founded by the Apostles or Apostolic men, nor had any succession of
Bishops. Likewise he shows, that they are the Apostles heirs, that hold
that faith, which is contained in their Testament. Seeing then we do only
publish Apostolical Doctrine, and purge away Popish errors; our Churches are
most truly Apostolical. But says K. page 196. This is to make bare Scripture
judge of our Doctrine, and as much, as if we should say, that the Church of God
failed, and that the Synagogue of the Devil possessed the world many years.
He tells also how Luther in his preface before the disputation of Lipsia,
vanted, that he had first published Christ. But first this is a common abuse of
Heretics, to call Scriptures bare. Secondly false (...) do clearly disperse
this cloud of slander. But his foolish attempt may give cause to us, to touch
both him and his consortes, for their manifold and blasphemous impietyes. In
the beginning of his third Book he says, that as the Stoickes commend Zeno,
the Platonickes Plato, the Peripatetickes Aristotle, the Epicureans Epicure,
the Atheistes Diagoras, so Christians should speak honorably of Christ. But if
he had not been of the sect of Diagoras, and a profane Atheist; he would have
blushed to have compared Christ to Diagoras, and Epicurus, two profane and
impious men; and Christians to Atheistes, and Epicureans and profane followers
of Philosophers. He would also have forborne to have concluded, that christians
are to honor Christ, as Atheistes honor Diagoras. But to refer the
examination of the impious Doctrine of this Atheist and his consorts to his
proper place, what has he to object against us and our Doctrine of Christ's
person, or nature?

First he tells us, how Michael Seruetus was a brother of our Religion, and
denied that God the Son was true God, or coaequall to his Father. But
whatsoever his blasphemies were, he learned them among the Papists, where he
was brought up, and not among us, where he was punished for his blasphemies.
Secondly he seems to be rather a brother of the Papists, among whom he
learned his impieties, and with whom he defended the adoration of Angels,
then of kindred to us. Thirdly this ignorant Surueyor attributes the heresy of
the Arians unto Seruetus, where he did wholly deny the Trinity, calling all that
believe the holy Trinity, atheistes; as may appear in the proceedings against
him.

Next he says, that Luther in his book against Latomus affirmed, that he could
not abide this word, homoousion. A matter most false and slanderous. His words
are conditional. Quod si odit anima mea vocem homoousion, says he, et nolim ea
vti, non ero haereticus, quis enim me coget vti, modo rem tenea^, quae in
concilio per scripturas definita est? so it appears he held the thing, and
that not words, but matters, in his conceit, made Heretics.

Thirdly he tells, how Luther in commentar. in C. 1. Genes. called the Son
of God, the instrument of God, by which he created the world. But like an
honest Surueyor, he confesses that he has not seen those commentaries. and
perhaps he would not see them. For if he had, he might have seen himself
convinced to be a lying companion. Now he shows himself only to be a light
fellow, that believes fables upon hear say. In his comentaries upon that
book now no such matter is to be found.

Fourthly he charge Luther with leaving out these words in ye Litany sancta
trinitas, vnus deus, miserere nobis: and the word deus out of this sentence,
deus fortis, and out of the first of John, the fifth Chapter, this sentence,
there are three which give witness in heaven, the father, the word, and the
holy Ghost, and these three are one. But first the reason, why he left out the
words mentioned in the Litany was not for mislik of the word Trinity, but for
that the dutch word dreifaltigheit did signify rather triplicitie, then
Trinity. Secondlye it is not like, that Luther did omit either the word Deus,
or the sentence in S. John's epistle, concerning the Trinity, because we find
not that objected unto him by his most curious adversaries. But what if by
negligence, or fault of the Coppie these words had been omitted, what is that
to us, that do not omit them? has the surueyor forgot, that he promises a
survey of our Religion?

Fifthly, he charge Luther with saying, that as Eutyches said, so it may well
be said, that the divinity of Christ suffered. But this slander is refuted not
only by Luthers book de concilijs, but also by Bellarmines preface in his
dispute de Christo. He only says, that he disputed with Nestorians which
contended that the divinity of Christ could not suffer. But he does not say
that Christ's divine nature could suffer, as Eutyches did, and as this K. would
have us to surmise.

Page 247. He imputes unto Melancthon, that he should say both in hs book of
common places, and in his book against Stankarus, that the Son of God
according to his divinity prayed to his Father for his kingdom, glory, and
inheritance, and that the divine nature of the Son was obedient to his Father
in his passion. And the like saying says K. has Beza, yea, and Calvin also.
But if either of them had said any thing, whereupon this accuser might ground
his slander; he would not have spared to have set down their words at full.
Melancthon has not these words according to his divinity. But what if he
should speak improperly, should he not have leave to interpret himself? Again
suppose there were an error in his words, must we satisfy for his fault?
Lastly who knows not, that the Fathers sometime by the divinity and
humanity of Christ singlye understand his person?

Afterward Page. 248. he inueigheth against the Vbiquetaries who affirm as he
says, that the divine attributes are reallye communicated unto Christ's humane
nature. But herein he shows great simplicity. For this touches the
Papists that will have Christ's body to be both in heaven and earth, and upon
every alter at one time: which being granted the Vbiquetaries omnipresence
does follow necessarily, seeing a body cannot be in two remote places, but it
must be in the midst. Secondly, they will have this communication to be per
communicationem idiomatum, so that it appears, their meaning is, that after a
manner of speech these divine attributes are communicated to Christ's humane
nature. Finallye of the opinion of the real presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament taught by Papists, this error of the Vbiquetaries, whether in speech
or Doctrine proceeded: and therefore it touches our adversaries very near,
and us nothing at all.

In the same place he charge Calvin for teaching, that the name of God is
attributed to the Father (...), and that he denies Christ to be God of God.
He says also that Whitaker herein subscribeth unto him, and lastly that
Calvin and Jewel and diverse other affirm, that Christ according to his
Divinity was Priest and mediator. But first both Bellarmine and this brabler
does calumniouslye report Caluins words. For writing against Valentinus
Gentilis he says not, that the father as God has any pre-eminence, but as
he is the first person in the Trinity, and as the Son is begotten of the
Father. Secondly he denies not, that Christ is God of God, but only says,
that the phrase is hard, and means, that we are to understand the words
personally thus, Christ which is God is of the Father, which is God, and not as
if there were two Gods the one proceeding from the other. Thirdly Master
Whitakers words being set down would clear him. For his meaning is, that the
divine essence does neither engender, nor is ingendered, those being properties
of the persons. Finally both Master Calvin, and the reverend Father Bishop
Jewel, and other our Divines do teach aright, that the office of Christ's
mediation and Preest-hood belongs not to either nature, singly considered in
it self, but to the person, that is God and man. But the adversaries that will
have Christ as God to act nothing, but ascribe the whole office of Christ's
Preest-hood to the humane nature, do divide the person, and not only the two
natures, approaching nearer to Nestorius, then our teachers to error.

Finally he alleges the testimony of Egidius Hunnius against Calvin, as if
in exposition of scriptures he did Iudaizare, or favor the Jews. But neither
is the testimony of a sworn enemy to be much regarded, nor has any man that
felicity in expounding Scriptures, that he fails in nothing.

In the second chap. he charge us, that we make Christ an absurd redeemer,
these are the words of this absurd surueyor. And why so, I pray you? forsooth
because we hope only to be justified by Christ's justice. But this does not
touch us only, but the holy prophets, and apostles also. God by his prpophet
Isay. c. 53. says yt his just servant shall justify many by his knowledge,
and shall bear their sins. The Apostle. 1. Cor. 1. teaches us, yt he is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. To make his
matter good page. 257. he makes us to say, that there is no justice but
Christ's justice, nor good works but Christ's works, nor merit but his merit,
nor satisfaction but his satisfaction. But these are his own sottish
ideotismes, and not our words. For we do not deny that there is a certain
imperfect justice in man sanctified by Gods holy spirit, and that such do good
works pleasing unto God. We confess also, that man by sin does merit death,
albeit his works be not so perfect, that they can deserve eternal life.
Finally we know, that the Fathers sometime account the obedience of the law to
be a satisfaction, and so call the performance of penalties enjoined by the
Church. But did we attribute all the honor of our justification and salvation
unto Christ our Savior; yet this is neither absurdity, nor dishonor to him.
But this absurd and kettle Divine does dishonor and blaspheme Christ joining
the words, absurd and redeemer together. He does also contradict the
Scriptures, where he says, that Christ with one word, or tear, or drop of
blood might have redeemed us. And therein he passes the impudency of his holy
Father Clement the sixth in the chap. vnigenit. extr. de poenit. and remiss. for
he says, one drop of blood would have sufficed. But this dropping and dreary
dunse adds a tear or a word. How contrary they are to scriptures, these
testimonies declare Isay. 53. therefore shall he divide the spoils of the
strong, because he has given his soul to death. Mat. 20. We read, that he
came to give his life a ransom for many, and Luc. 24. that so Christ must
suffer. and 1. cor. 15. that Christ dyed for us according to the Scriptures.
Gal. 3, We learn, that to deliver us from the curse of the law he was made
accursed, and Hebr. 2. that it was fitting, that the author of our salvation
should by suffering be co^summated. and Heb. 9. that his testament could not
be fulfilled without the death of the testator. Absurdly also he talks of a
storm raised in heaven for the Son of God, when Lucifer would be like the
highest. For it is ridiculous to think of any stir or storm raised in
Heaven, where there is, and always was such quiet and content; or to suppose
that Lucifer contended with the Son of God. He might do well to tell us
what Devil told him this. For in holy Scriptures no such thing is found.
Finally describing the blessed state of man in Paradise, and of his misery
being thrown out of Paradise, unawares he overthrows with his boisterous
eloquence two bulwarks of Popery, to wit Freewill and Purgatory. For if every
sinner be a slave to his flesh, and a captive to the Devil, and a slave to
sin, and the Devil, as he says; then has he not freewill. For to be
free, and bound at one time implies contradiction. Again, if the devil hold
sinners in hell perpetuallye, as page. 254. he confesses, then there is no
redemption out of Purgatory, which as Papists teach, is in hell.

Page 258. he charge us farther, that we teach, that good works are not
necessary, and thence infer, that no Laws either humane or divine can bind
us in conscience. And lastly he says that we hold that no sins, nor evil
works can hurt us, because Christ's justice being ours, no sin can make us
sinners. And so he runs on in a course of wild eloquence, like a Colte that
has broken his halter. But as Hierome says in his Book against Vigila^tius,
stultum est fingere materiam, cui rhetorica declamatione respondeatur. It is a
foolish and dizardly thing, to feine matters, and the^ in a rhetorical
surueying declamatio^ to answer. In his fictions certes this man seems
neither to have reason, nor conscience. For first albeit we say, that we are
not justified by works; yet we teach, that as many as are justified by faith
in Christ, are also sanctified by his grace, and that works are necessary
effects of our justification. Secondly we directly affirm, that Gods Laws do
bind in conscience, and man's Laws as far as they command for Gods Law,
albeit through Christ Jesus we are delivered from the curse of the law, being
justified by faith, and walking no more after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Thirdly we believe, that all sins and evil works do hurt those, yt do
them. Although we also believe, that he who is borne of God, and justified by
faith, sins not unto death. Finally most falsely he makes us to teach
first, that Christ has redeemed us, because no sin can hurt us; and next,
that we are delivered from the Law, because no Law can bind us; and thirdly,
yt we are delivered from the Devil and Hell, because howsoever we live, they
cannot hurt us. Nay we pronounce him anathema, that shall hold, that either
sin cannot hurt, or that the Law binds not, or that howsoever Christians
live, they cannot be damned to Hell. And thus much may serve to clear us from
this barking curres slanders.

But Popish Doctrine concerning our redemption is not so easily defended. For
Papists believe, that the Pope by his indulgences can redeem souls from
Hell. They teach also, that every man is to satisfy for his sins committed
after Baptism. But then Christ is but half a redeemer. Neither do they stick
to say, that the son of God assuming the nature of Thomas Aquinas, or some
other might have redeemed the world: which is contrary to all the promises made
to the Fathers concerning the Messiah to come of the seed of Abraham. Kellison
page 261. says, that Christ's Passion was not our formal justification, nor
satisfaction (he should have said Christ's Passion, obedience, and justice, if
he would formally have crossed our Doctrine) but only the meritorious cause, of
our redemption and salvation, which deserves for us at Gods hands grace, by
which together with our cooperatio^ we may be saved and redeemed. But if Christ
be not our formal justice, the^ his justice was not made our justice: which
contradicts the Apostle 1. Cor. 1. If he did not formally satisfy for us,
then he dyed almost in vain, and we are to satisfy for our selves. If he be
only the meritorious cause of our redemption and salvation, then has not
Christ saved or redeemed us, but we are to save and redeem our selves, as well
as we can. If by grace together with our cooperation we are saved and redeemed,
as this K. says; then we are formally saved and redeemed without Christ, which
only comes in as a meritorious cause. Beside that, if grace here be nothing
but charity, or a habit not distinct from Charity, as Schoolmen teach; then
our own works properly save us, and not Christ's Passion. Finally if Christ's
redemption of us from sin, be nothing else, but a deserving of grace, by
which we dispose our selves to justification, and if he has freed us from the
tyranny of the Diuill and captivity of Hell, because he has procured us grace,
by which we may resist maugre all the force of Hell, and has satisfied for our
sins, to obtain us grace, that we may satisfy for all our sins, as this
wicked blasphemer teaches page 262. Then is man the principal cause of his
own justification, and good works should go before justification, and Christ
should not deserve to be called our redeemer, or savior, but a grace giver,
that men might free and redeem them selves. And lastly not Christ should
satisfy for us, but we should satisfy for our selves: All which points are
not only contrary to Scriptures and absurd, but utterly overthrow the work of
Christ's satisfaction and ransom paid for us.

In the third Chapter of his third Book he goes on railing against us, and
cries out with open mouth, that we make Christ no redeemer at all, and his
reason is, for that we teach, that even righteous men are sinners, and that our
sins are covered by the imputation of Christ his satisfaction and
righteousness. But his Collection is so foolish, that if there were a whole
covent of Fools in place, he might well prove Abbot. For Saint John says,
that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. And the Apostle Romans 4. out of the Prophet says, blessed are they, whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. And yet Kellison will
not say, but that these holy Apostles acknowledged Christ to be their
redeemer. Our Savior also taught the Apostles to pray for the forgiveness of
their trespasses. Finally to say, that a Christian can live without sin, is
plain Pelagianisme. Hierome dialog. 1. aduers. Pelagianos sets down these
two propositio^s, for ye ground of Pelagianisme, that a man may be without
sin, if he will, and that Gods commandments are easy. Saint Augustine
likewise Lib. de haeres. c. 88. reckons this assertion among the heads of
Pelagius his heresy, that the life of just-men in this world has no sin at
all. Neither is Kellisons exception of any moment For it follows not, if
Christ make not men clear without sin, that Adam is more potent then Christ,
because all his posterity were made sinners. For by the same reason it may be
said, that as all men were made sinners by Adam; so all should be made
righteous by Christ. Furthermore the power of Christ's grace exceeds Adams
transgression in this, that Christ delivered man of his mere grace. But Adams
posterity by his transgression incurred the penalty thereof deservedly. The
Apostle shows, that Christ's grace exceeded Adams transgression. For Christ
pardoned many offenses, but death came by one man's offense.

He does also charge us, that we affirm, that notwith-standing Christ's grace,
we cannot resist any temptation of the flesh, or the Devil, that we cannot
fulfill the Law (in any sort) that we cannot do any good work, but must needs
sin in all our actions. But if he cannot prove, that we do so teach; then
I think he cannot deny, but that he has sinned in this action. Let him
therefore name them, that so teach, and prove it out of their words if he
can. Or else it will appear, that we teach nothing but that which stands
with truth, and with the honor of Christ in atcheuing our redemption.

But our adversaries will not so easily acquit themselves of teaching lewdly,
concerning the article of our redemption through Christ. For first Kellison
teaches, page 261. as before is noted, that Christ is only the meritorious
cause of our redemption. which is as much as if he should ascribe the
principal and formal cause to our selves. Secondly he says, that Christ gave
us grace, by which together with our cooperation we may be saved and redeemed.
Which being granted, it follows, that Christ redeemed us not, but only
procured us grace, whereby we might redeem our selves. Thirdly both he and
his consortes teach, that every man ought to satisfye for his sins committed
after Baptism. But if a man do satisfye for his sins, then is he his own
redeemer. Fourthly the Papists hope by the merits of Saints, to be saved and
redeemed. But as he, that serves many Gods, serves no God truly; so he
that has many redeemers has no true redeemer. Fiftlye they believe, that the
Pope by his indulgences can redeem souls out of purgatory. Which shows,
that Christ's redemption is insufficient. Finallye in the canon of the Mass
they profess, that they offer pro redemptione animarum suarum: as if the
Priest with the sacrifice of the Mass, could redeem souls.

By the very same argument also, Lib. 3. c. 4. he endeavors to prove, that
we make Christ no spiritual Physician. As if Christ did not cure our
diseases, when he covers them, and imputes his justice unto us, and
sanctifies us by the holy Ghost. But if his argument were concludent, then
must he himself also affirm, that Christ is no spiritual Physician. For he
will not deny, I trow, that Christ does cover our sins, and that no man in
this life is so perfectly cured, but that he commits diverse sins. To say
otherwise is flat pelagianisme. Furthermore he is a good Physician that takes
away the pain of the disease, albeit he cannot for the weakness of the
patient cure the relics thereof altogether. And Isay, c. 53. says we are
healed by the wounds of Christ. Yet no man will say, that in this frailty we
are so cured, that we sin not. Finally, there is a great disproportion and
dissimilitude betwixt the diseases of the body and the soul. The pains of
the soul diseases follow after this life, the pains of bodilye sicknesses
come together with the disease. For the soul diseases God punishes; for
bodilye diseases the Physician pitieth the patient. The soul diseases consist
in disobedience, and actions, which being once done, cannot be undone. But
diseases of the body consist in distemper, or other evil quality, which may
be removed. Although then the diseases of the body may be removed; yet the
diseases of the soul cannot be perfectly cured, so long as we live in this
world. Nay albeit this K. take Christ for his Physician; yet he will not say,
that he is cured of all ignorance, malice, defectes and infirmities. Most
ridiculous therefore is his discourse of the diseases of the soul, and of his
resine and emplasters of 7. Sacraments, and of his burning in purgatory, and
other his Schoole-trickes and foolerye, and more like to make his reader sick
with the surfeit of his survey, then otherwise.

The fifth Chapter of his third Book, contains a fragment of some
Schoole-lecture concerning the honor due to Law-giuers. But while he would
seem to honor Christ, with the title of a Lawgiuer, he does much dishonor
him comparing him to Moses, nay, to Lycurgus, Solon, Romulus, Plato,
Trismegistus, and I know not who. Against us all his bablement makes nothing.
For albeit we do not confound the law, and the gospel, nor make Christ a
lawgiuer like to Moses, or an exactor of the penalties of laws, as do the
Papists; yet we do not deny, that he may be termed, and is after a sort a
Lawgiuer. Neither does either Luther or Calvin, deny this absolutelye, as this
K. affirms. Hardly therefore will he be able to charge us with any fault in
this behalf, unless he will falsifye our words, as he does Caluins. lib. 3.
Instit. c. 19. 10. making him to conclude, that Christians are exempted from
all laws: where he has no such words and only speaks of ceremonies, that
may be observed and omitted. But the Papists, albeit they make Christ a
Lawgiver, and make that a part of his honor; yet they give the same power to
the Pope, c. translato. de constitutionibus: showing themselves to be subjects
of an other Kingdom, then that of Christ Jesus.

In the sixth Chapter he rayleth not only at man, but at God, calling him
absolutely an angry God, and supposing, that his wrath is no way to be
appeased, but by the mass priests sacrifices. Further he says, that Christ
offered two sacrifices, the one at his last supper, the other upon the Cross,
and that he has many vicegerentes. But that is contrary to the words of the
Apostle. Heb. 9. who says, that Christ was once offered to take away the
sins of many. This is derogatorie to the honor of Christ, that is a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech, and cannot well stand with the Popes
general vicarship, or the office of Masse-priestes his supposed vicegerents.
Against us his vain brablementes effect nothing, seeing Christ is a Priest
according to the order of Melchisedech, in regard, that he succeeds none, nor
has any successors or vicegerents in this sacrifice, that he offered once upon
the Cross. Furthermore this preesthood of Christ after the order of
Melchisedech we maintain, the Papists overthrow, as at full I have declared
in my third book de missa against Bellarmine, where also the absurdities and
contradictions of the Masse-priestes are particularly disciphred.

In the seventh Chapter of his third book most wickedly he would make the
world believe, that we deny Christ to be judge of quick and dead. And his
reason is, for that Calvin says, that Christ shall not condemn a faithful
man. As if it were not the part of a judge, as well to acquit, as to condemn.
Further if this argument were concludent; then should Kellison deny Christ to
be judge of quick and dead. For I hope he will not say, that Christ will at
the last day condemn faithful men. He adds also, that we deny to Christ,
two offices of a judge, to wit, remuneration, and discussion, because we teach,
that man in this corruption of his nature cannot merit heaven by his works,
and that no sin is in his own proper nature venial. But neither is this
argument better then the former. For although men's works deserve not the favor
and reward, that shall be showed them; yet no man will deny, that God almighty
that judges of their actions, may reward them. And albeit no sin is venial
in his proper nature, if we respect the rigor of the law; yet there is great
difference betwixt sin and sin, and the judge is not only to judge of the
quality of sins, but also to examine and discuss, whether the party have
sinned or not. Much idle talk also does he spend about Christ's two aduents,
as he calls them, and about Jewish fancies concerning the Son of Joseph,
that, as they dreamed, was to be slain in the battle of Gog and Magog, and of
the dispatch of the judgment in a trise, and of the pronouncing of the
sentence in an audible voice. But because these Schoole-boyes fancies belong
not to this argument, I will refer them to be censured by his own
fantastical disciples. In the mean while I would pray this surueyor either to
prove them more demonstratiuely, or to affirm them more modestly.

The 8. chapter contains a pack of calumniations against us for teaching,
that Christians are justified by faith apprehending Christ's justice, that is
imputed unto us. And hereof he concludes, that all men are not only equally
just, and perfect, as the Beguardes said, but also as just as Christ himself.
But his inference is foolish and absurd. For although by Christ's satisfaction
and merits we are all justified, and acquitted; yet there is an imperfect
justice in all the faithful, in some more, in some less, and no way comparable
to Christ's justice. As for the perfection of Beguardes and Beguines, it
proceeded from the opinion of Monkish perfection, and therefore much rather
deserves to be imputed to Papists, then to us. Papists also say, that a man
may perform the law perfectly, and that no man is saved, but he that
observes the law. But of the first we may conclude, that their justice is
equal to the justice of Christ, who performed the law perfectlye, and that
all they, that are saved by the law are equal in justice: matters somewhat
strange and absurd, yet following necessarily of our adversaries Doctrine.

In the ninth chapter he goes about to prove, that we bring the new
Testament, and Christian religion into question. But of all this great
slander, he has no other ground, then this small and simple collection, that
therefore we do so, because we teach, that Christ as man, knew not the day of
judgment, and that he increased in wisdom. But therein we teach nothing but
that which both the Scriptures affirm, and ancient Fathers believed. Christ
speaking of the last day Marc. 13. no man knows says he, no not the Son,
Nazianzen also Lib. 2. de filio: nouit vt deus says he, vt homo se dicit
ignorare. The same is proved by the testimony of Cyril. Luke. chap. 2. says,
that Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and men.
And hereupon Ambrose writes, that Christ according to the flesh was filled
with wisdom and grace. Maxentius also in profess. fid. cath. affirms, that
Christ according to his humanity did grow and profit in age and wisdom.
Quamobrem fatendum est says he, deum natum ex foemina non secundum
diuinitatem, sed secundum humanitatem, deum in cunis iacentem, pannosum,
sordibus inuolutum creuisse et profecisse, aetate, et sapientia secundum
humanitatem, non secundum diuinitatem.

Finally, if Christ as man by the Union be omniscient, why is he not
omnipotent, and praesent in all places? and why should not all the rest of the
divine attributes be really transfused into his humanity, as well as this one?

In the the tenth Chapter he says, we make Christ a desperate man, and for
proof he alleges certain places, as taken out of Calvin. But what if
Calvin have not these words? does not this K. desperately abuse his readers
patience? I would also complain, that Master Calvin is wronged, but that the
enemies of truth take pleasure in slaundring him. Whosoever list to compare
Caluins words with Kellisons report, shall easilye perceive the wrong offered
him. For neither does he say, that the horrible confusion of damnation did
fiercelye torment Christ with fear, nor that he had to do with the judgment
of God, albeit Kellison impute both unto him Falselye also he translateth
Caluins words in Math. c. 27. v. 46. turning reum, culpable, and exitio
deuotus, already condemned, and making him to affirm, that which he obiecteth
to himself, and answers. But suppose Calvin in terms had passed to far;
yet if this surueyor had done his office, he would not have reported other
men's words, for grounds of our religion.

The eleventh chapter contains nothing but an inuectiue against Calvin, who
supposed, that the article of the creed concerning Christ's discending into
hell, ought to be expounded of his grievous suffringes in his soul, which in
bitterness might be parangoned, as he thought, to hellish pains. But all this
concerns us and our religion nothing, which mislike his particular opinion
herein. All this while therefore, that he bauled against Master Calvin, the
Surueyor seems to be out of his way. Furthermore most shamefully he
belyeth Calvin diverse ways. First he says, that Calvin acknowledged no local
hell. Secondly that he affirmed, that these words, my God my God why have
thou forsaken me, were the words of a damned man. And lastly, that Calvin at
the hour of death dispayred and called upon the Devil. The two first are
confuted by his writings upon the Creed, and the passion. The last by the
testimony of all that were present at his death Neither must Kellison think
to escape hell for reporting these hellish untruths devised by Bolsec,
Genebrard, and such like hel-houndes, unless he repent. Finally he says
first, that all hellish pains are without end. Next he counts it strange,
that Calvin brought Christ into hell. And lastly affirms, that Christ's blood
was sufficient to redeem the Devil, and the damned. But his followers teach
first, that the pains of purgatory are hellish, and caused by the flames of
hell. Next they say, ye limbus patrum, whither Christ descended is in hell, and
lastly that Christ came not to redeem Devils, nor took the nature of Devils,
but of men.

In the 12. Chapter he goes about to traduce us, as not loving Christ. And
why? Forsooth because says he, you love not the Mother of Christ, nor the
Saints, nor the Cross, nor the Images of Christ or the Saints, nor his
Nails, and other things belonging to him. He might if it had pleased him, have
added also the Ass, whereon Christ rode to Jerusalem, and the Bones of the
Paschall Lamb, and the Baskets wherein the Fragmentes were gathered, after he
had fed five thousand with five Barley loves and two Fishes. But how proves
he, that we do not love the blessed Mother of God nor the Saints? Forsooth
because we do not worship them, as the Papists do. But if this be an
argument of want of love, the^ neither the Apostles, nor first Chrstians loved
Christ, or his Saints. He tells also how Quintin an Heretic used the
Apostles with lewd terms. But we do detest Quintin, as we do Kellison.
Thirdly he says, that Calvin called Saints long eared creatures, and Wicleph
called them scurras principis, and that Luther wrote, that every Ministers
yoake-fellowe may be as holy, as the Mother of God. But these are
calumniations devised by them, that neither love Christ, nor the professors of
the Christian faith. It may be, that Calvin said the Papists made them to have
long ears, and that Wicliph said they were used, as Princes vshers. But
against Gods true Saints they never opened their mouth, or thought basely.
Further he talks idely of the Cross, of the nails and Images of Christ, and
the Saints. For it is no great sign of love to keep the instruments, which
were cause of our friends death, and well may Christians detest the worship of
Images, and yet love the memorial of holy me^, that either travailed in
setting forth the Christian faith, or suffered for the same. This scuruy
Surueyor in seeking to set forth the honor of the Mother of God, and the
Saints; does most shamfully abuse them, endeavoring to prove, that we love not
Christ, because that we love not his Mother, nor his Saints, even as those
love not a man, that love not his Dog. and so most blasphemosly he compares
Gods Saints to Dogs. Much he talks of the worship of Saints, and their
relics, after the Popish manner. But if he were the man he would be taken
for; he should leave his vagrant scurueying discourses, and prove the same
with arguments. That he will be able to do it, we have cause to suspect,
seeing and feeling his weakness in this kind.

Page 355. he says the Saints see and know even our cogitations and
prayers. But that is as much, as if he should make them Gods. For to God alone
it belongs to search the hearts. He tells us also, how they see all in the
face of God. But then they must comprehend Gods infinite essence, which
implies a contradiction.

Thus we see our Doctrine concerning Christ's person, and nature cleared. But
the wicked Doctrine of Papists concerning not only the same articles, but also
his office, and the parts thereof, neither shall Kellison, nor all his
consortes be able to clear or defend.

Chap. 6. A collection of certain absurd and blasphemous assertions of the
Papists, concerning Christ his incarnation, person, natures and offices.
THIS argument, if I should prosecute it fully, would require a very ample and
large Treatise. The absurd and impious assertions of the adversaries are so
many. But I will content my self with few, that out of them we may collect,
what the quality is of the rest.

First then Alexander Hales p. 3. qu. 2. membr. 13. says, that although man
had not fallen, yet Christ should have been in carnated. With him also
consents Vdalricus Lib. 5. sum. and other Doctors. Thomas Aquinas in scripto
holds the opinion to be probable. But this opinion crosses Gods council,
makes man wiser then God, and contradicts both Scriptures and Fathers. Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, says the Apostle 1. Tim. 1.
whereupon the gloss adds, toll vulnera, toll morbos, et nulla est causa
medicinae. And Augustine ser. 9. super verb. apostoli, si homo non peccasset
filius dei non venisset. If man had not sinned, the son of God had not come
into the world. And Leo in sermon. de natiu. si homo in suo honor mansisset,
creator mundi creatura non fieret.

Secondly the same Alexander and Vdalricus do affirm, that the three persons
in the Trinity may assume one man's nature, tres personae says Alexander
possunt assumere and communicare vnu^ and eundem hominem indiuiduum. But this
is contrary to the work of the incarnation of Christ, and confounds the
persons, and is a thing not imaginable.

Thirdly Thomas inscripto, and Durande in 3. did. 2. q. 1. and others say,
that God was able to assume an unreasonable creature. But what is more
blasphemous, then to call God a horse or an unreasonable creature, as the Son
of God by taking our nature, became man, and was truly called man?

4. Bonauenture in 3. did. 4. says, that the Virgin Mary has destroyed all
Heresies, and did merit the reconciliation of all mankind. Reconciliationem
quoque toti humano promeruit generi. But if she did merit man's reconciliation,
what needed Christ's merits? If she killed all Heresies; then was she a more
excellent teacher, then the Apostles.

5. Vdalricus Lib. 5. sum. denies, that Christ has two relations of a son,
the one to his eternal Father, the other to his Mother. Veneramur says he, in
Christo duas natiuitates non duas filiationes. Other Schoolmen also are of his
side. But the Scriptures call him both the Son of God, and Son of man; and
if he were not truly the Son of man, as he is the Son of God; then could
he not have redeemed man.

6. Alexander Hales grants that this proposition, Christ as he is man, is the
adopted Son of God, is true: which destroys by a consequence Christ's
right, as being the Son of God by nature.

7. Durand in 3. sent. did. 11. admits this proposition, Christ is a
creature, which comes nere to Arianisme.

8. Bonauenture in 3. did. 12. confesses that in Christ there was a power to
sin. primo modo says he, fuit in Christo peccandi potentia. And he
collecteth this, because he had freewill. Neither does Thomas writing upon
the sentences differ much from him. But Durand goes beyond both, for he
says, that if the humane nature of Christ had been assumed in pure naturalls,
that Christ might have sinned and been damned: his words are these in 3.
sent. did. 12. q. 2. Constat quod humaena natura sibi derelicta potest
peccare. Ergo sic assumpta peccare potuit. And again, quod add^tur, si peccare
potuit, da^nari potuit, concedatur, quia cum damnari sonet, in poenam, non est
maius inconueniens dicere Christum damnatum, quam mortuum vel passum. So here
they may see that the blasphemous words, which they seek for in Calvin, are
expressly to be found in their own Schoolmen.

9. Bonauenture in 3. sent. d st. 12. says, that Christ might have taken flesh
of a man, as he did of a woman. Which destroys the Article of Christ's
birth. He seems also to grant, that the Son of God in the shape of a woman
might have redeemed mankind, albeit it was more decent, that he should be a
man.

10. The grace of union of the two natures in Christ both Alexander, and Thomas
and others hold to be uncreated. Which being granted it must needs follow,
that the union of the two natures was from everlasting, which is the total
overthrow of our Christian faith.

11. In Christ they deny commonly that there was faith or hope. But he that
wants faith, is an infidel, and he that wa^teth hope is a desperate man:
which to affirm of Christ, is most blasphemous. Nay in this point the
Scoole-men are contrary to themselves. For if faith be an assent to the word of
God; and hope be an expectation of things future: then either had Christ
faith, and hope, or else he believed not the word of God, nor expected or hoped
for the resurrection of his body: both which cannot be spoken of Christ without
blasphemy.

12. The Schoolmen commonly hold, that the pains of Christ's Passion were
exceeding great, and yet as touching the superior part of his reason, they say
that at the same time he was in exceeding pleasure and joy. But this implies
contradiction, that the same man, at the same instant, should suffer in his
soul extreme pains, and yet be in exceeding joy and pleasure. It is also
contrary to Scriptures: attendite says he, si est dolor, sicut dolor meus.
Behold if there be any dolor comparable to mine? But if he were in exceeding
pleasure, many men's passions should exceed his.

13. By the union of ye natures they teach, that Christ was made omniscient.
But no reason can be alleged, why the atribute of knowledge, should be more
really transfused into Christ's humane nature, then the attribute of
omnipote^ce or omnipresence, and the rest. And therefore Durand granted, that
he had omnipotence per assistentiam.

14. Henricus de Gandauo taught, that there was an other form in Christ's
humane nature besides ye reasonable soul, and that his death was not natural.
Richard de media villa says, his death was miraculous, and that if the
influence of the divinity had not been withdrawn, he could not have dyed.
But this is nothing else, but labor and contention to overthrow Christ's true
humanity, by showing him not to be like to us, and a plain way to dissolve
the union of his two natures.

15. The master of the sentences lib. 3. did. 16. holds ye Christ by
necessary course of nature neither suffered, nor dyed. dici potest says he,
Christum voluntate, non necessitate suae naturae hos defectus, sicut alios
suscepisse, silicet necessitatem patiendi in anima, et moriendi in carne. But
this takes away the similitude betwixt Christ's humane nature and ours, who in
this frailty cannot avoid pain, nor death.

16. Generallye they say, it was not necessary, that Christ should suffer
death for mankind. Kellison most impiouslye says, that one drop of Christ's
blood, and one tear was a sufficient ransom for the sins of the world. But
this is a plain overthwart course to Gods eternal council, to Scriptures,
and to reason. For how could man by these means be ransomed from death, Gods
justice being not to be satisfied, but by death?

17. Antisiodorensis. lib. 3. summae says, that Christ merited nothing, as he
loved God. But yt makes God a liar, that promises eternal life to those that
perform the law, and extolleth man's obedience above the obedience of Christ.
For Papists grant heaven to be deserved by such as love God.

18. They do hold for the most part, that Christ from the first instant of
his conception was vir perfectus, and had the perfect use of reason, and did
merit. But this being granted, there is no difference betwixt a man and an
Embryo, or Child newly conceived, and Christ must needs have a soul and body
of an other nature then other men.

19. Although Christ be the universal mediator of all mankind, yet Petrus de
Tarentasia, and Richard de media villa teach that praelates and Saints are
called particular mediators, praelati and viri sancti say they, dicuntur
particulares mediatores personarum quarundam.

20. They deny, that Christ was a man during the time, that he lay in the
grave. In that time also Antisiodorensis does deny him to be our redeemer, as
this word redeemer signifies the worker of the mystery of our redemption. But
if he were then no man, then was our Savior sometimes no man, and so the
mystery of the union of the two natures is dissolved; if then he was no
redeemer, then he lost the honor of the redemption of mankind; neither of
which can be affirmed without gross inconveniences.

21. Albertus and others say, that Devils carry their hell about with them.
Which if it be granted, then the hell of Papists is no determinate place,
neither is it in the bowels of the earth, but also above the earth, and in the
air, and in the Popes chamber, when the devil is there.

22. Bellarmine lib. 1. de missa. C. 2. says, that in a true sacrifice, that
is offered to God, it is required, that it be destroyed. His words are, ad
verum sacrificium, requiritur, vt id, quod offertur deo in sacrificium, plane
destruatur. If then the Papists offer up the very body and blood of Christ in
the Mass, as they teach; then they destroy Christ's body and blood, and
deprive us of Christ's body. But this is a most blasphemous assertion, to say
that Christ's body and blood may be destroyed, and such fellows deserve of
all Christians to be abhorred, as blasphemers, and abolishers of Religion.

23. They hold, that not only wicked and reprobrate men, but also that Dogs
and hogs may eat up Christ's true body. But that is contrary to all
Religion, not only to cast holy things, but also the redeemer of the world,
to Hogs and Dogs.

24. They believe and teach, that Christ's body is in the Sacrament really,
although it be neither seen nor felt there. They believe also that the same
body is both in heaven visible, and in the earth invisible at one time. But
this does quite overthrow Christ's humane nature. For never was there man in
the world, that had such a body.

25. Bellarmine lib. de incarnatione Cap. 11. says, that God is able to turn
all the world into bread, and that all this bread may be turned into Christ's
body. But it is most absurd to think, that Christ has a body so great as
all the world, or that all the world is no bigger, then a man's body, or that one
man's body may be in all places.

26. They pray unto Saints to help them, and to intercede for them. But what
is more absurd, then to leave Christ, and to pray to those, of whom they have
no certainty, whether they be saved or not? if they say, they are assured they
are saved, they speak absurdly. For if they teach aright, that no man, can
assure himself of his own salvation, then they teach men absurdly, to assure
themselves of the salvation of all those, that are canonized by the Pope.

27. They overthrow the grounds of arts and rules of reason and sense, where
they teach, that Christ's body and blood is really in the sacrament, and
offered up continually for quick and dead. For reason and Arithmeticke teach
us, that many vnityes make a number, and that one and one make two. But this
ground the Papists destroy. For albeit upon this Altar is one body, and at the
same time another upon an other, yet do they deny, that in this case one and
one make two. They say also, that albeit Christ's body be entyre upon three
hundred several altars, yet there are not diverse bodies upon the Altar. Sense
also teaches us, that we receive bread and wine. But they will have us
rather to believe the Pope, then our own senses. Philosophye teaches us, that
no body can come to a place, or go away without local motion. But these
teach that Christ's body begins to be in the Sacrament, and departs from
thence again, the forms being corrupted, without local motion.

28. All Christians believe, that Christ is the redeemer of the world and the
sole and absolute mediator betwixt God and man. But Papists in their Mass make
their Priests mediators betwixt God and Christ's body, that lies on the
altar, as they say, and that in pitiful sort, included in a small room. Supra
quae says the Priest, speaking of consecrated hoastes, propitio ac sereno
vultu respicere digneris, and accepta habere, as if God would not look upon his
Son, nor accept him without their mediation. And again iube haec perferri
per manus sa^cti angeli tui in sublime altar tuum, that is, command this
sacrifice viz. of Christ's body and blood, to be carried up unto thy high
altar by the hands of thy holy Angel. So they make Christ a weak and
impotent mediator, that cannot ascend into heaven without the Preests Prayers,
and help of Angels.

29. They believe, that their souls are redeemed by Masses (for that they
boldly, affirm in the Canon) by indulgences, and merits of Saints and by our
own satisfactions, as it appears by their common positions in their
Doctrines of indulgences, merits, and satisfactions.

30. They destroy Christ's Preest-hood, and that two ways. First, as if he had
offered no perfect Sacrifice for man's sin, they continually offer up
sacrifices for quick and dead. Secondly as if his prayer were not heard, they
run to our Lady, to Angels and Saints, and make them their mediators. Our
Lady they call the gate, and S. Peter the Porter of heaven.

31. They deny Christ to remain a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, when they teach, that their Mass Priests are after the order of
Melchisedech, and that Christ offers not now but by these Vicar-priestes.

32. They deny Christ to be the only head, foundation, and teacher of his
Church, giving equal authority to unwritten traditions, and popish
decretales, and to Christ's doctrine.

Finally, no man can talk more wickedly and dishonorablye of Christ's person
and offices then Kellison. Page. 256. he says the word was mute. But what
could the Arians speak more dishonorably of the eternal word, then to say, he
was mute?

He says also, that Christ with one word or tear might have redeemed us. But
this abaseth the greatness of his power, and diminishes the merit of his
passion. Page 261. He affirms that Christ's passion was not our formal
justification, nor satisfaction, but only the meritorious cause of our
redemption and salvation, which deserved for us at Gods hands grace, by which
together with our cooperation we may be saved and redeemed. He might in more
clear words have said, that Christ did not satisfye for us, nor save us, or
redeem us, but only merited for us, that we might satisfye for our selves,
and save and redeem our selves. Which doctrine is most blasphemous, most
desperate and derogatorie to the glorious work of that great redemption, which
Christ wrought for us upon the cross.

P. 265. He defends the mediation and intercession of our Lady, and of the
Saints, for such as worship them and call upon them. But as they that worship
more Gods then one, are indeed without God, so this defender of many mediators
has not, nor indeed acknowledges any true mediator.

P. 271. He says, that the seven Sacraments do all give grace, to heal our
spiritual wounds: which being added to that, which he said before of
Christ's meriting grace, by which together with our own cooperation we may
be saved: It appears, that he neither makes Christ our redeemer, nor the
Physicion by whose wounds we are healed. For you see he ascribes it to
secondary causes, nay to extreme unction and ceremonies never instituted by
Christ. Nay he supposes, that our diseases may be cured by the Priests of
Baal, by the flames of purgatory, and the oil of indulgences. But let him not
deceive himself. The scalding fire of purgatory will not agree with his
greasy shaven crown.

P. 283. He speaks eagrely against those, that deny Christ to be a law
maker. But his secret purpose he dare not utter, for he knows, that the
Romish Church makes the Popes laws to bind in conscience, and from Christ to
him tra^slateth the power to make laws. But this would have appeared very
gross, and would have showed, that for Christ's tribunal seat, he meant to
erect the Popes consistory.

P. 285. He tells us, that Christ has many vicegerents in his Preest-hood.
But this does quite overthrow Christ's preest-hood, that is without succession
and vicegerency being according to the order of Melchisedech, that had neither
successor, nor vicegerent. This K. himself will not deny, I think, albeit he
be a dull fellow, that Princes that are present need no vicegerents. How then
comes it to pass, Christ being present with his church, as the Papists say
really on the alter, as we say, by his holy spirit, and grace, that this fellow
will needs appoint him vicegerents, bring in a race of Baals Priests, and
bald Sacrificers without lawful institution or commission?

Lib. 3. cap. 7. he talks of Christ's judgment. And in the 8. Chapter of the
same Book of wrong offered to Christ by making others equal to Christ. And in
the 9. Chapter of those, that make Christ ignorant of his office. But he had
little reason to talk of these matters, seeing the Papists will have Christ
and the Pope to have but one consistory, and hold that the Popes judgment is
infallible, when he determines matters of faith. They do also make the Pope
head of the Church, and use other mediators as well as Christ. The gloss also
upon the extrauagant vnam sanctam. de maiorit. et obed. does blasphemously in a
certain case charge Christ with indiscretion. Non videtur dominus discretus
fuisse says he, vt cum reuerentia eius loquar, nisi vnicum post se talem
vicarium reliquisset.

Page 338. he comes in with this proverb, love me love my Dog. And
there-vpon gathers, that we love not Christ, because we worship not our Lady
and the Saints, comparing them to Dogs. What then remains but that the Pope
cause this mad Dogs teeth to be knocked out, that biteth he cares not
whom, blasphemeth Christ and dishonoreth his Saints, whom he would seem to
honor?

Chap. 7. An answer to Kellisons calumniations, charging us either to have no
Religion at all, or a graceless Religion.
IF Our adversary were a man of gravity, and did dispute like a Divine, or a
man of learning, it were not amiss to bestow some more labor upon him. But
now seeing he does nothing, but lie like a Sycophant, and rail like a
scurrilous and graceless companion deuoyd of reason and honesty, in that which
follows, I will trusse up his great fardle of foolery within the compass of
a few leaves. If any thing leave, it shall not fail to have answer God-willing
in my next, if he can and will note the dedefault.

His first bolt against our Religion is this: you have no true Priests, ergo
no true Religion, as we may read, Lib. 4. c. 1. But his antecedent is false.
For if by Priests he mean true Bishops and Pastors, that truly preach the
word, and sincerely administer the holy Sacraments according to Christ his
institution; then have we such. Neither is it material, that they have no
ordination from the Pope, nor offer sacrifice for quick and dead. For neither
are the Popish sacrificing shauelinges true Priests, nor have they any good
ordination being authorized either by the Pope, that is a lay man, or by
Abbots, that have no right to ordeine Ministers, or by such as have their
ordination from the Pope, who is a mere usurper of Episcopal authority. That
they are not true Priests, it appears both by their defect of ordination, and
also by the false title of their office, being appointed to sacrifice for quick
and dead. The scriptures speak often of Priests or Elders. So likewise do the
Fathers. But they understand such, as preach the word, and administer the
sacraments, and not sacrificing shauelinges offering for quick and dead.
Further we may answer, that for sometime, and in some places Religion may
consist without ordinary pastors, and very well without Popish-priestes. This
discourse therefore is all for us, and against Kellisons shaven crown, and
idolatrous Priesthood.

His second bolt is leuelled at our religion very lewdly. For it touches not
us, yt have not only ye sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, and all other
spiritual sacrifices used among Christians, but also the commemoration of
Christ's only sacrifice once offered upon the Cross daily celebrated in the
holy Eucharist. But it strikes the Massing Religion deadly. For if there be no
Religion, where there is no real and external sacrifice; then have the
Papists no Religion. And that is proved first by Bellarmines words Lib. 1.
de missa cap. 2. Where he says, that in a true sacrifice offered to God, it is
required, that the thing offered be destroyed. If then they offer up Christ's
body and blood in their Mass; then do they consume and destroy the same, and
afterward leave themselves nothing to offer. Secondly that sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood within the accidents of bread and wine, which the
Masse-priestes offer for quick and dead, as they surmise, is a mere fancy and
imagination of theirs contradicting Christ his institution of the Eucharist,
and diverse other places of Scriptures. They allege, I confess, some words of
the instituon of the Eucharist, and that which Daniel speaks of the daily
sacrifice, and Malachy of the clean oblation. But they fit not the impure
Mass, nor the Idolatrous sacrifice of Baals priests destroying Christ's
institution, and offering that, which he commanded not to be offered, but to
be received in remembrance of his death and Passion. The Fathers also were
ignorant of the histrionicall sacrifice of the Masse-priestes. Neither was
there any certain Law or Doctrine established for it before the wicked
conuenticle of Trent had enacted their sacrificing Laws. All which is proved
in my Books de missa against Bellarmine, which this K. does not make any have
to answer. Nay he is more absurd then Bellarmine where he says, that Christ
powered out his blood at his last Supper. For then he should have offered a
bloody sacrifice at his last Supper, and powered out his blood twice. To
conclude, where he thinks to commend unto us his massing sacrifice, he
shows that Popish religion is nothing, but mere novelties and fooleries
surpassing the reach of common understanding.

His third bolt is thus formed Lib. 4. c. 3. they have noe certentie of
Sacraments at all: ergo no Religion. And to prove his antecedent he says,
that if any will forsake the Catholic Church and her belief of seven
Sacraments, that he has no morrall nor probable assurance of any Sacraments.
But first we deny, that the particular Church of Rome is the Catholic Church.
Secondly we affirm, that the Catholic Church for a thousand years did never
hear of 7. Sacraments, only and properly so called. Thirdly it is absurd to
think, that the institution of confirmation, and extreme unction did as well
proceed from Christ, as Baptism and the Lords Supper, or that they work like
effects. Matrimony, orders and repentance we confess have their original
from God: but never as Sacraments of the new Testament. For they were in use
before Christ's time, and want both forms of words, and certain signs, and
promises annexed to signs: all which are necessarily required in true
Sacraments.

Kellison braggeth of proofs of Scriptures and Fathers for all matters. But
where are they? we can see none brought by him. Nay his Master Bellarmine has
bewrayed the poverty of his cause in this behalf, to no little discredit of
himself, and discomfort of his consortes. If then they have either no
Religion, or a graceless Religion, that have no assurance of seven Sacraments,
as this K. confesses; then is Kellison and his company left either without
Religion, or with a graceless Religion.

Only this is his comfort, yt if we have no graceful religion, yet he has a
greasy Religion, and hops to be justified partly by the greasing of his
hands and shaven crown, and partly by extreme unction being well greased
departing out of the world, that he may burn like a candle in purgatory, and
slip like an Eele out the gripes of Lucifer.

The fourth bolt is thus framed by this foolish surueying fletcher. They
detract from the dignity of Sacraments, and attribute little unto them. Ergo
they have no Religion, or a graceless religion. But how does he prove, that
we diminish the dignity of Sacraments, or attribute less unto them, then is
due? he alleges, how some call them badges or signs, and says, that we
deny that they give grace, or effectuate any jot of sanctification in our
souls more then the Sacraments of the old law did. But first no man among us,
will say, or ever did say, that they serve only for signs or badges of
Christianity, and have no other use. Secondly, we all confess, that God
works sanctification by ye sacraments of the new testament, albeit Gods power
is not so tied to sacraments, as the Papists teach, who affirm, that they
contain grace, and give that to the sign, that is properly wrought and
effected by Gods grace. Thirdly, we teach, that the Sacraments of the new
Testament are Sacraments of things passed and exhibited, as the sacraments of
Moses law were of things future; yet we deny not, yt God wrought grace by
them, as he does by these. And this is consonant both to holy Scriptures and
fathers. Finally we do not derogate any thing from true Sacraments, that by
the word of God is due unto them, albeit we prefer baptism and the Lords
Supper before the pretended Sacraments devised by the adversaries. But if
those have no Religion, that detract from the Sacraments, then have Papists
but a poor religion, which rebaptise oftentimes those which are by us
baptized, and in liewe of the holy Eucharist have thrust into the Church the
idol of the mass. They have also corrupted the Doctrine both of repentance,
and of orders, making their auriculer confession and humane absolutions and
satisfactions parts of penance contrary to all antiquity, and reordaining
those that are duelye ordered by us. Finallye they make their Priests, and
Monks, and Friars, to forswear marriage. and separate married folks for
Religion, violating the rites of their own pretended Sacraments.

The fifth bird-bolt of this dog-bolt is shot against Luther, Calvin, Brentius,
Melancthon and diverse other learned Divines, whom he charge, to have taken
away in effect those Sacraments, which they seem to allow of. But first, he
should have understood, if both his wits and brain had not failed him, that
there is great difference betwixt private opinions, and Religion. Secondly
lewdely does he prove, that which maliciously he obiecteth unto particulers.
Luther never said nor thought, yt either the words of baptism as they are
instituted by Christ may be omitted; or that the element of water may be
changed into bear, or milk, or other liquor. Nay, therein we reprehend the
Papists, for yt they are to bold, not only in changing and adding words,
but also in taking away the Elements in the administration of Sacraments. The
which appears in that they have thrust in these words and aeterni, and
mysterium fidei, into Christ's words, in the institution of the Cup, and
have added to baptism, salt, spittle, and other elements, and taken away the
Cup from the communicates.

Calvin also with all his might defends the integrity of Christ's institution
both concerning the words and elements of the sacraments, and never called
Christ's words magical charms, albeit the Papists with words, and a puff of
wind, as with a charm think to transubstantiate bread and wine into the
Lords body and blood.

Buccer in c. 26. Math. does not deny, that words are necessary in the
Eucharist. His words set down will clear him from Kellisons slander.

Luther, where he says, that Children believe, says nothing, but that which
S. Augustine and others have said before him. Of actual faith in Children he
says nothing, albeit this K. does actually and falsely report it.

Calvin lib. 4. Instit. c. 16. 18. says not, that S. John baptistes baptism
was as good, as Christ's baptism, but that his baptism was one with Christ's
baptism: which is also proved, for that Christ was baptized by John, and for
that the Apostles were baptized with no other baptism. Neither does the
example Act. 19. prove it to be different. For either they were not well
baptized, that were baptized into John's baptism, or they were not rebaptized,
but only had imposition of hands and the baptism of Gods spirit.

True it is, yt calvin denies women power to baptize: and so would yt
adversaries also, if they did not corrupt al good orders. But yt adds to ye
dignity of the sacrament. He says further, that some that are not baptized
may be saved. And so ye adversaries grant also, especially when either
Martyrdom supplyeth baptism, or a man seeks baptism, and cannot have it in
time. That the Children of the reprobate are not to be baptized, or that the
Children of the faithful need not to be baptized Calvin never said, nor
thought. Neither does he say, that we receive bare signs in the Lords
supper, but the communion of the body and blood of Christ. If then this
surueyor would have set down these learned men's words truly, then should
he have had no reason to charge them with taking away the Sacraments, or
derogating from them.

But ye Papists, while they depend wholly upon the preests intention, and chop
and change words in the holy institution, and take away, not only the
substance of bread and wine, but also the Cup from the communicantes, do
indeed deprive Christians of the Sacraments. Thomas Aquinas p. 3. q. 66. says
that baptism may be administered, in lixinio, that is in lie, and Albertus, in
Brodio, that is, in pottage. Dionysius Carth. in 4. sent. did. 3. q. 2. says,
yt our Ladies name may be added to the name of the Trinity, and yet all remain
good. Potest in inuocatione beatae mariae fieri baptismus cum inuocatione
Trinitatis. Finally, they teach, that Dogs and Hogs may eat the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, and use to baptize belles. These are the men therefore, that
abuse the Sacraments, and deprive Christians of them: and not Luther or Calvin.

His sixth and last bolt is directed against the Liturgy and prayers of the
Church. But as in other places so here also the man shoots at rouers,
ranging up and down in an idle and tedious discourse concerning the excellency
of prayer, which no man calls in question. But that which in the title of his
Chapter he proposes to himself, he forgets, and cannot prove viz. that
either we have no prayer, or else disorders in prayer. He is not ashamed to
affirm, that we have no prayers at al on working days. But that is confuted
both by common experience and the public orders of the Church. On Holy days,
he says, we spend our time in yelling out Geneua Psalms. So the Devil
teaches him to yell out blasphemies against the praises of God in Psalms,
translated out of holy Scriptures. And why think you? forsooth because we
admit not the filthy idolatrous prayers of the Mass, and breuiaries, and for
that also we pray in tongues understood, and with our spirit, and
understanding, and for that we use not their Baals songs. But when Christians
consider how Papists pray like Parrats, not understanding what they say, and
sing their monkish Hymmes, and call upon they know not whom, and send up
their prayers before stocks and stones; they have no occasion, either to
mislike our Prayers or Psalms, or to allow their own. Neither is it
material, that we believe not, that Prayers merit heaven, or satisfye for our
sins, or that man naturally has liberum arbitrium both in knowing and doing
things pleasing to God. For albeit they merit not, yet they both obtain
things necessary, and remove things hurtful. Again, albeit we cannot
satisfye for our sins by prayers, yet by them we obtain remission of sins,
for which our Savior has sufficiently satisfied. Finally albeit the natural
man by freewil and nature does neither understand the things of God, nor
pursue after things pleasing to God; yet directed by Gods holy spirit, by
prayers we obtain Gods grace, that both enlightneth our understanding, and
helps our weakness. So in all these cases prayer is profitable.

Furthermore albeit we teach, that man is justified by faith, and that every
true Christian led by Gods spirit, is to assure him self of Gods favor; yet
are we not to neglect the means, nor to contemn Prayers which are exercises
of our faith, and help to confirm us, and are means to obtain things
necessary for us. The Surueyor therefore that concludes against the means,
because we assure our selves of the end promised unto us through Christ Jesus,
is but an idiot disputer. For albeit we hope to attain to the end; yet we
do not deny ordinary means.

Chap. 8. The Surueyors calumniations against our Doctrine concerning God,
refuted.
AS it is a heinous Heresy to make God the author of sin, and condemned in
Florinus and Blastus; so it is a heinous calumniation to charge innocent
christians with so heinous a crime, as to hold God to be the author of sin.
All this notwithstanding, Kellison a Surueyor, as he calls himself, but not
for Christ, but for Antichrist, will needs affirm, that we make God the
author of sin and wickedness. But what if we teach contrary? will it not
appear, that the author of sin was author also of this shameless and
sinful slander? well then let us see what is publikelye professed by the
reformed churches. In the confession of the French Church, we read that God is
not the author of evil, and that he is clear of all blame for things done
evil. The Heluetian Churches condemn Florinus and Blastus for maintaining the
contrary Doctrine. Damnanus say they, Florinum and Blastum, and omnes, qui
deum faciunt authorem peccati. The same also we do both in our writings and
Sermons publicly teach, and profess. Neither can this K. allege either
sentence or word to the contrary. But says he, lib. 5. c. 1. Calvin and his
followers avouch, that God immediatelye and directlye is the author of
wickedness: and Melanctho^ in Romans c. 8. avouches, that David's adultery, and
Judas treachery were as much the work of God, as S. Paul's vocation. He says
also, that Beza, and diverse others have like sayings. But first we are
unjustly charged with every private man's opinions: neither will our adversaries
think it reason, in their own case to be so used. Secondlye Calvin is much
wronged by this foul mouthed curre. For he is so far from saying, that God
is the author of all wickedness, that expressly lib. 1. instit. c. 18. he
teaches, that God is author of no wickedness. Falsely also does he charge
Calvin to say, that God not only foreseeth man's sins, but has created him
of determinate purpose to that end. He says only, that God does not only
permit men to do what they will, but does govern their actions, and direct
them to such ends, as he appoints, not that he wills or acts their
sin, or the obliquity of the action, but that he directs their wicked
actions to good ends, which is the Doctrine of Saint Augustine in enchiridio
ad Laurentium, and diverse other places. Melancthon also is most wickedly
slaundered by this false and wicked fellow, for he has no such words, as
those, wherewith he stands charged. Neither may we doubt, but this fellow,
that has such leisure to prye into all men's faults, would have set down Bezaes
words, and any thing written or taught by us, if the same had made for his
purpose. Wherefore seeing this K. sets down his own malicious slanders,
and not our words, he may, if he find any inconvenience or absurdity
redounding thereof, take the same wholly to himself, and not impute it to us.
He may also forbear to prove, that God is not the author of sin. For
unless himself have any such wicked conceit, we know no man, that will
maintain any such blasphemy.

In his second Chapter of his fifth Book he charge Calvin further with
teaching, that Gods will and power does so domineere over the will of a sinner,
that he cannot resist Gods motion, which eggeth and urges him to sin. Matters
utterly false and forged. For proof he cites Lib. 3. instit. c. 21. 6. et 8.
But there is no such matter to be found in those places. There also he is
charged to say, that Gods will is a necessity of things. But neither does he
say any such thing in that place; nor if he should say, that Gods absolute will
does impose a necessity of things, does it follow, that God does egg and
urge men to sin. It appears therefore that this lying companion sought not
to find out truth, but to oppress truth, and the favorers thereof, with lies
and slanders devised by himself.

Thirdly he supposes, that we teach, that Gods commandments are impossible,
and that a man can as soon touch the heavens with his finger, as fulfill the
least commandment. But this is so gross a lie, as a man may almost touch it
with his finger. For although we believe, that noe man in this frailty of our
nature, after the fall of Adam, is able perfectly to fulfill the whole Law of
God; yet absolutely and simply no man teaches them to be impossible. Nay we
know they were possible to Adam in the state of innocence, and that now by
grace many commaundemets may be performed. But suppose we should say, that the
Law cannot perfectly be performed, yet should we say no more, then Ambrose
and Hierome do teach in Galat. 3. and Chrysostom in Gal. 2. and Bernard sermon.
50. in cant. and Thomas Aquinas in Gal. 3. lect. 4. He would prove, yt the
commandments of God are easy and light. But therein he shows his own
lightness, that condemns himself for not performing that, which he takes
to be light. The rest of his illations are mere fooleryes grounded upon his
own fancyes.

In his fourth Chapter he would infer that we make God a most cruel Tyrant,
because we teach, that no man is able to perform the whole Law of God
perfectly. But his inference is most wicked and blasphemous, and could not
proceed, but out of the blasphemous thoughts of a wicked Mass Priest. Out of
our Doctrine no such matter is to be inferred. For as in matter of debts, the
Creditor may justly exact his own, the Debtor having bound himself to pay,
and after proouing insufficient and unable; so man is justly punnished for not
paying his debt, whereto he is bound, and which by his own fault he is made
unable to pay. Luther de seruo arb. confesses, that in this obscure light of
nature, and debility of understanding man cannot see, why God should not be
unjust condemning him, that cannot choose but sin. But yet he accuses not God
either of injustice or cruelty, as this man would have it, but rather accuses
man of blindness and ignorance. And yet others do plainly see, that God does
most justly exact that at the hand of man, which by his own default he is
become unable to perform.

Finally he charge the reformers, that they pull down the true God out of his
throne, and place an Idol in the same of their own imagination. And his
reason is first, for that all Heretics are Idolaters; and next for that we
hold, that God is the author of sin, and of a bad nature, unreasonable, and
cruel. But if all Heretics be Idolaters; then as the Papists are gross
Heretics, so are they gross Idolaters, holding diverse branches of the
Simonian, Carpocratian, Collyridia^, Angelican, Manichean, Pelagian Heresy,
and of diverse other damned Heresies. Again if all Idolaters pull God out of
his Throne; then ye Papists that give Gods honor to creatures, and worship the
Sacrament, stocks and stones Idolatrosly, do pull God, as much as in them
lies, out of his Throne. Finally if we have cleared our selves from all the
iniust imputations of this Sycophant, and showed, that neither Calvin, nor any
of our teachers do hold, that God is author of sin, or guilty of any
injustice; then I hope the very Papists the^-selues will be ashamed to hear
such blasphemous terms proceed from their teachers, and be more wary
hereafter, how they give ear to our adversaries clamours. It is one thing to
cry loud, and another thing to bring sound proof. Sycophants object great
crimes: but wise Judges proceed according to proofs.

Chap. 9. That our Doctrine gives due obedience and respect both to Princes
and to their Laws.
HOW wickedly the Popes of Rome have abused the clemency of Christian Princes,
it would require a long discourse to relate. This breefly may be verified, that
they have trod down the majesty of Kings, contemned their Laws, and set
variance betwixt the Prince and his subjects from time to time. And yet, as if
the Doctrine of Popery, were clear in this point, this K. blusheth not to
object the faults of his consortes to us. Like unto Parmenian the Donatist,
who when he might be ashamed of his own faults, yet blushed not to accuse
innocent Catholics. Cum pro tuis erubescere debueras, says Optatus to
Parmenian, Lib. 2. contr. Parmen. catholicos innocents accusas. The difference
betwixt our Doctrine and Popery in this point is very great. We say, it is not
lawful for any subject to lay violent hands upon their anointed Kings. The
Papists are taught to rebel against Kings excommunicat by the Pope. Nay Pius
the fifth in bulla contr. Elizahetha^ denounces them excommunicate, that would
not stir against Queen Elizabeth, and take arms against her.

Secondly we say, that the King is not subject to any foreign Potentate. They
hold, that it is necessary to salvation for the King of England to be subject
to the Pope, and think men bound to believe it. Nay they say the Pope is as
far above the Emperor, as the Sun above the Moon.

Thirdly we say, that the Kings Laws concerning Ecclesisticall matters are to
be obeyed. The Papists give all power in Ecclesiastical affairs to the Pope,
and say that the King therein is but an usurper.

Fourthly we say, that not only laymen, but also all Masse-priestes, Monks,
and Friars, ought to be subject to the Prince. These fellows exempt their
Clergy and their goods from Princes government, as appears by Bellarmines
treatise de exemptione Clericorum, and diverse decrees of Popes.

Finally we make Princes and Kings, sovereign co^maunders over their
subjects, and immediate exequutors of Gods laws. Contrariwise the papists
make them most base exequutioners of the Popes Laws, and therein prevail so
far, that they not only set Princes together by the ears one with another,
but make them the Popes hangmen, and force them to persecute their own
innocent subjects, if they will not admit the Popes Idolatrous, and Heretical
Religion.

But says Kellison Lib. 6 c. 1. they teach, that no Prince can bind a man in
conscience to obey his Laws and commandments, and give subjectes good leave
to rebel and reuolte. This he says, and how proves he that, which he
says? forsooth says he, Luther exhorted the Germans not to take Arms
against the Turk. And in his Book against the King of England called him all
to naught. Secondly he tells us of the Rebellion of the Boores in Germany.
Thirdly he cites certain places out of Luther, showing, that the Popes laws,
or Princes positive laws bind not to mortal sin, nor rule the conscience.

Lastly he spends much idle talk about the tumults in France, Flaunders, and
Germany. But first what makes all this to laws binding in conscience?
Secondly the Articles of his accusation contain manifest untruths. For
neither do we give subjects leave to revolt, neither do we deny that
Princes laws do bind in conscience, as often as they command any thing
commanded in Gods word, or prohibit things by God prohibited. If Luther
respected not the Pope, nor his decretale laws; it is no marvel, seeing he
is no lawful Prince, but an Usurper, and the head and maintayner of
Antichrists Kingdom. Furthermore where he and Calvin defend Christian men's
liberty, as touching their conscience, they say no other thing, then that
which they have learned, and which every man may gather out of Saint James
Chap. 4. where he says, there is own Lawgiver, that can save and destroy.
As for Kellisons proofs they are either grounded upon false reports; or else
contain matters impertinent. First false it is, that Luther exhorted the
Germains not to take arms against the Turk. Nay he rather encouraged them to
defend their country against the Turk, only showing them, that if they meant
to prevail against him, they must first correct their lives, and reform their
errors in Religion. But whatsoever he said in this argument, it concerns this
matter in question, nothing. Secondly, he was not King Henry's subject, but
dealt against him more freely, as being by subtlety of Papists set forth to
countenance the Popes lewd cause. Thirdly, we defend not the Rebellion of the
rustical Boores in Germany, neither did Luther spare to reprove them, and to
write against them. Beside that, the cause of their insurrection was not
Religion, but temporal oppression. Fourthly we have before declared what is
Luthers and Caluins meaning concerning the binding of men's consciences. Fifthly,
the Germains and States of the low Countries are well able to clear themselves
from all blot of rebellion, or imputation laid upon them by this sycophant, as
may appear to any that will read their defenses. Finally the Christians in
France never rebelled, but only took arms in defense of their lives, against
such as broke the Kings edictes, and therefore have been justified in their
actions by the Kings themselves, and by their edictes at diverse times. Wherefore
seeing their own Kings did clear them; this swad has no reason to accuse
them.

In his second Chapter of his sixth book he charge us, that our Doctrine
does bring judges and tribunal seats into contempt. And his reason is
partlye, for that Luther and Calvin teach, that the positive laws of Princes
bind not in conscience, and partlye for that they do condemn the Popish
Doctrine of freewill. But his reason is so simple and soppish, that it falls
of it self without our help. For albeit the positive laws of Princes, that
have no strength of Gods law, do not reach so far, as to bind the
conscience; yet all the laws of Princes, that have their ground in Gods law
do bind the conscience also. Likewise the authority of Princes is of God,
and therefore no man may resist the^ without offense of conscience. Furthermore
albeit positive laws of Princes bind not in conscience; yet they do bind men
to sustain the punishment inflicted by Princes laws not direct contrary to
Gods laws. Finally albeit man have not freewil after the opinion of the
Papists in discerning spiritual matters, and doing works pleasing to God, and
tending to the ateining of eternal life; yet he has freewill to do lewdly,
and therefore justly deserves to be punished. This fellow therefore rather
deserves to be punished, that understands our cause no better, then admired
for his profound sophistry. He adds, that it follows by the Doctrine of
these nouuellants, that Princes have no authority to command. But then these
old hacsters must bring in new and strange conclusions. For as we have before
declared, we maintain the Princes authority against the usurpation of the
Pope, and obey his laws better then Papists, who for a long time have stood
for the Pope against their Princes, both in France and other places. Kellison
like an old sycophant may therefore do well, seeing the Popes tyranny is so
new, to abstain from charging others with novelty, and forbearing to rail
and lie, to produce some better arguments.

In the third chapter of his sixth book he concludes, that we bring Princes
laws into contempt, and in the fourth and last Chapter, that by our Doctrine,
neither the Prince is to rely upon his Subjects, nor Subjects upon the Prince,
nor one upon another: And all this because Luther and Calvin teach, that
Princes mere positive laws do not bind in conscience. But as leapers, that
mistake their rising fall often in the midst, so disputers failing in their
grounds come short of their conclusion. This position of Luther and Calvin I
have heretofore showed to have been quite mistaken by Kellison. But had they
taught so as he imagines; yet do they neither bring laws into contempt, nor
breed any distrust or evil correspo^dence betwixt Princes and subjects. For all
Gods laws bind in conscience, and man's laws as far as they have vigor from
Gods law. The authority of Princes is grounded upon ye Law of God. From the
same also not only our duty toward our parents, but also of husbands to their
wives, and wives to their husbands, of children to their parents, and
contrariwise for the most part receives strength. Finally the same
authoriseth diverse contracts willing us so to do to others, as we would have
others to do to us. Furthermore beside matter of conscience, civil laws do
sufficiently keep themselves from contempt by diverse sorts of civil
punishments. His frappling out-courses therefore touch us nothing. But admit
once the wicked and damnable doctrine of Poperye, and give the Pope leave to
excommunicate Princes; then subjects are assoyled from their fealty and
obedience, oaths are broken, laws are trodden under feet, Kings are murdered
and impoysoned, rebellions are raised, lawful contracts are broken, the Father
betrayeth his Children, and sets fire to them, as has been seen by
practice where Popery bears sway, and the like do the Children to their
Parents. Finally all lawful contracts are dissolved, and al justice is
banished. And this we can prove by diverse practices of the Pope and his
adherents in England, France, Flanders, Germany and other countries. But that
we reserve the full declaration hereof to another place.

Chap. 10. That our Doctrine leads men to virtue, and deterreth them from all
vices.
AS the Pagans cried out in old times against Christians, as if they were
Atheistes, and ye lewdest men that ever lived; so do Papists cry out against
Christians of our time. Kellison does redouble his cries of Atheism and
blasphemy, and in the seventh book of his Survey accuses us of loose
caryage, and vicious living. And thus it is come to pass, as says Nazianzen
epist. 31. ijdem iniuria afficiuntur, and accusantur, Honest men are both
wronged and accused. But our Doctrine will always stand firm against their
accusations, and we doubt not but the professors of our Religion will always
pass for right honest men, whenever they shall be paralleled either with
popes, cardinals, Monks, Friars, Nonnes, or ye Canaillery and rablement of
Mass Priests and their followers.

Many reasons we have to persuade us to obedience of gods Laws and holiness
of life, whereof these are principal. First Gods commandment, which we are
to obey; Secondly his honor, which we are to seek; Thirdly Christ's example,
which we are to follow; Fourthly the election and vocation of Christians, which
requires a life answerable to our profession; Fifthly the reward promised to
those, that keep Gods laws; Sixthly the scandale, that insueth of lewd
actions; and lastly the curse and eternal miserye and punishment, that is
denounced against the transgressors of the laws of God.

Herein we have also great advantage of the Papists. We follow Gods
eternal word, that is a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths; they
follow obscure and unwritten traditions, We ground our doctrine upon the
Apostles and Prophets, that were most holy men: they follow the decretales of
most wicked and impure Popes. We propose to our selves the example of Christ
and his holy Apostles: they follow Antichrist, and the founders of diverse
orders of Monks and Friars, and No^nes, who were rather superstitious, the^
zealous, ceremonious, then holy and Religious. We punish adultery in most
places with death, and fornication with shame and reproach; neither do we
admit public bordels: they count fornication and adultery small faults,
and maintain in all great cities of Italy, and most Countries subject to the
Pope common bordel houses, whereby great occasion of corruption of manners is
offered to youth, and great offense to Infidels and weak Christians. We force
none to forswear marriage: the Papists suffer neither Monks, Friars, Nonnes,
nor Masse-priestes to marry; whereof many horrible sins and abominations
follow. We dispense neither with oaths nor promises, nor dissolve contracts:
the Pope takes on him to do all this, whereby great occasions are offered of
perjury, and perverse dealing. We set up no banks of usury: they commonly
set up banks of usury, and call them sometime banks of pity, because men
borrow upon less interest, then of common-bankers. We fuffer neither Jews
nor Marans among us: they admit both, and take tribute of them, to the great
scandale of Religion. We count it a thing abominable, for men professing
Christianity to empoyson and murder those, that are opposite to them in
Religion: the Pope and his adherents count such murders and empoysonments
meritorious, and honor the assassiners, as Saints, as appears by the example
of James Clement, William Parry, Ghineard, Castle and such like. Such as rebel
or conspire against Princes we detest as Traitors; they honor as Martyrs, as
appears by the example of Plomptree, the two Nortons, Campian, Ballard,
Watson and Clerk and such like. And shortly we doubt not to hear but that
Pearcy and Catesbie and the gunpowder Traitors shall be put into the Popes
callender. We give no power to Priests to absolve impenitent sinners: the
popish Masse-preestes absolve all that confess, and bid them do pe^nance
afterward. Nay they absolve, murderers, assassinors and Traitors. We allow no
indulgences of Popes, that remit, as they say. temporal punishments; they
being confident upon the Popes indulgences commit gross offenses. We do not
believe, that sins are done away by masses: they hope to be justified by
gazing upon a Masse-preest. Finally, we leave no hope for sinners after this
life: they promise sinners that they shall pass to eternal life through
Purgatory.

Kellisons discourse therefore concerning virtues, which are so rare among the
Papists; and of vices, that so swarm amongst them, was unreasonably inserted
in his Survey. Against our Doctrine, certes, justly he can take no exception.
In the title of the first Chapter of his 7. Book, he charge us with taking
away the hope of Heaven and fear of Hell. But when he should bring his
proofs, he alleges only a broken sentence or two out of Luther and Calvin,
which notwithstanding being truly set down, do make nothing for him. For
neither does Calvin deny, that men ought to do well for hope of reward, but
only condemns the humor of those, that respect only reward, as if nothing else
were to move men to do good: nor does Luther mislike, that man should fear
Hell, but that Christians should not be moved for other causes to refrain
from evil, then for fear of Hell. But what is this to us, if advantage might
be taken of some words of Luther or Calvin? Further he runs back to talk
of Laws positive not binding in conscience, most falsely and without all
color, charging us with taking away all fear of Laws. The rest of his first
Chapter of his 7. Book is nothing but a ranging discourse of diverse sorts of
fear, and of the effects of the hope of reward and fear of punishment, which
in Doway might pass for a piece of a Schoole-boyes declamation, but here
coming out of place, and being not gaynsaid shall pass, as do the rest of his
idle declamations, for a piece of pedanticall foolery.

In the second Chapter of the same Book he makes a great matter of faith
only justifying, and says that thereby a gappe is opened to all vice. But his
discourse is such, as rather may beseem a stage vice, then a Divine speaking
against vice. First he tells us, that Satan beats his doctrine into men's
heads, and yt the same was maintained first by those, against whom S. John S.
James, S. Peter and S. Jude writes, as Augustine testifies; and then by Simon
Magus, and Eunomius; and lastly by Luther and Calvin. But herein he
resembles the Jews Luke 11. that attribute the miracles of Christ to the
power of Beelzebub. For this Doctrine of justification by faith without works
is the Doctrine not of Satan, as this Satanicall Mass Priest affirms, but of
the holy Ghost. We conclude says the Apostle Romans 3. that a man is justified
by faith without the works of the Law. Neither does he understand the works of
the ceremonial Law, or works done by force of free will. For then he would not
have excluded all the works of the Law, nor denied that Abraham was justified
by works. Furthermore he would only have concluded, that man is not justified
by the ceremonial Law or by works done by the force of free will without
grace. S. Augustine also lib. de fid. et oper. c. 14. teaches us, that man is
first justified, and then does good works. His words speaking of good works
are these: sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum. They follow
him that is justified, and go not before in him, that is to be justified. As
for those Christians, that turned the grace of God into wantonness, as Saint
Jude says, and the rest, against whom the Apostles wrote, they did altogether
contemn good works: a matter much condemn and far from us. Simon Magus
likewise and Eunomius gave themselves over to a dissolute life, and Eunomius
promising salvation to his followers believing only, speaks not of the true
faith of Christ, but of his own wicked and Heretical faith. But Luther and
Calvin neither speak against good works, nor conte^ne them, nor allow of
their opinions, that contemn good works, but only exclude them from being the
cause of justification, or concurring in the act of justification before Gods
tribunal seat. Otherwise they exhort all Christians to good works, and
highly praise them, as the fruits of our justification, and very acceptable in
Gods sight. And this Doctrine they devised not of their own brain, but
received it from the Apostles and the ancient Fathers of the Church. Cum dicit
apostolus says Saint Augustine de fid. et operib. C. 14. arbitrari se
iustificari hominem per ^^dem sine operibus legis, non hoc agit, vt praecepta
contemna^tur, sed vt sciat se quisque per fidem iustificari, etiam si legis
opera non praecesserint. When the Apostle says, that he believes man to be
justified by faith without the works of the Law, he entendeth not, that the
commandments should be despised, but would that every man should know, that
he is justified by faith, albeit the works of the Law go not before.
Against us therefore neither the words of Jude nor of other apostles make any
thing. But against our adversaries, if S. Augustine be Judge, they aim
directly. arbitrantur says he Lib. de fid. et operib. c. 15. per quasdam
poenas ignis eos posse purgari ad salutem percipiendam merito fundamenti. He
says, ye certain in his time errooniously believed, that such as live lewdly
may be saved through fire holding the foundation. And against such he
disputes and applies the Apostles words.

Secondly our adversary tells us, that Luther and Calvin teach, that
good-works are mortal sins, and that faith according to Caluins opinion is
sin. But that is rather a lewd and sinful trick to impute that to any,
which he never wrote nor thought. Nay it appears manifestly, that they
teach contrary.

Thirdly he asks a question, where we read in Scriptures, that only faith
justifies. But this question we have already answered. And now we say further,
that this is found in all places, where either the Law and works are excluded
from causing justification, or else we are said to be justified freely and by
grace, or else are taught that the just does live by faith. The Apostle Gal. 2.
says if justice be by the Law, that Chirst dyed in vain. And Gal. 5. volentes
iustificari per legem a gratia exciderunt. While they sought for justice by the
Law, they fell from Christ. Neither is our adversaries exception of any moment,
where he says that the works of the ceremonial Law, and of the Gentiles are
only excluded by the words of the Apostle. For he does not only speak of the
Gentiles, but of Abraham, yt was the Father of the faithful, and denies yt he
was justified by works. The prophet David also Psalm. 32. pronou^ceth him
blessed, to whom God imputes no sin. Which shows, yt it is not the
ceremonial Law, but the whole Law, whose transgressions are imputed to us.
And the Apostle generally excludes all works for which a reward is due from
justification. Ei qui operatur merces non imputatur secundum gratiam. He adds
also how faith may be said to justify. But he might have remembered, that here
he is no teacher, but an adversary. We do therefore rather expect arguments,
then documents from him. His exposition of faith justifying as a disposition,
or as a work is far from truth, and from the meaning of the Apostle, who
excluding our works places our true justification before God in Gods mercy,
and Christ's justice made ours by faith. To conclude this point, seeing none are
saved but such as are justified, and none are justified by works of the law,
but such as perform the whole law; it is manifest that before God, which is so
just and holy, and leaves no sin unpunished, no sinner is justified by the
works of the law. If it were otherwise, then would it follow, that Mary
Magdalen, and other great sinners transgressing the law were justified by the
law.

Fourthly he says It is an absurd heresy to say, that faith cannot be without
works. But if he speak of a true, lively and iustifiing faith, he is rather
an absurd heretic, if he say, that the same may be without good works. The
apostle says that faith works by charity, and that the just does live by
faith. But lively faith is active. S. Augustine also lib. de fid. et oper. c.
16. does testify, that true faith cannot be void of works, fides Christi
says he, fides gratiae Christianae, id est ea fides, quae per dilectionem
operatur, posita in fundamento n^minem perire permittit. So it appears, it
deserves not the name of Christian faith, that works not by charity. In
this place also this K. accuses the Lutherans and Caluinistes, as he calls
them, for their evil life. But this is only an ordinary phrase of his
railing style. For not those, that exclude works from causing our
justification before God, but such as albeit they pretend faith and works, yet
neither have true faith nor good works, are guilty of this accusation. If we
please to parralell those, whom he calls Lutherans and Caluinistes, with
the Popes, Cardinals, Masse-priestes and their adherentes, I doubt not, but
they will appear Saints in the eyes of indifferent judges in comparison of
them. If any man else doubt, let him read the acts of the Conuenticle of
Constance against John the 23. ye reports of John ye 12. Sergius the 3.
Landus, Gregory the 6 and 7. Alexander the 6. Paul the 3. Leo the 10. and other
Popes set down in Histories. To speak generally there is great difference
betwixt the men of Geneua and Rome, of England and Italy.

Finally he concludes, if faith only do justify, that if a man retain
faith, all the vilanyes in the world cannot hurt him: and that he may assure
himself, he is just, howsoever he lives. And this he goes about to confirm
by Luthers words which he reports thus, Sola fides Christi necessaria est ad
salutem: cetera omnia liberrimaneque praeceptaneque prohibita. Only faith is
necessary to salvation, all other things are free, and neither commanded nor
forbidden. But as his dealings are dishonest, so his conclusion concerning
vilanies is most vilanous. For albeit we hold, that a Christian man is to be
justified by faith alone in Christ Jesus: yet we teach also, that he abuses
Gods grace, and deceives himself, which walking after the flesh and not after
the Spirit, and living loosely and ungodly supposes notwithstanding, that he
retayneth true faith. Furthermore none of us ever taught, that every one is
presently justified, that believes himself to be just as this K. boldly
avouches, but he that indeed truly believes in Christ Jesus. Lastly this
sycophant does most unjustly wrest and misreport Luthers words. For in his
commentaries in Gal. 2. he has not the words alleged by Kellison, albeit
he boldelye affirm it. Nay he seems to write plain contrary. Iustificato
sic cord per fidem, says he, quae est in nomine eius dat eis deus potestatem
filios dei fieri diffuso mox spiritu sancto in cordibus eorum, qui charitate
dilatei eos ac pacatos hilaresque faciat omnium bonorum operatores, omnium
malorum victores, etiam mortis contemptores and inferni. Hic mox cessant omnes
leges, omniu^ legum opera. Omnia sunt iam libera licita, and lex per fidem and
Charitate^ est impleta. His meaning therefore is that those that are justified
by faith, have charity and do all good works, and avoid sin, not by
constraint of laws, but moved by Gods spirit working by faith and charity,
and being stirred to do well of their free choice. And after the former
words he adds, that a sinner looking for righteousness at Gods hands is
not to look upon his own works, but upon God through Christ. Are not these
fellows then strange collectors that conclude contrary to a man's words and
meaning, and would make Luther a fauorer of licentiousness of life, and an
enemy of good works, who expressly condemns al wickedness and commends
good works, detracting nothing from them, but that they do not iustifye before
God, but are rather fruits of justification?

In the third Chapter he affirms, that Luther and Calvin in assuring men by
an assured faith of election, remission of sins, justice, and perseverance in
the same loose the bridle to all iniquity. But had not he loosed the reins
of his malicious tongue, and suffered the same to range without restraint
against such as defend the truth; he would never have uttered so much falsehood
and villainy against Luther and Calvin. For they say not, that whatsoever men's
lives be, they may boldly rely on Christ: or else, that men being clogged with all the sins of the world are to believe, that they are just, as this surueying
sycophant gives out, but rather, yt no man is to presume of his faith or of
Gods mercy, or justice without repentance and good life, which are the fruits
and marks of a good faith. And Luther albeit he say that life cannot be lost
by any sins, unless a man will not believe: yet he does not speak of
sins to come, but of sins past and done away by the grace of Christ
through baptism and repentance.

Further out of Luthers words lib. de capt. Babyl. concerning the effect of
faith he collecteth, that howsoever a man live, and though he be never so
incredulous in the Articles of his belief; yet if he believe that he shall be
saved, that it shall be so. But no such conclusion can be drawn from his
words or Doctrine. Nay he shows that good life cannot be separated from
true faith, and never meant to disioyne the faith of the articles of the Creed,
from justifying faith, this being derived from that faith. Lastly albeit
Christians being justified by faith, hope they shall be saved; yet no man ever
believed, that justification is nothing else but an assurance that he shall be
saved, as the Surueyor surmiseth.

Page. 540. he calls the faith of a man's own salvation fantastical, as if
the Apostle Saint Paul believing that nothing should separate him from the love
of God were fantastical. Furthermore how can a man profess himself a
Christian, if he believe not remission of sins and eternal life? and if he
believe this, how can he choose but believe his own salvation? again how can
we pray without doubting, if we doubt of remission of sins, which we crave
in the Lords Prayer? finally the Sacraments are seals of this assurance of
salvation when they are applied to every particular Christian.

His last reason or rather reasonlesse argument to prove, that assurance of
faith brings forth looseness of life, is this: because a man, as he
thinks, may apprehend Christ's justice to be his, either being moved to
sin, or being in the act of sin. But this is his own weak surmise. For
he that truly apprehends Christ is clad with his justice, and guided by
his grace, and preserved from sinning. And he that walloweth in sin, and yet
presumes of Christ's grace, is not partaker either of his grace or justice.

In his 7. Book and 4. Chapter he inueigheth against us for teaching that
sin is not imputed to a faithful man. But all Christians are rather to
exclaim against him, that believes that sins are neither done away by
repentance, nor purged by faith in Christ's blood, but always imputed unto
true believers. To help forth with a bad matter, he says that Calvin lib.
3. instit. c. 14.17. and chap. 18.8. says plainly that all just and faithful
men's works are sins. But this is a plain lie, and shows that this
surueyor does use but little just and plain dealing. For in those places no
such thing is to be found. Nay, it implies contradiction to be a good work,
and a sin both together. After this he concludes, because sin is not
imputed unto them that believe, that Christians are not to fear theftes, or
adulteryes, or other sin. But his conclusion does but lewdly follow upon his
premises. For albeit former sins are done away by true faith and
repentance; yet all true Christians being once cured are to take heed they
sin no more. Further repentance brings with it newness of life and a care
to avoid sin afterward, and not as K. surmiseth, a boldness in sinning.

The fifth Chapter contains nothing almost but vain repetitions and odious
calumniations against Master Luther and Calvin and other Godly me^. First he
says, that they condemn the just man's good deeds as mortal sins. But this
has bin declared to be a mortal or rather capital slander. For although
they hold, that even in the works of good men there are imperfections, and
that many acts to us seeming good are evil; yet they no where say, that the
just man's good deeds are mortal sins. in the words by K. alleged
partially, there is no such matter. Secondly he charge them to teach, that
the faithful man's evil deeds are good and honest. But therein he deals
vnfathfully and dishonestly. For they do not diminish men's sins, but commend
Gods great mercy, that imputes them not, albeit they be very great and
heinous. Thirdly he affirms, that Calvin teaches, that original sin has
blotted out the image of God in man. But if all the untruths of this
slauderous Survey, were blotted out, the rest would scarce serve to stop one
Vinegar bottle. Calvin says, that the image of God in man is not lost by his
fall, but only blemished and defaced. The same man, where he speaks of the
works of Infidels says not that all of them are sins, but that they sinned
all in their morrall actions. And this he proves out of Augustine lib. 4.
contr. Iulianum. Finally, none of us teaching, that our will is unable to
perform any good work tending to the attaining of eternal life, does either
teach contrary to scriptures, or overthrow Arts, or extinguish reason, or
make all sins equal, albeit this K. in his brablement does charge us
therewith.

In the sixth Chapter he runs beside himself, and enters into a tedious
declaration concerning free will, and diverse odious repetitions of the same
matters. But what will you say, is this to the purpose? Forsooth no more then
if he should tell you what command he had in time past over the Hogsheades in
my Lord Vauxes Sellar. For we do not deny free will in all things, as did the
Manachees, who held that sin proceeded not from our will, but from the
substance of the evil soul, and therefore are justly refuted by Saint
Augustine in his Book de duab. anim. c. 11. neither did Luther deny free will
simply, but only in things that concern the attaining of the Kingdom of
heaven. Furthermore neither does Luther teach, that free will goes necessarily
that way, which either the spirit spurreth it, or the Devil urges it, as this
lewd Sycophant ridden and spurred on by no good spirit shamefully lies: nor
does Calvin affirm, that Gods providence and predestination takes away
free will, as he desperately and imprudently charge him: neither do we either
teach. that man sins unwillingly, or deny, that he has his will free in
natural and civil matters. What the^ is it that pincheth this thick-skind
fellow? Forsooth because we say that the natural man neither discerns the
things, that are of God, nor by his free will is able to perform them. This
is it, which the semipelagian Papists mislike, and against which Doctrine
Kellison marshalleth all his forces, if such weak stuff at the least, may be
termed forces. And first he endeuoreth to prove free will. But if by this word
he understand only an ability and will to do wickedly, then we deny not, but
man has free will. If by free will he understand that will and power in
spiritual matters and concerning eternal life, which the conuenticle of Trent
and other Romish teachers do mean; then he may do well to take a larger term
to prove his Doctrine. That conuenticle sess. 6. c. 1. et. 5. speaking of
free will in matters concerning eternal life, says, it is only attenuated,
and weakened and not extinguished or lost by the fall of Adam. Gabriel Biel Lib.
2. d. 27. 4. teaches. that a man by force of free will may remove the bar
(of Gods grace) that is mortal sin; because he may cease from the consent
and act of sinning, yea hate sin, and frame his will not to commit sin.
Homo existens in peccato mortali says he, potest remouere obicem, hoe est
peccatum mortale: quia potest cessare a consensu et actu peccandi, imo odisse
peccatum, et velle non peccare. Commonly they hold, that man in his natural
faculties, was left sound after the fall; that the will by the force of nature
is able to dispose it self to receive grace: that the same is able by the
force of nature to avoid every mortal sin, and to fulfill the Law of God,
as touching the substance of the act. But the Scriptures teach us, that the
unregenerate man is dead, and sold under sin. 1. Cor. 2. We read that the
natural man understands not the things that are of God, and that they are
foolishness unto him. And 2. Cor. 3. that all our sufficiency is of God. Si
ad aliquid idonei sumus, id ex deo est, says the Apostle.

Secondly he says if man have no free will, that then all vice may go for
current. But if he mean free will and the power thereof according to the
Doctrine of the Papists; then his conclusion will not pass for current, nor
will his vize-ship prove more vicious holding with us according to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures and Fathers, then he now is esteemed defending the
decretales of Popes, and Copper Doctrine of Schoolmen.

The seventh Chapter of his 7. Book contains an inuectiue against us, as if
we taught, that all Gods commandments are simply impossible. But herein it
seems, that wilfully he^ mistaketh our Doctrine, that he might the better
vent his swelling eloquence to his gaping and witless Diciples. For we neither
hold, that the Law is simply in it self impossible, nor teach that it is
impossible simply for the regenerat man, to perform the Law of God in part.
But we say, that the unregenerate cannot perform any Law of God in such sort
as he should, and that the regenerate cannot so perfectly perform the whole
law, as he ought. And this we know is the doctrine of the holy Apostles and
Fathers of the Church. Saint Peter Act. 15. says the Law was a yoke which
neither the Disciples of Christ, nor their Fathers were able to bear. Quid
tentatis deum says he, vt imponatur iugum super ceruices discipuloru^, quod
neque patres nostri, neque nos portare potuimus? Saint Paul Romans 7. speaking of
himself says the Law was spiritual, and he carnal sold under sin. And
Romans 8. the affection of flesh is death and enmity against God, and is neither
subject to the Law of God, nor can be. Saint Ambrose in Galat. 3. says that
the commandments of God are so great, that it is impossible to keep them.
Tanta sunt ma^data, vt impossible sit seruari ea. Likewise lib. 9. epist. 71.
He says, no man can avoid sin. Peccatum nemo euitare potest. And with him
co^senteth S. Hierome in c. 3. ad Galat. affirming, that no man can perform
the Law. Augustine lib. de perfect. iustit. shows reason, why no man is able
to fulfill that which is commanded. S. Chrysostom in his Homilyes upon the
epistle to the Romans speaking of the Law, affirms plainly, that it is a
matter impossible to fulfill it. Id vero says he, nemini possibile est. And
Bernard sermon. 50. in cantic. says that God commanding things impossible made
not men transgressors, but humble. And this is so plain a matter, that Thomas
Aquinas wrighting upon the third to the Galat. confesses freely, that it is
impossible to fulfill the whole Law. Implere totam legem says he, est
impossible. But what should we need to produce so many testimonies, when the
Pelagians are condemned for Heretics for saying, that a man may live without
sin (which must needs follow if a man be able to fulfill the whole Law) and
when experience teaches us, that even the just man falls and all of us
offend in many things? if then all those that affirm the Law to be impossible
give occasion of all impiety, as this sottish Surueyor, affirms; he had
need to distinguish subtly, if he mean to clear the ancient Fathers and
Christ's Apostles from impiety. If he teach contrary to them; then is his
Doctrine more like to savor of impiety, then that of the holy Apostles and
ancient Fathers.

The rest of his seventh Book is nothing else, but a rest of railing terms,
degorged out of his cankerd and malicious stomach, and void of truth and
proof. We answer therefore breefly, and plainlye to the intent that hereafter
he may be better informed concerning our Religion first that Christ has not
freed us from the obedience of Laws, and that this is no part of our faith to
hold so. Nay we say, that faithful men, as they are freed from the curse of
the Law for their sins, so by diverse arguments they are exhorted and stirred
up to hearken to the words of the Law, and to yield their obedience unto it.
Secondly we pronounce them anathema, that shall say, that God is the author of
sin: and have, I trust, fully discharged Master Calvin from this most unjust
imputation. Thirdly we take them to be brutish Heretics in the form of men,
that do not diligently distinguish between virtue and vice. In our Doctrine
there is not the least suspicion of any such matter. Fourthly of conscience we
speak according to the holy Apostle, that groundeth it not upon the Popes
decretales, but upon the Law of God. Fifthly we hate all pride, knowing that
humility is the cognizance of Christians, and groundwork of all virtues.
Sixthly we exhort men to labor diligently in their vocation thinking them
unworthy to eat, that will not work. We exhort all men also to do good
works and that while it is day, because the night comes when no man can
work; so far are we from allowing idleness. Seventhly we hold that Marriage
is honorable among all degrees of men, and say that God will judge adulterers
and fornicators. We teach chastity, we punish unchaste and lecherous persons.
Finally our Doctrine does show the way for sinners to arise, and to be loosed
from the bonds of sin. What a shamlesse fellow then is this to make these
Doctrines falsely imputed to us rules of our Religion, when we not only
renounce them, but also detest them, and the reporter of them?

The Papists justly charged with that which is fals^ly i^^^^ed (...)
But if we look back and reflect our eyes upon the Doctrine and practice of
Papists, we shall then perceive them to be guilty of that, which they most
wickedly and slaundrously impute unto us. First as if Christ had freed them
from al laws, so they contemn all Laws. The Pope takes upon him not only
to dispense against the Doctrine of the Apostle, and the Law moral, but also
to loose the subjects from the obedience of laws, and to arm them against
their Princes. The Mass Priests and marked slaves of Antichrist are exempted
from al burdens of Law. And Emanuel sa in his Aphorisms says, that the
rebellion of a Clerk against. his Sovereign Lord is no treason, because he is
not his Subject

Secondly, albeit they say, that God is not the Author of sin, yet they hold,
that their idolatrous doctrine of worship of Angels, Saints, and Images, that
the rebellious and treacherous practices of Subjects against Princes upon
warrant of the Pope, that the heretical opinions and traditions of the
Synagogue of Rome, which are most wicked and sinful, are of God. They blush
not also to say that the pope and papacy is of God. But he is the man of sin,
and his state is the Kingdom of Antichrist.

Thirdly, as if they put no difference betwixt virtue and vice, so they choose
Prelates, Cardinals, Popes indifferentlye, without respect to the^r piety,
learning, and other good qualities. The Pope he dispenses with all vices, the
people lives most beastly. Petrarch in his Sonnets calls Rome Babylon, in
regard of the confusion there. In his Epistles without title speaking of the
Popes Court, all goodness, says he, is there lost. Omne ibi bonum perditur.
Bernard lib. 4. de consid. speaking of the Romans says, they were impious
toward God, profane in ha^dling holy things, seditious one toward another.
Breidenbach in the history of his travails, shows a marvelous corruption
to have grown among the people of his time. Recessit lex a sacerdotibus, says
he, a principibus iusticia, consilium a senioribus, a populo sides. That is,
the Law is departed from Priests, justice from rulers, counsel from the
Elders, and good dealing from the people. And least any man might doubt of the
indifferent opinion that Papists have both of good and bad, the Pope grants
indulgences to all, and Priests absolve all that come to them, and promise
heaven to all.

Fourthly, he that seeks for conscience, must never hope to find it among
Papists, who making conscience to work on a holy day, and to eat flesh on
Frydaies, were nothing scrupulous to murder old and young, men and women, and
all sorts of people, and without form of law to kill many thousands of
innocent Christians, as may appear by the bloody massacre of France Anno 1572.
and by diverse exequutions done upon men of our religion both there and in
other places. Of late in England Pearcy and his mates being resolved to blow up
the upper house of Parliament, and to make a general massacre of such as
feared God, were absolved by Jesuits and Masse-priestes, and promised heaven
for their good service. To make a sum of all, they make no conscience to make
idols, and to worship them, to violate the Saboth, to rebel against
Magistrates or parents, or to break any law of God. But to break the Popes
orders, or their own traditions, they account it a matter very heinous.

Fifthly, next to Lucifer the Pope excels in pride He treads on Princes
necks, he gives his feet to be kissed, he rides on men's shoulders, he is
called a God on the earth and usurps his honor. Such also are the Prelates
and the rest of the popish Clergy. Auentinus lib. 6. annal. in praef. shows
they excel in pride, and with goods given to the poor keep Dogs, Horses,
Harlots. Pauperum alimentis canes, equos, scorta alunt.

Sixthly, never was idleness more in price, then since Monks and Friars came
into the world. They devour the fruits of the painful labor of others, and
intend nothing but to eat, drink, sleep and to enjoy carnal pleasures. Of
such we may say with the Apostle. 2 Thessalonians. 3. He that labors not, let him
not eat.

Seauenthly, albeit the Masse-priestes, Monks, Nonnes and Friars forswear
marriage; yet not sect of Religion, or state of men or women is more impure.
Honorius Augustodunensis speaking of Nuns, says they are more common then
Harlots. Omnibus fornicarijs peius prosternuntur. In England most horrible
abominations were found in the visitation of Abbyes. Petrus de Alliaco lib. de
reformat. Eccles. and Theodoric a Niem in nemore union. and diverse others show,
that albeit Priests were not married; yet commonly they kept Harlots, and that
now is evident, in our times, by common experience. Sacerdotes moderni says
Holcot in lib. sap. lect. 182. sunt similes sacerdotibus Baal, sunt angeli
apostatici, sunt similes sacerdotibus Dagon, sunt sacerdotes priapi, sunt
angeli abyssi. The Priests of his time he resembles to heathen Priests, and
shows how much they were subject to lechery, and heathenish impieties.

Finally, the Doctrine of Popery is a doctrine full of licenciousnesse, the
Popes of Rome take upon them to dispense with all sins and wickedness. Their
indulgences as the Germans Grauam. 3. complain, are causes of many mischiefs,
hinc stupra say they, incestus, adulteria, periuria, homicidia, furta, rapinae,
foenora, ac tota malorum lerna. They take upon them to absolve most wicked
sinners, a poena and culpa. Nay every Mass Priest challenges to himself
power to give absolution to such as come to confession. The Jesuits of late
absolved them before hand, which by gunpowder went about to blow up the
Parliament house. Ha^mond the Jesuit absolved Pearcy, Catesby and their
fellows taking arms against their King and Country. While men hope to
satisfy for their sins in purgatory, they defer repentance to the last
breath. Their enemies they tie with iron bonds. Alexander the 3. would not
release the Emperor, until he had trod on his neck with his feet, and used
him with great indignities. Contrariwise they promise heaven to their friends,
though laden with grievous si^s. They hold every transgression of the Popes
decretales to be sin. This is therefore a Religion, that both promises
reward to cutthroates and grievous sinners, and by their indulgences,
absolutions, and fancies of purgatory hold a sinner so fast bound in sin,
that there can be no hope for him, to be loosed as long as he follows their
wicked Doctrines. As for Luther and Calvin they are far from such wicked
courses. They teach christian liberty. But they extend it not so, yt they
exempt Christians either from ye obedience of Gods laws, or man's laws, but
only from the curse of the law, and from humane traditions, that they bind
not men's consciences. They distinguish Christ and Moses. And so would Kellison
too, but that he talks he knows not what. Of Moses his law they make
diverse uses, and only detract from it the effect of justification, and
salvation by reason it accuses man of sin and is not fulfilled. The Apostle
also teaches, if justice were of the law, that Christ had dyed in vain. Of
the author and original of sin, and of conscience, they teach most
Christianlye, following therein the Doctrine of the Apostles and holy Fathers
of the church. The pride of the Pope and his adherents they detested and
refused both by words and examples; and so far were they from idleness, and
allowing of idleness, that they thought him unworthy to live or eat, that
labored not in some honest, and lawful vocation. Concerning chastity they
taught as truly, as the Papists wickedly. They showed, that it consisted not
in forswearing marriage, but in abstinence from all filthy thoughts, acts
and speeches. That which some impute to Luther, of taking the Maid, when the
wife refuses, is a mere calumniation. He shows only what some do, or at
the least threaten to do, and not what they ought to do. Of the degrees of
consanguinitie they teach better then the Pope. They never taught, that a man
might marry his brothers wife, or his Niece, or his Sister, as the Popes have
done. Finally they hold no sinners fast bound in sins, but show the right
way, how to rise from sin, by faith in Christ and true repentance, clearing
those doubts, which before had entangled many Christian souls, and brought
them to utter destruction. If then this K. had not had his conscience seared,
and his eyes seeled, and his understanding darkened in these points, he would
have seen and acknowledged the deformities of his own fellows Doctrine, and
abstained from accusing others.

Chap. 11. A reiection of Kellisons slanderous accusations, imputing in his 8.
Book, Atheism, and contempt of Religion to the professors of true and
Christian Religion in the Church of England.
COnsorte not thy self with detractors says Solomon Proverb. 24. For their
destruction shall come upon them suddenly. But Kellison was not so wise, as to
borrowe light from so wise and prudent a King. He has chosen rather, to
imitate fools, who as if all their treasure were in their tongues, count it
gain, to speak lewdely of their betters. Istic est thesaurus stultis in
lingua situs says plautus in paenulo, vt quaestui habeant male loqui
melioribus. Forgetting his friends in Italy, Spain, and other countries
groaning under the captivity of Antichrist: in his preface he charge his
native country of England, as unfortunate for ingendring a certain Monster
called Atheistes. But if our Country men had less frequented Italy, there had
been far less Atheism, then in England now there is. It is well known,
that Machiauelisme came from Italy, and rose not in England, and how Englishmen
Italienated are said to be like Devils incarnated. Furthermore if the
Masse-priestes, as they have brought with them the dregs of Popish heresies,
had not also brought with them the sins of Sodom, and mixed divine Religion
with temporal policies, and state practices, seeking with fire and Gunpowder
to reestablish in this kingdom the Popes tyranny; then had he had no color of
this imputation. Neither does this any way concern us, that profess Religion
here in England, being the proper crime of the Italianated and Hispaniolized
Masse-priestes and their consortes, that being inspired with the malicious
spirit of Antichrist, live like Atheistes and Sodomites, and teach rebellion,
murder of Princes, perjury, equivocations, and diverse other points of
Doctrine repugnant both to Religion and civil policy.

In the first Chapter of his 8. Book, he affirms, Kellisons
calumniatitions, as if our doctrine sauored of Atheism refuted.
that certain points of our Doctrine open a gappe to a denial of the divine
Majesty. But when he comes to particulars, he powers out of his wide mouth
a stream of impudent slanders. First he says, we are not afraid to avouch,
that God is the author of all sin and wickedness: and that he has ordained
us to sin from all eternity, that we sin by Gods will and commandment,
and that he urges us to sin. And concludes, that we make God cruel and
tyrannical, as commanding us that, which we cannot perform, wanting
freewill, and punishing us for faults, which we cannot avoid. But first he
does not so much as offer to prove his charge either out of the Doctrine of
the Chuch of England, or out of any man's wrightinges, whose name is of any note
in our Church. Nay he knows, we teach contrary to that, which he imputes
unto us. May he not then be ashamed to charge his adversaries with matters so
false and improbable? Secondly, he is neither able to convince Master Calvin
of any such impious Doctrine, nor has he reason to make so great clamours, if
any one private man of our teachers should hold any point of erroneous
Doctrine. Lastly, before he come at his conclusion, he must make better
proof of his premises, if he mean to have the particulars of his survey to
pass without censure. He must also understand, that albeit we have not
freewil, or liberium arbitrium in discerning the things of God, and doing
things pleasing to his divine Majesty; it follows not, that God is
therefore cruel or tyrannical, because by our own default we became unable
to perform the Law, and blind in discerning matters tending to eternal life.

The rest of the first Chapter contains a long inuectiue against Atheistes,
and certain weak arguments brought to prove, that there is a God. But as in
the first he touches his own fellows, so in the second he confirms them
in their Atheism, being able to bring no better arguments to confute them, and
in the whole behaueth himself fondly and unlearnedly. First he says, that
neither reason, nor faith, nor both together are able to discover, what God is.
But therein he discovers by his own confession, that he is a poor
Surueyor of Religion, not knowing what God is, and a silly Doctor of Divinity,
if he deny that Scriptures teach us what God is, as far as is necessary for
us to know.

Page 642. he says, that creatures in God are increate, infinite, perfect, and
that all of them in God are God. Which assertion first takes away the
distinction betwixt God and creatures. Next aduanceth creatures to a divine
being. And thirdly comes near to Seruetus his impiety. For if a creature in
God is God, why may not Kellison also say, that God in a stone is a stone, and
in Iron Iron, as Seruetus did, if Bellarmine in praefat. ante tom 1. disput.
say truly. Neither can it excuse him, that God foresawe and foreknew all
things, and as Philosophers say, had ideaes in him. For this devise of ideaes
is a Philosophical fancy, and yet cannot make Kellisons assertion good, seeing
the platonicall philosophers distinguish ideaes from the things themselves
and make them separate from them.

Page 645. he talks of conuincing a Godhead, and says, that the world by
Philosophers is called All. But the first speech is impious seeming to import,
that he means to overcome God, and to confute him, as he has already
endeavored to confute his truth. The second proceeds of ignorance. For hardly
will he be able to show, in what tongue Philosophers call the world, All.

Page 648. he belyeth Caesar, where he makes him say, that the first
inhabitants of England sprang out of the earth, as herbs or Toad-stooles.
Caesar in his commentaryes talks neither of herbs nor Toad-stooles, and
utterly rejects this falsehood.

Page 649. he would gladly prove, that there is a God by the conuulsions of
men possessed. And page 650. by Witches. He says also, that such as are
possessed by Devils sometimes howl like Dogs, sometime yell like Wolfes. But
his arguments from Witches and possessed with Devils prove the Devil, rather
then God. Secondly his proofs are weak being drawn rather from illusions and
counterfeit tricks, then from matters evidently true. Lastly it is hard to be
believed, that he has heard any, that either howled like Dogs, or yelled
like Wolfes. These proofs therefore are liker to draw men to infidelitye, then
otherwise.

Afterward he talks idly of the heavy and lumpish nature of the earth; an
element, as it seems predominant in him, of the Commonwealth of Bees so well
ordered, that a Statist may learn policy from it, as he believes, of the
leapes of Hares, of Foxes and Fearne bushes, of Spiders and spider-webs, and
such like vain and idle similitudes. But what should I follow or run after
him, that runs so far not only from his argument, but from himself also?

In the second chapters rubrike he affirms that our Doctrine, ruineth al
Religion. But in the Chapter it self there is no ground brought for proof of
his assertion. Only in the latter end he does afresh charge us with holding,
that God is the author of all sin. And thereof concludes, that those which
believe this must needs have cold hearts in Religion. But we have declared his
antecedent to be false and fantastical. What then shall we need to beat down
his ruinous consequent? The rest of this Chapter contains diverse points of
popish Doctrine concerning Gods true worship, Heretics and their marks,
Christ's honor, Priests an sacrifices, succession, unity, universality, here
idelye repeated, and formerly refuted. Page 671. he bears us in hand, that
the modern Romish Religion is most conformable to the Doctrine planted by the
Apostles. But he shall not be able to prove all his life, half of that which
he has affirmed in one line. He says, he has proved it in his commentaries
in secunda secu^da. But his proofs are weak, and therefore dare not abide the
light. If he come forth with his proofs of his Religion hereafter, we will
pray him also to show, that the Romish Doctrine of blowing up Princes and
Parliament-houses with Gunpowder, of breaking of oaths, of lying and
equiuocating, of the Popes universal Monarchye, of kissing the Popes
Pantoufle, of justification by confirmation, extreme unction, Marriage, and
orders ex opere operato, of taking Christ with the teeth, of
transubstantiation, half communions, private Masses, prayer in a tongue not
understood, worship of Saints and Angels, and the rest of those Popish
Heresies which we refuse, are conformable to that Religion, which was first
planted by the Apostles.

In the third Chapter he affirms, that in contempt of the Churches authority
we bring all Religion into contempt. But how proves he, that we contemn
the Churches authority? First he says, it is a maxim, and almost an article
of faith among us, that the true Church, which once was, has erred grossly,
and in no less matters, then faith, justification, merit, free will, works,
satisfaction, Purgatory, prayer to Saints, worship of Images, number and
virtue of Sacraments, sacrifice and such like. But if he mean the whole
Catholic Church; this is neither article, nor maxim, nor opinion of ours,
that the whole Church has erred grossly. If he mean the Pope, and his
adherents, and parasites, why should not they err as well, as the Churches of
Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Constantinople? That they have indeed
erred, we have already proved, and offer our selves always ready to prove:
and it is most apparent, for that their Doctrine is not only diverse, but also
contrary to the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and namely in the points
above specified.

Next he says Luther cared not for a thousand Churches, and Calvin, Beza and
others despised all the Councels, and ancient Fathers. But neither the contempt
of the Synagogue of Rome, nor the reiection of diverse Conuenticles assembled by
Popes, nor the refusal of diverse counterfeit Books alleged under the name of
Fathers, or of some Fathers singular opinions does argue any contempt of the
true Church, or of lawful councelles, or of the authentical writings and
common Doctrines of Fathers. Further, I would have thought, that reason might
have taught him, talking so long of Religion, that private men's sayings and
opinions should not so often have been imputed generally to us or to the whole
Church.

To prove, that contempt of the Churches authority brings Religion into
contempt, he alleges, that we cannot know, which is Scripture, which not,
but by the voice of the Church. But first this is nothing to us, which do much
esteem ye authority of the Apostolic and Catholic Church. We say also, that
every private man is to reverence the judgment of the true Church. But what
is this to the Romish synagogue yt is not the true church? again what is this
to the Pope, yt is an oppressor of the church, and an enemy of Christian
Religion? if Kellison will contend, that the sentence of the Pope, which neither
understands, nor percase can read Scriptures in the original tongues, must
needs be followed in deciding the controversies about Canonical scriptures;
his own scholars will laugh at him, yt makes a betilheaded fellow judge in
matters of religion, and a blind man judge of colors. If he refer men to the
particular church of Rome, that now is, it will be said, that she cannot be
judge and party, and that the ancient Church is much to be preferred before
her. Saint Augustine, we confess among many other reasons was enduced also
to believe by ye churches authority. So likewise are many more then he. But K.
remooueth all other reasons and motives in matter of discerning scriptures, and
makes his modern Church a necessary cause and almost sole motife of faith,
as if none were to believe either scriptures, or any other Article of faith
unless he be resolved by the Pope, and the modern Church of Rome.
Blasphemously also he affirms, that the Roman Church being contemned, we
can no more assure a man of Scripture, then of a Robin-hoodes tale. But to use
these comparisons is blasphemye. To make so much of nothing, and to stand so
much upon a blind Pope, and to prefer the Roman modern Church before the
ancient, and all other modern churches, is foolery.

In the fourth Chapter he bears his Reader in hand, that we reject some
books of Canonical Scripture, and for proof says that Luther rejected the
Book of Job, Ecclesiastes, and all the Gospels save that of John, and that we
reject the Books of Judith, Tobia, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and the Machabees.
But these latter Books he shall never prove to be canonical, unless we
take the Canon largelye, as Saint Augustine sometimes seems to do. S.
Hierome in prol. galeato, Athanasius in Synops. Gregorius Nazianzenus in
carminibus, Epiphanius in lib. de pond. and mensur. and the most and best
Fathers esteem of them no otherwise, then we do. The calumniation concerning
Luther we have answered already. But says K. they will needs receive
Scripture at the Roman Churches hand. And of this he would infer, that as
well we ought to follow that Church in the number of books, as in receiving
canonical Scripture upon that Churches warrant. This s^ith he, but he takes
that for granted, that no man yields him. For we take the Scriptures as the
Church of Rome her self did, from the Prophets and Apostles. We do also
assure our selves, that the judgment of the Apostolic Church is far to be
preferred before the judgment of the Apostaticall modern Romish Church.
Lastly we answer to his argument, that we have diverse arguments to assure
us of the authority and truth and number of canonical books of Scriptures,
beside the testimony of any one particular Church, as for example the testimony
of Scripture it self, the likeness, Majesty antiquity, truth, style of
Scripture and such like.

In the fifth chapter he endeuoreth to prove, that our dissensions in Religion
do open a gappe to contempt of Religion. And thereupon talks his pleasure of
Caluinistes and Lutherans, Puritanes, Protestants, soft and rigid Lutherians,
Zuinglians, Bezites, Anabaptists, Libertines, Brownistes, Martinistes, family
of love, and damned crew. But first the damned crew is by us damned. In this
late conspiracy of Papists, Edward Baynham, that is known to be of the
damned crewe was choson for a fit man to go as nuntio from this damned crew to
the Pope. Anabaptists, Libertines, and the family of love, are more among the
Papists, then among us. We say to them anathema maranatha. The Brownistes and
Martinistes, we generally condemn. The rest are the names of slander devised
by Papists. To answer his objection therefore, we say, that the Churches of
Germanye, France, and other countries do well agree: and private men do
submit themselves to the determination of a free general council, and in
the mean while to their national Churches.

The grounds of his sixth chapter are laid upon the Popes head-ship. For
because we want a visible head, he supposes we give great advantage to
Atheistes. But as the Popes headship is a matter rather fancied, then proved
out of Scriptures or Fathers; so what so ever is thereupon built, the same is
founded upon fancy, and not worth a head of Garlike. That Saint Peter did rule
both the Apostles and all the church, as Christ's vicar general, and head of
the Church, it cannot be proved. All the Apostles were called alike, and sent
to teach and administer the Sacraments alike. They had also the keys of the
Church given to them by one joint commission, and Paul professes, that the
principal of the Apostles gave unto him nothing. But had Peter had any such
monarchy, as is pretended; yet that is nothing for the advantage of our triple
crowned Popes, that are so unlike to Peter, and kill Christ's sheep, as he fed
them. Nay the ancient Bishops of Rome neither gave laws to the whole church,
nor ordained bishops in all quarters, nor received appeals out of all the
world, nor reserved certain cases to themselves, nor practiced the rest of the
modern Popes authority. But says K. where a head wants, there every man
may preach, and embrace what Religion he will. As if general and provincial
councels, and Bishops in their Diocesses, and Godly Princes in their Kingdoms,
were not able to remedy this disorder. Other means certes there was not in the
primitive Church, and he that looks, that Popes should redress Atheism, and
other abuses, is himself much abused.

In the last Chapter he says, that denying the real presence (taught by the
Popish Synagogue) we ruin Christian Religion, and call all other mysteries of
faith in question. But his proposition is most false, and absurd. For not
those which deny the Cyclopicall eating of Christ's flesh, and the carnal
presence thereof under the accidents of bread and wine, but such rather, as
hold that Christ's flesh and blood is received of reprobats persons, nay Hogs
and Dogs, and is swallowed down into the belly, and deny things felt and
seen, do bring a slander upon Religion, and call all holy mysteries, not
only into question, but into contempt also. Auerroes for this gross opinion
only affirmed, that the Religion of Christians was of all other most
ridiculous. For what can be devised more ridiculous, then to make a God, and
to eat him up presently? this doctrine of Papists has been a great stumbling
block both to Gentiles and Christians, and is so improbable and contrary to
Christ's institution, the expositions of Fathers, and common reason, as nothing
more. Kellison, I confess, braggeth that he will bring as plain proofs for
the real presence, as are brought in scriptures, either for the holy Trinity,
or Christ's incarnation. Or else he promises he will yield the bucklers.
Which if he would have performed, then had he long ere this lost and forsaken
the field. For he brings only two places, and neither of them to his
purpose, as I have at large declared in my Book de missa against Bellarmine,
where all the cauillations of our adversaries are particularlye discussed, and
so stand, for any thing either this doughty Doctor of Doway, or Bellarmine can
say against us. Furthermore the comparison of the popish real presence, and
the Doctrine thereof compared with the great mysteries of the holy Trinity,
and Christ's incarnation, declares him to be an Atheist, that believes such
fundamental points of Religion no more, then the popish absurd Doctrine of
the carnal and canibal like eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood
and receiving them with our mouth into our bellyes.

Diverse other absurdities he commits also in this Chapter. page. 698.
speaking of popish sacrifices: by sacrifice says he, we consecrate to his
service the lives, and substance of brute beasts. So it appears, if they
sacrifice Christ in the Mass, that they kill him, and compare him to brute
Beasts. page. 710. he falsifyeth Saint Augustines words in his tract. upon
S. John's Gospel. page 713. he confounds real, and sacramental eating.
There also he says, that Christ would not say, he meant a figurative and
spiritual eating: but most falsely. For Christ says that the flesh profits
nothing. And both Origin and Austen do expound these words of eating Christ's
flesh spirituallye and figuratiuelie. Lastly to prove the real presence, he
alleges page. 728. a testimony out of S. Andrews legend.

But neither can he prove his carnal real presence, nor justify his
assertion, where he makes them Atheistes and ruiners of Christian religion,
that deny this absurd, scandalous and blasphemous Doctrine.

Wherefore as by lawful trial we have acquitted our selves and our doctrine of
all suspicion of Atheism; so we doubt not, but to lay the same most justly
upon ye Pope, and his adherents, and upon their impious and wicked doctrine.
Outward professors of Popery inward Atheistes.
Bernard in sermon. 1. in Conuers. Pauli. began to complain long since, both
of the iniquitye of Popes, and of the dissoluteness of Priest and People.
Egressa est iniquitas a senioribus iudicibus vicarijs tuis says he, qui
videntur regere populum tuum. Non est iam dicere, vt populus, sic sacerdos,
quod nec sit populus, vt sacerdos.

Petrarch in his Sonnets calls Rome false and traiterous Babylon and the
mother of errors, and charge her with serving Venus and Bacchus rather then
the God of heaven. In his Epistles without name speaking of the Popes Court,
he says, it is void of all goodness, and that there is neither liberty,
nor rest, nor joy, nor hope, nor faith, nor charity, but contrariwise great
loss and casting away of men's souls. Omne ibi bonum perditur, sed primum
omnium libertas, mox ex ordine, quies, gaudium, spes, fides, Charitas, animae
iacturae ingentes.

Wernerus in fascic. temporum in Martino. 2. Adriano. 3. and Stephano.
exclaimeth, as if holy men were perished from the earth, and truth diminished
among the Sons of men, and as if that were a most wicked time. o tempus
pessimum says he, in quo defecit sanctus, and deminutae sunt veritates a
filijs hominum!

Breidenbachus in historia peregrinat. sua, reports, that in his time, the
law was departed from priests, justice from Princes, counsel from the
Elders, faith from the people, love from parents, reverence from Subjects,
charity from Praelates, Religion from Monks, honesty from young men,
discipline from the Clergy. His words are these: Recessit lex a sacerdotibus,
a principibus iustitia, consilium a senioribus, a populo fides, amor a
parentibus, a subditis reuerentia, charitas a praelatis, religio a monachis, a
iunenibus honestas, a clericis disciplina.

In veritate comperi says Walterus Mapes quod sceleri cleri studet
vniuersitas, liuor regnat, veritas, datur funeri, haeredes luciferi sunt
praelati. That is, of a truth I find, that the whole (Romish) Clergy does
study vilany. Envy reigns, and truth is buried. Such Clergiemen are the
heirs of Lucifer. And again non est qui faciat bona istorum, quorum
conscientia speluncae est latronum. There is none of these, that does good,
their conscience is like a den of thieves.

Matthew Paris in Henr. 3. says, that in those times the sparks of faith began
to grow cold. Temporibus illis ingruentibus igniculus fidei coepit nimis
refrigescere.

Petrus de Alliaco in lib. de reformat. eccles. notes the luxuriousnes,
avarice, idleness, blasphemies, magic arts, and superstitions, and that
both of Princes and people of his time.

Adrian the 6. in his instructions to his legate Cheregatus confesses
ingeniously the corruptions of the church of Rome and Romanistes. Omnes nos
says he, declinauimus, vnusquisque in vias suas, nec fuit iam diu qui faceret
bonum, non fuit vsque ad vnum.

The Bishop of Bitonto preaching in the first session of the conuenticle of
Trent and speaking of the manners of the people then, confesses, that they
said in their heart, that there was no God, dicunt in cord suo says he, quod
non est Deus.

This may also be specified by infinite examples both of Popes and Cardinals,
and their followers. Theodoricke a Niem. de schism. lib. 2. c. 42. calls
Gregory the 12 and Petrus de Luna Elders of Babylon, and says, that such
iniquity was gone from them, that the Catholic faith was thereby ouershadowed,
and that Religion suffered Shipwreck, and that virtue was departed from all
men. Vt Catholica fides obnubiletur, and omnis religio naufragium patiatur.
Virtutes ab omnibus recesserunt.

John the 12. or as some number, the 13. drank to the Devil in his meriment,
and called upon him, when he played at Dice, and as the Histories set out by
Papists themselves declare, was a wicked fellow.

Gregory the seventh, as Beno the Cardinal writes had commerce with the
Devil, and was in the Council of Brixina condemned for a Magician. He says
also, that he cast the Sacrament into the fire, which is not so much in him to
be marvelled. For he that worshipeth the Devil, cannot esteem much of the
body of Christ, which as Papists hold, is contained under the forms of bread
and wine in the Sacrament. This man, when he dyed, as Sigebertus witnesses,
confesses, that by the persuasion of the Devil, he had raised many stirs
in the world.

Siluester the second, as stories report, made a compact with the Devil. It is
said also, that Gregory the 6. Bonet the 9. Paul the third, and diverse other
Popes were Magicians, and Negromancers. But such men, as give themselves to art
Magic, renounce God and serve the Devil.

Of Sixtus the fourth we read, that he laughed at Religion, and believed not,
that their was a God.

Riserat vt viuens caelestia numina Sixtus,
Sic moriens nullos credidit esse Deos. says one.
Upon Alexander the sixth Sanazar wrote these verses, as a memorial of his
impieties: Humana iura, nec minus caelestia,
Ipsosque sustulit deos etc.
That is he disolued both Gods Laws, and man's Laws, and believed not that
there was a God.

Clement the 7. as is said, when he drew near to his end, told those which
stood about him, ye shortly he hoped to be resolved of that, of which he had
ever much doubted, viz. whether there were either Heaven or Hell, or no. And
the rather we believe this report, because these verses were written of him.

Contemptor diuum, scelerum vir, publicus hostis, that is, a contemner he was
of God, a flagitious fellow, and a public enemy of his Country.

John the 23. was condemned by the council of Constance for denying the
resurrection of the dead, and for other points of Atheism. Leo the 10.
esteemed the Gospel no otherwise then as a fable. And of Julius the third, the
Papists themselves report diverse speeches savoring of Atheism.

If then Atheism do so reign in the Popes of Rome, whom the Papists call
most holy, and honor as the heads and foundations of their Church, and supreme
Judges of all controversies, and are bound to follow, albeit they may lead
infinite souls to Hell, as it is said in Chap. si Papa. did. 40. it is no
marvel, although the Mass priests and their followers be tainted with
Atheism, and contempt of Religion. Machiauell, whom many Atheists follow, was
no Englishman but an Italian, and a great friend of Clement the 7. to who^e
also he dedicated his Florentine history. Neither was he an Englishman, that
held it a peccadillo or little sin, no creer en dios, that is, not to believe
in God. That Italian, that believed no other Trinity, then Messer domine dio,
il papa et nostra donna, et preti et frati, that is, God Almighty, the Pope
and our Lady, and Priests and Friars, learned not his impiety, I trow, from us.

The That the Doctrine of Popery tends to Atheism.
very doctrine of Popery tends to Atheism and ignorance of God. Generally
the lay people think themselves safe, if they believe, as the Church believes,
and so Hosius and others teach their Disciples. But what, I pray you, is this,
but Atheism for men to be ignorant of Christ his grace, and of the means of
their salvation, and of Gods true worship?

Ephesians. 2. the Gentiles worshipping many Gods are said to be without God in the
world. May not then the same be verified of Papists, that worship so many
Angels and Saints, and give the honor of God to the Sacrament, to the
Crucifixe, and the Images of the Trinity?

Thirdly how can we esteem them to have any feeling of true piety, that speak
so lewdly of Scriptures? Some call them a Nose of Wax, some a Ship-mans Hose,
some a bare Letter, some Inky Divinity, some a matter of strife, some the
ground of Heresies. Kellison page 687. says, if a man contemn the authority
of the Roman Church, that he shall no more be able to assure himself of
Scripture then of a Robin Hoodes tale. Page 41. he says the Scripture with a
false meaning is the word of the Devil. As if the Scripture being endited by
the holy Ghost could in any respect be called the word of the Devil. Page 39.
he compares Scriptures to Aesopes Fables, and says they are of a Waxie
nature. But he that is of God hears Gods word, and speaks reverently of
Scriptures.

Fourthly none but Atheistes, and such as savor of Atheism directly violate
and impugn Gods commandments, and make Laws repugnant unto them. But the
Papists offend herein both grievously and notoriously. God says thou shall
have no other Gods but me: the Popish faction says contrary, thou shall have
other Gods, commanding their followers to call upon Saints and Angels, to
worship the Sacrament and Crucifixes, to confess their sins, and to offer
Christ's body and blood in ye honor of Saints and Angels. Tursellinus a
Iebusite in his Epistle to Peter Aldobrandini before his story of Loreto.
says Christ has made his Mother partaker of his divine Majesty and power as
far as it was lawful. Matrem suam says he praepoteus ille deus diuinae
maiestatis, potestatisque sociam, quatenus licuit, asciuit.

In the second Commandment we are directly prohibited to make graven Images,
to the intent to bow to them, and to worship them. But the Papists have
impiously blotted out this commandment in their short Catechismes, and
command men upon pain of death and damnation to fall down before Crucifixes,
and other Images, and to worship them sometime with doulia, sometimes with
latria, according to the subject.

The third Commandment forbids us to take Gods name in vain. But Papists
in their rascal Rhemish annotations in Act. 23. teach their followers to
periure themselves, and in their resolutions of cases of consciene teach them
how to equivocate, and to frustrate oaths. And the Pope commands his
followers to break their oaths given to Princes by him excommunicate upon
pain of damnation.

God commands subjects to obey Kings, and Children to honor Parents. The
Pope commands them to Rebel and take arms against such as he
excommunicateth, and wills Children to be exequutioners of their Fathers, by
his inquisitors being falsely judged Heretics.

God forbids murder, adultery, fornication, theft, false witnessing and
concupiscence. The Pope promises heaven to murderers of Princes, and to
Gunpowder Traitors, permits common stews, and receives the hyre of
Whores, commands all his followers to spoil such as by him are most
unjustly excommunicated, by lies and forgeryes maintayneth his usurped
Monarchy, and determines in the conuenticle of Trent, that concupiscence is no
sin in the regenerate. Can we then doubt, whether Papists be Atheistes?

Fifthly, none but Atheistes either take to themselves divine honor, or give the
same to creatures. But the Pope c. satis. did. 96. takes to himself the name
of God. In the first Book of Ceremonies. c. 7. he applies to himself the
honor, that is proper to Christ saying, All power is given to me in heaven and
earth. In c. quoniam. de immunitate in 6. he claymeth to be the spouse of the
Church. His flattering parasites call him a God on the earth, and our Lord God
the Pope, and such like terms, as may be proved by the testimony, of Felin
in c. ego N. de iureiurando. and by the gloss in c. cum inter non nullos.
extr. de verb. signif. Thomas Waldensis a man much esteemed by Stapleton, in
prolog. Tom. 1. doct. fid. thus cries out to Pope Martin, Lord save us, we
perish. Simon Begnius in council. later. sess. 6. calls Leo the x. the Lion of
the tribe of Judah, and a Savior. Ecce venit Leo de tribu Judah says he. And
again te Leo beatissime, saluatore^ expectauimus. The same may also be proved
by infinite other testimonies.

Sixthly Atheistes they are, that make a mock of Christian Religion. But this
is a common crime of Popes and Papists. for commonly they use words of
Scripture to make sport withal. As did Bon^face the 8. casting ashes into
Prochetus his eyes and turning these words memento homo quod cinis es, into a
jest. They also say, that Christ may be eaten of Hogs and Dogs, and hang
him upon every Altar. Gregory the 7. cast him into the fire. When the Pope
rides abroad he sends his God of past among the baggage and scullery. When
their Saints do not answer their desires, they cast them into the water, and
rail on them.

Seauenthly not contenting themselves with Christian Religion, they have forged
diverse new Relgions, and place more perfection in them, then in Christian
Religion. Unto S. Francis they give the title of figurative Jesus, and say,
that the order of S. Dominicke is protected under our Ladies gown in heaven:
all which be tricks of Atheism.

Eighthly the worship of Angels and Saints is confirmed with infinite lies, and
most ridiculous fables read publicly in popish Churches. And yet no man
allows them, but such, as make mockes at Religion.

Ninthly it is plain Atheism to devise, new worships of God. For Christians
have but one God and one worship of God prescribed in his word. It is also
atheism to violate Christ's institution in his Sacraments. But Papists have
devised diverse new forms in worshipping of God by Masses prayers to saints,
incensing of images, leading about Asses, carrying of palms, and infinite such
like ceremonies. They have also devised new Sacraments, and made them equal to
baptism and the Lords Supper. Unto bapisme they have added chrisme, salt,
spittle, light. From Christ's supper they have taken the Cup. They have
abolished bread and wine. Of a Sacrament to be received they have made a
sacrifice to be heaued and offered. That which should be common to all, they
have made private, and where Christians should celebrate the memory of Christ's
death in the Lords Supper, these command the Sacrament to be administered in
a tongue not understood, where the People understands neither what is done
nor said.

Finally by the confession of Kellison the Papists may be convinced to be
execrable Atheistes. Papists proved Atheists by Kelliso^s confession.
For if Atheistes be monsters begotten by Heresies, as he says, then are
Papists mo^sters. For they maintain many old and new Heresies, as has often
been proved, and are easily convinced to be Atheistes. The heresies of Simon
Magus, Carpocrates, the Scribes and Pharisees, the Capernaites, of Marcus, the
Encratites, Collyridians, Eutychians, Pelagia^s, Staurolatria^s, and diverse
others are common among them.

Page. 261. he says, that Christ's passion was not our formal justificatio^,
or satisfaction. He means likewise, that his justice is not our formal
justice, and says that he is only the meritorious cause of our redemption and
salvation, which deserves for us at Gods hands grace, by which together with
our cooperation we may be saved and redeemed. But this is most horrible
impiety, and takes from Christ the honor of our redemption, salvation, and
justification, making man to be his own redeemer and savior.

Page 667. he reckons them among Atheistes, that make God cruel and
tyrannical. But so do the Papists making our Lady more merciful then Christ,
and setting out him with Darts and Thunder-boltes, and her with mercy and
pity. They do also say, that God punishes sins forgiven with cruel
torments in Purgatory, and make the Pope to grant indulgences, which God does
not.

Page 668. he insinuates them to be Atheistes, that err in Gods worship,
and offer not lawful sacrifices unto him. But of this crime ye Papists are
most guilty pretending to offer Chistes body and blood really which was never
commanded them, nor can be done more then once, and erring wholly in the
worship of Saints and images.

Page 674. He gives out boldly, that those which contemn the Churches
authority bring all Religion into contempt. But audaciously he therein
condemns the Pope and Synagogue of Rome. For none ever did more proudly
condemn the authority of the church then they. The Pope claymeth to be above
the general council, and above the Church. If the whole world should give
sentence against the Pope, they say his sentence is to be preferred before all.
Him they honor as supreme judge. The authority of the Fathers they regard not,
if he say contrary. They give him power to dispense against the Law, and
against the Apostle.

Page. 689. he says, that such as admit some books of Scripture and reject
others, open a gappe to contempt of all Scripture and religion. But if such, as
reject Scriptures, and contemn them, be Atheistes; then are Papists
superlatiue Atheistes They also reject the third and fourth books of Ezras,
and the third and fourth of the Machabees. Lastly they esteem not, in
allowing, or disalowing of canonical Scriptures, either the sayings of
Fathers, or the judgment of the ancient Church, but wholly rely upon the
opinion of the Doctors of Trent, and the Pope. They prefer the old Latin
translation before the original text of the Bible, and allow no sense of
Scripture, but that which the Romish church approoueth.

Page 693. he makes dissension in Religion to be a note of Atheism, but if
that be so; then has he branded his own consorts with a mark of atheism.
For hardly shall you find one article of Religion, wherein the wrangling
Schoolmen do not differ one from another. Bellarmine quarrelleth as often
with his own fellows almost, as with us. About the divine attributes, and
notions they are not yet resolved. If they durst, many would dispute against
the Popes Monarchye, dispensations, indulgences and such like. The Mass, as
yet, is not perfectly settled.

Page 696. he signifies, ye erroneous opinions about the head-ship of the
Church, are enducements to atheism: which being granted, then are the
Papists in a fair way to atheism. For under the title of Christ the sole and
true head of the church they admit Antichrist, and bring us forth a monster,
not only with two heads, but with as many heads as Popes. There wants
therefore nothing, but some Hercules, to cut of these Hydraes heads, and to
restore to Christ his right of headship. Further in every vacation they want
their visible head, which as Kellison says, gives adauantage to Atheistes,
and makes them to make a mock at Religion. They have also some times Popes
without brain, or wit: which is as great an inconvenience, as the rest.

Finally if such as teach erroneously of the presence of Christ's body and
blood in ye sacrament, and understand not ye words of Christ's institution,
ruin Christian Religion, and call all other mysteries of the faith into
question, as Kellison Page. 698. resolutelye and peremptorily avouches; then
will it plainly fall out, that the Papists are ruiners of Religion, and have
no assurance of any point of faith by them defended. For as I have before
touched, and shall elsewhere more plentifully declare, they err most
grossly in their Doctrine concerning the real presence, and have shamefully
mistaken and corrupted Christ's institution of that holy mystery.

We may therefore conclude first, that as the true professors of the christian
faith in the church of England are most innocent and clear of this shameless
imputation of atheism most wrongfully charged upon them by this surueying, or
rather surfeting Sycophant; so the Papists our adversaries and the principal
actors among them are much to be suspected, that under color of Popery, they
cover a secret poison of atheism. Secondly if either our adversaries, or any
other would with indifferent eyes and impartial judgment consider either the
articles of our faith, which we profess, or the deformities and abuses of
popery which we refuse and detest, discerning truth from the slaundrous
imputations of such wicked sycophants as this; that then they would neither
mislike us for our forsaking the Synagogue of Satan, nor allow the impious
courses of our railing adversaries, nor long stick in the myrie and filthy
puddle of popish errors, and endure his tyrannical government.

ALmighty God, which have told us, that Antichrist shall be revealed, and slain
by the breath of the mouth of the Lord Jesus, and destroyed with the
brightness of his coming, vouchsafe daily more and more to reveal him to all
the christian world, and to discover his treacherous and murdrous practices to
all true Catholics, and to dispell the mistes of calumniations, lies and
forgeryes, which his agentes do daily endeavor to spread abroad against the
professors of truth, that so the truth appearing, both such as are in error may
be reformed, and the weak confirmed in the sincere profession of the Gospel,
and the Kingdom of Antichrist destroyed through our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus. And let all those, that wish the prosperity of Sion, and the conversion
or confusion of Babel, say always Amen. Amen.

An aduertisment to the Reader.
RIDICVLOVS it is, gentle Reader, for him, that enters into the Battle, to
complain of blows. He that comes to strike others must not think strange,
if he be stricken himself. And yet I perceive my adversaries blush not to
complain, that herein they have received wrong. They, I say, that come like
wolves with open mouth to devour us, and rail at M. LVTHER, Master CALVIN,
and all the church of England, as if it consisted of Heretics, Schismatikes,
loose livers, and Atheistes, nay of a sort of men worse then Turks and Pagans,
find fault with me, if I tell them of their heresies, Treasons, Gunpowder
practices, Idolatryes, infidelity, perjuries, and other vilanies.

Whether they, or we have reason, I refer my self to indifferent judges,
that shall read the Treatises of both the parties. HILARY in his Book against
CONSTANTIVS thought it no fault to speak sharply, if truly. Si falsa dicimus,
says he, infamis sit sermo malidicus. That is, if we speak untruth, let our
tarte speech seem infamous. Otherwise he challenges the liberty of Apostles
in censuring manifest faults. Si vniuersa haec manifesta esse ostendimus says
he, non sumus extra apostolicam libertatem, and modestiam. Saint HIEROME
apolog. 2. in Ruffin. thinks it lawful to bark for Christ, because Dogs
bark for their Masters. Canes latrant pro dominis suis, tu non me vis latrare
pro Christo? Beside that, when a man is accused of Heresy, he would not have
him patient.

If then we neither show impatiency, nor speak doggedlie, but only report
those crimes truly, of which our adversaries are most guilty; it is then our
adversaries evil conscience that pincheth, rather then our tart style that
byteth. To let Dogs baule without correcting were nothing else, but to
encourage them in their dogged snarling and barking: and Bishop Jewel of
reverend memory and others, that have used this mildness have greatly
confirmed our adversaries malice.

This therefore understand, that it is not out of stomach, but out of judgment,
that we take this course of plain dealing. Phryx plagis emendatur. The
PHRYGIAN, and such as are of his base humor, are bettred with stripes, rather
then with gentle words. There distemper is (...), as THEOPHRASTVS says in
sympos. apud Plutarchum, That is, a drunkenness without wine. But it may be
corrected with a sad and tart answer. Further, necessity forced us, for the
repelling of their malicious slanders, to show, that they are to be charged
with those crimes justly, which they impute to innocent men most falsely. And
it may be, if truth make them not cease their barking, yet shame will make
them bark more softly.

This is the reason of our doing: which if thou be indifferent, I hope thou will allow. If enemy, I hope thou can not justly condemn. And if thou be
experimented in these courses, thou can not choose but acknowledge the same to
be both profitable, honest, and necessary. Profitable to repress the malice
of such Curres, as continually bark against truth: honest for the defense of
the pious memory of the innocent: and necessary for the ending of these
brablements. If the adversaries give us no occation to lay open theit faults,
we shall be content to burye them in silence. If they persist in railing and
reuiling at honest men, they must have patience to hear our free answer.
Against Popes, Cardinals, Monks, Friars, Masse-priestes and their seditious
Saltpeter followers, we cannot want either words, or matter. This is that
which I thought good to advertise thee, and which I hope will satisfy all, if
they be indifferent. If not indifferent, they have no reason to take upon
them, to be our judges, nor we to undergo their censure, nor you to mislike
our style, as too sharp and unfitting.

Laus Deo.

