THE ARAIGNMENT OF LEWD, IDLE, FROward, and unconstant women: Or the vanity
of them, choose you whether.

With a Commendation of wise, virtuous and honest Women.

Pleasant for married Men, profitable for young Men, and hurtful to none.



LONDON

Printed by George Purslowe for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop
in Pope's Head Palace, near the Royal Exchange. 1615.

NEITHER TO THE BEST, NOR yet to the worst; but to the common sort of WOMEN.
MVsing with my self being idle, and having little ease to pass the time
withal; and I being in a great choler against some women, I mean more then
one; And so in the ruff of my fury, taking my pen in hand to beguile the time
withal; indeed I might have employed my self to better use, then in such an
idle business, and better it were to pocket up a pelting injury, then to
entangle my self with such vermin: for this I know, that because women are
women, therefore many of them will do that in an hour, which they many times
will repent all their whole life time after; yet for any injury which I have
reccyued of the^, the more I consider of it, the less I esteem of the same.
Yet perhaps some may say unto me, that I have sought for honey, and caught the
Be by the tail, or that I have bin bit or stung with some of these waspes,
otherwise I could never have been expert in bewraying their qualities, for the
mother would never have sought her daughter in the Oven, but that she was
there her self. Indeed I must confess, I have been a traveler this thirty
and odd years, and many travelers live in disdain of women; the reason is,
for that their affections are so poisoned with the heinous evils of unconstant
women, which they happen to be acquainted with in their travels: for it does
so cloy their stomachs, that they censure bardly of women ever afterward:
wronged men will not be tongue-tyed: therefore if you do ill, you must not
think to hear well; for although the world be bad, yet it is not come to
that pass, that men should bear with all the bad conditions that are in some
women.

I know I shall be bitten by many, because I touch many: but before I go any
further, let me whisper one word in your ears, and that is this; whatsoever
you think privately, I wish you to conceal it with silence, lest in starting
up to find fault, you prove your selves guilty of these monstrous accusations,
which are here following against some women: and those which spurn, if they
feel themselves touched, prove themselves stark fools in bewraying their
galled backs to the world: for this book touches no sort of women, but such
as when they hear it, will go about to reprove it: for although in some part
of this book, I trip at your heels, yet I will stay you by the hand, so that
you shall not fall further then you are willing; although I deal with you
after the manner of a shrow, which cannot otherwise ease her cursed heart but by
her unhappy tongue: If I be too earnest, bear with me a little, for my meaning
is not to speak much of those that are good, and I shall speak too little of
those that are naught; but yet I will not altogether condemn the bad; but
hoping to better the good by the naughty examples of the bad: for there is no
woman so good, but has one idle part or other in her which may be amended; for
the clearest River that is, has some dirt in the bottom: Jewels are all
precious, but yet they are not all of one price, nor all of one virtue: gold is
not all of one picture, no more are women all of one disposition; women are all
necessary evils, and yet not all given to wickedness, and yet many so bad,
that in my conceit, if I should speak the worst that I know by some women, I
should make their ears glow that hear me, and my tongue would blister to
report it: but it is a great discredit for a man to be accounted for a scold,
for scolding is the manner of shromes; therefore I had rather answer them with
silence which find fault, then strive to win the Cucking-stoole from them. Now
me thinks I hear some curious Dames give their rash judgments, and say that I
having no wit, descant upon women which have more wit then men. To answer you
again, If I belie you, judge me unkind; but if I speak the truth I shall be
the better believed another time: and if I had wrote never so well, it is
impossible to please all, and if never so ill, yet I shall please some. Let it
be well or ill, I look for no praise for my labor; I am weined from my
mothers teat, and therefore never more to be fed with her pap: wherefore say
what you will, for I will follow my own vein in unfolding every pleat, and
showing every wrinckle of a woman's disposition, and yet I will not made so
far over the shoes, but that I may return dry, nor so far in, but that I
may easily escape out, and yet for all that, I must confess my self to be in
a fault, and that I have offended you beyond satisfaction, for it is hard to
give a sufficient recompense for a slander; and yet here after, if by no
means I cannot obtain your favor to be one of your Pulpit-men, yet you
cannot deny me to be one of your Parish; and therefore if you please but to
place me in the body of the Church hereafter, you shall find my devotion so
great toward you, as he that kneeleth at the Chancell door: for I wrote this
book with my hand, but not with my heart.

Indeed, when I first began to write this book, my wits were gone a
wool-gathering, in so much that in a manner forgetting my self, and so in the
rough of my fury, I vowed for ever to be an open enemy unto women; but when my
fury was a little past, I began to consider the blasphemy of this infamous
book against your sects; I then took my pen, and cut him in twenty pieces,
and had it not been for hurting my self, I would have cut my own fingers which
held my pen: and furthermore for penance, I do crave that my self may be a
Judge against my self; but yet assure your selves, of all evils I will choose
the least; wherefore I choose rather to bear a faggot, then burn by the faggot;
you may perceive the wind is changed into another door, and that I begin to be
sea-sicke, and yet not past half a mile on the salt water, and that my mouth
has uttered that in my fury, which my heart never thought, and therefore I
confess that my tongue has gone beyond my wits; for I do surmise, that the
sauce which I have made, is too sharp for your diet, and the flowers which I
have gathered, are too strong for your noses: but if I had brought little dogs
from Iceland, or fine glasses from Venice, then I am sure that you would either
have wooed me to have them, or wished to see them. But I will here conclude
this first Epistle, praying you with patience to hear the rest: for if I
offend you at the first, I will make you amends at the last: and so I leave you
to him, whose seat is in Heaven, and whose footestoole is the Earth.

Yours in the way of Honesty, Joseph Swetnam.

To the Reader.
Read it, if you please, and like as you list: neither to the wisest Clarke,
nor yet to the starkest Fool, but unto the ordinary sort of giddy-headed young
men, I send this greeting. IF you mean to see the Beare-bayting of women, then
trudge to this Beare-garden apace, and get in betimes, and view every room
where thou may best sit, for thy own pleasure, profit, and hearts ease,
and bear with my rudenes, if I chance to offend thee. But before I do open
this trunk full of torments against women, I think it were not amiss to
resemble those which in old time did sacrifices to Hercules; for they used
continually first to whip all their dogs out of their City; and I think it
were not amiss to drive all the women out of my hearing, for doubt, lest this
little spark kindle into such a flame, and raise so many stinging Hornets
humming about my ears, that all the wit I have will not quench the one, nor
quiet the other: for I fear me that I have set down more then they will like
of, and yet a great deal less then they deserve: and for better proof, I
refer my self to the judgment of men, which have more experience then my
self; for I esteem little of the malice of women, for men will be persuaded
with reason, but women must be answered with silence; for I know women will
bark more at me, then Cerberus the two-headed dog did at Hercules, when he
came into Hell to fetch out the fair Proserpina: and yet I charge them now but
with a bulrush, in respect of a second book, which is almost ready: I do now
but fret them with false fire, but my next charge shall be with weapons, and my
larum with powder and shot: for then we will go upon these venomous Adders,
Serpents and Snakes, and tread and trample them under our feet; for I have
known many stung with some of these Scorpions, and therefore I warn all men to
beware the Scorpton. I know women will bite the lip at me and censure hardly
of me, but I fear not the cursed Cow, for she commonly has short horns; let
them censure of me what they will, for I mean not to make them my Judges, and
if they shoot their spite at me, they may hit themselves, and so I will smile
at them, as at the foolish Fly which burns her self in the candle. And so
friend Reader, if thou have any discretion at all, thou may take a happy
example by these most lascivious and crafty, whorish, theeuish, and knauish
women, which were the cause of this my idle time spending; and yet I have no
warrant to make thee believe this which I write to be true, but yet the simple
Be gathers honey where the venomous Spider does her poison. And so I will
hinder thee no longer from that which insueth. But here I will conclude, lest
thou have cause to say, that my Epistles are longer then my book, a Book I
hope I may call it without any offense: for the Collyer calls his Horse a Horse,
and the Kings great Steed is but a Horse.

If thou read but the beginning of a book, thou can give no judgment of
that which insueth: therefore I say is the Friar, who in the midst of his
Sermon said often, that the best was behind: And so, if thou read it all over,
thou shall not be deluded, for the best is behind. I think I have shot so
near the white that some will account me for a good Archer: And so praying thee
to look to thy footing, that thou run not over thy shoes, and so be past
recovery before my second book come.

Thy friend, JOSEPH SVVETNAM.

CHAP. I.
This first Chapter shows to what use Women were made, it also shows that
most of them degenerate from the use they were framed unto, by leading a proud,
lazy, and idle life, to the great hinderance of their poor Husbands.

MOses describes a Woman thus: At the first beginning (says he) a woman was
made to be a helper unto man, and so they are indeed: for she helps to spend
and consume that which man painefully gets. He also says that they were
made of the ribbe of a man, and that their froward nature shows; for a ribbe
is a crooked thing, good for nothing else, and women are crooked by nature: for
small occasion will cause them to be angry.

Again, in a manner, she was no sooner made, but straightway her mind was set
upon mischief, for by her aspiring mind and wanton will, she quickly
procured man's fall, and therefore ever since they are and have been a woe unto
man, and follow the line of their first leader.

For I pray you let us consider the times past, with the time present; first,
that of David and Solomon, if they had occasion so many hundred years ago to
exclaim so bitterly against women, for the one of them said, that it was
better to be a doore-keeper, and better dwell in a den amongst Lions, then to be
in the house with a froward and wicked woman: and the other said, that the
climing up of a sandy hill to an aged man was nothing so wearisome, as to be
troubled with a froward woman: and further he says, that the malice of a beast
is not like the malice of a wicked woman, nor that there is nothing more
dangerous then a woman in her fury.

The Lion being bitten with hunger, the Bear being robbed of her young ones,
the Viper being trod on, all these are nothing so terrible as the fury of a
woman. A Bucke may be enclosed in a Park, a bridle rules a horse, a Woolfe may
be tied, a Tiger may be tamed: but a froward woman will never be tamed, no spur
will make her go, nor no bridle will hold her back; for if a woman hold an
opinion, no man can draw her from it: tell her of her fault, she will not
believe that she is in any fault: give her good counsel, but she will not take
it; if you do but look after another woman, then she will be jealous, the
more thou love her, the more she will disdain thee; and if thou threaten
her, then she will be angry; flatter her, and then she will be proud; and if
thou forbear her, it makes her bold, and if thou chasten her, then she will
turn to a Serpent; at a word, a woman will never forget an injury, nor give
thanks for a good turn: what wise man then will exchange gould for dross,
pleasure for pain, a quiet life, for wrangling brawles, from the which the
married men are never free?

Solomon says, that women are like unto wine, for that they will make men
drunk with their devices.

Again, in their love a woman is compared to a pommis-stone, for which way
soever you turn a pommis stone, it is full of holes; even so are women's
hearts, for if love steal in at one hole, it steppeth out at another.

They are also compared unto a painted ship, which seems fair outwardly, and
yet nothing but ballace within her; or as the Idols in Spain, which are
bravely gilt outwardly, and yet nothing but lead within them; or like unto the
Sea, which at some times is so calm, that a cockbote may safely endure her
might, but anon again with outrage she is so grown, that it ouerwhelmeth the
tallest ship that is.

A froward woman is compared to the wind, and a still woman unto the Sun: for
the Sun and the wind met a traveler upon the way, and they laid a wager,
which of them should get his cloak from him first; then first the wind began
boisterously to blow, but the more the wind did blow, the more the traveler
wrapped and gathered his cloak about him; now when the wind had done what he
could, and was never the nearer, then began the Sun gently to shine upon him,
and he threw off, not only his cloak, but also his hat and ierkin: this
moral shows, that a woman with high words can get nothing at the hands of
her husband, never by froward means, but by gentle and fair means she may
get his heart-bloud to do her good.

As women are compared unto many things, even so many, and many more troubles
comes galloping after the heels of a woman, that young men beforehand do
not think of; for the world is not made all of ote-meale, nor all is not gold
that glistereth, nor the way to Heaven is not strewed with rushes, no more is
the cradle of ease in a woman's lap. If thou were a Servant or in bondage
before, yet when thou do marry, thy toil is never the nearer ended, for
even then and not before, thou do change thy golden time for a drop of honey,
which presently afterward turns to be as bitter as wormwood.

Yet there are many young men which cudgel their wits, and beat their
brains, and spend all their time in the love of women, and if they get a smile
or but a favor at their Loves hand, they straightway are so ravished with
joy, yea so much, that they think they have gotten God by the hand, but within
a while after they will find that they have but the Devil by the foot. A man
may generally speak of women, that for the most part thou shall find them
dissembling in their deeds, and in all their actions subtle and dangerous for
men to deal withal: for their faces are lures, their beauties are baytes,
their looks are netts, and their words charms, and all to bring men to ruin.

There is an old saying goes thus, that he which has a fair wife, and a
white horse, shall never be without troubles; for a woman that has a fair
face, it is ever matched with a cruel heart, and her heavenly looks with
hellish thoughts; their modest countenance with merciless minds, for women
can both smooth and sooth: they are so cunning in the art of flattery, as if
they had bin bound prentice to the trade, they have Sirens songs to allure
thee, and Xerxes cunning to inchant thee: they bear two tongues in one mouth
like Judas, and two hearts in one breast like Magus; the one full of smiles, and
the other full of frowns, and all to deceive the simple and plain meaning
men, they can with the Satyr out of one mouth blow both hot and cold.

And what of all this? why nothing, but to tell thee that a woman is better
lost then found, better forsaken then taken. Saint Paul says, that they which
marry, do well, but he also says, that they which marry not, do better: and
he no doubt was well advised what he spoke. Then, if thou be wise, keep thy
head out of the halter, and take heed before thou have cause to curse thy hard
pennyworth, or wish the Priest speechless which knit the knot.

The Philosophers which lived in the old time, their opinions were so hard of
marriage, that they never delighted therein, for one of them being asked why
he married not? he answered, that it was too soon; and afterward when he was
old, he was asked the same question; and he said then that it was too late: and
further he said, that a married man has but two good days to be looked for,
that was the marriage day, and the day of his wives death: for a woman will
feed thee with honey, and poison thee with gall. Diogenes was so dogged, that
he abhorred all women, and Augustus wished, that he had lived wifelesse, and
died childlesse.

On a time one asked Socrates, whether he were better to marry, or to live
single? and he made answer; which soever thou do, it will repent thee: for
if thou marriest not, then thou will live discontented, and dye without issue,
and so perhaps a stranger shall possess thy goods: and if thou do marry,
thou shall have continual vexations, her dowry will be often cast in thy dish,
if she do bring wealth with her: again, if she complain, then her kinsfolk
will bend the brows, and her mother will speak her pleasure by thee: and if
thou marriest only for fair looks, yet thou may hap to go without them,
when thou look for them: and if thou marriest one that is fruitful in
bearing of children, then will thy care be the more increased; for little does
the father know what shall be the end of his children: and if she be barren,
thou will loath her; and if honest, thou will fear her death; and if dishonest,
thou will be weary of thy life: for when thou have her, thou must support her
in all her bad actions, and that will be such a perpetual burden unto thee,
that thou had even as good draw water continually, to fill a bottomless
tubbe.

A Gentleman on a time said to his friend, I can help you to a good marriage
for your son: his friend made him this answer; My son (said he) shall stay
till he have more wit; the Gentleman replied again: saying, If you marry him
not before he has wit, he will never marry so long as he lives.

For a married man is like unto one arrested, and I think that many a man would
fly up into Heaven, if this arrest of marriage kept them not back. It is said
of one named Domett as that he buried three wives, and yet never wet one
handkercher, no not shed not so much as one tear: also Ulysses, he had a Dog
which loved him well, and when that Dog died, he wept bitterly, but he never
shed one tear when his Wife died: wherefore if thou marriest without respect,
but only for bare love, then thou will afterward with sorrow say, that there
is more belongs to housekeeping then four bare legs in a bed. A man cannot
live with his hands in his bosom, nor buy meat in the market for honesty
without money: where there is nothing but bare walls, it is a fit house to
breed beggars into the world: yet there are many which think when they are
married, that they may live by love: but if wealth be wanting, hot love will
soon be cold, and your hot desires will be soon quenched with the smoke of
poverty. To what end then should we live in love, seeing it is a life more to
be feared then death? for all thy money wastes in toys, and is spent in
banqueting, and al thy time in sighs and sobbes, to think upon thy trouble
and charge which commonly comes with a wife: for commonly women are proud
without profit, and that is a good purgation for thy purse; and when thy purse
is light, then will thy heart be heavy.

The pride of a woman is like the dropsy; for as drink increases the drouth
of the one, even so money enlarges the pride of the other: thy purse must be
alwaie open to feed their fancy, and so thy expenses will be great, and yet
perhaps thy gettings small: thy house must be stored with costly stuff, and
yet perhaps thy Servants starued for lack of meat: thou must discharge the
Mercers book, and pay the Haberdashers man; for her Hat must continually be of
the new fashion, and her Gown of finer wool then the sheep bears any: she
must likewise have her Iewell-box furnished, especially if she be beautiful;
for then commonly beauty and pride goes together, and a beautiful woman is
for the most part costly, and no good huswife; and if she be a good huswife,
then no servant will abide her fierce cruelty; and if she be honest and
chaste, then commonly she is jealous: a Kings crown and a fair woman is
desired of many.

But he that gets either of them, lives in great troubles and hazard of
his life: he that gets a fair woman is like unto a Prisoner laden with
fetters of gold: for thou shall not so often kiss the sweet lips of thy
beautiful wife, as thou shall be driven to fetch bitter sighs from thy
sorrowful heart, in thinking of the charge which comes by her for if thou
deny her of such toys as she stands not in need of, and yet is desirous of
them, then she will quickly shut thee out of the doors of her favor, and deny
thee her person, and show her self as it were at a window playing upon thee,
not with small shot, but with a cruel tongue she will ring thee such a peale,
that one would think the Devil were come from Hell, saying, I might have had
those which would have maintained me like a woman, whereas now I go like
nobody: but I will be maintained if thou were hanged: with such like words she
will vex thee, blubbering forth abundance of dissembling tears (for women do
teach their eyes to weep) for do but cross a woman, although it be never so
little, she will straightway put finger in the eye and cry: then presently
many a foolish man will flatter her and entreat her to be quiet: but that
marres all, for the more she is entreated, she will power forth the more
abundance of deceitful tears, and therefore no more to be pitied, then to
see a Goose go barefoote; for they have tears at command, so have they
words at will, and oaths at pleasure; for they make as much account of an
oath, as a Merchant does, which will forswear himself for the getting of a
penny. I never yet knew woman that would deny to swear in defense of her own
honesty, and always standing highly upon it, although she be ashamed to wear
it in winter for catching of cold, nor in summer for heat, fearing lest it may
melt away.

Many will say, this which I write is true, and yet they cannot beware of the
Devil, until they are plagued with his Dam; the little Lamb skips and leapes
till the Fox come, but then he quiuers and shakes: the Bear daunces at the
stake, till the Dogs be upon his back: and some men never fear their money,
until they come into the hands of thieves; even so some will never be warned,
and therefore us not to be pitied if they be harmed: what are women, that make
thee so greedily to gape after them? Indeed, some their faces are fairer and
beautifuller then others, some again stand highly upon their fine foot and
hand, or else all women are alike: Ione is as good as my Lady, according to the
Country man's Proverb, who gave a great sum of money to lie with a Lady, and
going homewards, he made a grievous moan for his money, and one being on the
other side the hedge heard him say, that his Ione at home was as good as the
Lady. But whether this be true or no, my self I do not know, but you have it
as I heard it.

If thou marriest a woman of evil report, her discredit will be a spotte in
thy brow, thou can not go in the street with her without mocks, nor amongst
thy neighbors without frumps, and commonly the fairest women are soonest
intised to yield unto vanity: he that has a fair wife and a whetstone, every
one will be whetting thereon; and a Castle is hard to keep when it is
assaulted by many, and fair women are commonly catched at: he that marries a
fair woman, every one will wish his death to enjoy her; and if thou be never
so rich, and yet but a Clown in condition, then will thy fair Wife have her
credit to please her fancy, for a Diamond has not his grace but in gold, no
more has a fair woman her full commendations but in the ornament of her
bravery, by which means there are diverse women, whose beauty has brought
their husbands into great poverty and discredit by their pride and whooredome:
a fair woman commonly will go like a Peacocke, and her Husband must go like
a Woodcocke.

That great Giant Pamphimapho, who had Bears waiting upon him like Dogs, and
he could make tame any wild beast, yet a wanton woman he could never rule nor
turn to his will.

Solomon was the wisest Prince that ever was, yet he lusted after so many
women, that they made him quickly forsake his God which did always guide his
steps, so long as he lived godly.

And was not David the best beloved of God, and a mighty Prince? yet for the
love of women he purchased the displeasure of his God Sampson was the strongest
man that ever was; for every lock of his head was the strength of another man,
yet by a woman he was overcome; he revealed his strength, and paid his life
for that folly. Did not Iesabel for her wicked lust cause her husbands blood to
be given to dogs?

Jobs wife gave her husband counsel to blaspheme God and to curse him.

Agamemnons wife for a small injury that her husband did her, she first
committed adultery, and afterward consented to his death.

Also the wife of Hercules, she gave her husband a poisoned shirt, which was no
sooner on his back, but did stick so fast, that when he would have plucked
it off, it tore the flesh with it.

If thou will avoid these evils, thou must with Ulysses bind thy self to the
mast of the ship, as he did, or else it would have cost him his life; for
otherwise the Syrenian women would have intised him into the Sea, if he had not
so done.

It is wonderful to see the mad feats of women, for she will be now merry,
then again sad; now laugh, then weep; now sick, then presently whole; all
things which like not them, are naught: and if it be never so bad, if it like
them, it is excellent: again, it is death for women to be denied the thing
which they demand: and yet they will despise things given them unasked.

When a woman wants any thing, she will flatter and speak fair, not much
unlike the flattering Butcher, who gently claweth the Ox, when he intends
to knock him on the head: but the thing being once obtained, and their desires
gained, then they will begin to look big, and answer so stately, and speak
so scornefully, that one would imagine they would never seek help, nor crave
comfort at thy hands any more. But a woman is compared unto a ship, which
being never so well rigged, yet one thing or other is to be amended: even so
give a woman all that she can demand to day, yet she will be out of
reparations to morrow; and want one thing or other.

Women are called night Crows, for that commonly in the night they will make
request for such toys as comes in their heads in the day: for women know
their time to work their craft, for in the night they will work a man like
wax, and draw him like as the Adamant does the Iron, and having once brought
him to the bent of their bow, then she makes request for a Gown of the new
fashion stuff: or for a Petticote of the finest stammell: or for a Hat of the
newest fashion. Her husband being overcome by her flattering speech, partly he
yields to her request, although it be a grief to him for that he can hardly
spare it out of his stock, yet for quietness sake, he does promise what she
demands, partly because he would sleep quietly in his bed: again every
married man knows this, that a woman will never be quiet, if her mind be set
upon a thing, til she have it.

Now, if thou drive her off with delays, then her forehead will be so full of
frowns, as if she threatened to make clubs trump, and thou never a black
card in thy hand: for except a woman have what she will, say what she list,
and go where she please, otherwise thy house will be so full of smoke, that
thou can not stay in it.

It is said, that an old dog and a hungry flea byte sore; but in my mind, a
froward woman biteth more sorer; and if thou go about to master a woman, in
hope to bring her to humility; there is no way to make her good with stripes,
except thou beat her to death: for do what thou will, yet a froward woman in
her frantic mood will pull, haule, swerue, scratch and tear all that stands
in her way.

What will thou that I say more, oh thou poor married man? If women do not
feel the rain, yet here is a shower coming which will wet them to the
skins: A woman which is fair in show, is foul in condition: she is like
unto a glow-worme, which is bright in the hedge, and black in the hand; in the
greenest grass lyethhid the greatest Serpents: painted pottes commonly hold
deadly poison: and in the cleerest water the vgliest Tode; and the fairest
woman has some filthiness in her.

All is not gold that glistereth: a smiling countenance is no certain
testimonial of a merry heart, nor costly garments of a rich purse: men do not
commend a Judge, for that he wears a Skarlet gown, but for his just dealing;
no more are women to be esteemed of by the ornament of their bravery, but for
their good behavior; yet there is no river so clear, but there is some dirt
in the bottom: But many a man in this land, we need not go any further for
examples, but here we may see many fools in every place snared in women's
nets, after a little familiarity and acquaintance with them: I think if they
were numbered, the number would pass infinite, if it were possible, which for
the love of wantons have lost their voyages at Sea to their great hindrances,
and many other have never regarded the far distance which they have been
from their country and friends, until they had consumed their substance, and
then being ashamed to return home again in such bad sort, I mean, by weeping
cross, and pennilesse bench, many of them rather choose to deserve Newgate,
and so come to Tiburne, far contrary from the expectation of their friends and
Parents, which had otherwise provided for them, if they had had grace, or would
have been ruled.

CHAP. II.
The second Chapter shows the manner of such Women as live upon evil report:
It also shows that the beauty of Women has been the bane of many a man, for
it has overcome valiant and strong men, eloquent and subtle men. And in a
word, it has overcome all men, as by examples following shall appear.

FIrst, that of Solomon, unto whom God gave singular wit and wisdom, yet he
loved so many women, that he quite forgot his God, which always did guide his
steps, so long as he lived godly, and ruled justly: but after he had glutted
himself with women, then he could say; vanity of vanities, all is but vanity:
he also in many places of his book of Proverbs exclaimes most bitterly against
lewd women, calling them all that naught is, and also displayeth their
properties: and yet I cannot let them go blameless, although women go
shameless; but I will touch them both: for if there were not receivers, then
there would not be so many stealers: if there were not some knaves, there would
not be so many whoores; for they both hold together to bolster each others
villainy: for always birds of a feather will flock together hand in hand, to
bolster each others villainy. Men I say may live without women, but women cannot
live without men: For Venus whose beauty was excellent fair, yet when she
needed man's help, she took Vulcan a club-footed-Smith. And therefore if a
woman's face glister, and her Iesture pearce the Marble wall, or if her tongue
be so smooth as oil, or so soft as silk, and her words so sweet as honey: or
if she were a very Ape for wit, or a bag of gold for wealth: or if her
personage have stolen away all that nature can afford, and if she be decked up
in gorgeous apparel, then a thousand to one but she will love to walk where
she may get acquaintance; and acquaintance brings familiarity, and
familiarity sets all folies abroach: and twenty to one that if a woman love
gadding, but that she will pawn her honesty, to please her fantasy.

Man must be at all the cost, and yet live by the loss; a man must take all
the pains, and women will spend all the gains: a man must watch and ward,
fight and defend, till the ground, labor in the vineyard; and look what he
gets in seven years, a woman will spread it abroad with a forke in one
year, and yet little enough to serve her turn, but a great deal too little
to get her good will: nay, if thou give her never so much, and yet if thy
personage please not her humor, then will I not give a halfepenny for her
honesty at the years end.

For then her breast will be the harbourer of an envious heart, and her heart
the storehouse of poisoned hatred, her head will devise villainy, and her hands
are ready to practice that which her heart desires. Then, who can but say that
women sprung from the Devil, whose heads, hands, hearts, minds and souls are
evil? for women are called the hook of all evil, because men are taken by
them, as fish is taken with the hook.

For women have a thousand ways to entise thee, and ten thousand ways to
deceive thee, and all such fools as are suitors unto them: some they keep in
hand with promises, and some they feed with flattery, and some they delay with
dalliances, and some they please with kisses: they lay out the foldes of their
hair, to entangle men into their love; betwixt their breasts is the vale of
destruction, and in their beds there is hell, sorrow and repentance. Eagles eat
not men till they are dead, but women devour them alive: for a woman will pick
thy pocket, and empty thy purse, laugh in thy face and cut thy throat: they are
ungrateful, perjured, full of fraud, flouting and deceit, unconstant, waspish,
toyish, light, sullen, proud, discurteous and cruel, and yet they were by God
created, and by nature formed, and therefore by policy and wisdom to be
avoided; for good things abused, are to be refused, or else for a months
pleasure she may hap to make thee go stark naked, she will give thee
rostmeat, but she will beat thee with the spitte: if thou have crowns in thy
purse, she will be thy hearts gold, until she leave thee not a whit of white
money: they are like summer birds, for they will abide no storm, but flock
about thee in the pride of thy glory, and fly from thee in the storms of
affliction; for they aim more at thy wealth, then at thy person, and esteem
more thy money, then any man's virtuous qualities for they esteem of a man
without money, as a horse does of a fair stable without meat, they are like
Eagles, which will always fly where the carrion is.

They will play the horse-leach to suck away thy wealth, but in the winter of
thy misery she will fly away from thee. Not unlike the Swallow, which in the
summer harbors her self under the eues of an house, and against winter
flies away, leaving nothing but dirt behind her.

Solomon says, he that will suffer himself to be led away, or take delight in
such women's company, is like a fool which rejoices when he is led to the
stocks, Pro. 7.

Hosea, by marriage with a leaud woman of light behavior, was brought unto
idolatry, Hosea 1. Saint Paul accounts fornicators so odious, that we ought
not to eat meat with them; he also shows that fornicators shall not inherit
the kingdom of Heaven, 1. Corin. the 9. and 11. verse.

And in the same chapter Saint Paul excommunicateth fornicators, but upon
amendment he receives them again. Whoredom punished with death, Deuteronomy
22. 21. and Genesis 38. 24. Phinehas a Priest thrust two adulterers, both the
man and the woman, through the belly with a spear, Numbers 25.

God detesteth the money or goods gotten by whoredom, Deuteronomy 23. 17. 18.
Whores called by diverse names, and the properties of whores, Proverbs 7. 6. and
2. A whore enuieth an honest woman, Esdras 16. and 42. Whoremongers God will
judge, Hebrews 13. and 42. They shall have their portions with the wicked in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rcuelation the 21. 8.

Only for the sin of whoredom God was sorry at the heart, and repented that
ever he made man, Genesis 6. 67.

Saint Paul says, to avoid fornication, every man may take a wife, 1.
Corinthians the 7. 2.

Therefore he which has a wife of his own, and yet goes to another woman,
is like a rich thief, which will steal when he has no need.

There are three ways to know a whore: by her wanton looks, by her speech,
and by her gate, Ecclesiasticus 26. and in the same chapter he says, that we
must not give our strength unto harlots; for whores are the evil of all evils,
and the vanity of all vanities, they weaken the strength of a man, and deprive
the body of his beauty; it furroweth his brows, and makes the eyes dim; and
a whorish woman causes the fever and the gout: and at a word, they are a
great shortning to a man's life.

For although they seem to be so dainty as sweet meat, yet in trial not so
wholesome as sour sauce: they have wit, but it is all in craft; if they love,
it is vehement; but if they hate, it is deadly.

Plato says, that women are either Angels or Devils, and that they either love
dearly, or hate bitterly; for a woman has no mean in her love, nor mercy in
her hate; no pity in revenge, nor patience in her anger; therefore it is said,
that there is nothing in the world which both pleases and displeases a man
more then a woman for a woman most delights a man, and yet most deceives
him; for as there is nothing more sweet unto a man then a woman when she
smileth: even so there is nothing more odious then the angry countenance of a
woman.

Solomon in his 20. of Ecclesiastes says, that an angry woman will foam at the
mouth like a Bore: if all this be true as most true it is, why should thou
spend one hour in the praise of women, as some fools do? for some will brag
of the beauty of such a maid; another will vaunt of the bravery of such a
woman, that she goes beyond all the women in the parish: again, some study
their fine wits, how they may cunningly sooth women, and with Logic how to
reason with them, and with eloquence to persuade them; they are always
tempering their wits, as Fiddlers do their strings, who wrest them so high,
that many times they-stretch them beyond time, tune, and reason.

Again, there are many that weary themselves with dallying, playing and
sporting with women, and yet they are never satisfied with the insatiable
desire of them; if with a song thou would be brought asleep, or with a
dance be led to delight, then a fair woman is fit for thy diet: if thy head be
in her lap, she will make thee believe that thou art hard by Gods seat, when
indeed thou artiust at hell gate.

Theodora a monstrous strumpet, on a time made her brags to Socrates of the
great hant of lusty Gallants which came to her house, and furthermore she told
him, that she could get away more of his Scholars from him, then he could of
hers from her.

No marvel (quoth Socrates) for thy ways seem pleasant and easy, and that
is the way youth loves to walk in; but the way that leads to a virtuous life,
seems full of brambles and briars: and to match with this, there is an
history that makes mention of three notable Curtizanes, whose names were Lauia,
Flora, and Lays: Lauia and Lays were homo, common to all men, they would play
at small game, rather then sit out; these three Strumpets during their life
time, were the beautifullest and richest of that trade in the world, and had
three several gifts whereby they allured their Lovers to seek their favors.

The Engine wherewith Lauia entrapped her Lovers, proceeded from her eyes; for
by her smiling countenance, and wanton looks, she greatly inflamed all that
beheld her. And Flora wan her Lovers by her excellent wit and eloquent tongue.
And Lays enticed her Lovers by her sweet singing and pleasant fingering of
Instruments of music.

But now again to Lauia, King Demetrius gave but a glaunce of his eyes
suddenly upon her, and was taken presently with her net, and spent eleven
talents of silver upon her, which he had provided and appointed to pay his
soldiers; and furthermore, he quite forsook his own wife, and never left
the company of this Strumpet, until death took her from him; and after she
was dead, he made great moan for her death; he also kissed and embraced her,
and caused her to be buried under his window; that so often as he did see her
grave, he might bewail her death.

Lays likewise had a King, whose name was Pirrhus, which was her chief
friend, but yet he served but as it were for a cloak; for he continued not
very long with her in Greece, but went himself to the wars in Italy; but in
his absence she was not only sought to, but obtained of many, and set down
her price, that before she would do her work, she would have her money.

Now to Flora, she was a Kings daughter, her parents died when she was of the
age of fifteen years, and she was left as rich as beautiful, she had the
bridle of liberty thrown on her neck, so that she might run whither she
would; for she was left without controulment, so that suddenly she determined
to travel and see the wars of Africa, where she made sale both of her
personage and honor.

King Menelaus was the first that made love unto her, as he was marching to the
wars of Carthage, and spent more money upon her, then in conquering his
enemies.

But as she was of noble race, so it is said, that she never gave her self
over to mean or petty company, as the other two did; but she had a scroule
set over her gate, the tennor whereof was thus, King, Prince, Emperor or
Bishop, enter this place and welcome: neither was this Flora so greedy of gold,
as the other two were; for on a time one of her familiar friends asked her the
cause, why she did not make price of her love? she made this answer, I
commit my body to none but to Princes and Noblemen, and I swear there was
never man gave me so little, but that I had more then I would have asked, or
that I looked for; and furthermore she said, that a noble woman ought not to
make price of her love: all things are at a certain rate, except Love, and
that a woman of great beauty should be so much esteemed of, as she esteems of
her self. She died at the age of forty years, and the wealth she left behind
her in Rome, was valued to be so much as would have builded new walls round
about the City, if there had been no walls at all.

Was not that noble City of Troy sacked and spoiled for the fair Hellena? and
when it had cost many men's lives, and much blood was shed, and when they had
got the conquest, they got but a harlot: by this and that which follows, thou
shall see the power of women, how it has been so great, and more prevailed in
bewitching men's wits, and in ouercomming their senses, then all other things
whatsoever. It has not only vanquished Kings and Keisars, but it has also
surprised castles and countries, nay, what is it that a woman cannot do, which
knows her power?

Therefore stay not alone in the company of a woman, trusting to thy own
chastity, except thou be more stronger then Sampson, more wise then Solomon, or
more holy then David; for these and many more have been overcome by the sweet
entisements of women, as thou shall read hereafter.

It is said, that the Gods themselves did change their shapes, for the love of
such women as they lusted after: Jupiter, he transformed himself into a Bull,
Neptune into a Horse, and Mercury into a Goat.

Aristippus desired sweet meat for his belly, and a fair woman for his bed.

But in my mind, he that lays his net to catch a fair woman, he may chance
to fall into the sprindge which was laid for a woodcocke: therefore I do
admonish young men, and I advise old men, and I counsel simple men, and I
warn all men, that they fly from a wicked woman, as from the pestilence, or
else they will make thee fly in the end.

Aristotle, for keeping company with a queen in Athens, was feign to run
away, to save himself from punishment; and yet he had dwelt there, and wrote
many books for the space of thirty years.

Again of Sampson and Hercules for all their great strength and conquest of
Giants and monsters, yet the one yielded his club at Diauer as foot, and the
other revealed his strength to Dalila, and he paid his life for his folly.

The sugared and renowned Orators Demosthenes and Hortentius, the one came from
Athens unto Corinth, to compound and agree with Lays a common Strumpet as you
heard before of her, and yet he had but one nights lodging with her. And the
other was so far in love with another bird of the same cage, the which he
could not obtain, nor yet could he conquer his affection, until he had quite
pined himself away, so that in short time he had wasted himself to nothing.

Plato, for all his great Philosophy and knowledge, yet he kept company with
Archenasse when she was old, and forsaken of all her Lovers; for she had given
her self to a number in her youth, yet nevertheless Plato so loved her, that
he wrote many verses in commendation of her.

Also Socrates for his gravity and wisdom is renowned throughout all the
world, yet he most dearly loved Alpasy, an old and ouerworne Strumpet.

Love stayed King Antiochus in Calcidea a whole winter, for one maid that he
fancied there, to his great hinderance.

Love stayed King Hannibal in Capua a long season, laying all other his
necessary affairs aside, the which was no small hinderance to him; for in the
mean while his enemies invaded a great part of his Country.

Likewise Julius Caesar, he continued in Alexandria a long season, not for the
love of one, but he lusted after many, to his great infamy and disgrace.

That great Captain Holofernes, whose sight made many thousands to quake, yet
he lost his life, and was slain by a woman.

Was not Herod's love so great to a woman, that he caused John Baptist to lose
his head for her sake?

Wherefore to avoid the sight, many times is the best rasor, to cut off the
occasion of the evil which comes by women; For had not Holofernes seen the
beauty of Iudeth, and marked the finenesse of her foot, he had not lost his
head by her. If Herod had not seen Herodias daughter dance, he had not so
rashly granted her Saint John Baptists head. Had not Eua seen the Apple, and
also she was tempted with the beauty of the Serpent, who as our Schoolmen do
write, that he showed himself like a fair young man; but had not she seen
it, I say, she had not eaten thereof, to her own grief and many more. By
sight the wife of Putiphar was moved to lust after her servant Joseph. It is
said of Semir amiss of Babylon, that after her husbands death, she waxed so
insatiable in carnal lust, that two men at one time could not satisfy her
desire, and so by her insatiableness, at length all Persia grew full of
whoores.

And likewise of one Venise a strumpet in Cipris it is supposed, that by her
fame and ill life, she caused all Cipres at length to be full of queanes.

And of one fair Rodape in Egypt, who was the first noted woman in that
Country, but at length all the whole country became full of Strumpets.

Is it not strange, that the seed of one man should breed such woe unto all men?

One said unto his friend, Come, let us go see a pretty wench. The other made
this answer; I have (said he) shaken such fetters from my heels, and I will
never go where I know I shall repent afterward: but yet happily some may say
unto me, If thou should refuse the company or the courtesy of a woman, then
she would account thee a soft-spirited fool, a milk-sop, and a meacock.

But alas fond fool, will thou more regard their babble, then thine own
bliss, or esteem more their frumps, then thine own welfare? do thou not
know that women always strive against wisdom, although many times it be to
their utter overthrow? Like the Be which is often hurt with her own honey:
even so women are often plagued with their own conceit, waying down love with
discurtesie, giving him a weed, which presents them with flowers: as their
catching in jest, and their keeping in earnest, and yet she thinks that she
keeps her self blameless, and in all ill vices she would go nameesse, but
if she carry it never so clean, yet in the end she will be counted but for a
cunny-catching queen; and yet she will swear that she will thrive, as long as
she can find one man alive: for she thinks to do all her knavery invisible;
she will have a fig leaf to cover her name: but when the fig leaf is dry
and withered, it does show their nakedness to the world: for take away their
painted clothes, and then they look like ragged walls: take away their ruffes,
and they look ruggedly: their ^oyfes and stomachers, and they are simple to
behold: their hair untrust, and they look wildly; and yet there are many
which lays their nets to catch a pretty woman, but he which gets such a
prize, gains nothing by his adventure, but shame to the body, and danger to
the soul; for the heat of the young blood of these wantons, leads many unto
destruction for this worlds pleasure. It chaunts your minds, and infeebleth
your bodies with diseases, it also scandalleth your good names, but most of
all, it indangereth your souls; how can it otherwise choose, when lust and
uncleanness continually keep them company, gluttony and floth serves them at
the table; pride and vainglory apparelleth them; but these servants will wax
weary of their service, and in the end they shall have no other servants to
attend them, but only shame, grief and repentance; but then, oh then (you
will say) when it is too late, Oh would to God that we had been more careful
of true glorious modesty, and less cunning to keep wantons company! Oh
therefore remember, and think beforehand, that every sweet has his sour:
then buy not with a drop of honey a gallon of gall; do not think that this
worlds pleasure will pass away with a trifle, and that no sooner done, but
presently forgotten: No, no, answer your selves that the punishment remains
eternally, and therefore better it were to be an addle egg, then an evil
bird. For we are not borne for our selves to live at pleasure, but to take
pains, and to labor for the good of our Country, yet so delightful is our
present sweetness, that we never remember the following sour: for youth are
too too easy won and overcome with the worlds vanities: Oh too soon (I say)
is youth in the blossoms devoured with the caterpillars offoule lust, and
lascivious desires, the black Fiend of Hell, by his enticing sweet sin of
lust, draws many young wits to confusion; for in time it draws the heart
blood of your good names; and that being once lost, is never gotten again.

Again, Lust causes you to do such foul deeds which makes your foreheads
for ever afterward seem spotted with black shame, and everlasting infamy, by
which means, your graves after death are closed up with times scandal. And
yet Women are easily wooed, and soon won, got with an apple, and lost with the
paring: young wits are soon corrupted, women's bright beauties breed curious
thoughts; and golden gifts easily overcome wanton desires, with changing
modesty into pastimes of vanity, and being once delighted therein, continues in
the same without repentance: you are only the peoples wonder, and misfortunes
banding ball tossed up and down the world with woe upon woe, yea ten thousand
woes will be galloping hard at your heels, and pursue you wheresoever you go;
for those of ill report cannot stay long in one place, but rome and wander
about the world, and yet ever unfortunate, prospering in nothing, forsaken and
cast out from all civil companies, still in fear lest authority with the
sword of Justice, bar them of liberty. Lo thus your lives are despised,
walking like night-Owles in misery, and no comfort shall be your friend, but
only repentance coming too late, and ouer-deare bought: A penance and
punishment, due to all such hated creatures as these are.

Therefore believe, all you unmarried wantons, and in believing grieve, that
you have thus unluckily made your selves neither maidens, widows, nor wives,
but more vile then filthy channell-durt, fit to be swept out of the heart and
suburbs of your Country. Oh then suffer not this worlds pleasure to take from
you the good thoughts of an honest life: But down, down upon your knees, you
earthly Serpents, and wash away your black sin with the cristall tears of true
sorrow and repentance, so that when you wander from this enticing world, you
may be washed and cleansed from this foul leprosy of nature.

Lo thus in remorse of mind my tongue has uttered to the wantons of the
world, the abundance of my hearts grief, which I have perceived by the
unseemly behavior of unconstant both men and women, yet men for the most part
are touched but with one fault, which is drinking too much: but it is said of
women, that they have two faults, that is, they can neither say well, nor yet
do well.

For commonly, women are the most part of the forenoone painting themselves,
and frizling their hairs, and prying in their glass, like Apes to prancke up
themselves in their gawdies; like Poppets, or like the Spider which weaues a
fine web to hang the fly. Amongst women she is accounted a slut which goes
not in her silks: therefore if thou will please thy Lady, thou must like and
love, sue and serve, and in spending thou must lay on load; for they must have
maintenance howsoever they get it, by hook or by crook, out of Judas bag, or
the Devils budget, thou must spare neither lands nor living, money nor gold.

For women will account thee a pinch-penny, if thou be not prodigal, and a
dastard, if thou be not ventrous for they account none valiant, except they be
desperate if silent, a sot; if full of words, a fool; judging all to be
Clownes which be not Courtiers. If thou be cleanely in thine apparel, they
will term thee proud; if mean in apparel, a slouen; if tall, a lunges; if
short, a dwarf: for they have ripe wits, and ready tongues, and if they get a
inch, they will claim an ell: she will coll thee about thy neck with one
hand, but the other shall be diving into thy pocket, and if thou take her with
the manner, then was but in lest, but many times they take in jest (and if they
be not spied) keep it in earnest: but if thy pockets grow empty, and thy
revenues will not hold out longer to maintain her pomp and bravery, then she
presently leaves to make much of thy person, and will not stick to say unto
thee, that she could have bestowed her love on such a one as would have
maintained her like a woman, so by these means they weaue the web of their own
woe, and spin the thread of their own thraldom; if they lack they will lack
at the last, for they will cut it out of the whole cloth so long as the piece
will hold out.

Is not the Be hiued for his honey, the Sheep sheared for his fleece, the Ox
neck wrought for his masters profit, the foul plucked for her feathers, the
tree grafted to bring forth fruit, and the earth labored to bring forth
corn? but what labor or cost thou bestowest on a woman, is all cast away, for
she will yield thee no profit at all, for when thou have done all, and given
them all that they can demand, yet thou shall be as well rewarded, as those
men were whom Esop hired for three halfepence a day to hear him recite his
fables. These things being wisely considered, then what a fool art thou to
blind thy self in their bold behavior, and bow at their beckes, and come at
their calls, and sell thy lands, to make them swim in their silks, and iet
in their jewels, making Iill a Gentlewoman, insomuch that she cares not a
penny for the finest, nor a fig for the proudest? she is as good as the best,
although she have no more honesty then barely to serve her own turn,
suffering every man's fingers as deep in the dish, as thine are in the platter,
and every man to angle, where thou castest thy hook, holding up to all that
come, not much unlike a Barbers chair, that so soon as one knave is out,
another is in, a common hackney for every one that will ride, a boat for every
one to row in: now if thy wealth do begin to fail, then she bids thee
farewell, and gives thee the adieu in the Devils name, not much unlike the
knauish Porters in Bristow, who will cry, A new master, a new, and hang up the
old. If the matter be so plain, then consider this, that the house where such
a one keeps her residence, is more-odious with slander, then carrion does
infect the air with stink; let them flatter how they will, there is no love
in them, but from the teeth outward. I blaze their properties the plainer, and
give thee the stronger reasons, because I would have thee loath the alluring
trains of such deceitful and lascivious women: although she make great
protestations of love, and thereto binds her self with most damnable oaths,
then believe her least of all, for there is no more hold in her oaths, nor in
her love, then is certainly of a fair day in April, although it look never
so clear, yet it may turn to a foul. I have seen a Curtizan thus pictured
out:

First, a fair young man blind, and in his arms a beautiful woman, with one
hand in his pocket, showing her theft, and a knife in the other hand to cut his
throat.

Now peradventure, thou may say unto that, thou do not know one woman from
another, without some trial, because all women are in shape alike: for the
sour crab is like the sweet pippin: true it is, so the Raven is a bird, and
the Swan is but a bird: even so many women are in shape Angels, but in
qualities Devils, painted coffius with rotten bones: the Estridge carries
fair feathers, but rank flesh: the herb Molio carries a flower as white as
snow, but a root as black as ink.

Although women are beautiful, showing pity, yet their hearts are black,
swelling with mischiese, not much unlike unto old trees, whose outward leaves
are fair and green, and yet the body rotten: if thou hant their houses, thou will be enamoured; and if thou do but harken to these Sirens, thou will be
enchanted, for they will allure thee with amorous glances of lust, and yet kill
thee with bitter looks of hate: they have dimples in their cheeks to deceive
thee, and wrinkles in their brows to betray thee: they have eyes to entice,
smiles to flatter, imbracements to provoke, beckes to recall, lips to inchant,
kisses to inflame, and tears to excuse themselves.

If God had not made them only to be a plague to man, he would never have
called them necessary evils, and what are they better? for what do they either
get or gain, save or keep? nay they do rather spend and consume all that
which man painefully gets: a man must be at all the cost, and yet live by
the loss.

It is very easy for him which never experienced himself in that vain
pleasure, or repenting pleasure, choose you whether, I mean the accompanying
of lewd women: but such as are exercised and experimented in that kind of
drudgery, they I say, have a continual desire, and temptation is ready at
hand: therefore take heed at the first, suffer not thy self to be led away
into lustful folly, for it is more easy for a young man or maid to forbear
carnal act, then it is for a widow, and yet more easy for a widow, then for
her that is married and has her husband wanting: then take heed at the first,
for there is nothing gotten by women but repentance.

For women are like the Bay tree, which is ever green, but without fruit; or
like the unprofitable thorn, which bears as trim a blossom as the apple:
this is nothing, but to tell thee that thou must not judge of gold by the
color, nor of women's qualities by their faces, nor by their speeches; for they
have delicate tongues, which will ravish and tickle the itching ears of giddy
headed young men, so foolish, that they think themselves happy if they can but
kiss the dazie whereon their love does tread; who if she frown, then he
descends presently into hell: but if she smile, then is he carried with wings
up into heaven: there is an old saying, that when a dog wags his tail, he
loves his master.

Some think, that if a woman smile on them, she is presently over head and
ears in love: one must wear her glove, another her garter, another her
colors of delight, and another shall spend and live upon the spoil which she
gets from all the rest: then if thou will give thy body to the Chirurgian,
and thy soul to the Devil, such women are fit for thy diet. Many creatures of
every kind resemble women in conditions; for some horse an unskillful rider can
hardly disorder; and some again in despite of the best rider that is, will
have a iadish trick: some Hawke although he be ill served, yet will sit quiet;
and some, if never so well served, yet will continually fly at check: again,
some hounds by no means will forsake their undertaken game, and some again in
despite of the huntsman will continually run at random: and some men will
steal if their hands were bound behind them; and some again will rather
sterue then steal, even so some women will not be won with seven years
loving, and some again will offend with an hours liberty.

Therefore, if thou study a thousand years, thou shall find a woman nothing
else but a contrary unto man: nay, if thou continue with her a hundredth years,
yet thou shall find in her new fancies, and contrary sorts of behavior;
therefore, if all the world were paper, and all the sea ink, and all the trees
and plants were pens, and every man in the world were a writer, yet were they
not able with all their labor and cunning, to set down all the crafty deceits
of women.

Now me thinks I hear some of you say, that young wits are soon corrupted,
and that women's bright beauty breeds curious thoughts in men, also golden
gifts easily overcomes wanton women's desires: and thereby make them become
Venus darlings, quite changing customs of modesty, into passions of vanity,
wherein once delighted, they continue in the same without repentance or sorrow:
But out alas, you lascivious Dames, these lewd conditions of yours, will
speedily bring all your joys to sorrow.

CHAP. III.
This third Chapter shows a remedy against love, also many reasons not to be
too hasty in choice of a Wife. But if no remedy but thou will marry, then how
to choose a wife, with a Commendation of the good, virtuous, and honest Women.

BE not too hasty to marry, for doubt lest thou marry in haste, and repent by
leisure; For there are many troubles which comes galloping at the heels of a
woman, which many young men beforehand do not think of, the world is not all
made of Otemeale; nor all is not gold that glisters, nor a smiling countenance
is no certain testimonial of a merry heart: nor the way to heaven is not
strewed with rushes; no more is the cradle of ease in a woman's lap: if thou
were a servant, or in bondage before, yet when thou marriest, thy toil is
never the near ended, but even then, and not before, thou changest thy golden
life which thou did lead before, in respect of the married, for adtop of
honey which quickly turns to be as bitter as wormwood; And therefore far
better it were to have two plowes going then one cradle, and better a barn
filled then a bed; therefore cut off the occasion, which may any way bring thee
into fools Paradise. Then first, and above all, shun idleness, for idleness is
the beginner and maintainer of love, therefore apply thy self about some
affairs, or be occupied about some business: for so long as thy mind or thy
body is in labor, the love of a woman is not remembered, nor lust never thought
upon: but if thou spend thy time idly amongst women, thou art like unto him
which plays with the Be, who may sooner feel of her sting, then taste of
her honey; he that touches pitch, may be desiled therewith. Roses unadvisedly
gathered, prickle our fingers; Bees ungently handled, sting our faces, and yet
the one is pleasant, and the other is profitable, and if thou be in company of
women, the Devil himself has not more illusions to get men into his net,
then women have devices and inventions to allure men into their love; and if
thou suffer thy self once to be led into fools paradise, (that is to say) the
bed or closet wherein a woman is, (then I say) thou art like a bird snared in a
Lime-bush, which the more she strives, the faster she is. It is impossible to
fall amongst stones, and not be hurt, or amongst thorns, and not be pricked,
or amongst nettles, and not be stung: a man cannot carry fire in his bosom,
and not burn his clothing; no more can a man live in love, but it is (...) as
wearisome as hell, and he that marries a wife, matcheth himself unto many
troubles. If thou mariest a still and a quiet woman, that will seem to thee
that thou ridest but an ambling horse to hell; but if with one that is froward
and unquiet, then thou were as good ride a trotting horse to the Devil:
herein I will not be my own caruer, but I refer you to the judgment of
those which have seen the troubles, and felt the torments; for none are better
able to judge of women's qualities, then those which have them; none feels the
hardness of the Flint, but he that strikes it; none knows where the shoe
pincheth, but he that wears it. It is said that a man should eat a hushell of
salt with one which he means to make his friend, before he put any great
confidence or trust him: And if thou be so long in choosing a friend, a my
mind thou had need to eat two bushels of salt with a woman, before thou
make her thy wife; otherwise, before thou have eaten one bushel with her, thou
halt taste of ten quarters of sorrow, and for every dram of pleasure, an ounce
of pain, and for every pint of honey a gallon of gall, and for every inche of
mirth an ell of moan. In the beginning, a woman's love seems delightful, but
ends with destruction; therefore he that trusts to the love of a woman,
shall be as sure as he that hangs by the leaf of a tree in the later end of
Summer: and yet there is great difference betwixt the standing poole, and the
running stream, although they are both waters.

Therefore of two evils, choose the least, and avoid the greatest; but my
meaning is not here to advise thee to choose the least woman: for the little
women are as unhappy as the greatest; for though their statures be little, yet
their hearts are big: then speak fair to all, but trust none, and say with
Diogenes, It is too soon for a young man to marry, and too late for old men.
One asked a Philosopher, what the life of a married man was? he answered,
Misery. And what is his felicity? Misery: for he still lingers in hope of
further joy. And what is his end? and he still answered, Misery.

There are six kinds of women which thou should take heed that thou match
not thy self to any one of them: that is to say, good nor bad, fair nor
foul, rich nor poor; for if thou marriest one that is good, thou may
quickly spill her with too much making of her: for when prouender pricks a
woman, then she will grow knauish: and if bad, then thou must support her in
all her bad actions, and that will be so wearisome unto thee, that thou had
as good draw water continually to fill a bottomless tub: if she be fair, then
thou must do nothing else but watch her: and if she be foul and loathsome, who
can abide her if she be rich, then thou must forbear her because of her
wealth: and if she be poor, then thou must maintain her.

For if a woman be never so rich in dowry, happy by her good name, beautiful
of body, sober of countenance, eloquent in speech, and adorned with virtue, yet
they have one ill quality or other, which overthrows all the other: like unto
that Cow which gives great store of milk, and presently strikes it down
with her foot, such a cow is as much to be blamed for the loss, as to be
commended for the gift: or like as when men talk of such a man, or such a man,
he is an excellent good workman, or he is a good Chirurgian, or a good
Physician, or he is a pretty fellow of his hands, but if they conclude with
this word, But it is pity he has one fault, which commonly in some men is
drnnkennesse, then I say, if he were endued with all the former qualities, yet
they cannot gain him so much credit to counterpoise the discredit that comes
thereby.

It is said of men, that they have that one fault, but of women it is said that
they have two faults, that is to say, they can neither say well, nor do well:
there is a saying that goes thus, that things far fetched and dear bought
are of us most dearly beloved, the like may be said of women, although many of
them are not far fetched, yet they are dear bought, yea and so dear, that
many a man curses his hard penniworths, and bannes his own heart; for the
pleasure of the fairest woman in the world lasts but a honey moon, that is,
while a man has glutted his affections, and reaped the first fruit, his
pleasure being past sorrow and repentance remains still with him.

Therefore to make thee the stronger to strive against these tame Serpents,
thou shall have more strings to thy bow then one, it is safe riding at two
ankers; always look before thou leap, lest thy shinnes thou chance to
break. Now the fire is kindled, let us burn this other faggot, and so to our
matter again.

If a woman be never so comely, think her a counterfeit; if never so straight,
think her crooked; if she be well set, call her a bosse; if slender, a hazell
twig; if brown, think her as black as a Crow; if well-colored, a painted
wall; if sad, or shame-fac'd, then think her a clown; if merry and pleasant,
then she is the liker to be a wanton. But if thou be such a fool that thou will spend thy time and treasure, the one in the love of women, and the other
to delight them; in my mind thou resemblest the simple Indians, who apparel
themselves most richly when they go to be burned.

But what should I say? some will not give their babble for the Tower of London.
He that has sailed at sea, has seen the dangers, and he that is married, can
tell of his own woe, but he that is never burnt, will never dread the fire.
Some will go to dice, although they see others lose all their money at play,
and some will marry, though they beg together. Is it not strange that men
should be so foolish to dote on women, who differ so far in nature from men?
for a man delights in arms, and in hearing the rattling drums, but a woman
loves to hear sweet music on the Lute, Cittern, or Bandora: a man rejoices
to march among the murdered carcasses, but a woman to dance on a silken
carpet: a man loves to hear the threatenings of his Princes enemies, but a
woman weeps when she hears of wars: a man loves to lie on the cold grass,
but a woman must be wrapped in warm mantles: a man tryumphes at wars, but a
woman rejoices more at peace.

If a man talk of any kind of beast or foul, presently the nature is known:
as for example, the Lions are all strong and hardy, the Hares are all fearful
and cowardly, the Doves are all simple, and so of all beasts and foul the
like, I mean few or none swaruing from his kind; but women have more contrary
sorts of behavior then there be women, and therefore impossible for a man to
know all, no nor one part of women's qualities all the daics of thy life.

Some with sweet words undermine their husbands, as Dalila did Samson, and
some with chiding and brawling are made weary of the world, as Socrates and
others: Socrates when his wife did chide and brawle, would go out of the house
till all were quiet again; but because he would not scold with her again, it
grieved her the more; for on a time she watched his going out, and threw a
chamber pot out of a window on his head. Ha, ha, quoth he, I thought after all
this thunder there would come rain.

There is an history makes mention of one named Annynious, who invited a
friend of his to go home with him to supper; but when he came home, he found
his wife chiding and brawling with her maidens, where at his guest was very
much discontented. Annynious turning to him, said. Good Lord how impatient art
thou? I have suffered her these twenty years, and can not thou abide her two
hours? by which means he caused his wife to leave chiding and laughed out the
matter.

There is no woman but either she has a long tongue, or a longing tooth, and
they are two ill neighbors, if they dwell together: for the one will lighten
thy purse, if it be still pleased, and the other will waken thee from thy
sleep, if it be not charmed. Is it not strange of what kind of metal a
woman's tongue is made of? that neither correction can chastise, nor fair
means quiet: for there is a kind of venom in it, that neither by fair
means nor foul they are to be ruled. All beasts by man are made tame, but a
woman's tongue will never be lame; it is but a small thing, and seldom seen,
but it is often heard, to the terror and utter confusion of many a man.

Therefore, as a sharp bit curbes a froward horse, even so a cursed woman must
be roughly used: but if women could hold their tongues, then many times men
would hold their hands. As the best metlted blade is mixed with iron, even so
the best woman that is, is not free from faults: the goodliest gardens are
notfree from weeds, no more is the best nor the fairest woman from ill deeds.

He that uses troth to tell,
May blamed be, though he say well.
If thou be young, marry not yet,
If thou be old, thou will have more wit;
For young men's wives will not be taught,
And old men's wives are good for naught.
When he that for a woman strives by law,
Shall strive like a cox-comb, and prove but a daw.
Then buy not thou with overmuch cost,
The thing which yields but labor lost.
Diverse beasts, and foul, by nature have more strength in one part of the body
then in another, as the Eagle in the beak, the Unicorn in the horn, the Bull
in the head, the Bear in his arms, the Horse in his breast, the Dog in his
teeth, the Serpent in his tail: but a woman's chief strength is in her tongue;
the Serpent has not so much venom in his tail, as she has in her tongue;
and as the Serpent never leaves hissing and stinging, and seeking to do
mischief: even so, some women are never well, except they be casting out
venom with their tongues, to the hurt of their husbands or of their
neighbors; therefore he that will disclose his secrets to a woman, is worthy
to have his hair cut with Samson; for, if thou vnfoldest any thing of secret
to a woman, the more thou chargest her to keep it close, the more she will
seem as it were to be with child till she have revealed it amongst her
gossips; yet if one should make doubt of her secrecy, she would seem angry,
and say, I am no such light huswife of my tongue, as they whose secrets lie at
their tongues ends, which flies abroad so soon as they open their mouths;
therefore fear not to disclose your secrets to me, for I was never touched
with any stayne of my tongue in all my life; nay, she will not stick to
swear that she will tread it under foot, or bury it under a stone: yet for
all this, believe her not, for every woman has one especial gossip at the
least, which she does love and affect above all the rest, and unto her she
runs with all the secrets she knows.

There is an history making mention of one Lyas, whom King Amasis commanded to
go into the market, and to buy the best and profitablest meat he could get;
and he bought nothing but tongues; the King asked him the reason why he bought
no other meat, who made this answer, I was commanded to buy the best meat, and
from the tongue came many good and profitable speeches; then the king sent him
again, and bade him buy the worst and vnprofitablest meat: and he likewise
bought nothing but tongues, the King again asked him the reason, from nothing
(said he) comes worse venom, then from the tongue, and such tongues must
women have.

Roman history makes mention of one of the chief governors of Rome, that
had a son, whose name was Papirius, whose father took him with him to the
Councell-house, that thereby he might learn wisdom, wishinge him withal to
keep their secrets: his mother was diverse times asking of the boy what they
did at the Counsaile-house, and what the cause was of their often meeting; one
a time young Papirius fearing to displease his father, and hoping to satisfy
his mother told her this, Mother (said he) there is hard hold amongst them
about making of a law, that every man shall have two wives; or every woman two
husbands and so far as I can perceive, it is likely to be concluded upon, that
every man shall have two wives.

The next day, when his father and he were gone to the Counsaile-house, she
bestirred her self, and got most of the chief women of the City together, and
told them what a law was like to be made, if it were not prevented: and so to
the Counsaile-house they went a great flock of them: but when they came in,
the Governors were all amazed, and asked the cause of their coming? and one
of the women having leave to speak, said thus; Whereas you are about to make
a law, that every man shall have two wives, consider with yourselues what
unquietness and strife thereby will arise: but (said she) it were better that
one woman should have two husbands, that if the one were on business abroad,
the other might be at home. Now when the Governors heard this speech, they
maruailed whereupon it should arise? then young Papirius requested that he might
speak, who presently resolved them the cause of the women's coming, so they
greatly commended the boy, and laughed the women to scorn.

Here thou may perceive by a taste, what wine is in the butt: if the Dragons
head be full of poison, what venom then (think you) lurketh in the tail? All
this is but to tell thee of the doubts and dangers that come by marriage, yet I
would not have all men fear to lie in the grass, because a Snake lies there,
nor all men fear to go to Sea, because some men are drowned at Sea, neither
do I warrant al men to fear to go to their beds because many die in their
beds: then marry a Gods name, but again and again take heed to the choice of
thy wife.

Marry not for beauty without virtue, nor choose for riches without good
conditions. Solomon amongst many other notable sentences fit for this purpose,
says, that a fair woman without discreet manners, is like a gold ring in a
swines snowte? and if thou marriest for wealth, then thy wife many times will
cast it in thy dish saying, that of a beggar she made thee a man: again, if
thou marriest for beauty and above thy calling, thou must not only bear with
thy wives folly, but with many unhappy words, for she will say, she was blinded
in fancying thee: for she might have had Captain such a one, or this Gendeman,
or that, so that thou shall never need to crave a foul word at her hands in
seven years, for thou shall have enough without asking; besides, I fear me
thou will be better headed then wedded, for she will make thee wear an Ox
feather in thy cap; yet he which has a fair wife will adventure on a thousand
infamies, only in hope to keep her in the state of an honest woman; but if
she be ill given, do what thou can, break thy heart and bend thy study
never so much, yet all will not serve, thou may let her go all hours of
the night, she will never meet with a worse then her self, except she meet
with the devil himself.

Therefore yet once more I advise thee in the choice of thy wife, to have a
special regard to her qualities and conditions before thou shake hands or
iumpe a match with her; Also inquire and mark the life and conversation of her
Parents, let the old Proverb put thee in mind hereof, that an evil Bird
lays an ill Egg, the Cat will after her kind, an ill Tree cannot bring
forth good fruit, the young Crab goes crooked like the Damme, the young Cock
croweth as the old, and it is a very rare matter to see children tread out of
the paths of their Parents. He that comes into a Fair to buy a horse, will
prye into every part to see whether he be sound of wind and limb, and
without crack or flaw, and whether his breeding were in a hard soil, or
whether he be well paced, and likewise he will have a care that his horse shall
have all outward marks which betoken a good horse, yet with all the cunning he
has, he may be deceived; but if he prove a Jade, he may put him away at the
next Fair.

But if in choice of thy wife thou be deceived, as many men are, thou must
stand to thy word which thou made before the whole Parrish, which was, to
take her for better or worse; for there is no refusing, she will stick to
thee as close as a saddle to a horses back, and if she be frowardly given,
then she will vex thee night and day.

Amongst the quietest couples that are, yet household iars will arise, but yet
such quarrels which happen in the day, are often quallified with kisses in the
night; but if it be not so ended, their thirst will go forward like the
carriage which is drawn between two horses, tail to tail, and if she cannot
revenge her self with her tongue, nor with her hands, nor with conuaying thy
goods, yet she will pay thee home privately; for if thou strike with thy
sword, she will strike with the scabard; choose not the rapier by his ringing,
nor thy wife by her singing; for if thou do, thou may be very well
deceived in both, for thy rapier may prove a gad, and thy wife but little
better.

Now if thou ask me how thou should choose thy wife? I answer, that thou
have the whole world to make choice, and yet thou may be deceived. An
ancient father being asked by a young man how he should choose a wife, he
answered him thus, When thou see a flock of maidens together, hudwinke thy
self fast, and run amongst them, and look which thou chasest, let her be
thy wife: the young man told him, that if he went blindfolded, he might be
deceived: and so thou may (quoth the old man) if thy eyes were open; for in
the choice of thy wife, thou must not trust thy own eyes, for they will
deceive thee, and be the cause of thy woe: for she may seem good whose waste
is like a wand, or she which has a spider fingered hand, or she which on her
tiptoes still does stand, and never read but in a golden book, nor will not be
caught but with a golden hook; or such a one as can stroke a beard, or look a
head, and of every flea make her self afraid if one had a spring, such a
wench would make him a beggar if he were half a King: then this is no bargain
for thee. But hark a little further: the best time for a young man to marry,
is at the age of twenty and five, and then to take a wife of the age of
seventeen years, or thereabout, rather a maid then a widow; for a widow is
framed to the conditions of another man, and can hardly be altered, so that thy
pains will be double: for thou must unlearn a widow, and make her forget and
forgo her former corrupt and disordered behavior, the which is hardly to be
done: but a young woman of tender years is flexible and bending, obedient and
subject to do any thing, according to the will and pleasure of her husband.

And if thy state be good, marry near home, and at leisure; but if thy state
be weak and poor, then to better thy self after enquiry made of her wealth
and conditions, go far off, and dispatch it quickly, for doubt lest tattling
speeches, which commonly in these cases run betwixt party and party, and
break it off, even then when it is come to the vp-shot: but as I have already
said, before thou put thy foot out of doors, make diligent enquiry of her
behavior; for by the market-folke thou shall hear how the market goes: for
by enquiry thou shall hear whether she be wise, virtuous, and kind, wearing
but her own proper hair, and such garments as her friends estate will
afford, or whether she love to keep within the house, and to the servants
have a watchful eye, or if she have a care when to spend, and when to spare,
and to be content with what God does send, or if she can shed no kind of
unstained tears, but when just cause of hearty sorrow is, and that in wealth
and woe, in sickness and in health, she will be all alike, such a wife will,
make thee happy in thy choice.

Although some happen on a deuilish and unhappy women, yet al men do not so,
and such as happen ill it is a warninge to make them wise, if they make a
second choice, not that all other shall have the like fortune, the sun
shines upon the good and bad, and many a man happens sooner on a shrew then
a ship: Some thrive by dicing, but not one in an hundredth, therefore dicing is
ill husbandry, some thrive by marriage, and yet many are undone by marriage, for
marriage is either the making or marring of many a man, and yet I will not say
but amongst dust there is Pearl found, and in hard rocks Dyamonds of great
value, and so amongst many women there; are some good, as that gracious and
glorious Queen of all womankinde, the Virgin Mary, the mother of al bliss:
what won her honor, but an humble mind, and her pains and love unto our
Savior Christ.

Sara is commended for the earnest love that she bare to her husband, not only
for calling him Lord, but for many other quallities: Also Susanna for her
chastity, and for creeping on her knees to please her husband, but there are
meaner histories which makes mention of many others, as that of Demetryes how
that she was content to run Lackey by her husbands side.

Likewise Lucretia, for the love and loyalty, that she bare to her husband,
being unkindly abused by an unchaste lecher against her will, she presently flew
her self in the presence of many, rather then she would offer her body again
to her husband being but one time defiled.

It is recorded of an Earl called Guncalles, that upon the Kings displeasure
was committed to prison, and his wife having liberty to visit him in prison,
on a time she caused him to put off his apparel, and to put on hers, and so
by that means got out by the Porter, and she remained in prison; and so by
this means he escaped the angry rage of his Prince, and afterward his wife
was delivered also.

Likewise it was no small love that Artymenes bare to her husband; for after
his death she built such a famous Sepulcher (and bestowed the greatest part of
her wealth thereon) in so much as at this day it is called one of the seven
great wonders of the world.

Also Pliny makes mention of a Fisherman which dwelt near unto the Sea side,
and he fell sick of an incurable disease, by which means he endured such
torment and pain, that it would have grieved any creature to behold him; his
careful and loving wife labored and traveled far and near to procure his
health again, but at last seeing all means in vain, she brake out with him
in these words: Death at one time or another will come, and therefore rather
then you should any longer endure this miserable life, I am content that both
of us prevent death before he come: so this poor grieved man did yield to her
counsel, and they went forth to the top of an exceeding high Rock, and there
this woman bound her self fast to her husband, and from thence casting
themselves down, ended their lives together.

Now I do not commend this death to be godly, although it showed great love in
the woman: no doubt but the King of Ayra had a very kind and loving wife as
shall appear, for when Alexander the great had deprived him of the greatest
part of his kingdom, yet he bare it out very patiently with a valiant and
manly courage, and without any show of outward grief at all: but when news
was brought him that his wife was dead, he then most grievously brake into
tears, and wept bitterly, and withal he said, that the loss of his whole
Kingdom should not have grieved him so much, as the death of his wife.

It is also recorded of Alexander, that at the death of his wife he made such a
sorrowful kind of speech for her, saying, Death were kind if he took nothing
but that which offends; but he has taken her away which never offended. Oh
death, thou have bereaved me of the better part of my life.

It is also said of Valerius Maximus, that he on a time finding two Serpents in
his bedchamber, being strangely amazed thereat, he demanded of the
South-sayers what it meaned? and they answered him, That of necessity he must
kill one of them; and if he killed the male, then he himself must first die;
and if the female, then his wife should die before him: and because he loved
his wife better then himself, he most grievously made choice of the male, and
killed him first, and shortly after he dyed, leaving his wife a widow.

Such a kind fool to his wife was Adam; for he was forbidden on pain of
death, not to eat of the tree of good and evil, yet for all that, Adam
notwithstanding, to gratify his wives kindness, and for love he bare her,
refused not to hazard his life by breach of that commandment.

But because in all things there is a contrary, which shows the difference
betwixt the good and the bad, even so both of men and women there are contrary
sorts of behavior: if in thy choice thou happen on a good wife, desire not to
change, for there is a Proverb faith, Seldom comes a better. And there is
none poorer then those that have had many wives. Thou may bear a good
affection toward thy wife, and yet let her not know it: thou may love her
well, and yet not carry her on thy back: a man may love his house well, and
yet not ride on the ridge: love thy wife, and speak her fair, although thou
do but flatter her: for women love to be accounted beautiful, and to be
mistresses of many maids, and to live without controlement, and kind words
as much please a woman, as any other thing whatsoever: and a man's chiefest
desire should be first the grace of God, a quiet life, and an honest wife, a
good report, and a friend in store; and then what need a man to ask any more?

Saint Paul says those which marry do well, but he also says, those which
marry not do better; but yet also he says, that it is better to marry then
to burn in lust. A merry companion being asked by his friend, why he did not
marry, he made this answer, and said; That he had been in Bedlam two or
three times, and yet he was never so mad to marry; and yet there is no joy nor
pleasure in the world which may be compared to marriage, so the parties are of
near equal years, and of good qualities, then good fortune and bad is
welcome to them, both their cares are equal, and their joys equal, come what
will all is welcome, and all is common betwixt them, the husband does honor
and reverence her, and if he be rich he commits all his goods to her
keeping, and if he be poor, and in adversity, then he bears but the one
half of the grief, and furthermore she will comfort him with all the
comfortable means she can devise, and if he will stay solitary in his house,
she will keep him company, if he will walk into the fields, why she will go
with him, and if he be absent from home, she sigheth often, and wishes his
presence, being come home, he finds content sitting smiling in every corner
of his house, to give him a kind and a hearty welcome home, and she receives
him with the best and greatest joy that she can: Many are the joys and sweet
pleasures in marriage, as in our children, being young, they play, prattle,
laugh and show us many pretty toys to move us to mirth and laughter, and when
they are bigger grown, and that age or poverty has afflicted the Parents,
then they show the duty of children in relieuing their old aged parents with
what they can shift for, and when their parents are dead, they bring them to
the earth from whence they came.

Yet now consider on the other side, when a wrinckled and toothlesse woman
shall take a beardlesse boy (a short tale to make of it) there can be no liking
nor loving between such contraries, but continual strife and debate, so
likewise when matches are made by the Parents, and the dowry told and paid
before the young couple have any knowledge of it, and so many times are forced
against their minds, fearing the rigor and displeasure of their parents, they
often promise with their mouths that which they refuse with their hearts.

Also if a man marry a wife for fair looks without dowry, then their love will
soon wax cold, insomuch that they use them not like wives, but rather like
kitchinstuffe, whereas those which marry rich wives, they have always
something to be in love withal. It is a common thing now a days, that fair
women without riches find more lovers then husbands.

Choose not a wife too fair, nor too foul, nor too rich: for if she be fair,
every one will be catching at her, and if she be too foul, a man will have no
mind to love her which no body likes, and if too rich thou think to marry
with one which thou meanest to make thy companion, thou shall find her a
commanding Mistress; so that riches causes a woman to be proud, beauty makes
her to be suspected, and hard favored makes her to be hated. Therefore choose
a wife young, well borne, and well brought up, reasonable rich, and indifferent
beautiful, and of a good wit and capacity: also in choice of a wife, a man
should note the honesty of the parents, for it is a likelihood that those
children which are virtuously brought up will follow the steps of their
parents, but yet many a tree is spoiled in the hewing, there are some which
have but one only daughter, and they are so blinded with the extreme love
that they bear her, that they will not have her hindered of her will
whatsoever she desires; so suffering her to live in all wanton pleasure and
delicacy, which afterwads turns to be the cause of many inconveniences.

Now the Father before he marry his daughter, is to sift thoroughly the
qualities; behavior, and life of his son in law; for he which meets with a
civil and an honest son in law, gets a good son, and he which meereth
with an ill one, casts away his daughter.

The husband must provide to satisfy the honest desires of his wife, so that
neither necessity nor superfluity be the occasion to work her dishonor: for
both want and plenty, both ease and disease makes some women oftentimes
unchaste: and again, many times the wife seeing the husband take no care for
her, making belike this reckoning that no body else will care for her, or
desire her: but to conclude this point, she only is to be accounted honest,
who having liberty to do amiss, yet does it not.

Again, a man should thus account of his wife, as the only treasure he enjoys
upon earth, and he must also account that there is nothing more due to the
wife, then the faithful, honest, and loving company of the husband, he ought
also in sign of love to impart his secrets and counsel unto his wife, for
many have found much comfort and profit by taking their wives counsel; and if
thou impart any ill hap to thy wife, she lightneth thy grief, either by
comforting thee lovingly, or else in bearing a part thereof patiently. Also if
thou epsy a fault in thy wife, thou must not rebuke her angerly or
reprochfully, but only secretly betwixt you two, always remembering that thou
must neither chide nor play with thy wife before company, those that play and
dally with them before company, they do thereby set other men's teeth on edge,
and make their wives the less shamefaste.

It behooves the married man always to show himself in speech and countenance
both gentle and amiable; for if a woman of modest behavior sees any gross
inciuility in her husband, she does not only abhor it, but also thinks
with her self, that other men are more discreet, and better brought up,
therefore it stands him upon to be civil and modest in his doings, lest he
offend the chaste thoughts of his wife, to whose liking he ought to conform
himself in all honest and reasonable things, and to take heed of every thing
which may mislike her.

Why some women love their lovers better then their husbands; the reason is,
the lover in the presence of his Lady is very curious of his behavior, that he
uses no unseemly gestures, whereby there may no suspicion of jealousy or any
exception be taken by any thing he does: it behooves every woman to have a
great regard to her behavior, and to keep her self out of the fire, knowing
that a woman of suspected chastity lives but in a miserable case, for there is
but small difference by being naught, and being thought naught, and when she
hears other women ill spoken of, let her think in her mind what may be
spoken of her; for when a woman has gotten an ill name, whether it be
deservedly or without cause, yet she shall have much ado to recover again
her honor and credit thereof: let a woman avoid so much as may be the
company of a woman which has an ill name, for many of them endeavor by their
evil fashions and dishonest speech, to bring others to do as they do, and
many of them wish in their hearts that all women were like unto themselves: it
may be said of many women that the feathers are more worth then the birds;
therefore it behooves every woman to behave her self so sober and chaste in
countenance and speech, that no man may be so bold as to assail her: for
commonly Castles, if they come once to parlie, are at point to yield; therefore
if a woman by chance be set upon, let her make this answer, When I was a
maid, I was at the disposition of my parents, but now I am married, I am at the
pleasure of my husband, therefore you were best speak to him, and to know his
mind what I shall do; and if her husband be out of the way, let her always
behave herself as if he were present.

Also a woman may consider, if her husband be choleric and hasty, she must
overcome him with mild speech, and if he chide she must hold her peace, for
the answer of a wise woman is silence, and she must stay to utter her mind
until he be appeased of his fury, and at quiet, for if women many times would
hold their tongues they might be at quiet. There was a very angry couple
married together, and a friend being with them at supper, asked them how they
could agree together being both so froward and testy: the good man made him
this answer, When I am angry my wife bears with me, and when she is angry I
bear with her, for with what heart can a man so much as touch a hair of his
wives head? (I mean rigorously) for the husband ought to rebuke her with
words secretly, and seek to reform her by good counsel, he ought to lay
before her the shame of ill doing, and the praise of well doing, if this will
not serve, yet he ought rather patiently to forbear her, then rigorously to
beat her, for she is flesh of his flesh and there is no man so foolish to hurt
his own flesh, a man ought to be a comforter of his wife, but then he ought
not to be a tormenter of her for with what face can a man embrace that body
which his hands have battered and bruised? or with what heart can a woman love
that man which can find in his heart to beat her?

Also when a man finds a painful and a careful woman, which knows when to
spend, and when to spare, and to keep the house in good order, then the
husband will not deny such a wife any necessary thing belonging to the house:
but if she be a light huswife who lives without doing of any thing, without
caring for husband, children or servants, or any other thing belonging to the
house, thereby showing, although her body be in the house, yet her mind is
abroad, which redowndeth to her shame, and to her husbands great hinderance,
for when the Mistress is occupied in vanity, the servants care less for her
profit, but look to their own, for while the Mistress plays, the maiden
strayeth.

But these men are to be laughed at, who having a wise and a sufficient wife to
do all the work within doors, which belongs for a woman to do, yet the
husband will set hens abroad, season the pot, and dress the meat, or any the
like work which belongs not to the man. Such husbands many times offend
their wives greatly, and they wrong themselves; for if they were employed
abroad in matters belonging to men, they would be the more desirous being come
home to take their case, then to trouble their wives and servants in meddling
with their matters, for the rule and government of the house belongs to the
wife.

And he that has a wife of his own, and goes to another woman, is like a
rich thief which will steal when he has no need.

Amongst all the creatures that God has created, there is none more subject to
misery then a woman, especially those that are fruitful to bear children, for
they have fearce a months rest in a whole year, but are continually overcome
with pain, sorrow and fear, as indeed the danger of childbearing must needs
be a great terror to women, which are counted but weak vessels, in respect of
men, and yet it is supposed that there is no disease that a man indureth, that
is one half so grievous or paineful as childbearing to a woman: Let it be the
toothache, gout or collicke; nay if a man had all these at once, yet nothing
comparable to a woman's pain in her travel with child.

Now if thou like not my reasons to expel love, then thou may try Ouids
art, who prescribes a salve for such a sore; for he counsels those which feel
this horrible heat, to cool their flames with herbs which are cold of
nature, as Rue and Lettis, and other herbs too long to recite: also he says,
thou should abstain from excess of meat and drink, for that prouokes thy
mind greatly to lust: also to hunt, to hawke, to shoot, to bowl, to run, to
wrestle, and some other play, for this will keep thy mind from thinking of
lust: also shun slothfulnes and idleness, for these are the only nurses of
love, eschew melancholy or sadness, and keep merry company, turn thy eyes
from the place where bewitching spirits are, lest the remembrance do
increase, and rub thy galled mind: also to eschew the place where thou did
first feel the fire that burns thy mind with such unquiet thoughts.
Likewise, says he, beware thou do not twice peruse the secret flattering
letters of thy supposed friendly joy; for if thou do not refuse the often view
thereof, it will much increase thy grief, dolor and annoy: use no talk of
her whom thou love, nor once name her; for that will increase thy care, by
thinking in thy mind, that thou beholdest her face: but some are persuaded
that no rules of reason can assuage this grief, for love is lawless, and
obeyes no law, no nor yet no counsel can persuade, nor take effect, or subdue
the affection of his bewitched spirits. Furthermore, Ovid prescribes other
reasons to expel the heat of love for where love is settled, the lovers are
many times hindered of their purpose: sometimes for want of friends consent, or
distance of place; then and in such a case, his counsel is to love two or
three, for love being so divided, makes the love of one the less thought upon:
or else, says he, satisfy thy lust upon some other dame, for it will also
help to wear the former love out of thy mind. Lo thus Ovid shot, but yet
he mist the mark, not for want of learning, but for want of grace, for grace
subdues and treades all vices under foot, although mortal means does
prescribe diverse other diets to waste the heat of loves desire, as long
absence from the place where thy liking lives, for the coals of company does
kindle and heat the heart, that with absence would be void of harm, for
absence does quallifie that fire, and cool the minds of those which many
times the company of wantons does warm; for he which does not shun the place
where Venus in her glory sits, has no care of himself, but suffers her to
supprize his wits.

The Bearebayting, or the vanity of widows: choose you whether.
WOe be unto that unfortunate man that matcheth himself unto a widow; for a
widow will be the cause of a thousand woes: yet there are many that do wish
themselves no worse matched then to a rich widow; but thou do not know what
griefs thou ioynest with thy gains; for if she be rich, she will look to
govern, and if she be poor, then art thou plagued both with beggary and
bondage: again, thy pains will be double, in regard of him which marries
with a maid; for thou must unlearn thy widow, and make her forget her former
corrupt and disordered behavior, the which if thou take upon thee to do, thou
had even as good undertake to wash a Blackamore white; for commonly widows
are so froward, so waspish, and so stubborn, that thou can not wrest them
from their wills, and if thou think to make her good by stripes, thou must
beat her to death. One having married with a froward widow, she called him
thief and many other unhappy names; so he took her, and cut the tongue out
of her head; but she ever afterward would make the sign of the gallows with
her fingers to him.

It is seldom or never seen that a man marries with a widow for her beauty,
nor for her personage, but only for her wealth and riches; and if she be rich
and beautiful withal, then thou matchest thy self to a she-Deuill, for she
will go like a Peacocke, and thou like a Woodcocke; for she will hide her money
to maintain her pride: and if thou at any time art desirous to be merry in
her company, she will say thou art merry, because thou have gotten a wife that
is able to maintain thee, where before thou wast a beggar, and had nothing:
and if thou show thy self sad, she will say, thou art sad because thou can
not bury her, thereby to enjoy that which she has: if thou make provision to
fare well in thy house, she will bid thee spend that which thou broughtest thy
self.

If thou show thy self sparing, she will say thou shall not pinch her of that
which is her own, and if thou do any thing contrary to her mind, she will
say, her other husband was more kind: if thou chance to dine from home, she
will bid thee go sup with thy Harlots abroad: if thou go abroad and spend any
thing before thou come home, she will say a beggar I found thee, and a
beggar thou meanest to leave me: if thou stay always at home, she will say
thou art happy that have gotten a wife that is able to maintain thee idle: if
thou carue her the best morsel on the table, though she take it, yet she
will take it scornefully, and say, she had a husba^nd that would let her cut
where she liked her self.

And if thou come in well disposed, thinking to be merry, and entreating her
with fair words, she will call thee dissembling hypocrite, saying, thou
speak me fair with thy tongue, but thy heart is on thy minions abroad. Lo
these are the frantic tricks of froward widows, they are neither well full
nor fasting, they will neither go to Church nor stay at home, I mean in
regard of their impatient minds; for a man shall never be quiet in her sight,
nor out of her sight, for if thou be in her sight, she will vex thee as before
said; and out of her sight thy own conscience will torment and trouble thy
mind to think on the purgatory which perforce thou must endure, when thou
come home.

She will make Clubs trumpe, when thou have never a black card in thy hand,
for with her cruel tongue she will ring thee such a peale, that one would
think the Devil were come from Hell; besides this, thou shall have a brended
slut like a Hell-hagge, with a pair of pappes like a pair of dung-pots shall
bring in thy dinner, for thy widow will not trust thee with a wench that is
hansome in thy house: now if that upon just occasion thou throwest the platters
at the maids head, seeing thy meat brought in by such a slutte, and so
sluttishly dressed, then will thy widow take pepper in the nose, and stamp and
stare, and look so sour, as if she had come but even then from eating of
Crabs, saying, If thou had not married with me thou would have been glad
of the worst morsel that is here: then thou again replying, say, If I had
not been so mad, the Devil himself would not have had thee; and then without
cause thou blamest her of old age and of jealousy, and for hiding her money,
and for co^uaying away of her goods which thou have bought with the displeasure
of thy friends, and discredit to thy self, in regard of her years; then
again, she on the other side runs out to her neighbors, and there she
thundereth out a thousand injuries that thou do her, saying, my Corn he
sends to the Market, and my Cattle to the Fair; and look what he openly
finds, he takes by force, and what I hide secretly, he privily steals it
away, and plays away all my money at dice. Lo thus he consumes my
substance, and yet hates my person, no longer then I feed him with money, can
I enjoy his company, now he has that he sought for, he gives me nothing else
but froward answers, and foul usage, and yet, God knows, of pure love I
married him with nothing, but now his ill husbandry is like to bring to ruin
both me and my children: but now all this while she does not forget to tell of
her own good huswifery, saying, I sit working all day at my needle, or at my
distaffe, and he like an unthrift, and a whoremonger runs at random: thus
they are always stretching their debate upon the rack of vengeance.

Lo here is a life, but it is as wearisome as hell, for if you kiss in the
morning, being friends, yet ere noone ready to throw the house out at the
window. The Papists affirm, that Heaven is won by Purgatory, but in my mind
a man shall never come into a worse Purgatory then to be matched with a
froward widow. He that matcheth himself to a widow and three children,
matcheth himself to four thieves. One having married with a widow, it was his
luck to bury her, but not before he was sore vexed with her, for afterward
he lying on his deathbed, his friends exhorted him to pray unto God that his
soul might rest in Heaven, and he asked them this question, whether (said he)
do you think my wife is gone? and they said unto him, no doubt but that your
wife is gone to Heaven before you, he replied, I care not whether I go, so I
go not where my wife is, for fear I meet with her and be vexed with her as I
have been heretofore.

Another having married with a widow, being one day at a sermon, heard the
Preacher say, whosoever will be saved, let him take up his cross and follow
me; this mad fellow after Sermon was ended, took his wife upon his back, and
came to the Preacher and said; here is my cross, I am ready to follow thee
whether thou will.

Another having married with a widow which showed her self like a Saint
abroad, but a Devil at home; a friend of her husbands told him, that he had
gotten him a good, still and a quiet wife: yea marry, quoth the married man,
you see my shoe is fair and new, but yet you know not where it pincheth me.

Another merry companion having married with a widow, and carrying her over
the Sea into France, there suddenly arose a great storm, in so much that they
were all in danger of drowning; the Master of the ship called unto the
mariners, and bade the^ take and throw over board all the heauiest goods in the
ship; this married man hearing him say so, he took his widow, and threw her
ouer-boord; and being asked the reason why he did so, he said, that he never
felt any thing in all his life that was so heavy to him as she had been.

Another having married with a widow, and within a while after they were
married, she went out into the garden, and there finding her husbands shirt
hang close on the hedge by her maids smock, she went presently and hanged her
self for a jealous conceit that she took, and a merry fellow asked the cause
why she hanged her self, and being told that it was for jealousy: I would
said he that all trees did bear such fruit.

Thou may think that I have spoken enough concerning Widows; but the
further I run after them, the further I am from them; for they are the sum
of the seven deadly sins, the Fiends of Satan, and the gates of Hell. Now
me thinks I hear some say unto me, that I should have told them this lesson
sooner, foe too late comes medicine when the patient is dead; even so too
late comes counsel when it is past remedy, but it is better late then never,
for it may be a warning to make others wise.

But why do I make so long a harvest of so little corn? seeing the corn is
bad, my harvest shall cease; for so long as women do ill, they must not think
to be well spoken of; If you would be well reported of, or kept like the Rose
when it has lost the color, then you should smell sweet in the bud as the
Rose does, or if you would be tasted for old wine, you should be sweet at the
first like a pleasant Grape, then should you be cherished for your courtesy,
and comforted for your honesty, so should you be preserved like the sweet Rose,
and esteemed of as pleasant wine, but to what purpose do I go about to
instruct you know: ing that such as counsel the devil can never amend him of
his evil.

And so praying those which haue-already made their choice, and seen the
troubles, and felt the torments that are with women, to take it merrily, and to
esteem of this book only as the toys of an idle head.

Nor I would not have women murmur against me for that I have not written more
bitterly against men; for it is a very hard winter when one Wolf eats
another, and it is also an ill bird that defiles her own nest; and a most
unkind part it were for one man to speak ill of another.

FINIS.

