AN APOLOGY FOR CHRISTOPHER SYMS Gent. and his way and Method of teaching, the
effect thereof, and his end therein, against many foul and false Aspersions.

Wherein and whereby is averred and maintained that all persons, who can see,
hear and speak, may be easily taught to read.

And that all Children, which can read, may be easily taught to understand the
Latin Speech.

Vide, Fide. printer's or publisher's device

Printed in Anno 1633.

An Apology, for Christopher Syms Gent. and his way and method of teaching, the
effects thereof, and his end therein, etc.
SCinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus:
So it was in the Poets time, so is now, and so it will be, when I am gone, and
sleep with my Fathers. Yet while I am broad waking in this lyncean eye sighted
age, wherein every man is apt to be peeping and spying, above, beneath, and
round about another, especially a stranger, (such persons for the most, part
being the busiest, who have the narrowest eyes both in apprehension and
judgment) the peircing glaunces of some shallow, rash, preiudicate, uncertain
and slanderous censures, darted at me, and my practice in teaching, either from
ignorant, or malevolent aspects, or both, enforce from me a reflection, and
constrain me to say somewhat more certainly for both against them: wherein if
I should endeavor to avoid the various passions, and ungrounded censures of
such persons, who are not endued with ability to judge of the dispositions of
minds, or the qualities and ends of works and actions; I might as justly draw
on my self the censure of weakness, folly, and madness, as mine honest
artificial endeavors have undeservedly and unjustly pulled upon me the
imputation of impostor, cheator conjurer, and crochetter to get money; and that
I would get some money in my purse and be gone; that when my slender skill had
showed some real effect, it would not hold, that the children whom I have
taught, can do nothing, but whilst I am present, and such other fantastical
censures, I know not what. These giddy indiscreet censures doubtless have
proceeded from persons ignorant of any cause; who like young and ill sented
hounds not knowing their game run on in the chase, and spend their mouths for
company. Let them bark: Quibusdam canibus sic innanatum est latrare, ut non
pro feritate, sed pro consuetudine latrent: as their good words cannot much
benefit, so their evil words will do little hurt. For, Quicquid faciunt, ex
morbo faciunt, non ex judicio, they extol and praise (for the most part) the
unworthy, and cry down and condemn the deserving and innocent; faciunt quod
solent, non quod mereor, male de me loquuntur homines, sed mali and maniaci;
they will be meddling. But my drift and scope is, not to give satifaction to
such: it were a vain, endless, and would be a fruitless labor. Rumor vulgi
attonitus; I leave them to their own folly and madness, and I am content to
pass by, and slide away as a strange dog does through a town or street, when
every domestic curre has a snap at him. Such like is humane courtesy: and
more envious, inhumane, and barbarous are the English to their own countrymen,
then other nations: I am not glad, that I can speak it. Moverer autem si
Marcus Cato, si Laelius saepiens, si alter Cato, si duo Scipiones ista
loquerentur de me. Those Laelij, those Scipioes, those Curij, those Catoes, who
attribute nothing to the vulgar idols, opinion and fame, envy and detraction,
which for the most part carries all now; who never entertain a preiudicate
opinion, either of persons, or of things; who never vent a rash censure without
mature deliberation upon events and issues of works, are the men whose good
esteem and good report I affect and seek, and that not for mine own sake
merely, but for the works sake chiefly, which I have in hand: the proof
whereof will maintain it self, to be worth respect and embracement of a
commonwealth; which shall with Gods help, if mine industry be accepted, benfit
the world, when I am gone, if the envious, quasi canis in praesepi, hinder not:
to prevent whose malice and opposition, it is very necessary by this way of
Apology, to stop the wide mouths of ignorant and envious detractors, besides
whom none will disallow the fitnes, and in some cases the necessity of
apologies and defenses; as in this subject of this mine apology, whereby I
doubt not, but in some measure to make it evidently appear, that my method and
experiment of teaching is of greater and better consequence, then to be
slighted, despised, or rejected: And I hope no teacher, no scholar, no man
disparaged thereby, although it proceed from a mean and obscure author, who
never sought employment by a si quis, nor glory out of other men's disgraces. If
the method were a trick or toy, that could not be conveyed to others, but must
vanish with my self, I would easily yield, it were of no value: but it is
otherwise, it may be continued to all posterity. It is as well the instruction
of children in the Latin language, as also in reading the English with more
alacrity, celerity, and facility, then formerly; the example whereof may be
followed in other languages. I am verily persuaded that few teachers have
hitherto otherwise delighted in that function, then as carriers, sailors,
bargemen, and the like do in their painful, hard, stormy and perilous
journeyes and voyages, which they undergo merely for the sustentation of
life. For mine own part, since I found the validity of the method, I never
took delight in any earthly thing, but in teaching, and should delight much
more, if I might be recompensed. As for profit, I suppose, that every man, who
knows nothing of my education, inclination, or mean qualification, can and
will say for me, that other more advantageous courses of life might have been
undertaken, if advancement or gain had been the object of mine undertaking:
And those, who do truly know me (I doubt not) will soon deliver their
opinion, it being required, that I am tam aulae, quam caulae mediocriter
adaptatus, and that I make not the profession my ultimum refugium as being
necessitous, and fit for nothing else, nor yet for that. Although it cannot be
denied, but that many unexpert men do so without controulment, in diverse
places, both in England and Ireland, whom the meaner sort of people, and some
who will not be so ranked, because they accept slender and base hyre, employ
and applaud, and let their children spin out time with them, until they have
gotten even as much skill as their teachers. Such a one could I point out in
this cities suburbs, who understands not the difference between e and ae
dipthong; as I can make appear under his own hand writing. It is an ordinary
practice in England, for men who have themselves no faculty in teaching, (to
the end they may raise unto themselves a liuelyhood,) to take into their houses
stipendary mercenaries, teachers of the Latin, and French, Musicians, Dancers,
etc. And one among the rest there is who has thereby gotten singular fame
spread far and near, who leaving an heroical (abusively so called) trade,
more gainefull, not so lawful, has by the encomiastick narration of friends,
drawn into his tuition the sons of many worthy persons: with what
proficiency they have come off, let them boast who found the success. Of the
danger that attends birds, who run too early from their nests, as the Patridge
and the Lapwing, I will say nothing. But little probability is there that any
good foundation of the Latin can be laid, when the instructers are often
changed, as in such a course without doubt they are: for every of them will
start for the better stipend, and oftentimes offenses on the one side or the
other causes separation. I my self knew one man in England, who set up the
trade, and within two years changed the master of his shop seven times, qui
ubique est, nusquam est; non venit vulnus ad cicatricem, ubi crebra medicamenta
tentantur. But I digress: Painful is the profession, if it be exercised with
diligence, as it ought: and yet thereof does arise little gain, love, thanks
or courtesy, from many unthankefull persons, who, if their children make good
progress and attain the end, attribute nothing to the teacher, but all to the
childs ingenuity, to time, and the book, falsely imagining, that there is no
Art in teaching, but only following, as they term it. And contrariwise if by
reason of natural defects, the teacher cannot infuse so much into their
children, as into others more acute, or if their children by reason of natural
deficiency of eyes or tongues be not able, when they are earnestly hastened, to
utter what they conceive, nor the parents endued with skill and patience to
extract it from their children, then the teacher must be blamed and rebuked,
and peradventure go unrewarded, the parents never considering natures
imperfections, and the imbecility of such capacityes, nor the tender care that
a wise teacher ought to take of such, least he do more hurt then good. Many
such have I here met with, who besides non-payment, after a good effect of mine
Art and industry upon wooden and leaden subjects both young and old, have
rewarded me with obloquy, railing, and detraction, and some with violence: yea,
where I did best and deserved most, I reaped Billinsgate friendship and
entertainment, and Pyecorner, and Picks-hatch farewell. In one place for forty
shillings I got a Box, but no money to put in a box: in another the husband
invited me, and the wife gave me a farewell, not Vsquebach for dough a doris,
not a cup, but a paile of hotewater on my head, when I was shutting the door
at my departure. Si quisquam huius procellae causam ulterius investigare
cupiat, ab archimagiro in culina sciscitetur: exinde enim aqua calefacta: sin
minus, lararij or acula petas, quae nemo, nisi praecentor ejus, explicare
poterit. To me it seems more a riddle, then this Latin sentence can be to
them, that know not the subject and members thereof, that a dignified Dame
should call me cheating knave, and that her Cavallier should smite me, when I
had given no offense, nor had gotten any money for a year and halfes labor;
but was rather cheated of my Art and industry: and that with as much more loss
of time, Art, and industry, her Gossip should scold at me, and scald me, no
cause of quarrel being known or declared, albeit it were demanded. When I
consider the parties, I admire not their properties kind charitable creatures,
who would rather, that I should perish, then they pay me the due reward of my
labors. Well yet there is a fourth thing, which might as much discourage me
from the prosecution of my profession, as the other three, great pains, small
gains, and base requital, that is, the slender and mean estimation the world
receives and holds of the professors, when it speaks according to its weak
judgment contemptuously, thus, he is but a Schoolmaster a Pedagoge. If any be
unworthy, men's unthankfulnes and want of judgment is the cause; for that they
make not better choice, nor will confer better salary upon those, who are more
worthy and more able. Surely they ought to be worthy: for upon the^ it rests,
whether the sons of the Nobles and Gentry get, and love learning, for they have
the seasoning of them, and a work of weight it is, and must be done in their
childhood, or never: and without all doubt the common wealth is much
endammaged, yea, and the Church suffers, when the Nobles be agrammati, and on
the contrary both flourish, when they be philomusi, and philologi. By these
precedent reasons it may appear to the judicious Reader, that I intend it to
be my greater glory to defend the work, then the workman. For what have I, who
am but a clod of clay, which I have not received from the giver of every good
and perfect gift? If then I have received a talent, I have together received a
charge, that I shall not hide that talent: and what is it being not
communicated? of the employment whereof my conscience informs me, that a
strict account will be exacted at that dreadful day, when every steward must
give a reckoning of his stewardship. If there were no more in it but morality,
I would not for virtues sake be telluris inutile pondus. The love of the
public likewise together with mine own delight may and does incite me: for
other encouragement have I none, neither would I do it; but because non nobis
nati sumus; and to the end, that the practice thereof might win credit to the
experiment for the contemplative demonstration only without the proof of
practice might worthily be exploded. Peradventure some of that rabble, whom I
mentioned before, whose derisions I contemn, and whose objections are not worth
the answering, will say, what fellow is this? And what great thing is this,
that needs this apology? And why was not this way of teaching (if there be
such a thing) found out in former ages, as well as now? And were not children
taught to read, and to understand the Latin speech, before this fellow was?
True; But many failed even in reading, and in the Latin, there were always as
many, or more deficients then proficients. Then I say, for the first part of
the work, the device and practice being wholly and merely invented by my
self, is a way, whereby any person young or old, acute or obtuse may be taught
to read with facility and delight, both to teacher and learner, to which little
memory is requisite, but a full pronuntiation is very necessary. By this method
a child of perfect speech may be made able to spell english truly and readily
whatsoever be proposed, syllable after syllable, the memory being not charged
with two at once within one quarter of a year; yea it may, it has been
effected within a month, and in less time. And does it not then necessarily
follow, that that child, who can give every letter howsoever transposed its
true sound must easily and speedily read, and that long before he be fit to
learn the Latin tongue, beginning at five years of age? Will any sensible
man deny it? It is a very plain and easy way and method, not far fetched, nor
much strained for, but therein a very little Art added to nature. For the
second, it is not merely mine own, but partly Mr Lilies: for he gave me the
hint thereof: Wherein if any man concur with me in science practick for the
common good, I repine not, but rather rejoice; because the experiment may be
more authentic by a twofold or triple cord. Howsoever cum capitis periculo, I
will maintain it to be such a way and method, whereby the most indocile and
obtuse child, whosoever he be, if animi compos, may within one quarter of a
year after he can read well, be made expert and perfect in the variation of
the Verb, as of all other parts declinable; yea to give English for latin, and
Latin for English readily and truly thorowout all Verbs whatsoever, the Verb
and his signification being given, and the child being supplied with the
preterperfect tense of the Indicative mood, until he have learned Mr Lilies
Rules to find out the same: and so consequently, forasmuch as the difficulty
and intricacy of the Latin consists in the infinitenes of the Verbs variety,
which is above one thousand in both voices, the different signs of the
Optative, Potentiall, and Subjunctive being compared, it will make every child,
who is animi compos, (as I said before) docile and capable of understanding the
Latin, and that within three or four years, and sometimes in much less
time: As for writing copiously, and speaking fluently, who knows not, that
much reading must furnish with words and phrase, and frequent speaking bring
facility and readiness of speech. Both which ways and methods are such, as when
they shall be laid open, every literate man will say, why did not I see this, as
well as he? and those men, who now envy, deride and scoff, and such others,
who plot, combine, and load me with detraction, and stir wormanish and worse
faction, will alter their opinions, and embrace my poor invention and
experiment: which in due time I will tender to reverend authority, teaching in
the mean time, none but the lawful Grammar.

The occasion of my study and exquisition to find out a more familiar and easy
way of teaching aprimordijs, then had formerly been received, was the
consideration of the tedious time of seven, eight, nine, yea ten years, (may I
say, no more) which was and is spent in teaching the Latin speech, and four,
five, and six in the way of reading, with much austerity and bitterness to the
great discouragement of children, before it can be brought to perfection; nay
yet after much toil on the teachers part, and torture of the children, many
as well the sons of the Nobility and Gentry, as of meaner persons fail, and
never attain what they go about, unless some more acute then the rest: and
many so imperctly taught to read, that when they come to learn the Latin, both
themselves and their teachers thorough their unreadines in reading, unless it
be first rectified, are much vexed; which produces no small obstacle to their
progress. And so by that means many good wits beaten out of heart, and
brought into hatred both of books and learning, yea and teacher too* and not
few, when grown up to good stature thorough the sharpenes of some teachers
driven into desperate courses. I can truly say that of diverse children brought
to me, some whereof were eight years old, some nine, some ten, some eleven,
some twelve, one fourteen, not all the Sons of common persons, nor such as had
been neglected, but had been formerly taught with care and cost, none could
read so much as meanly well, which my way would have made them do by that time
they had accomplished seven years of age, had they begun at five. And moreover
some of them, and some younger so affrighted and discouraged, that until I had
altered their temper with lenity and familiarity, they would quake and shake
and sweat, when they came to the business. How some of their parents and
friends have requited me, who craved not, nor expected my wages, till my work
was done, I will not now complain; let me only say, that many withdrew their
children from me surreptitiously to save their moneys, and permitted me not to
make appear what was done, lest I should have challenged what was due: And to
disgrace me yet further, when I had almost perfected the work for many of them,
for the matter of reading; they set up a fly upon the wheel, that presently
cried, what a dust have I stirred? when as the horse heels had stirred the
dust, before the fly settled on the coach-whell. Let them go on with their
giddines, avarice, and baseness, and let their own experience find, that
planta, quae saepius transfertur, non convalescit; that time will not be called
again, that there is Art in teaching, which may and can sharpen and quicken
hebetude, and help imperfect speech very much in infancy, before long custom
have confirmed it. What effect in the Latin my labors have produced
answereable to the efficacy, which I attribute to my Method, if any man
require an account, I appeal in the first place to the testimony of Master
William Langford Captain of his Majesty's Post Bark, and Master William Scot
his Majesty's Seaacher of his Port of Dublin, who within one month after I had
undertaken a child of Master Scots, who was my first Scholar but no acute
one, (as the issue will manifest now he is off from my method) heard the same
child being then half a year short of nine years of age, give Latin for
English, and English for Latin thoroughout a Verb chosen by one of them, and
it was expergiscor. Now because it little availed to tell of such beginnings,
unless it may appear, that they were seconded with like proceedings, and
because he was taken from me above half a year since, at the earnest suit of
the mother, quasi invito patre, when I had spent two years and a quarter upon
him, or little more, and for that I am not assured, that that man, to whose
instruction he was next committed, will either give me or him our dues, and
because I am well assured that he will not proceed with the like profit being
out of his first Method by reason of his hebetude and young years being but
eleven complete, momorie and judgment being not confirmed, and because much
womanish clamor has been throated out against me touching him, those of the
faction falsely surmizing him to be my Masterpiece, and that if he were taken
off, I were utterly supplanted, and quod salvus superest Artifex, It is
therefore expedient, that I show to what ripeness the Child was grown in our
two years, which was such, as he was able to read Tullyes Offices into English
at first sight, and then necessarily able to translate it, and when he had
translated it, to read it again into true Latin, having never committed any
one clause of the book to memory; he did often in the presence of diverse
persons, the Book being opened at adventure, read the Latin Testament into
English; he could likewise for short sentences, such like as Corderius has at
an instant, for English give true Latin: for proof hereof I could produce the
testimony of diverse Gentlemen, not all of the lowest rank, some whereof
took a view of the Childs ability accidentally, others at my request; because
I foresaw the cloud of future clamor and disgrace, wherewith I was like to be
sprinkled; it was long in rising, all the foreign and domestic winds met in
their chapel and consistory to blow it abroad. In the second place, that a
child of Mr George Badlyes in Damask street, did within six weeks after he
had entered upon the Introduction to Grammar, being then under the age of seven
years, vary the Verb exactly after the form aforesaid, I appeal to the
testimony of Master Roger Puttocke Minister of Gods word, and Master Badely
himself, who heard the Child do it in the presence of the Reverend Father in
God William Lord Bishop of Kilmore. Diverse other Children, and some
superannited, and despaired of, have attained the same ability within my time
limited a quarter of a year. Whether I report truth, it may easily be
examined. And I hope it may be believed that Mr Scots child had attained the
ability aforementioned, if it appear that Mr Badelyes child who is little
more then nine years old, have attained (and not he alone, but some others)
the same ability, within less time. I am almost afraid to relate it, lest it
should not be believed, but should beget more censures. Let him therefore that
desires to be best informed; come and satisfy his own ears, or let him bring
me a subject to work upon, and he shall well see, that whatsoever I have
affirmed, if my head lay at stake, shall by Gods assistance mangre the spite of
envy and detraction be performed, and should have been proved upon any one,
whom I undertook within my time limited, that is, two years for reading, and
four for the Latin, and upon acute ones in much less time, might I be
admitted to time and trial: In performance whereof my chiefest care has been,
is, and ever shall be, that by facility and encouragement I beget alacrity and
delight in all, but especially in the most way ward and obtuse, that at no time
they be daunted with pressure and austerity. If I should give answer to every
censure, I should swell into a volume. I will therefore omit all but one, and
let my life and labors clear me living, and my papers, when I am dead; and
that one is, it will not hold: I believe verily that young children will not go
on with the same facility, unless memory and judgment were confirmed, which
cannot be expected at nine or ten years of age: or unless the same method
might be prosecuted: yet I say had Mr Scots child continued in the way but one
year more, he had been fully confirmed. A comparison may be drawn from a
horse, his owner, and a rider to help me with moderat men, no cavillers. The
owner or master commits his horse (being a natural trotter) to a certain
rider, or an Artist, that can teach him to amble; he agrees at a price to have
it done; the rider undertaketh, goes on, brings the horse, so long as
himself rides him, to a good stroke, the horse over-reacheth a good space;
the owner observes it, and before the rider have settled and confirmed the
horse in his new pace, takes the horse out of his hands, whether out of
avarice to save his money, or curiosity and overmuch hastines, being overjoyed
with his horses pace, it matters not; but he dismisseth his rider, and rides
the horse himself, falsely supposing that then he can hold the horse to his
pace, as well as the rider: After a while the horse, by reason that the master
has not the same slight of hand for his carriage, is brought to a fluttering
and shuffling pace, and has lost all good pace. Can the rider be justly
blamed? or shall he be condemned to be no Artist? Such like is our case, until
the method be generally known. For those, that be so overly and proud, of and
in their own wits and judgments, who will not believe, that there can be such
an invention for the improvement of Art, either because it came not, nor yet is
come into their notion, or because it transcendeth their capacityes, or because
former ages had it not, nor will admit that any man's method can hold
equivalency with theirs, as if no man's conceit or invention could mount so high
a pitch as theirs, I refer such men to the study of Almanacks, out of which
they may learn to be such good Chronologists, as to prescribe time to two of
the rarest inventions, which the earth contains: the one is the Art of
Printing, the other, the terrible Engyne of the Gun and Cannon, and the violent
devouring matter thereto belonging, the Powder, which neither the first, nor
the second age of the world brought forth, nor the head of this, but even the
very tail. For it is not two hundred years since the invention of the one, and
not three since the invention of the other. Much might be said touching the
several methods, and the fruits and effects of them, as also touching the
necessity and dignity of teachers and schoolemasters, if they be such, as they
ought to be. But lest in saying more of either, I might seem to arrogate that
to my self, which will not be given or granted, I will only say of these, that
they ought to be men endued with Art, method, and discretion: art, to
understand what they teach; method and order, to teach it the right way, and to
bring it to the capacity of children, with as much facility as may be;
discretion to deal with children according to their constitutions and
capacities. As concerning the methods, and the fruits and effects thereof, let
the most intelligent caviller, give me answer to two questions. First, what is
the way and ground of reading? Is it any other, then to know the true sound of
every letter, how variously soever transposed in monosillable or polysillable,
and to divide polysillables rightly? and that skill being attained, is not the
ground and way of reading? What can be done or required more, but daily
practice? Secondly, what is the first and chief ground of Grammar? Is it not
the true variation of the declinable parts, whereof the Verb is the most
perplexed? and that skill being attained, is not the chief ground of grammar
attained? can true connection be made without true variation? What literate man
knows not, that the Verb in all languages is the basis of all, and that all
the other pa^ts be but dependants on it, for that no full sentence or ^^nce can
be spoken or written without a Verb expressed or understood. As I have said
before, so I say again, the true ground of either may be laid upon a competent
subject within a quarter of a year, and sometimes within less time: and then
what workman may not finish the work? I herefore I conclude thus, Dimidium
facti, qui been coepit, habet. And so I commit my slender invention and
practice, to the censure of the noble, generous and judicious, that they seeing
the fruit thereof may commend it to posterity. Then howsoever my pains has
not gotten payment of some people, my conscience shall get consolation, and I
shall confidently say at my dissolution, I have endeavored to keep a clear
conscience, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith henceforth is laid up for me. etc.

FINIS.
decorative device

