A Table concerning Christ our Advocate, and whether remission of sins once
obtained, can again be made frustrate, comprised in four propositions, and
fourteen Conclusions.
CHRIST is the Advocate of the elect John 17. Romans 8.
only, and (that) of all which have been from the beginning of the world, and
shall be to the end.

Aug. Tract. 41. in Ioh. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 15
2 Christ also is the propitiation only for the sins of the elect of the whole
world: therefore he is their Advocate only. So the Church of Smirna to all
the parishes, as Paul says; Christ did suffer for the salvation of all the
world which are to be saved; but the elect only are saved. So Ambrose, Tom. 2.
de fide ad gratianum, lib. 4. c. 1. If thou do not believe, he descended not
for thee: therefore he suffered only for the believers.

Genesis 18. 22. Galat. 3. Psalm. 44. John. 12. Romans 5. 2. Cor. 5. Coloss, 1.
Habet ergo populus Dei plenitudinem suum. Ambros. Ibid.
3 The (world) is sometimes taken for the whole world, and all men, as well
Elect as Reprobate. Sometime for the more principal part; to wit, the Elect.
Sometime for the worse part of the world, that is, the Reprobate. The author
also of the book, De vocatione Gentium, lib. 1. cap. 3. does declare by
examples of many scriptures, oftentimes for a part of the earth, the whole
earth; for a part of the world, the whole world; for a part of men, all men to
be nominated: and this as well touching the wicked as the godly. Therefore
when he says, that Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
we are not enforced by the name of (the whole world) to understand universally
all men.

4 There is a difference between the work of our Redemption, and the force
(or fruit) of our redemption: for the first is once done, the other is eternal,
extending it self as well to them which were from the beginning of the world;
even before the work of our redemption was accomplished, as to them who after
the work of our redemption effected, shall be to the end of the world. (...) is
properly the efficacy of redemption and propitiation; nothing therefore does
let, but that Christ has been, and is perpetually the atonement for the
sins even of them which were elected from the beginning of the world.

The summary of questions, whether remission of sins once obtained, can
again be made frustrate, comprised in fourteen Conclusions.
THe whole course of the Gospel is contained in this sum, that it might
persuade us with belief in Christ, that our salvation is firm and constant
John 3. 5. Math. 7. and 16. Romans 11.
(that is in Christ.) If therefore any shall say, that remission of sins once
obtained, by consequent falls can be made frustrate in the Saints, he does
ouer-turne the whole scope of the Gospel. Read Esaias 38. 44. Mich. 7.

2 Only by an absolute relapse from piety to impiety, Nunquam in nemine ob
nullum peccatum sit irrita remissio. Zanch.
the remission of sins past once obtained, can be done away. But this relapse
the true Saints and elect are not incident unto: therefore in them forgiveness
of sins cannot be frustrate.

3 In the Reprobate true remission of sins never took place: therefore it
can never in them be frustrate; wherefore in none.

Pro omnibus sufficienter, pre electis tantum efficaciter. Zanch.
exscholasticis.

Pro omnibus illis electis. ex Aug. John. 17. 1, Ioh. 2. Romans 8


4 For the blood of Christ, by which alone remission is achieved, is not
according to the purpose of God, and in deed shed out for the reprobate
unbelievers, but only for other many, that is, the Elect, and that for all
those many.

5 Neither did Christ pray upon earth, nor now mediate in heaven, for the
reprobate; but only for the elect believers, and in time to come to believe in
Him; but remission of sins is obtained by the Aliqua luce me^tes illuminat,
nurquam tame^ pen^^^at illo^is corda, Zanch. Ioh. 1.
intercession of Christ.

6 Likewise none but the Elect are truly endued with the Spirit of
Regeneration, who are truly Christ's, Romans 8. But without the Spirit of
Regeneration forgiveness of sins is not gotten.

Titus. 1 Romans 10. 2 Thessalonians 3. Act. 13 Romans 5.
7 So also true and justifying Faith is only proper to the Elect: How then can
the reprobate attain remission of sins?

8 To the wicked reprobates there is no peace, as says the Prophet, but of
remission of sins does follow true peace.

9 From remission of sins does always follow title to eternal life, and
after title the possession it self; but the reprobate can never have any title
unto life eternal, and much less to the possession thereof.

10 To attain remission of sins, and to be justified, are all one Romans 4.
Now none are justified who are not predestined, and elect to justification
and life eternal; and whosoever are justified shall be glorified Romans 8.
Therefore the Reprobate Romans 8
shall never obtain truly remission of sins, therefore it can never be
frustrate in them, in whom it is not at all.

Gu^erunt no^ ^ederunt.

Zanch. Gustant sed ^ox expuu^t idem. discrimen inter dona spiritus sancti
simpliciter and dona spiritus sancti regenerantis.

Zanchius.


11 By that speech of the Apostle to the Hebrews c. 6. It is impossible that
they who are illuminated, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been
made partakers of the holy Spirit, and have tasted notwithstanding of the good
Word of God, and of the Powers of the world to come, and are fallen away, to be
again renewed to repentance: it cannot be concluded that the reprobate are
endued with the true Spirit of Regeneration, with a true and justifying Faith,
and therefore with true remission of sins: yet that many of them are affected
with a temporary faith, and some tastes of the holy Spirit, this, and other
places, do plainly teach.

12 The place 2. Pet. 1. touching Hypocrites (For he that has not these
things is blind, which sees nothing a far off, forgetting that he was
purged from his old sins) is to be understood according to the custom of
the holy Scriptures, which do call Saints according to the judgment of charity,
Just, purged from their sins, although they are not all so before God, so
many as are Baptized into Christ, and confess Him, all such are Sacramentally
cleansed.

Conditionalis propositio nihil ponit in forma. Zanch.

Psalm. 1. 112.


13 That of Ezech. chap. 18. (If the Just do auert from his Justice) is not to
be understood of him who is truly just, but of him who only seems of men to
be just. For neither can he who is truly righteous, finally fall from justice
to iniquity, and die therein, of which final and perfect auersion the Prophet
speaks: Now hypocrites being just only before men, do never obtain true
remission of sins before God, therefore it cannot be proved by this
sentence, that it is frustrate.

14 That Mat. 18. So your heavenly Father shall do to you, unless you forgive
every one to his brother from his heart their offenses; does not conclude, that
sins once truly released can again be called into judgment, but this only,
that such men are deceived, who think their debts to be remitted from God unto
them, when as they do not forgive trespasses to their brethren.

Math. 12. 33.
Every tongue that speaks against me (that is the Holy Ghost) shall be
condemned.

1. Cor. 15. 19.
If in this life we have only hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.

By Richard Swain,
Printed at London for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his Shop without
Bishops-Gate. 1615.


