REST FOR THE WEARY, OR A BRIEF TREATISE tending to the comfort of a poor
soul truly humbled for sin.

By Archibald Symmer, Aberdonen. minister of the Gospel.

printer's or publisher's device

Matthew. 11. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. LONDON. Printed by I. N. for William Sheres. at the South door
of Paul's. 1630.

To the Right worshipful Sir John Hanbury, of Kelmarsh Knight peace external,
internal, supernall, eternal,
Right worshipful,
GReat is the love of Christ to his Saints, 1. Ioh. 3.16
and gracious is the effect thereof in them, which is their Christian charity
one to another. This is not in word neither in tongue only, but in deed, and
in truth: v. 18.
and such is that of your Wor^ to me. This is a comfort; but what shall I say?
it inferres a difficulty, it must be mutual, love requires a requital, and
how can Cleanthes requite a real, a golden love with the airie flore of his
fantasy? For poverty is the patrimony of the Muses. Noble sir, though Momus
reckon, that letters are but the clouds of Helicon, yet in Apolloes esteem
they are durable riches: yea so lovely is learning, Fauin. Parisien. in his
Thea^^, Honor
and gracious are the Muses, that the Rose is become their livery, and the
Hieroglyphicke of such as love them; and good reason, for most tried is the
truth of that posie: Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori: Per The Immortal
Sisters Chaplets in their Bowers,
They Wither not, as do all other flowers.
Reict not therefore (I humbly entreat) this poor present of my rustique
muse, the testimony of my love; so shall my little infant being swadled in the
gentle bands of your most worthy acceptance, batten at the last among men, and
its parent shall be bound to continue.

Your Worcester. humble Orator at the Throne of Grace, ever in the Lord Jesus to be
commanded Archibald Symmer.

Comfort for a weary soul humbled for sin,
Chap. 1. All men are weary.
MAn that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of trouble:
Job. 14.1.
Surely every child of Adam is altogether vanity: for all that is under the
Sun is vanity, and vexation of the spirit; Psalm. 39 11
Which the wise man declares by his own example, Ecles. 1.14
and very dear experience. And if that wise and peaceable King of the Lords
peculiar people, 1 Timothy 1.1.
and glorious type of Christ the prince of peace, and author of our hopes and
happiness, Psalm. 39 5.
was on the highest sphere and top of all his earthly prosperity, and rest,
altogether vanity, what shall we say of our selves, Epict.
who are but punies, and Wretches, yea mappes of miseries and calamityes, in
comparison of him?

Now this universal labor of man's mind, and unresisted vexation of his spirit,
is properly when we can neither obtain that which we desire nor shun that
which we loath. And as the mutinous perturbations and affections of our hearts
and wills, and the desires of our flesh are in number and variety many, so are
the afflictions and vexations of the spirit; for every affection a several
affliction. Every carnal desire causes sorrow, and sorrow is a tedious labor
and toil to the mind, Pro. 15.13. Every carnal affection causes grief,
because it is always confounded and disappointed. What if the carnal heart
obtain all that it desires? yet is it frustrated, and disapointed still; for
it hoped for more comfort in its perishing hopes and earthly transitories than
ever they can possibly afforde: the hope of earthly comforts is better than the
sruition and inioyment of them. Thus every man labors, is heavy laden and
weary under the burden of vanity. The labor of the vnre generate.
The proud and ambitious man labors for honor and glory, and curryes the
applause of the world with all his might, to touch heaven, like Herod, with his
finger, and the firmament, as Lysimachus, with the point of his lance, and all
is vanity. The mammonist and Idolatrous worldling coues to wax plentiful and
rich; Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5.
this is the moiling toil of his miserable carkeis by day, and watching
vexation of his restless spirit by night. Mammon in the Syriacke dialect is
the desire of riches.
This labor is never at an end in this life: for mammon increases as fast as
money, the love of riches increases with the vanity loved The Epicure and
voluptuous manlabours for pleasure and to plung himself with the sow in the
mire of sensuality, and perishing delight. Crescitamor nummi, etc. Inuen.


This is the most brutish labor of all: for hereby a man is, as it were,
metamorphized and turned into a beast. The envious man labors to annoy and
endammage his neighbor: Thus did those forty men travel with mischief, that
vowed Paul's death: their labor was painful; for they would neither eat nor
drink, till they had effected their purpose, Act. 23.12, etc. Thus all men
labor by nature, and all are weary, and all these labors are sinful,

The Saints and spiritual Ones of the Lord also labor but after another
manner; theirs is a blessed labor for it is for the remission of sins, and
peace of conscience: they are weary under the burden of Iniquity, and
therefore cry out every one with David Psalm. 51.2. Wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquity and cleanse me from my sin, and with the holy Apostle O wretched
man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Chap. 2. All find not rest.
ALlour cares tend to this end (says St. Augustine) we may enjoy the thing we
desire: No true rest for the Wicked.
And the heart finds rest when it obtaines that which it hops and labors
for. Now Christ will never fulfill any carnal desire, therefore the natural
and carnal heart shall never find content and rest; there is none for such in
Christ, for carnal men are none of his, Cassiodor, Psalm, 6: A narrow sea
between the haven Aulis of
whom nothing can please but the new creature, Gal. 6.15. For they have not the
Spirit of Christ: Romans 8.9. And without Christ there is nothing but labor and
toil, vexation and weariness. The world is like, an Irish sea, wherein is
nothing to be expected, but the stormy tempests of adversity. It is like
Euripus, which ebbeth and flows seven times a day, constant only in
inconstancy.

Behold therefore the carnal man's folly though there be no peace to the
wicked, says my God; yet will he Seek for content and rest by the means of
his own labor, Beotia and Eubeu arist. Isa. 57.31.
and to quiet his discontented heart by his own ways but all is in vain,
Riches cannot possibly satisfy the covetous man; if Jupiter (as the heathen
reports) should multiply his sheep still at his request, he would mutter
notwithstanding: Pauperis est numer are pecus, he is but a poor man that can
number his flock. Isay, 47.21.
The Epicure and sensual man thinks to satisfy the concupiscence and lusts
of his flesh, by obeying and following the same, but he is grossly deceived:
for as oil being cast into the sea mitigates the violent surges of the same,
but for a moment, and by and by they become a great deal fiercer: so the thing
that a voluptuous man desires, though it abate the toil of his laboring
mind, it is but for a while, and never fully, but presently afterward it
befalls him as it did the monster Hydra; Simile.
when Hercules had cut off one head, two did rise in the place, so the Epicures
labor, and vexation of his swinish heart, after it is a little mitigated,
increases; and arises to an higher pitch then ever it did before. As then he
that has the dropsy can never quench his thirst by drinking, so can no
carnal and unregenerate man content and quiet his spirit with the vanities of
this world, nor the sensual soul its brutish desire with pleasures.

Chap. 3. All and only the weary members of Christ are refreshed.
HO, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters etc. for thus says he
that is high and excellent, he that inhabiteth the eternity: Isay. 55.1.
whose name is the holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place, and with him
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to receive the spirit of the humble,
and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart, (...). 11.28.
Isay. 57.15. and again, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden
and I will give you rest. Such as feel the but then of their sins original
and actual, and groan under the same, Matthew. 5.3.
labonring to have the release and ease of them and such as are poor in spirit
and senfible of their spiritual wants and weakness, lowly in heart, and base
in their own esteem, and therefore labor for the free pardon of all their
offenses for the righteousness of Jesus Christ, Phil, 3, 9,
which is by faith and a joyful sense of the love and favor of God, which is
better then life it self, and pray for that peace of God, even that
tranquillity of conscience that passes all natural understanding; such as are
thus humbled, C. 4, 7,
are fit objects of mercy and compassion: for the Lord gives grace unto the
humble: they are capable of rest and refreshment. Iam, 4, 6.
Such broken hearts are the sacrifices of God, a broken and a conttite heart O
Lord thou wiltneuer despise, Psalm, 51, 17
whosoever does pray with David Hide thy face from my sins, V. 9, 10.11.12.
and blot out all mine ini quities: Create in me a clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within me, Cast me not away from thy face and take not thy
holy spirit from me: Restore unto methe joy of thy salvation, etc. that poor
soul shall be liberally comforted, and fully refreshed in the bowels of Christ's
endless compassions. Never did any Faithful penitent heart depart from the
throne of Grace without some sensible consolation. Never did Christ since the
foundations of the world reject any of his poor ransomed members; Isa. 1.
but though their sins were as red as crimson, they became as white as snow
so that the bones which the Lord had broken, did ever thereafter rejoice in his
mercy.

Chap. 4. The reason of the former point.
ALl the weary Saints of Christ are refreshed, whether these be rich or poor,
Gal. 3.28.
Jews or Greeks, bo^d, or free, male or female: for with God there is no
respect of persons, Ephesians. 6.9.
but as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Gal 6.16.
Who else should be invited unto the participiation of mercy, to be partakers
of the privileges and comforts of the Kingdom of Christ, Phil. 2.8, 9.
but such as he came into the world to save? whom should he refresh, but those
whom he has redeemed? And whom should he exalt, Matt. 10.6.
but those for whose sakes he was humbled? and afterward highly exalted? Now it
is evident that Christ was sent of the Father into the world, not, to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, and to save the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, for the same was prophesied of him, by the holy Ghost long before
his Incarnation. Isa. 61. 1. etc. And when Christ himself came to Nazareth,
where he had been brought up, he went (as his custom was) into the Synagogue
on the Sabbath day, and the Book of this Prophecy being delivered of the
Minister unto him, Luke, 4.21.
he expounded the same: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me,
that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty
them that are bruised, and that I should preach the acceptable year of the
Lord. Luke 4.16.17.18.19. Hence it is evident that our blessed Savior was sent
of God the Father not for his own cause, but for his afflicted members sake,
neither came he to be Lord over all, but to redeem all his own. So God the
Farher delivered all things unto him, Mat. 11.27.
he gave him all power both in heaven and in earth, C. 28.18.
and made him Lord over all; that he might deliver us wretched souls from the
jaws of hell, and pull us out of the paws of that infernal Lion Satan, whose
bondslaues we were, sitting in darkness, and in the region and shadow of
death, Isay. 9.1.
till that day spring from on high visites us, and set us at liberty. Thus our
blessed Redeemer sits at the right hand of God, Luke. 1.
and makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34
he helps his afflicted servants, and sends them release in their distresses.
So was Joseph sent into Egypt by God, Genesis 45.5.
and there exalted fot the preservation of his Church, and so he was a typpe of
Christ. Psalm. 18.
So David was preferred and advanced unto the Kingdom of Israel, and so was
he likewise a figure of Christ. 2. Sam. 22.

Chap. 5. Damnable is the case of all such as are strangers from Christ.
What shall we say then of those that are enemies unto the Cross of Christ
Jesus? Ephesians: 2.
what is the condition of such as are strangers from the life of God, Ephesians: 2.
aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and for rainers from the Covenants of
promise, who have hope, but are without God in the world, walking according to
the course of the same, according to the prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience? Their estate is most
damnable and woeful; the tragical plight of all such impenitent and senseless
sinners is to be deplored even with tears of blood. Tim. 1.1.
The Atheist, that is abominable and disobedient, and unto good works
reprobate, though his cauterized conscience, and senseless heart hardened
through the custorae and habit of sin, The misery of the Atheist.
seem to rest and sleep for a while; yet shall he be wakened with a doleful
wakening, when the dreadful sense of the wrath of the Lord of hosts shall
lash and whip him naked, as he did Cain, and as the furies of hell did
monstrous Nero. Genesis 4.
Then shall he cry out with cursed Caligula: A wounded conscience who can bear
it? Sueton.
Where shall he rest then? all his former pleasing courses then shall he
condemn, In Ner.
as Job did his friends: miserable comforters are ye all; Job. 16.1. Thus is
the wicked like the raging sea that cannot rest, Pro. 18.14.
whose waters cast up mire and dirt there is no peace to the wicked, says my
God. Isay, 57.20.21. The proud Pharisee and Iusticiarie Hypocrite, that
flatteres and deludes his soul with a groundless opinion of his own
righteousness, shall instead of peace and rest inherit trouble and sorrow: Of
the proud pharisee.
for all his righteousness, is instar pauni menstruati, like a filthy clout,
Isay, 64.6. and therefore when Isaiahs hungry man, after his dream, Isay.
29.8. and Passetes the Iuglers guests shall be satisfied, and filled with the
fantastical shows, and vain appearances of imaginary, Isay. 29.8.
and ^uanishing dishes; then shall the hypocrites heart be quieted and
refreshed through his own righteousness: Jewel.
for his most plausible works of morality, and seeming devotion are so
imperfect, and polluted, that they are not able to abide the examination of
Iehouaes all-seeing eye, and trial of his dreadful tribunal: none but that
pure and perfect Righteousness of Christ can endure it: none but the contrite
heart, that is clothed and armed therewith shall ever be able to stand before
him. Of those that seek for help of wizzards etc.


If such smooth formalists find no true rest, what shall we say then of such
as seek for comfort and ease, not through any appearance of goodness, or so
much as any show of holiness; but by the means of the devil as wizzards, and
witches? cold is their comfort: it is like a draught of cold water to a man
that is sick of the dropsy; as that hasteneth him to his grave, so does this
diabolical comfort drive the sons of Belial to the pit of hell. What fruit
reaped Saul by his conference and consultation with the witch at Endor, and
with the devil himself? A woeful answer: Tomorrow shall thou and thy sons
be with me, and the Lord shall give the host of Israel into the hand of the
Philistines. And what was the effect of this answer? surely nothing but bitter
fear, and fainting infirmity. 1. Sam. 28.20. Abaz died the death because he
sent to enquire of Baalzebub the devil god of Ekron. 2. Kin. 3.4. Thus are all
the enemies of Christ, and such as are strangers from him, ever confounded.

Chap. 6. An Exhortation to come unto Christ.
Whosoever then would find rest unto his weary soul, 1, Sam. 28 Christus
scala coeli,
must come unto Christ: for he is that Ladder which Jacob in the way to Haron,
saw reaching to Heaven, whereby God and man are joined together, and by whom
the Angels minister unto us: all graces, joys, and rest by him are given unto
us, and we by him ascend into heaven. Genesis 28.12.13. Neither is there salvation
in any other: for among men there is given none other name under heaven,
whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.12. And this is our glorious prerogative, and
consolation, that if any man sin, Jesus Christ the just is our Advocate with
the Father, and he is the atonement for oll our sins. 1. John 2.1.2. For the
office of his intercession, and redemption are joined together. And how soever
he prove a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness unto the Grecians:
yet unto them which are called, 1. Cor 1.23.24.
both of Jews and Grecians, Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of
God, yea he is all in all. Col. 3.11. He is our hope. 1. Tim. 1.1.

Without Christ then, and the grace of his Kingdom there is nothing in the
world but vanity and vexation of spirit. Learning and victory, plenty and
pleasure, honor and length of days, vanity of vanities, without Christ all is
vanity. As Aristotle's learning increased, so did the care and toil of his
restless and wandering spirit ever till the first borne of death had the
dominion over him. Qint. Cicutis.
As was the master, so was his Scholar. Alexander the great when he had
conquered and subdued Grecia, Vnus thelex lnueni non sufficit orbis, etc.
Asia, and India, all these triumphant victories could not content his
insatiable heart but he wishes that Phlegia field had been full of giants,
like Porus that most magnanimous and mighty Indian prince in fight with all,
Iuuen. Satio, 10. Ecles: 12.7.
and that the vast Ocea^ had been firm land. There is no earthly material
thing that can satisfy the heavens immaterial soul none but that infinite God
of spirits is able to content man's insatiable spirit. For the Lord made it for
him self, to feed on his immortal joys and dainties: plutarch therefore
derides and mockes the Epicure and sensual math^^would delight and please the
soul with the pleasures of the body. This is impossible: Let the Ruffian
labor to drown his melancholy fit, and cheer up, and refresh his pensive and
languishing heart with quaffing and swilling, and healthing; yet shall he be
confounded: drink may make him mad, but never truly merry; he may roar and
never rejoice for this is the privilege of the sober Saints of Christ Jesus,
Psalm. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all
ye that are upright in heart. But some man will object, What? did not the
noble and brave Philosophers, Socrates, (who called, as it is reported, and
brought as it were Philosophy down from Heaven) and Divine Plato, in Alcib. 2.
vel de voto. Nulli secund. Plutar.
who taught the Art of prayer, and in Alcib. 2. vel de voto. Null secund.
Plutar.
wise Seneca, who wrote so learnedly of the tranquillity and peace of the
mind, etc. Did they never attain unto true blessedness and rest? Surely no:
for though they sought and searched for consolation and peace to their troubled
minds; yet did they never labor for this peace of God, which passes all
natural understanding. Phil. 4.7. For they knew it not, and why? Because they
knew not Christ the Lord of glory and peace. 1. Cor. 2.8. So without Christ
(d) the way unto peace, they wandered out of the path of peace, without Christ
the Truth of peace, John 14.6.
they obtained at the most but a shadow of peace, as Ixton embraced an empty
cloud in stead of his beloved Juno, and without Christ the life of peace, they
ended their lives, and their peace together. Wherefore; if any man would live
in peace and joy with God and his own conscience, which is Gods continual
Deputy, he must begin, continue, and end in Christ. No beginning of true
peace, till a man begin truly to live in Christ; and no continuance and
perpetuity of rest, 1. Pe
unless he continue and rest in that God of rest. If after (e) we are
received in the sheepefolde of that Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, we go
astray at any time, and pass beyond the limits and bounds of his blessed will,
then do we disquiet and trouble our souls; we (f) refuse the waters of
Shiloah, that run softly and sweetly, ^^ay. 8.6.
and go to the swelling and raging waters of Jordan. What trouble and sorrow,
and bitter anguish of heart did poor David suffer by the means of his sins?
how heavy complaints and lamentations did he express, Psalm. 6.25.32. And how
strong tears and prayers sent he up to the Lord again for mercy and
forgiveness, and for the renewing of his holy Spirit of peace and joy in him.
Psalm. 51. So does every sanctified sensible soul seele the smart of sin,
and breach of peace by the same. When God is offended, the conscience is
troubled; and till h^^e pacified; peace cannot be recovered. Therefore the
wounded soul must run unto Christ, and rest in him.

Now the man that comes unto Christ for mercy and peace, How we should come
unto Christ.
he must run unto his Redeemer, with the two spiritual feet of faith and
repentance; of faith: because it is impossible without faith to please God: for
he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him. Hebr. 11.6. And he that asks and beggeth of Christ
what he needs, must ask in faith, and not waver: For he that wauereth, is
like a wave of the Sea, toised of the wind, and carried away. Neither let that
man that doubts of Gods will, think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord. Iam. 1.6.7. He must run likewise with the foot of Repentance: For we
know that God hears not impenitent sinners, contemners of God, and such as
delight in wickedness, John 9.31. Which that blessed man (g) after Gods own
heart, confessed. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard wickedness in mine heart, the Lord
will not hear me. He that comes unto Christ to be comforted and exalted, 1.
Sam. 13.14.
must first be numble and dejected, and in the humiliation and lowliness of
his heart (h) enter in at the strait gate, and walk in the narrow way that
leads unto life: For the man that is stuffed up with sin, and puffed up
with pride and arrogance, with lust and covetousness, with a natural conceit
of righteousness, with malice and envy, Matr. 7.13
etc. Such a one is too too big to enter in at that strait gate, and walk in
that narrow way; he can no more get in and walk there, then a Camel can go
through the eye of a needle. But the contrite and broken heart, the soul
forrowfull for sin enters in at that gate, and walks in that narrow way,
Ior, 6, 16.
(i) which leads it assuredy unto solid and true rest. The true penitent is
conducted and led unto true rest, and his joy is certain: For Christ
promises the same assuredly, Matthew. 11.28. Refocillabovos, I will give you
rest. He promises more than any corporal Physician dare, or can do to his
patient: he can but offer his pains, and promise to do his best endeavor;
but he cannot promise recovering of health to the sick: But Christ does
infalliblie as sure his spiritual patient of true health and peace to his
soul. Never was there from the foundations of the world any contrite spirit
disappoynted of this joyful refreshment, nor ever shall be. A broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou wift never despise. Psalm. 51.17. Christ the God of
truth has ever fulfilled his promise. And as this rest is certain, so is it
solid and true: the remission of sins, the sense of Gods love, and the peace of
conscience is heaven upon earth: it is a continual Feast (k) which makes a
cheerful countenance, ane causes good health. Prou. 15, 13
Prou. 17.22. yea it sustaineth and bears the infirmities, and all the
crosses and vexations of this life. Prou. 18.14. And finally, being the first
fruits and beginning of eternal blifse, it is the infallible note and token of
the same. Whosoever finds and enjoys this rest, the same shall be glorified
after this life with Christ in the heavens world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

