JACOBS VOVV.

A SERMON Preached before his MAJESTY, and the PRINCE his Highness, At
HAMPTON COURT, September. 23. 1621.

By Christopher Swale, Doctor of Divinity, and one of his MAJESTY'S Chaplains
in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill. 1621.

The Text.
Genesis chap. 28. verse. 20. 21. 22. 20. Then Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God
will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on.

21. So that I come again to my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be
my God.

22. And this Stone, which I have set up as a Pillar, shall be Gods house: and of
all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the Tenth unto thee.

JACOBS Vovv.
WHICH words are the Vow of that holy Patriarch Jacob, who being mortally
hated of his brother Esau, for deceiving him (as he termed it) both of his
Birthright, and of his Blessing, was forced to fly for his life: And by the advice of his Mother, with the express consent, and commandment of his Father
in the first verse of this chapter, he travailed toward Padan-Aran unto his
uncle Laban for succor; in hope there not only to have his life secured from
his brothers rage; but also to be provided of a Wife, amongst his own kindred,
which might be a helper, and comforter unto him: yet he went not forth like a
Woer, nor like either his father Isaacs son, or his grandfather: Genesis 24.
Abraham's servant, with Gamels, and Men, and Jewels, and other provision for
such a journey, (for then perhaps he had never made this Vow,) but he went
all alone like a poor Pilgrim, with his staff in his hand, and so came
weary, and late (the Sun being down) unto a certain place, near unto
Haran, where he took up his lodging for that night: Homil. 54. in Genesis
and as Saint Chrysostom says, Ibi dormiuit, vbi nox eum comprehendit, He
slept there where he was benighted, not in any town or house; or tent, but Sub
dio, making the earth his bed, heaven his canopie, and a stone (which he found
in that place) the pillow whereupon he reposed his head: and yet having a
wearied body, and a quiet conscience (which are two good Engines, to draw on
sleep) he slept as soundly upon that hard pillow, as if he had lien upon a
bed of Down: And in his sleep he dreamed of a certain Ladder reaching up
from earth to heaven, upon which the Angels of God ascended, and descended, and
the Lord himself stood at the top of the Ladder; who made unto him a large,
and a most gracious fourfold promise, in the 13.14. and 15. verses. 1. That
he would give unto him and his seed, that land upon which he then slept. 2.
That he would multiply his seed as the dust of the earth. 3. That in his
seed, all the Nations of the earth should be Blessed; And lastly, that he would
be with him, and keep him whithersoeuer he went, and bring him again unto
that land, and not to forsake him until he had performed all, that he had
promised unto him.

When Jacob awoke out of his sleep, and perceived that the Lord was in that
place, and he not aware of it, and that that place was no other, but the house
of God, and gate of heaven, verse 17. he was stricken with fear and reverence,
as every one ought to be, that comes within the gate of Gods house, and
took the stone that lay under his head, and set it up for a pillar, and powered
oil upon the top of it, and called the name of that place Bethel, that is, the
house of God.

And entering into a serious consideration of this gracious Promise, which far
exceeded all that he could either ask, or think, he did not through
unbelief make any doubt of the performance thereof; but certainly believing
that it should be accomplished in due time, like a thankful Pilgrim, or a
man even ouer-ioyed with unexpected, but yet assured hopes; he began to study
with himself, what he should render unto the Lord, for all these benefits
promised unto him; and not finding any better means to express his
thankfulness, he vowed a Vow in my Text, saying, If God will be with me, etc.

Of which Vow there be two parts. The first is, Petitio, a Request, which he
desired of God; The second is, Promissio, a duty, which he promised to
perform to God.

The Petition in these words, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this
way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I
come again to my fathers house in peace; The duty which he promises to
perform in liew of this benefit is threefold. 1. That the Lord shall be his
God. 2. That the stone which he had set up for a pillar, should be Gods house.
3. That of all that God should give him, he would give unto God the Tenth. Of
which points in order as they lie in the Text.

And first of the Petition, or request, which (as you see) is very moderate,
and reasonable: for whereas God had promised unto Jacob four things; Jacob
does not desire all, nor half, nor the third part of that which was promised,
but contenteth himself with the last, and least of all those four things, and
desires nothing, but only necessaries for the present; not Quails, or Manna
for delight; but only bread for necessity, that is necessary food: not
purple and fine linen for pomp; but only raiment to put on, that is,
necessary clothes: not the attendance of many feruants; but only the
protection, and blessing of God, without which, neither his food, nor raiment,
nor any thing else could do him good, nor himself, either be well, or be.

But what is the reason why Isaac, who was exceeding rich, sent forth his
son Jacob (who by Gods providence was now lately made his Heir) so exceeding
poor, that he is feign to petition for food and raiment, whereas Abraham his
father, sent forth his very servant upon the like journey richly furnished,
and sumptuously attended? Was Abraham's servant better then Isaacs son?

To omit the diverse Allegories which Saint Augustine, Aug. Ser, de te^por. 79.
Gre. mor. lib. 5. cap. 21.
and Gregory have observed upon this passage, the reasons, as Theodoret and
others have well summed them up, might be these.

1 Vt fratr is conatus melius declinaret, that going poorly, and privately,
his brother Esau might not so easily miss him, nor know which way to pursue
after him. 2. That this misery might move his brother to compassion, and
reconciliation. 3. Vt animus esset reuertendi, that carrying no wealth with him
to maintain, or detain him abroad, he might have the more mind to return
unto his father home again. 4. And lastly, that he might have the better
experience of Gods mercy, as indeed he had, for which he returned thanks
unto God at his return in the 32. chap.
Jacobs poverty may teach us, that although worldly prosperity be the good
blessing of God, wherewith he often enricheth his own children: yet he ever,
at one time or other, chasteneth those, whom he loves, and traineth them up in
his school of affliction, and nurtureth them with his Ferula of wants and
crosses. Virgatua and baculus tuus, says the Psalmist etc. Psalm. 23.4.
they must as well be humbled, and instructed with his rod of correction, as
supported with his staff of comfort. Abraham and Isaac, Job, and David, and
Jacob also in my Text, after his return from Padan-Aran, were all rich, and
our Lord himself was Lord of all, and yet none of them wanted either their
wants or crosses. And the children of Israel, Gods own people were not only
pinched with wants in the wilderness; Ios. 23.13.
but were pricked with thorns in their eyes, and goades in their sides, even
in the land of Promise.

Whence we may learn, that Adversity is the blessing of God upon his
Children, as well as Prosperity. Res prospera donum est consolantis, res
aduersa donu^ est admonent is Dei, says S. Augustine, Prosperity is the gift
of God comforting, Adversity the gift of God admonishing: Prosperity may be
the more pleasant, but Adversity many times is the more profitable: which made
David out of his own experience ingeniously confess, Psalm. 119.71.
that it was good for him, that he had been afflicted. And so it is good for
us all to be afflicted sometimes, else we should forget both God, and our
selves, and be too much wedded to this world, and say with Saint Peter, Mat.
17.4.
Bonum est esse hic, and begin to build such Tabernacles here upon earth, as
would hinder us from our everlasting Tabernacles of bliss in heaven. And thus
much of Jacobs poverty and want.

But now being in so great want as he was at this time, why does he prefer
so poor a Petition unto God, who is so rich in mercy? And whereas God had now
lately appeared unto him here in Bethel, and promised the whole land of Canaan
to him, and his, why does he desire so poor a pittance, as food and raiment,
which would only keep life and soul together? the very fowls of the air
are furnished with these.

And yet Jacob desires no more, to teach us, how moderate we should be in the
desire of earthly things. We may and ought to be even covetous of things
spiritual, and heavenly; so says the Apostle: Covet after the best gifts: 1.
Cor. 12.31.
but of temporal, and earthly things we may not be covetous, more then is
necessary for our callings and estates: because as our Savior teaches, Luke
12.15.
Amans life does not consist in the abundance of the things which he
possesses. Therefore the Apostles rule is, that having but (...) only food
and raiment, 1. Tim. 6.8.
we must be content therewith: for Victus, and vestitus sunt diuitiae
Christianorum, says Hierome: food and raiment are the riches of Christians:
and our pattern of Prayer does warrant us, to petition only for our daily
bread, that is, as it is excellently expounded in that Royal Meditation upon
the Lords Prayer, Written by the kings Majesty.
only for such temporal things, as are necessary for our Esse, or at
farthest, for our Been esse. And they that cannot be content with these, but
with the Horse-leaches daughters, still cry, Give, Give; and will needs be
rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish, and hurtful
lusts, which drown the soul in perdition, and destruction, 1. Tim. 6. Jacob
having once seen God in Bethel, and set his heart upon him, who is the true
treasure, neither admired, nor much desired (more then was necessary) this
worldly trash.

Where we may see, that howsoever worldlings do not only admire, but even
adore riches, and honors, and earthly pleasures, as their sole trinity, yet
the Children of God, knowing that earthly honors, and riches are but shadows
of heavenly, and the pleasures of sin, not so much as shadows of heavenly
pleasures: use these things, when God gives them; but neither abuse nor admire
the same And why should men admire shadows, painted fires, which flame, but
warm not? and may fitly be compared unto Glo-wormes, or pieces of rotten-wood,
which in a dark night shine like stars, but when the Sun arises, and
shows what they are, the one appears to be a poor worm, the other nothing
but a rotten stick: So these glorious outward things, shine like Stars in
the eyes of the Children of darkness: but the Children of light, whose eyes
are purged from those skales of darkness, do plainly see, that in regard of
true content, they be Vanit as vanissima, worms, and sticks, before which
Solomon incomparably preferred wisdom; 1. Kings 3.9.
and Agur in the Proverbs of Solomon, prayed expressly against riches in the
thirtieth Chapter, as well as poverty. Mendicitatem, and diuitias ne dederis
mihi: Give me neither poverty, nor riches, but feed me with food convenient
for me. And this is the reason, why Jacob in my Text, petitions neither for
riches, nor honor, nor any other outward thing, but only for bread to eat,
and clothes to put on.

And yet one thing more is to be observed in Jacobs Petition, out of these
words of my Text, where he says, If God will be with me, and keep me in this
way, that I go, and bring me again to my fathers house in peace; wherein
besides food, and raiment, you see he desires the protection, and blessing
of God in his whole journey going out, and coming in: without which, neither
his bread could nourish, nor his clothes keep him warm, nor any thing else
do him good. For Man does not live by bread only, Mat. 4.4.
but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, that is, the
blessing of God upon bread: For as in Physic, a diseased man is prescribed to
boil certain medicinable herbs in running water, and then to drink a
quantity of that water, and so is cured of his disease: and yet we know, that
it is not the water, but the decoction, or infusion which cures the Patient:
so it is not the bread that nourishes, nor the abundance of outward things,
which enricheth, or contenteth, but the infusion of Gods blessing, which is the
staff of bread; without which a man may starve for hunger, Leuit. 26.26. Ezekiel.
4.16.
with bread in his mouth, and die like the children of Israel with the flesh of
Quails in their teeth. Psalm. 78.31.


Whereas on the contrary, Daniel feeding upon bare pulse, strengthened by the
blessing of God, which is the staff of bread, and of all other nourishment,
was fatter, and fairer, Dan. 1.15.
then they that were fed with the Kings diet: For it is the blessing of God,
that makes rich: and a little, Pro 10.22.
that the righteous has, Pro. 16.8.
is better then the great revenues of the ungodly. And we may observe in our
own experience, many a man, who with a dinner of green herbs, Pro. 15.87.
as Solomon speaks, that is short diet, course clothes, hard lodging, and a
poor estate, looks fatter, lives merrier, sleeps sweetlier, enjoys more
hearts ease, and true content, and in truth lives better then others that
wear a chain of gold. And therefore wisely did Jacob desire nothing but food,
and raiment, and Gods blessing upon them, which he knew would serve his turn.
And thus much of the Petition, or Request which Jacob desired of God.

Now I come to the duties, which he promises to perform to God, in the next
words, Then shall the Lord be my God, etc. herein Jacob, who was afterward
surnamed Israel, Genesis 32.
having received but even the promise of a benefit, presently voweth the
performance of a duty, to teach all true Israelites, that Beneficium postulat
of ficium: and that the thankfulness of the receiver, ought to answer unto
the benefit of the bestower, as the Echo answers to the voice: we do no
sooner receive the one, but we are immediately bound to return the other. Psalm.
116.
So does David, Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling, There is the benefit received; and then it follows
in the very next words, I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living,
Verse. 9.
there is the duty returned: So likewise in my Text, If God will be with me,
and give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, there is the benefit
petitioned for, and promise, Then shall the Lord be my God, etc. there is the
return of a duty vowed.

Now we all have received the same or the like benefits, both spiritual and
temporal, whereby we are all bound unto the like thankfulness; but where is
the performance of the same, or the like duties? We owe as much, or more unto
God for his benefits, then Jacob did, but who voweth, or paieth unto him the
like duties, that Jacob did? What heart can think, or what tongue can express
our infinite obligations? First for spiritual favors: Infinitely are we bound
unto God for our Creation: more then infinitely (if more might be) for our
Redemption, and our effectual Calling unto the participation thereof. What
shall we then render unto the Lord, for all these benefits done unto us? Totum
me debeo, says S. Bernard, pro me facto: quid igitur rependam pro me redempto?
Iowe every whit of my self (unto God) for my Creation, what shall I then
render unto him for my Redemption?

And Saint Ambrose says, Ambr. super lue. ser. 5.
Nihilest quod dignum refer possumus pro suscepta carne Maria, quid pro cruce
obita, quid pro verberibus, and sepultura reddemus? We are not able to be
sufficiently thankful for taking our flesh of the (Virgin) Marie, what shall
we then return unto him for his suffering upon the Cross, for his stripes,
for his burial?

And as for temporal benefits, we are far before Jacob; he wandered up and
down the world like a poor Pilgrim, with his staff in his hand: he kept
sheep, and was parched with the heat of the day, and frozen with the cold of
the night; and in my Text, the bare earth was his bed, a hard stone his
pillow; he had nothing, he desired nothing, but only bread to eat, and
clothes to put on, and the protection and blessing of God upon him in his
journey, and yet he, even for these vowed a Vow unto God. We sit under our
own Vines, and our own Fig Trees in peace and rest, Amos 6.4, 5, 6.
We lie upon beds of Iuorie, and stretch our selves upon our couches; we are
clad in purple and fine linen, and fare delicately every day; we eat calves
out of the stalles, and lambs out of the flocks; we drink wine in boules,
and anoint our selves with costly ointments, and invent instruments of Music
(like David.) But who is either sorry for the affliction of Joseph, the
extreme miseries of our Brethren in neighbour-Countries, or who is sensible of
our own great prosperity, and our incomparable happiness, or who for all
this voweth one Vow to God?

When our Savior CHRIST had cleansed ten Leapers, Luke 17.17.
there was but one found amongst all those ten, and he a stranger too, that
returned to give God thanks. I fear there is scarsely one of an hundred
amongst us, that is but even so thankful unto God for all his benefits, as
that stranger was only for his cleansing.

When this good Patriarch Jacob returned rich from Padan-Aran in the 32.
chapter of this book, he neither forgate what he was then, nor what he had
been before: and therefore in a thankful remembrance of Gods great mercies
toward him, he paid one part of this Vow in that place, and worshipped God,
Genesis 32.10.
saying, O Lord, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. for with my
stasse I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands.

Many a one there be in this honorable Court, who have passed over, not the
river of Jordan, but the river of Trent, or Thames, or Seuerne with their
staves in their hands, that is, poor estates in comparison, and have been
delivered from many dangers, and are now even laden with riches and honors;
And yet I doubt there be not many, that for all this, have vowed with Jacob,
to have the Lord for their God, or to build him an House, or to pay him the
Tenth of all that he has given them.

One Religious Vow, you see weekly paid in this place by our royal Jacob, I
mean our Tuesdayes Exercise; which was devoutly vowed, upon as just an
occasion, as ever Vow was made. And hitherto (God be thanked) it has been
religiously performed. God grant that this our Jacob may long, and long live a
happy King of this happy Island, even as long (if it be his will) as the
old Patriarch Jacob did, to pay this tribute, and the rest of his Vows unto
the King of Kings. And can we that are his servants, have a better pattern to
imitate, then the Religious example of so Royal a Master? therefore I will
conclude this point, with that zealous exhortation of another King, Psalm.
76.11. Vouete and reddite Domino Deo vestro. Vow unto the Lord your God, and
keep it, all ye that are round about him: bring presents unto him that ought
to be feared. And thus much of the general of Jacobs Vow.

Now I come to the particular duties vowed; and they are three. First, that the
Lord should be his God, that is, that he would worship the true God, and no
other. Secondly, that the stone which he had set up for a pillar, should be
Gods house: that is, he would dedicate that place unto the public worship of
God. Thirdly, for the maintenance of both these, he would give the Tenth of all
that he had. All which were necessary duties, and every one of them has a
necessary relation, and dependence upon other; For if God must be worshipped,
then must he have a place to be worshipped in, which is here called an House,
and our SAVIOVR says, Mar. 11.17.
shall of all nations be called the House of Prayer; And if a House of Prayer,
then a maintenance for that House, and them that shall say Prayers in it. Of
these in order, and first of the first.

Then shall the Lord be my God.
To have the LORD for our GOD, is the very sum of the first Commandment, the
meaning whereof, as all Interpreters expound it, is to love God above all, to
make him our treasure, and infinitely to prefer him, and his Service before
our selves, and all other things in the world. A duty whereunto every man is
bound, as well as Jacob, and every man that is not an Atheist, will confess,
and profess as much: But how they perform this duty, or either love, or
prefer God above all, who so far prefer themselves, their honors,
pleasures and profits unto Gods Service, that they spend more hours of time,
and pounds of money upon the one, then minutes, or pence upon the other; and
bestow more cost even upon points and shooe-strings in one day, then upon the
worshipping of God in a whole year, judge ye. Aures omnium pulso, conscientias
singulorum conuenio, as Saint Augustine speaks. If the Lord be their God,
where is his fear? where is his love? where is his honor? there goes more to
this, then the hearing of a Sermon once, or twice a week; especially as it is
usually heard, which is scarce worth the name of a hearing: and Jacob meant
more then so in my Text. For to have the Lord for our God, is to love him above
all, as I said before, and to serve him Semper, and ad semper, with an
universal obedience, both in regard of time and place, and with David to have
respect, not unto some one, or two; Psalm. 119.6.
but unto all his Commandments. They which serve God on the Sundaies, but not
on the weeke-dayes; in the Church, not in their Chambers, Closets, Callings,
and whole course of life; and that, not for praise, profit, pleasing of men, or
custom; but out of a good and honest heart, and a conscience of their duties,
do not perform this part of Jacobs Vow, to have the Lord for their God. And
thus much of the first duty.

The second follows in the next words, And this stone, which I have set up
for a pillar, shall be Gods House. A duty necessarily depending upon the former;
for if God must be worshipped, then must he have a place to be worshipped in,
here called an House.

Now some think, that this place where Jacob slept, and set up this Pillar,
was Mount Moria, and that he called it Bethel, or the House of God,
Prophetically by a Prolepsis, because the Temple should afterward be built
there: yet there may be two other reasons, why Jacob calls this pillar Gods
House, as before he called the very place Bethel.

1. Because God had manifested his presence here, in an extraordinary manner,
as he did afterward both in the wandering tabernacle, and in the fixed Temple,
where he was, therefore said to dwell, 1. King. 8.13.
as in an House.

2. Because Jacob consecrated this place unto the Service of God, and chap. 35.
and 14. verse, set up an Altar for his worship in stead of this Pillar, and (as
may probably be thought) would have built a House for Prayer, and sacrificed in
this place, if him self, and the Church had been then settled here, and had
opportunity, and means to have done it. But being a Pilgrim, and in his
journey, he did what he could for the present, he anointed a Pillar, erected an
Altar for Sacrifice, and dedicated a place for an House of Prayer; whereby we
may see what great care this holy Patriarch had of the place of Gods worship:
his first care was for the worship it self, which he vowed in the former
words: his next care is of the place of his worship, in these words.

To teach us, that as our first care should be of the worship of God: so our
second care should be of the place of his worship. The object of our first
love, must be God him self: the object of our second love, must be the House
of God. O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells, (says David) Psalm. 26.8. Thy servants take pleasure in
her stones, and favor the very dust thereof. Psalm. 102.14. And Psalm. 84.10.
One day in thy Courts, is better then a thousand. I had rather be a
doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness:
And he renders the reason, why he so exceedingly loved the House of God, in
the very next verse: for there the Lord is the sun and shield, there he will
give grace and glory: and no good thing will he withhold from them that live a
godly life. God is in all places by a general providence, but he dwells in
his house by a special presence. He distilleth the drops of his mercy upon
every part of the earth, but he powers it down upon that holy ground which
is dedicate to his Service. There, be shines like the Sun: there, he
defends like a shield he filled the Temple at Jerusalem with his glory: he
made many gracious promises to them that prayed therein, or toward it and
still where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the
midst amongst them: Mat. 18.20.
and no good thing will he withold from them, that worship him in the beauty
of holiness, and wait for his loving kindness in the midst of his Temple.
Psalm. 48.9.


Private Conuenticles are not to be compared with the public Assemblies of
the Church that is both the throne of Gods glory, and his Mercieseat.

Which ever so inflamed the holy men of God in former ages with the zeal of
his House, that they spared neither cost, nor pains, nor ever affected any
thing so much, as the building and beautifying thereof. I will not suffer mine
eyes to sleep, nor my eyelids to slumber (says David,) until I find out a
place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Psalm. 132. Luke
7.5.
The good Centurion in the Gospel builded a Synagogue at his own charges.
Great Constantine, that mirror of devotion, bare twelve baskets of earth upon
his own shoulders toward the founding of a Church. And when that noble
Captain Terentius had done such service in Armenia, that the Emperor Valens
bade him ask whatsoever he would, for a reward of his service, his only
suite (as Theodoret reports) was vt Orthodoxis vna praeberetur Ecclesia:
Hist. tripart. lib. 8. cap. 13.
And when the Emperor tare his petition, and bade him ask somewhat else, he
still persisted in his suite, and called God to record, that he would make no
other suit but that. And how zealous our own forefathers have been in this
kind of devotion, I need not speak, the zeal of Gods House did even eat
them up: the goodly Monuments whereof, yet extant in all our Cities, and many
Countey-Parishes (which have spared us both the labor, and charge of building
Houses unto God) speak for them. But some of those Houses which they have
built, and even the fairest of them, since their Butteresses, and Pillars (I
mean their maintenance) has been plucked away, begin to droope already, and
in time, (if it be not prevented) will moulder away, and drop down: And yet
who pittieth the ruins of Sion, on repaireth any one wall, or window thereof?
Will your selves dwell in sieled houses, Hag. 1.4.
and suffer the Houses of God to lie waste? Shall Pater noster build Churches,
and Our father pull them down? (as the proverb is) or suffer them to fall? 2.
Sam. 1.20
O let not that be told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Askalon, lest
the Philistines rejoice, lest the uncircumcised triumph.

Therefore to conclude this point, Seeing we need not with Jacob in my Text,
vow to build: let us all out of our zeal unto Gods House, vow to beautify, or
at least to keep up those Houses, which are built to our hands. And thus much
of the second duty, which Jacob vowed in these words, This stone which I have
set up, etc.

The third follows in the last words, And of all that thou shall give me, I
will give the Tenth unto thee. A duty necessarily depending upon the two
former, as I said before: For if God must be worshipped, and have an House,
then must there of necessity be a maintenance: therefore Jacob in the third
place, for a perpetual maintenance of the worship, and house of God, and them
that shall attend therein, voweth for himself, and all the posterity, as well
of his Faith, as Flesh, unto the end of the world, the payment of Tithes; Of
all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the Tenth unto thee.

But what is the reason why Jacob here voweth to give unto God rather the Tenth
then any other part of his goods? Surely howsoever some other causes may be
alleged, yet the true reason is, because Jacob knew, either by the light of
Nature, or by the tradition and practice of his Ancestors, that this quota, the
very tenth, and no other part, was, is, and for ever must be as due unto God,
as either his House, or his worship: therefore he joins these three together,
being all relatiues which depend one upon another; Se mutuo ponunt, and
auferunt, and they are all equally due unto God: And due unto him, not by any
common right, as other things, but by a special propriety, and right of
reservation: whereby Almighty God from the very Creation of the world, and
donation thereof unto the use of men, reserved unto himself, and separated
from common use, unto his own Service, some out of every one of these five
things, which should never after be alienated, or taken away without Sacrilege.

1. A form of Divine worship, which may never be given to any other. 2. A time
for this worship, which is the Saboth day, never to be abrogated. 3. A place of
worship, which is his House, never to be profaned. 4. A Priesthood, which may
never bow knee unto Baal. 5. And lastly, for the maintenance of all these,
Tithes, which he therefore calls his own inheritance, never without
Sacrilege to be impropriated. Ambr. Ser. 34. in feria tertia post 1.
Dominicam, quadrages. in vlt. edit. col.
De omni substantia quam Deus homini donat, decimam partem sibi reseruauit. Of
all the substance which God has given unto man, he has reserved the Tenth
part unto himself. They be the very words of Saint Ambrose, And S. Augustine
says, Aug. de temp. Ser. 219.
Deus sibi tantum decimam vendicans, nobis omnia condonauit. God challenging
only to himself the Tenth, has given all things unto us. And that he
reserved to himself the tithes for this purpose, even from the beginning, as
well as any of the other four things may appear by this; That for any thing
we know to the contrary, tithes were paid even from the beginning of the
world: for some think, that Caine, and Abel offered the very tithe as they
were instructed of their father Adam: But howsoever that be, certain it is,
that there is no sooner mention made of any Priest (...) of an order fit to
receive them, then there is mention of paying of tithes unto him. For Abraham
the father of the Faithful, no sooner met with Melchise dec a Priest of an
Order, but for an example unto all his posterity, even all the Faithful, unto
the end of the world, he gave him tithes of all the spoils. Genesis 14. And gave
it him, not as an arbitrarie gift; but as a necessary due unto God: for he
swear not to take so much as a Shooe-latchet of the King of Sodoms, And yet he
took the tithe, to offer, not as his, but as Gods due. And Jacob in my Text,
amongst other Morrall duties (for here is nothing Ceremonial) voweth the
paying of tithes: and in the 27. of Leuiticus, which is the first place where
tithes are mentioned under the Law, God does not then begin to reserve them,
and to say, All the tithes of the land shall be the Lords; but claims them as
his due of old by ancient inheritance, All the tithe is the Lords, it is holy
unto the Lord; not it shall be. And so being his own of old, he only
assigns them unto the Leuiticall Priesthood for that time. And thus you see
them due, both before, and under the Law.
Now let any man show, when, and where they were abrogated by the Gospel? Not
by our Savior CHRIST, who speaks of them twice, or thrice, and so had just
occasion to have abrogated them, if he had had any such intent; yet he
abrogateth not, but rather confirms them. Matthew. 23. Haec oportuit facere;
These things ought you to have done. Nor by the Apostle, for S. Paul is so
far from abrogating, that on the contrary he both commands, and
establishes them, and proves them due. He commands them, Gal. 6.6. Let him
that is taught in the word communicate with him that teaches, (...) in all
good things. Indeed he names not the very Quotum, how much they were to
communicate, as taking it for granted, that the Galathians themselves knew
that to be the truth, both by the light of Nature, and by the Scriptures, and
by the perpetual practice of the Church, and by the practice of the Heathen
themselves, who used to offer their Tithes to their Idols.

And 1. Cor. 9. he plainly establishes for a perpetual ordinance the paying
of Tithes: for says he, Even so has the Lord or dained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Even so, (that is as appears)
out of the former verse, As they that ministered about holy things in the
Temple, lived upon those holy things, and they that waited upon the Altar,
lived of the Altar: Even so must the Ministers of the Gospel live, upon the
self same maintenance. Now how lived they? Indeed the Priests of the Law had
other emoluments, which were Ceremonial, and temporary: but their principal,
moral, certain, and perpetual maintenance was out of those ordinary, and
annual Tithes, which are Gods standing Inheritance; therefore of them must the
Priests of the Gospel live; Even so (says the Apostle) has the Lord
ordained: here is no abrogation, but a ratification of this eternal ordinance.

And lastly (which in mine opinion is the most impregnable place) Heb. 7. the
Apostle strongly proves, that the Tithes must for ever remain due unto God:
For being to prove the excellency of CHRIST'S Priesthood, above the
Priesthood of Aaron, and Leui, he proves it by the perpetuity thereof:
because CHRIST remains a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec:
whereas the Leuiticall Priesthood was already ended, and to prove the
perpetuity of Christ's Priesthood, he uses no other Medium, but this
perpetual tithing, Verse. 8. Here men that did receive Tithes, that is Leui,
who died both in regard of person and office: but there, that is CHRIST in
Melchisedec received them, of whom it is witnessed, that he lives: therefore
if Christ's Priesthood be perpetual, then must his tithing be perpetual, or
else the Apostles argument is to no purpose.

And thus you see it proved by these three places of Scripture, that these
Tithes, which Jacob vowed in my Text long before the Law, are still due unto
God, and his Church in the time of the Gospel iure Diuino: And this has been
both the constant opinion of all Antiquity, and the perpetual practice of the
Church, whatsoever any late History does report to the contrary. Therefore it
is absurd to say, that these Tithes were only Leuiticall, and that there is
now nothing but a competencie due by a Moral equity: For how can they be only
Leuiticall, which were vowed by Jacob in my text, Heb. 7.8.
and paid by Abraham, and by Leui himself in the loins of Abraham, five
hundred years before the Leuiticall Law began. And to speak of a Competencie
now, is a mere conceit: For who shall presume to prescribe an uncertain
Competencie, where God himself has set down a perpetual certainty, which
he never yet altered? Or why should any man think, that God, who provided a
standing, certain, and liberal Maintenance for the Leuiticall Priesthood in
the time of the Law, which was less honorable, should leave the Ministry of
the Gospel, which exceeds in honor unto an uncertain and beggarly
competencie: especially foreknowing, and foretelling that in these last days
Charity should wax cold, and men be lovers of themselves, and their
pleasures, more then lovers of God, and his Church. And yet he requires
Hospitality at our hands too, which he knew the worlds competency could not
afford.

Therefore it must needs follow for a certain conclusion, where with I will
end, that all true Iacobites, or true Israelites, which live under the Gospel,
are bound to perform all Jacobs Vow in the time of the Gospel, and not only
to have the Lord for their God, and build, or at least maintain his houses;
but also, of all that he has given them, to give the Tenth unto him. And
therefore, as Solomon says, It must needs be a destruction for any man to
devour these things that are sanctified, the usurping, and devouring whereof,
(as I verily believe) has been the destruction of many Houses amongst us.
Noluimus partiri cum Deo decimas, says Saint Augustine; Sermon. de tem. 219.
cap. 39.
Modo autem totum tollitur: We would not give our Tithes unto God, and now all
is taken from us. And Malachi says, They are cursed with a Curse all the whole
Nation of them, that robbed the Lord of Tithes and Offerings. And David curses
the deuourers of these holy things, with the most bitter curse, that ever he
cursed any creature. Psalm. 83.
O my God (says he) Do unto them that say, Let us take the Houses of God into
our possession, as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera and Iabin; which perished
at Endor, and became as dung for the earth. Make their Nobles like Oreb, and
Zeeb: yea all their Princes, as Zeba and Zalmunna: make them like a wheel, and
as the stubble before the wind: As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame
sets the mountain on fire; so persecute them with thy tempest, and make
them afraid with thy storm, etc. God keep all our Nobles and Princes, and
People from this bitter Curse: for the avoiding whereof, and obtaining the
contrary blessing, me thinks many should not only, with Jacob in my Text,
vow to give their own Tithes; but vow to redeem these captiue-tithes, out of
the hands of other men, who have usurped the same, and to restore them unto the
Lord again, who is their right owner; then which, they cannot almost offer a
more acceptable Sacrifice, or Service unto him.

And yet how these houses of God are taken, and still held in possession, and
his Inheritance still embezelled in these days, the cries (...) the poor
Levites every where do witness, not only in those places, where all is gone,
and only a Competency (as it was then supposed) often pounds a year left
(which is scarce a Competency now for a Hog-heard) but also in many other
places, where the tithes are not quite impropriated, but yet so gelded by
pretended prescriptions, and unconscionable, nay unreasonable customs de modo
decimandi, and de non decimando, and they many times confirmed by prohibitions,
that the poor Leuite has in some places, not the tenth, in some, not the
twentieth part of the tithe. I would to God that the Body of the Honorable
Parliament were as willing as the Religious and Royal Head thereof, to take
this grieuance into their serious consideration, that this Parliament might
have the honor to enact some wholesome Law for the honor of God, the
advancement of his Church, the peace of their own consciences, and the relief
of the poor Clergy in this behalf; that so we might all (as we are all
bound) pay Jacobs Vow unto the God of Jacob, and receive from him Jacobs
blessing. Which God grant for his Son JESUS CHRIST his sake, who is our
eternal Priest, to whom with the Father, and his Blessed Spirit be all
Honor, Praise, and Thankes-giulng for ever, and ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill. 1621.


