SERMONS BY Humph. Sydenham late Fellow OF Wadham College in Oxford.

Religioni, non Gloriae.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, for Nathaniel Butter, at Saint Austens
Gate. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Edward Lord Howard, Baron of Escrick, my very
Honorable good LORD.
SIR,
WHen you were pleased, the other year, to admit me your Chaplain, I had
intended, and prepared my praemetiall oblations to your Lordship, from the
Pulpit; But I was, then, prevented by a sudden, and severe sickness, which
has, hitherto, disabled me to tender you any thing that way. Now, because I
would not be obnoxious to a double mis-conceit, I present you this piece from
the Press, that your Lordship may read, and so remember the record, both of
my devotions, and endeauours. I heartily wish I were so completely recouer'd
for attendance, that I might as well speak, as write my labors; and then
(perhaps) I should better satisfy your Lordship, then in this common kind;
which has made many of my Profession (and may me) ridiculous. But I fear my
infirmities, and therefore, as I must beg the honorable charity of your
Patience, so of your Protection also. For as I was, at first, a suitor for your
service, (In which I have cause to glory) both for the greatness and
goodness of your self, and name) so I am, still, for the graces of it: and
do hope, that when you have made a fuller enquiry, who I am, and where I have
spent my time, and talent; your Lordship will not disdain to own, and honor
me with your succeding favors. In a word (my noble Lord) I shall not forget
what you have made me, nor the duty enioyn'd me by it: I will pray for you,
for your Lady, for your little Ones, and for the growth, and continuance of the
house begun in you; and what else is required in a religious observance, you
shall surely find in the faith and loyalty of

Your Lordship's humble servant, Hum. Sydenham.

The several Texts, and names of the Sermons herein contained.
I. The Royal Passing Bell: or Dauid's Summons to the Grave.

The Text. PSALM. 39.6. Thou have made my days as a span-long, and mine Age is
nothing before thee; Surely, every man, in his best state is altogether vanity.

II. The Rich man's Warning-Peece.

The Text. PSALM. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not thy heart upon them.

III. Waters of Marah and Meribah, or the sower of Bitterness, and Strife,
Sweetened and Allayed.

The Text. ROM 12.1. I beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of God, to offer
up your Bodies, a living Sacrifice, Holy, acceptable to God which is your
reasonable service.

THE ROYAL PASSING BELL: OR, DAVID'S SVMMONS to the GRAVE. A Sermon preached
(lately) in the Parish Church of Orchard-Portman in SOMMERSET. At the Funeral
of the most hopeful, and truely-noble, Sr. HVGH PORTMAN, Baronet; the great
loss and sorrow both of his Name and Country.

By HVMPHREY SYDENHAM, Master of Arts, late Fellow of Wadham College in OXFORD.

Qui virtutem alterius publicari vult, virtuti laborat, non gloriae.

ANT. SEN. LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby, for Nathaniel Butter, An. Dom. 1630.

TO MY DESERVEDLY honored, JOHN HELE, of Wembury, Esquire; the great hope of
his NAME, and expectation of his COUNTRY.
SIR;
THis flies not to you for perusal barely, and survey, but for protection; I
want not a a Reader, but a Vindicator; such a one, as can as well justify
Jnnocence, as shrine it: an Agent remarked, no less for Goodness, than for
Power. And, in this my Appeal to Worth and Justice, J sincerely wish, that,
whilst I awake your Charity, I pull not on you Envy, or Dishonor; it is not my
intention, but my fear. For, amongst other my weak endeavors which have
formerly advanced me to the undeserved applause of many. This had the
Happiness to displease, and I think it not my wound, but my Glory. Impartial
discourses are equally blunt, and honest; and though sometimes, they have their
relish and farewell in distaste, yet that is their Crown, and not their Fate.
Howeuer, an affected Stoicisme I ever loathed, and not only as a Stoicisme,
but as affected. There is nothing so open to contempt and laughter, as a
composed sullenness. It Is true, a native roughnes and austeritie of language,
I have pupill'd from my youth, That Is mine own, J confess, but I dote not on
it; my Child but I lull it not; and therefore, if it sometimes prove wayward,
and offensive, Nature praevaricates, and not will. I was never yet guilty of a
premeditated trespass on men's Names, or Honors; J have neither so much time
for rancour, nor disposition; or had I both, I should have here strangled them
for his dear memory, to whom I owed, not only my services, but my self. He
was nobly your Associate, (my honored Sir) and (for J must still boast in the
livery) my Master; nay, my Patron; and, what is higher yet, my friend, my
unshaken friend. These have so engaged me both in Civil and Religious bonds,
that should I labor to dissolve either by any Real affront, or discourtesie
to his Tribe, I were neither morrall man, nor Christian; and yet, lo, I am
more than both, a Divine; but, a saucie one ('it is rumored) and a Cruel; a
sordid also, and Contemptuous; and, (O my impossible guilt! my unjust
calamity!) a false one, and unthankful. Such Liueries I can wear with as
much patience as the the former, tho not triumph; and yet these, again are not
my Cross, but my Laurel; I grow green in the opinion of mine own innocence,
though wither, perhaps, in the Respects of others; who, if they were not so hot
as to ravish words unnaturally, and force them from the honest intentions of
the Speaker, they should find, I am a Leuite, still, and not a Libeller; and,
what I preached, was not an Inuectiue, but a Sermon. Me thinks, it is neither
Charity, nor Judgment in a hearer, to wrest Divinity to the disuantage of his
own honor; 'twas n'ere my Custom to rub harshly, on particulars; my
reproves were, as they should be, of sins, and not of Persons; and those
too, ran generally, which no Circumstances can reduce to paticulars, but where
the Parties are either preiudicate, or guilty; And, if any such I met with,
(as I hope I did not) let them learn to reform, and not to censure; and
thank him for his homespun aduertisements, who was rather a Remembrancer of
their errors, than a Judge. This is the way to rescue their honor, and my
innocence; which, as it has been ever taught to magnify worth in others; so,
to presume on yours, that, when you have read impartially this sad piece of
mine, you will say that I have been a faithful Servant to my dead friend, and
yours, whose noble respects to me, I have found to survive in you; whom, for
many solid and material favors, I am captived to observe, whilst I am

Yours most thankfully devoted, HVM. SYDENHAM.

THE ROYAL PASSING BELL: OR, DAVID'S SVMMONS to the GRAVE.
TEXT. Psalm. 39. v. 6. Thou have made my days as a span-long and mine Age is
as nothing before thee; surely, every man, in his best state, is altogether
vanity.


THE Text is a sad Story of man's frailty here; And it is a Prophet's, and a
King's; a King, as mighty in Religion, as in valor; one that knew as well how
to tune his sorrows, as his triumphs, and had often warbled sweetly to them
both, and sung many a dainty Antheme in his Israel; so that, here wants
neither eloquence, nor state; nothing that may persuade an auditorie, or awe
it. I need not beg then either your patience or attention; the one is
enioyn'd you from a Prophet, the other from a King; a good Prophet, and a King;
David, the King, and the Prophet after God's own heart; whose words here are
are as Compact, as they are powerful, so ioynted and knit together in one
piece (a piece so uniform, and exact) that should I disranke or sunder them, I
must either deface this beauty, or destroy it. I take them then as I first
found them in their rich pyle and fabric; wherein I have observed three
stories or ascents.

Days in the first; and these days measured, and in that measure, resembled
Instar pugilli; as a span-length; and this length, punctual, and prefixed, not
alterable by any power of man; for, in posuisti, thou have made it so.

these Days, are an Age; and this Age; weighed and compared, falls light in the
scale, tanquam nihil, as nothing; not absolutely nothing, but comparatively,
Ante te, before thee.

Days, and this Age, are man's; not man's in his Autumn, or declination, but
in his best state; and man thus in his best state is but vanity; no
peice-meale vanity; but omnimoda vanitas, altogether vanity; man is
altogether vanity; man is so; not man in particular, this man, only; not I,
David, the Prophet, or the King; but vniuersus homo, every man; as well the
Beggar as the King, or the Prophet; all mand-kinde; every man; every man, in
his best state, is altogether vanity.

Thus I have showed you the front of the Text, and what it promise's in the
rooms within; if not so fully as you expect, or desire, please you to take a
review; and then you may see, more at large; Days, in the first part; these
days, proportioned; who did it: and how: and all this in a Tu posuisti, thou
have made them; and thou have so made them that they are as a span long; there
I begin. Thou have make my days as a span-long.

A span-long.
Pars prima.
TO weigh the misery of things transitory, with the glory of others more
permanent and solid, is the most exact way to judge of either; the life of
opposites is in Comparing them, when the good seem better; and the bad worse.
Our Prophet therefore, in a deep speculation of the Almighty, and the frail
rarities of his creatures here below, looking up at length to the beauty of
the Celestial host, Sun, moon, and stars, brings up man unto to them;
not to rival their perfection, but to question his; and, after some stand, and
pause, in steed of Comparison, makes an enquiry; a double one; first, what man
is? and then, what is the son of man? in his eighth Psalm, the fourth verse.

Here is Homo, and filius hominis, and both, in the text, have their energia,
and weight of emphasis. The word enosc, or enosh, translated, man, signifies
miserum and calamitosum hominem (says Musculus) a man of calamity, and
sorrow; Musc. in Psalm. 8.4.
and it is given to all men as a remembrance of their mortality; so Psalm. 9.20.
Let the Heathens know that they be Enosc, men, mortal men. Moreover, son of
man, has in the root. Adam; vt primae originis admoneamur, Musc. ibid.
to mind us of our carnal pedigree; and that our source and offspring is but
Adamah, and so all mankind, earthie. And therefore some translations,
following closely the tracke of the original, Aynsworth. Psalm. 8.4.
read thus; what is sorry man that thou remembrest him, and the son of Adam,
that thou visitest him? not what is man, that rare creature endued with
wisdom, and understanding, the Almightie's Masterpiece, the Image of his
maker, and model of the universe? But, what is Enose? what is Adam? What, the
son of calamity and sorrow? the son of earth and fraili^^? what is he? nay
what is he not? what not of calamity and earth? insomuch that the patient man,
under the groan and sense of humane imperfections, and the daily bruise of his
manifold affliction, is driven to his expostulation also, with a quid est
homo,? what is man? Job. 7.17. where we meet again with the word Enosc,
misellus homo, wretched man; and not nakedly the word, but a particle joined
with it, not mah, Bolduc. in Cap. Job. 17.
but mi, (as Bolducus observes) non quis, sed quid quaerere intendens, as if
the enquiry looked not to the person, but his condition; not, who is man? but
what he is? knowing that man is not only the concrete, miserable; but, the very
abstract misery it self; such a misery as may be an example, and president of
all others. And, if we but observe the criticismes and curiosities of
expositours upon the word man, they are neither impertinent nor fruitless; for
we shall never meet it through the whole current of sacred Story without some
descant and paraphrase from the Hebrew. To particular in that of Esaias, where
(in one text) words of opposite signification mask under a single antithesis,
as in the fifth of that Prophecy, Bolduc. in cap. 4. Job. 17.
Incuruabitur homo, and humiliabitur vir, man shall be brought down, and man
shall be humbled. Homo, there, is in the original, Adam, quod nomen
infirmitatis est, a name of crazines and languishment. Vir, Ise, or Ish,
Heroem, magnumque importans, which inuolues something of eminence, and renown;
and so our new translation gives it, Esa. 5.
the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled;
so that let man be of what condition or estate soever, he shall not be long
in it, without a bringing down, or an humbling. If he be Isc, mighty in
possession and name; humiliabitur, he shall be humbled; if he be Adam, of course
and popular condition, and so humble already, yet he must be lower,
incuruabitur, he shall be brought down; brought down and humbled with a
witness, ad infernum, says the Text, even unto Hell. Aperit infernus os suum,
the 16. verse of that Chapter. Esa. 5 16.
But Hell is the misety of another Age; our Text has little to do with that,
and so this place makes not for our purpose; but, the word Sheol will befriend
us here, and make this infernum, a grave, too, and thither we are humbled every
day; and then we ask no more Quis? or quid est homo? who, or what is man? but,
Vbi homo? where is man? Job. 14.10.
for so the pensive man interrogates; man wastes away, and gives up the
ghost, and where is he? Job. 14.10. where is he? fuit, non vixit, he was here
but now, but he is gone; gone from his Caluary to his Golgotha; his gall and
vinegar in his late agony (the bitter Cross of his body) to his sepulcher
(here) he wed out of the rock; He was buried in a vault.
his bed ready made for him in the dark, where he lie's down, and rises not,
till this fuit has put on a resurrexit, this mortality, a resurrection. And,
seeing he is now gone, let us no more ask, Quis? aut vbi? who, or where man
is? but once more, quid est what he is? or rather, what his Age is? or (if you
please) what his days in that age? and then the text will answer by way of
similitude and resemblance, Instar pugilli, as a span-long. A short time (no
doubt) that is inch't out, or singred by the span; other things remark't in
holy story, have their dimensions lin'dout by the farhome, or the cubit, or the
foot, at least; nothing that I remember, by this frail measure, but the life
of man; a thing so fragile and momentany, that there was nothing to express
it, but a span; a word so tumbled by Expositours, that they are somewhat driven
to the plundge, to give the original of it a proper signification in a second
language, and therefore some translations have it instar pugilli; or, ad
mensuram pugillorum, a little handful; so Felix, and Musculus; others ad
mensuram quatuor digitorum, or palmi minoris longitudinem; the breadth of four
fingers, or small inches; so Pagnine, and Tigurina; and near these, Iunius and
Mollerus palmares posuisti dies thou have made my days as a hand-breath. The
word of the Septuagint, is (...), which the vulgar Latin read's mensurabiles;
and Hierome, Vide Musculum in Psalm 39.6.
Breues something that is measurable, and therefore, short. For, though the age
of man, in holy writ, weare's sometimes the attribute of days; sometimes, of
months; sometimes, of years; yet these days, and months, and years are not
without their frail Epithets of, vani, or, breues, or the like; so Job is said
to possess many months; but they are menses vanitatis, months of vanity,
Job. 7.2. and not only months, but years also; but these years are anni
pancissimi; or breues anni, few years, and short Job. 16.12. Howeuer, suppose
these years were multiplied, and lengthned somewhat in their span, yet they
are short still, because numbered. Pineda in Job 16.22.
And therefore the Latin version here, breues annos, the Hebrew reads annos
numerari; and the Septuagint, annos dinumeratos, years to be numbered, or
years already numbered, and not only numbered, but prefixed; and not prefixed
barely, but circumscribed; circumscribed by the finger of the Almighty; and
that in a narrow circuit, this span-long; so Job says, man's days are
determined, and his months are with thee; thou have appointed his bounds that
he cannot pass, Job 14.5. Insomuch that days, Bolducus in cap. 16. Job. v.
23. Pined. ibid.
or months determined are but short; and short days and months, the Hebrews
call dies numeri, and menses numeri; days, and months of number quia pauci,
and numerabiles (says Pineda) because they are numerable, and therefore few.
Neither are days only, and months, and years so styled, but the men of those
days, and months, and years; so in the twelfth of Ezekiel, Ezech. 12. v. 16,
17.
the Prophet speaking of the desolation of the Jews, says, that God will
scatter them amongst the Nations, and disperse them in their Country, but
would leave of them homines paucos a gladio, and a fame, some few of them, that
is, homines numeri, some few that he had selected and numbered, these he would
reserve from the sword, the pestilence and the famine, that they might declare
all their abominations amongst the Heathens, whether they came, that they
might know that he is the Lord their God.

Thus, measure, or number, of times, or seasons, in what proportion soever,
presuppose a kind of rottenness and instabilitie; so our months are numbered,
and our days measured, Pineda in cap. 14. Job. v. 5.
Job 14.5. that is, short. The Latin word there, is praecisi, (according to
Tremeluis) decurtati, others; curtailed and contracted; from the original,
Charats; which signitieth, acuere, or, praescindere; to sharpen, or cut off.
So, the lostie Prophet, assuring to a remnant of Israel, their safctie form the
Assirians, tell's them of a consummatio praecisa, in the midst of the Land. A
consumption decreed, Esaias 10.22.
the English saye's, but that rendering is to narrow, and will not bear up with
the latitude of the original, and therefore not, a consumption; for, that
linger's too much; but rather, a consummation; a precise one; such a one as
argues both a certainty, and quickness in the doing; so quick and certain,
as if it were done, 'ere it began; and, acted, as soon as prophesied; so Joel
also call's the valley of Iehosophat, Pin. in cap. 4. Job.
vallis concisionis; multitudes, multitudes in the valley of concision; that
is, vallis abreuiationis; or, vallis praecisionis; the valley of abreuiation,
or cutting off; because that the vast multitude of people there met, should be
rarifi'd, and lessened; Joel 3.14.
and only a few number of the Just selected. In like sort, the days of man,
here, may be called dies concisionis, or dies praecisi, because they are
abreuiated maimed, cut off, determined, and straightned to a prescript time; a
strict measure; this span-long, which man can neither diminish, nor dilate in
his own power; but he is pent up, here, in his narrow Royalty; his frail
enclosure, where his days are spanned out, his pillars pitched; his non vltra
limited; his circuits bounded; and tu posuisti terminos, and thou (O God) have
appointed those bounds, and tu posuisti dies, and thou have made those days;
so made them, that thou have measured them; measured them, exactly; by a span;
a narrow span, which he shall neither fall short of, nor exceed, no not one
tittle or punctum of it; not the breadth of the smallest hair, or atome; no,
not the rare-spun gothsimere; or any other extenuated or imaginary thinness
whatloeuer. For tu constituisti, and, tu posuisti, thou have appointed, and
thou have made it so: Job. 14.5. Psalm 33. and
and whatsoever is thy appointment, is thy Law; a Law not to be corrupted, or
minced, or disanull'd, either by equivocation, or partiality, or rigor, or
any other iuggling or imposture of flesh and blood. There is none (says Job)
that can deliver out of thy hand. Statuta eius fecisti, and non praeteribit,
Job 10.7. Lat. Interp. in 10. cap. Job. v. 20.21. Prou. 8. v. 24.
thou have appointed man his bounds that he cannot pass, statutes which he
cannot violate certain channels and banks in thy decrees, which he cannot
possibly exceed. And as thou have established the clouds, and strengthened the
fountains of the deep, bound up the floods from ouerflowing, and given them
thy command that they shall not pass, but placed the sand as a wall about them
by a perpetual Decree; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, Ier. 5.22.
yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not swell over; so
all those tossing; and swellings of flesh and blood the surges and billows
rising in the tempests of our life, Job. 38.10, 11.
have their cliffes and shoares, and strict limits, and God has done to them,
as to the great deep, brake up for them his decreed place, and set baries and
doors, and said, hither you shall come, no further; here shall your proud
waves stay: for tu posuisti dies, thou have made our days, and those days but
a span-long and tu constituisti terminos, thou have appointed our bounds, and
those bounds we shall not pass. Pineda in cap. 14. Job.
And therefore the afflicted man seeme's to complain of the Almighty, that
he had environed him, terminis suis, with his bounds; that is, praeceptis
suis, and statutis, with his precepts, and his statute; such orecep saud
statutes, as he cannot abrogate; so in the eight of the Proverbs 29. the
Wiseman speaking of the mighty providence of God in ruling and ordering the
vast deep, says Iegem ponebat aquis, he gave the waters a law, or a decree,
that they should not pass his command, and yet the singer of Israel call's
this very law, a bound, thou have set a bound that they cannot pass, Psalm. 104
9 so that, that terminus, or bound was a law to them; and this lex, or decree,
a bound to us; and neither this bound, nor law, to be ouer-past; and therefore
we find it once again spoken of in the 148. Psalm, and there is a non
praeteribit, to it; it shall not pass away, pass away? No, not one jot, or
tittle of it. Heaven and earth shall first pass away, before one jot or
tittle, either of Gods Word or Law, his posuit, or his constituit, his bound,
or his span-long, which are a law to him; a law irreuocable, both in matters of
life, and death. And therefore this necessity of fate, Saint Paul expresses,
by the name of a law, with a statutum est, and a semel statutum est, it is
appointed to man to die, and it is once appointed. Statutum est there is the
law, or the decree, and the semel once, says, that this law is firm,
constant, inviolable; for God speake's once, and he speake's but once, Pinedain
cap. Job.
vt iterato pracepto opus non sit, says Pineda, that we should not expect any
iteration or doubling of his command. And therefore in the seventeenth of the
Acts, we have, though not this statutum est, the law punctually set down, yet
we have the statuta tempora, the times prefixed for the execution of that law;
so the text, God has made of one blood all the nations of men, and has
determined the times before appointed and the bounds of their habitation, which
they cannot pass, the six and twentieth verse of that Chapter. And least we
should think times determined to be no law, our death, which is a thing
determined, and to a time determined, is called, a Testament, or, a Law.
Remember that death will not be long, in coming, and that the Covenant or Law
of the grave, is not showed unto thee. Ecclus 14.12.

So that this business of death and the grave, is a law certain, and prefixed,
both for the time and manner, and that beyond all possibility of alteration;
and therefore whether we style it a decree, or a statute, or a law, or a
testament, or a bound, Pin. ibid.
or this span-long, Semper dicis aliquid quod praeteriri non poterit, says the
Jesuit, there is something inuolu'd that is both constant and inviolable;
whose rampires, and walls, and bulwarks, thou shall never scale nor dig
through; for it is the Almighties Citadell and strong fort, so garrisoned and
intrencht by his eternal power, and wisdom; the doors and gates of it so
barrocade'd, and blockt-vp against all invasions of flesh and blood, that no
earthly stratagem, no temporal assault, no humane policy, shall ever raze or
demolish; but it stand's vnshooke, against all tempests; firm, against all
batteries; solid, against all underminings; so that if the floods rise, and the
winds blow, and the waves beat, they shall never stagger it.

Seeing then there is a Statutum est past upon all mankind, that it must once
die (and that statute is not rough, though it be sometimes unpleasing, to die
once, so we die no more, for a double death is our due, though not our pay)
and knowing that there are precise bounds, and limits, and span-longs to flesh
and blood, beyond which it cannot pass, and these bounds, and spans, and
limits have the Inscription of Gods unalterable Decree, with the authority of
his stamp and seal, his posuit, and his constituit, let us take up the prayer
here of our Psalmist. Aug. in Psalm. 38.
Lord make me to know mine end, and the number of my days, what it is; the
number, what it is? and est, and non est, says Saint Augustine.

The measure of our days you have had in an exact proportion, in this
span-long; but the number of them, Aug ibid.
is both secret, and uncertain: it is and it is not, truly. Nec esse possumus
dicere, quod non stat, nec non esse, quod venit, and transit, saye's the
father, we cannot properly say that that is which remaynes not, nor that is
not, which comes and goes. Days past, and future, are as no days. Yesterday,
was; and to morrow, will be; and so, now, are not; and of such things as are
not, there is no number, today, only, is man's; and this not long his,
neither; for it is going; or if it did not go, it is but one day, and of that,
there is no number, neither; so that the total here, aut non est, aut quasi
est, is either no number at all, or, Aug. vt supra.
as it were, a number. Sum up all the minutes and hours thou can, and
those, truly, and thine own; thou shall make up but one day, and that day
(wholly) not thine own neither. Let Us begin from the first dawne, or hour of
it; where is that hour, says the father? it is gone, where is the second then?
perchance thou will say that is gone too; but, the third (doubtless) thou
enioy'st; that is thine own; Aug. ibid.
be it so; and yet si tertiam dabis, non diem, sed horam dabis. Do thou
talk then of number, that have but a day, or of a day, that have but one
hour? an hour? not that neither, not that very hour thou think thou
enioy'st; for, if some part of it be now past, and another as yet remaining;
and of that which is past thou can not dispose, because it is not now; nor,
of that which remaynes, because it is not yet, what can thou give of this
hour? or if thou give, what is it of thine own thou give? the Father is at
a stand, here; and in steed of a resolution put's a quaere. Cui committam hoc
verbum, vt dicam, Est? what shall I do with the word. Est (says he?) it is
but one syllable, and one moment, and three letters in that syllable, and
moment. We cannot come to the second, but by the first, nor to the third, but
by the second; and then quid mihi de hac vna syllaba dabis? and tenes dies, qui
vnam syllabam non tenes? do we talk of years, and months, and days, and
hours, when we cannot give an account of one syllable? not of one letter of
it? Away then with this vain credulity, this fond assurance of our settled
plantation here below; momentis transuolantibus cuncta rapiuntur, all things
are snatched away in moments; moments that have wings, and no seete; momentis
transuolantibus, moments that fly away, as if they were afraid of mortality,
or loath to assist it. And yet, behold, our tents here are not so thinnly
built, but they will endure the blasts (or breathings rather) of a few days, a
few days (indeed) that are spann'd-out; and when these are gone, Lord, what
are we? surely, even as nothing; as nothing before thee: so the Prophet in the
words following Mine Age is as nothing before thee.

Mine Age is as nothing before thee.
Mine Age, etc.

Justinian reads it vitamea; Pars secunda. auum meum. vulg. lat: Jun. and Trem.
Musc. in Psalm. 39. Aynsworth. in Psalm. 39. 1. Cor. 7.31.
Pagnine, tempus meum, my life, and my time; the two Fathers, Hierome and
Augustine (following the Greek) substantia mea my substance; the Caldee (not
much unlike) Corpus meam, my body; but, the Hebrew word, Cheled, signifies, the
World, Psalm. 17.14. used here, for man's life or Age, or time in the world; so
that, as the fashion of this greater world passes away, says the Apostle, so
does the body and substance of the lesser; insomuch that this whole pilgrimage
on earth, is but as nothing (most translations reading here vt nihil, or
tanquam nihil) and though some be so merciful in their rendrings, Aeuum meum
coram te est, ac sinon essot. Musc. Aeuum meum ac si nibil esset ante te,
Molcrus.
as to make man's Age a something, yet that has but an Est, acsi non esset: or
else an Ac, with a si nibil esset: so that I find little difference in the
readings, the one making man's age as nothing; the other, a something, as if it
were not. But suppose it were a something, indeed, such an age as had a
stabilitie both of days and years, and these not spann'd so narrowly, but
they might climb up to the miracle of a thousand years, yet this huge mass
of time is little better then the tanquam nibil in the Text, as nothing before
thee, such a nothing, as is resembled to the decursion and sticklenes of one
day, not a day present, but already spent, A yesterday, Psalm. 90.4.
a yester day that is past. A thousand years in thy eyes are but as yester day
that is past, or as a wacth in the night. Psalm. 90.4.

Had our Prophet resembled it to a day, such a day as we enjoy; this day, or,
one hour of this day; or one minute of this hour; or, one moment, or ictus of
that minute, we might have presupposed some stabilitie, though short-breathd,
and panting, in the course of man's age; but, to a day, a day languish't, and
consumed; to yester day, to yesterday expird; how does it whisper our frailty?
how our transitorinesse? not such a frailty, and transitorinesse, as shall
hereafter fade and wither, but a rotten transitorinesse, a putrisied frailty; a
yester days frailty and transitorinesse; a yester day that is worme-eaten and
dustie; a yesterday that is past. The natural man then looked not home to the
brittlenesse of our constitution, when he styled Man a creature of a day;
(...). Arist. Job. 8.9.
nor the righteous man, when he clothed him with an hesterni sumus, we are
but as yester day, Job 8.9. but, the man after Gods own heart (whose knowledge
was as pure as his integrity) he displayes him at the full, when he makes his
Age, a season obsolete; Psalm. 90.4.
a Calender out of date; a yesterday that is past.

And therefore in a deep contemplation of our mortality (bottoming and
sounding (as it were) all humane wretchedness) he opens the fleetnesse of his
age by a nihil, here, a nihil (I confess) with a tanquam to it, Mine Age is as
nothing before thee: as nothing (indeed) before thee; thy Omnipotency, thy
Infiniteness; before these, as nothing. For, if a thousand years to thee be
but as yester day, must be nothing to thy thousand; thy thousand thousands;
thy myriades of thousands, thy eternity; thy euerlastingnesse. And therefore,
my Age, or, my substance, is a tanquam nihil ante te, Ante te, qui vides hoc
(Saint Augustine eccho's) and cum hoc video, ante te video, ante te homines non
video. I confess, that it is nothing that I am, in respect of him; that is,
ante te domine, ante te; vbi oculi tui sunt, non vbi oculi humani sunt; Aug. in
Psalm.
so the Father warble's. To a blemished or a deluded eye (and such a one is a
mortal eye) my age may be something; a something of some few dimensions, a
span-long, and yet this is but a tanquam nihil, a tanquam nihil, unto man, too;
as nothing before him: but to thee; to thy eyes (which are brighter then those
beams, which dazzle mine) those eyes, substantia mea, pure nihil; no tanquam,
there; mine age is nothing; purely nothing, there. Nothing? why? vniuersa
vanitas omnis homo, every man is vanity; such a vanity as is stol'n-by; or else,
now going; as, yester day; or, as a watch in the night. And, these have their
tanquam nihil, too; are as nothing before thee; so truly nothing, that they
make not up an Age, or a day, but some few hours; enough to make up the watch
of a night; no more. But suppose this tanquam nihil beaten out to the
perfection of an Age; and that age, threescore and teu: this, trodden on to an
hundred; that trebledvp to Nestors; and his, to Methusalah's; yet all these
would not make up our number of a thousand; and so, in God's eyes, would be
less then a day; then a day that is past. Than a day? one night; nay, one
poor watch in that night; a watch of some three houres-space, that is all. For
the Jews divided their day into twelve hours, and subdivided their night into
four watches, and every watch, three hours. 1. Evening. 2. Midnight. 3.
Cock-crowing 4. Dawne. Mare. 13.35. Math. 14.13.
A goodly monarchhie, of flesh and blood; a spacious; souerainty (no doubt)
both in power and time; a Reign of some three hours; three hours of a night
too, not of a day; as though the time of our sway, and scepter, here, were
attended merely with obscurity and dullness, a scene of heaviness and
slumber, such as are incident to this watch in the night. And, indeed, what is
our life, but a very Watch? and the the time of it, but as the night season?
wherein, by reason of the darkness that mantles, and o'respreads it, we
grope in vncertenties and errors: the light we have of things is but weak
and borrowed; a glimmering, or twinkling only, no true light; and, rather a
conceit, and apprehension of what we seem to see, then an exactken or
knowledge of what we should.

Moreover, in this watch of ours, we are apt to nod, and forget; forget, not
only that we are here at Sentinel; who set us here; and the short time we
are at it, our three boures; but the strict charge of our Commander, and the
danger of surprizall and defeat, by the invasion of our powerful Adversary.
But, night and frailty (as what is our age but these?) are beauie-ey'd, and
drowzie; and then, our three hours, are (perchance) no more a watch, but a
dream; And what is our age but a dream too? a dream of some three hours;
and that is a long one (you will say) but, howeuer long, it is but a dream; and,
as a dream, not long neither. But did I say, man's Age was a dream? nay,
rather, man, in that Age, Tob 20.8.
a dream. He flies away, as a dream, and is chased as a vision in the
night. Job. 20.8. So that, now, here is a dream in a dream, Ezechiels vision;
a wheel in a wheel, this turne's in that, and yet, but one vision, one
dream; or, if there be disparitie any where, it is in man; and he, the vainer
dream of the two.

Our life (you know) has been called a shadow; and not only a shadow, but a
vain shadow, in which man is said to walk; He walks in a vain shadow, in
the seventh verse of this Psalm; And not only walke's in it, but dreame's in
it; so dreame's in it, that he is of it, too; and therefore the Heathen call's
him vmbrae somnium, (...). Pindar.
the dream of a shadow; and what is that, but the shadow of a shadow? for
there is nothing so truly a shadow, as a dream, in which (oftentimes) there
are strange objects presented to the fantasy, whereof in nature, and true
being, there is not so much, as a resemblance, no, not a shadow; and yet, even
these so captive and shackle the whole man, that (according to the variety of
species offered) they take us, either with delight, or horror; sometimes
commanding our sigh, our groan, our tear; sometime, our elevation of spirits;
our applause, our laughter; even then, when our out ward senses seem fettered
and chain'd-vp in the bands of sleep; and all this was but the Fisher-man's
dream in Theoeritus, whose Golden Booty vanished with his dream, and he
awak's at length to himself, and his old wants gulled with an apparition and
shadow of that substance, of which he now find's there was neither shadow, nor
substance, truly, but, a dream of both.

Again, Dreams are the true Hieroglyphics of our mortal state, in which the
whole passages of our life, are either prophesied, or acted; and that, much to
the complexion, or quality of humors in him that dreameth. Sometimes, they
are ambitious; and then we think we are upon the tops of hills, or mountains;
now on Basan, then, on Libanus; where (for our pride and loftiness) we are
called Oaks, and Cedars; sometimes they are more humble, and dejected, and
then we grouell in bottomes, and in valleys; where, for our low estate, we
are called shrubs and hysop; sometimes they are presumptuous, and then we are
at the fall of a steep Cliffe, or Rock; sometimes, they are desperate, and
then we are at the quick-sand, or the gulf; sometimes, they are vainglorious,
and then we are at the battlement, or pinnacle of the Temple; sometimes they
are pusillanimous and fearful; and then we are at the roaring, or swallowing
of the great deep; sometimes they insinuate a kind of auspice and blessed
abundance, and then we tumble in Arabian spices, gold of Ophir, Indian
Diamonds; but this (for the most part) is a very dream, such a one, as our
fantasy tell's us, in our dream, is a dream indeed; sometimes again, they
are Ominous, and then ghastly apparitions, and fearful shreekes startle and
affright us; Galbas halter, or knife, or poison, or some other Engine of blood
and death more horrid; lastly, sometimes they are fatal, and then we dream
that we have feet of clay; walk in a Caemeterium, or a Golgotha, tread amongst
tombs, or dead men's bones, stumble at a Coffin, or (perchance) a green meadow,
and that (they say) is an infallible praediction of mortality; I know not
whether a meadow be, I am sure grass, or a flower is; or, if not a prediction,
at least, an emblem. All flesh is grass, Esaias 40 6.
and the beauty thereof as the flower of the field, the grass withers, and
the flower fades, Esaias 40.6.

Mark, the substance of flesh and blood (here) is but grass, such grass as
withers, and the beauty of that substance, as a flower, such a flower, as is
open to all tempests, a flower of the field: and that flower of the field which
fades too. Here is nothing but withering, and fading, no time of flourishing,
as if man were a piece merely of declination, and wasted before he grew. And
yet lo, he grows, and he flourishes too, but it is for a day only; a day?
nay. the first part of that day, the morning; so says our Psalmist. Psalm. 90.6.
In the morning be flourishes, and grows up, Psalm. 90.6. That Is well; here
is man, and the glory of man; he grows, and he flourishes; and all this is
in the morning; But what follows this morning, and this growth, and this
flourishing? surely, a ripeness, a sickle, and a harvest; an evening, a
cutting-downe, and a withering. In the evening he is cut down, and withers,
the same verse, of the same Psalm.

But, has all flesh and blood (the grass here mentioned) a time of growing up
'ere it be cut down? a flourishing before it wither's? we read of grass,
that wither's before it grows; before it grows up, up to any ripeness, or
perfection; and this the Psalmist call's grass on the house top, Psalm. 129.6,
7. Psalm. 119.6, 7.
So thinly grown, that the mower, fills not his hand, nor he that binds up
fheaues, his bosom. Oh, that the Top of a house, the maine beam, and rafters
of a Family, the chief buttresse, and pillar of a name, should be so barren,
the fruit of it so soon fade, when those that are nearer earth, take better
root. But lo; He grew so thinly up, that there is not so much left of him,
as to fill a hand, not to make up this span-long, in the text, no not this
tanquam nibil; He withered before he grew-vp; we had him only in the morning,
in the blooming of youth, when the Damask and the Lilly daunc'd in the cheek:
Before his noone, he is reapt away, and his sheafe bound-vp, and now he is
gone, gone like the day you heard of, the yester day, or the watch, or the
shadow, or the dream, or the grass, or the frail flower, nothing remaining,
but the memory, that He was; And why? Vniuersa vanitas omnis home; surely, man
is vanity; every man is vanity; every man, in his best state is vanity;
every man, in his best state, is altogether vanity. So the words run in the
next part. Every man in his best state is altogether vanity.

Pars tertia.
Every man in his, etc.
THe translations (here) run diversely; so do the fancies on them. Vniuersa
vanitas omnis homo; August. Musculus. Mollerus. Iun. Trem. in locuin.
so, Saint Augustine; omnis vanitas vniuersus homo; so Musculus; mera vanitas
omnis homo; so Mollerus; and omnimoda vanitas omnis homo; so, Iunius and
Tremelius. Every Translation is double-strung, and harp's altogether on the
plural. The Prophet says not, I am vain, or man is vain, or, man is
vanity; nor that men are vain, or vanity; but the whole series, Aynsworth in
Psalm. 39.
and descent come within the chorus; Every man is vanity; nay, every man is
every vanity; all mankind, all manner of vanity; so the Root, All Adam, all
Hebeb, all mankind, all vanity. There is nothing within the round of this
little world, the whole circuit of flesh and blood, (whosoever, whatsoever, or
how great soever) but it is vain, Bolduc. in cap. 11. Ioh. v. 11.
vanity, all vanity. And therefore some Commentators (perusing that of the
eleventh of Job, verse. 11. God knows vain man) read it nouit Deus hominum
vanitatem, God knows the vanity of men: or, as others, more nimbly, nouit
Deus homines vanitatis; God knows the men of vanity. So, Saint Augustine,
paraphrasing on that of the Preacher, Eccles. 1. Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity. will not read the words, Aug. lib de vera Religione cap. 21.
Vanitas vanitatum, but vanitas vanitantium, as if men made the vanity, and
not vanity the men, so. Neque frustra additum est vanitantium, (says the
Father,) quia si vanitantes detrahas, non eritcorpus vanitas, sed in suo
genere, quamuis extremam pulchritudinem, sine vllo errore remonstrabit, in his
Book, de ver a Religione, cap. 21. And, indeed, we too much iniure and
disparage, not only the times we live in, but also, those of our Predecessors,
crying out on the vanity of either, when the Stoyicke tells us, hominum sunt
ista, Sen. Epist. 56.
non temporum; the vanity is in the man, and not in the Age; or, if it were
there, and the vanity of all creatures within it, man would ingrosse it all;
so, the same Saint Augustine, expounding the Apostles, Aug. in cap. 8. To. cap.
53.
vanitati subiecta est creatura, the creature is subject unto vanity, Romans 8.
First, put's all vanity into the creature, and then; all creatures into man,
and that without the least calumny, or, injustice (so he professes) omnem
creaturam in ipso homine, sine vlla calumnia cogitemus, in his tract upon the
Romans, cap. 13. And, indeed, it was just, that he who had the glory of all
creatures, whilst he stood clothed in his integrity, should have all their
frailty, too, when he was disrobed; and so it fell out at length; that he
that was the occasion of all vanity, man, was all vanity himself. Verse 4.
There was a time, when he was but like unto it, Man is like unto vanity,
Psalm. 144. now He is vanity it self, it is his essential, and proper
quality; not in part, or resemblance only, but, altogether vanity; man is
altogether vanity. And what is that? Aug. in Psalm. 38.
Totum hoc quod transit vanitas dicitur. Every transitorinesse is a vanity;
That which reside's not, we call vain, because it vanishes; so does a vapor,
we say, or a smoke, and man is both; and therefore a vanity, and a vanity;
or, (if you please) once more, a vanity of vanities; for that which the
Septuagint read's so in their (...); Hierome, and others would have read (...),
vapor fumi, and, aurea lenuis, the vapor of a smoke, or, a thin air;
Hebel, a soon vanishing vapor, as the breath of ones mouth, or nostrils; so
Viues note's upon the Father, in his twentieth, De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 3. It Is
true then, whatsoever vanishes, we call vanity; and man, that vanished
vanity; insomuch that he seeme's to be a frail creature, indeed; some what
less then vanity, or beyond it. Psalm 109.23.
And therefore our Prophet does not only compare him to a shadow (which must as
a shadow vanish) but to that shadow, when it declineth, Psalm. 109.23. and it
seems this is not enough neither, and therefore, Psalm 102.12.
Psalm. 102.12. Dies mei similes vmbrae declinatae; I am gone ae a shadow
declined. He is gone, and declined, not declining, as if his passage were
rather coniectur'd then discerned. And therefore, in Scripture, we seldom
find man's Age resembled to a shadow, but there is a fugit with it, fugit
velut vmbra. Job. Job 14.12.
14.12. He sties as a shadow; flie's with a nimble wing; so nimbly, that
sometimes He outdoe's the acuteness of our sight; I be held him (says David)
and he was gone, Psalm 37.37.
I sought him, and he was no where to be found; so also, dies nostri, quasi
vmbrae super terram, 1. Chron. 29.15.
and nulla est mora, 1. Chron. 29.15. Our days are as a shadow upon earth, and
there is no stay; they pass along; nay, they fly; fly so swiftly, that they
are gone, when we think them going, like a gasping coal, which in one Act,
glare's, and dye's; or the rude salutations of fire and powder, which but meet,
and part; touch, and consume. And, indeed (if we but observe) a shadow is not
so proper a resemblance of our life, as of our death; or, rather, something
between both. It Is an unequal mixture of light and darkness; or rather, a
light mask't, or vayl'd-vp in darkness, so that, the greater part must be
obscurity; and that resemble's death; what remayne's of light, is screen'd and
intercepted, and so look's but dimly toward life. Every shadow is an
imperfect night, and every night, a metaphorical death. Sleep and Death have
been long since called two sisters; and Night, the mother of them both.
Moreover, as every shadow is an imperfect night, so every life is an imperfect
death. The greater the shadow is, the nearer unto night, and so is the life
protract'd, unto death. And therefore our Prophet knowing that his earthly Tent
was a little wind-shooke, and obnoxious to daily ruin, will have his age
emblem'd by a shadow that is declined, ad occasum vergens, In Psalm. 102.12. and
109.23.
and in tenebras euanescens, says Muscuius; hastening to darkness, and the
night, and that night, death. When the Sun is in the Meridian, and the beams
of it perpendicular to our bodies, shadows change not suddenly, but when it
begin's to decline to the fall, every moment, almost, they vary; and therefore
his days are velut vmbrainclinata, seu serotina, Museul. ibid.
as an evening shadow which decline's with the Sun, and so set's. For, though
shadows appear larger, when the Sun is near the fall, yet that greatness
is not fatre from vanishing; vanity (I should say) the vanity in the text
(here) man; whose honors and triumphs, at the height, and, in his best state,
are but as shadows at noone; and his days, but as shadows near the set;
nay, not so hopeful, for they return again with the Sun; but man once set,
rises not, till the Sun and Heavens shall be no more. Job. 14.12. And twere
well that only the time of man's life were vanity, but his actions in that time
are a wilder vanity then the other. The Poets signified so much, when they set
in combustion all Greece and Asia for a gaudie Apple; and all Troy and Greece,
for a fair Curtizan; two dainty trifles to cause such bloody agitations in
States and Empires. What, but vanity could have proiected it? What but this,
omnimoda vanitas, put it in execution? But, who knows not, that most things
arrive mankind, as they seem, not as they are? As we please to fancy them,
not as they prove in their own nature? And so we are fooled out of the truth,
and realtie of things, by a vain apprehension of what they are not; showing
one thing in the rind, an external appearance, another, in the core and
internal essence; Sophistications, Impostures, Lies. And therefore the Prophet
complains on the sons of men, that they loved Vanity, and followed after
lies, Psalm. 4.9. not only because all worldly allurements yield no true
contentation, and felicity, but because (in very deed) they tend either to
equivocation, or falsehood; a deceivable falsehood (so the word Cozab
signifie's) which is such a lie, Aynesworth. in Psalm. 4.9.
as deceiue's men's expectations; and therefore that which in the twelfth
Psalm, verse 3. We translate deceitful lips, according to the Hebrew, is
false vanity, or vain falsehood, the word Shau noting both vanity of words,
and deeds, and sometimes that which is false too. Here upon the Prophet Agur
amongst other petitions he preferred to his God, his principal desire was,
that he would remove from him, vanity and lies, Pro. 30.8. And commonly they
go hand in hand; for, whatsoever is vain must be false too; Insomuch that under
the word vanity, a lie passes srequently in Scripture, or, Vide Pineda and
Boldnc. in cap. 11. Job 11.
at least in the Expositions on it: so in the eleventh of Job, what the vulgar
read's, hominum vanitatem, vanity of men, Pagnine call's homines mendaces, and
Caietan, homines falsitatis, lying men, or, men of falsehood; Pagn. Vatab.
Caiet. in cap. 11. Job. 11.
and Vatablus, (unwilling, as it seems, to sunder vanity from the lie)
translate's both ways, Nouit Deus quam vani, and ne quam homines. God knows
how vain and false men are; And therefore in the 62. Psalm. 10. the Latin has
it, Mendaces homines in stateris, men are lies in the balance; the English,
thus, men are vanity in the balance. And, indeed, the whole race of mankind
come's within the verge of these two words; if they be of cheap and humble
condition, they are called Vanity; if, of a more climing, high, and noble
estate, a lie. Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are alye,
Psalm. 62.9. Aynsworth in Psalm. 62.9.
A lie, or a vanity? nay, lighter then both; so that if they were laid in
balances together, they would mount up, says the text; In balances to mount
up, they together are lighter then vanity; intimating, Psalm. 62.10.
that if all men were put together in one balance, and this vanity and lie,
in another, the balances would mount up, and the frailty in man's side. A
pretty piece of aeyre, and leuitie, that vanity should weigh-downe; or, alie;
childhood, or wantonness, or folly, or ignorance, are not so light; nay, not
the leuitie of all these, woman.

The Locust, or the Grasshopper (creatures of emptiness and fear) are no
greater slaves of the wind then he. He is tossed to and froas the Grasshopper,
and driven away as the Locust, Aug. Iun. and Trem. Psalm. 30. In imagine non in
vmbra.
Psalm. 109.23. Thus, his whole life is but a tossing, or a driving (types of
instabilitie, and trouble) and these in a vain way too; so our Psalmist, here;
He walke's in a vain Image (as if his life were rather suppositious, and
imaginary, then a life indeed) and in this, he is at no peace, but he
disquieteth himself in vain, or, (as some read it) in vanity does he make a
stir; And what is the issue of this vain tumult? He beapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them, in the seventh verse of this Psalm. Of all
earthly vanities this is the most superlatiue; the omuimoda vanitas in the
Text, Aug. de Temp. 49. in cap. 3.
is not so vain as this. Conturbaris, o homo (says Augustine) Vane
conturbaris; quare? thesaurizas; cui? nescis. A rare providence (no doubt) to
treasure up, I know not what, for I know not whom. The Scripture scarce
afford's a fleeting at tribute to flesh and blood, but Riches have a share in
it. Men are called vanities, so are Riches, shadows, so are Riches; nothing,
so are Riches. Hark, Mammonist, here is a vanity, as well of Riches, Aug.
ibid.
as of men, and both these a shadow, and a nothing. But suppose those riches
firm, and solid; what then? Non infructuose conturbaris, sed vane conturbaris,
(says the Father) perchance the trouble is not so fruitless; but, it is as
vain; vain? Why? Thou know not who shall gather them; and, if thou know
not that, why do thou heap them up? or, if thou do, tell me, for whom?
thy self? dare thou say so, that art to die? thy issue, then? dare thou
say so of those that shall? Magna pietas! thesaurizat pater filijs; imo, magna
vanitas, thesaurizat moriturus, morituris; the Father, still, in his nine and
fortieth Sermon, de Tompore.

But grant thy heaps enlarged; thy fortunes, prosperous; thy loins,
fruitful, yet there is a moth and gangreene haunt's that estate that is
purchased with too much solicitude, the heir of it, (oftentime) subject to a
fit of improuidence, or luxury, or pride, or folly, or else, that common fever
of lust, and riot; or (perchance) the palsy of a die, shake's out his
posterity into misery, and want; and then Ille fluenao perdidit, quod tu
laborando congregasti; Aug. vt supra.
what before was a dropsy, is now grown to a consumption, thy baser avarice,
to a reproachful penury; and what thou have long fed on, with the bread of
carfulness, is at last brought to the bread of sarrow, to the lean cheek,
the hollow eyes, and the clean teeth; and he that was before the object of
thy wretchedness, and poor anxietie, is now, He that by usury and unjust gain
increases his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the
poor. Prou. 28.18. Vide Eccles. 2.26. Psalm. 127.
of another man's Charity, and remorse; and then thou will acknowledge this
vane conturbaris, too, that thou have disquieted thy self in vain, and to no
purpose heaped up riches, since thou know not who has gathered them. But,
suppose thy issue, both hopeful, and provident, such a one as will not only
preserve thy treasure, but inhaunce it; yet oftentimes his vine is barren, and
there are no Olive plants about his table; God does shut up the womb, or so
emasculate his loins, that either the fruit of it is abortiue, or none at all;
or, if he have any (as Bildad said unto Job) the first borne of death shall
devour his strength, Job. 18.13, 14.
and bring him to the King of terrors, Eccles 5.4. Job 33.34. Job 15.33. Vide
Eccles 4.8
he shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine and cast off his flower as the
Olive; and then the vane conturbaris comes here also; He has disquieted
himself in vain, and heaped up riches, and knowe's not who shall gather them.
Thus, Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it;
Psalm. 127.2.
Children are the heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward; others may plant, and water, but be giue's the increase; and where he
giue's them as blessings (as oftentimes he does) they are as arrows in the
hand of the strong man, Psalm. 127.4.5.
and happy is he that has his quiver full: but when they are given otherwise
(as they are sometimes) as the whip and sword of a declining house then they
are as arrows in the hand of the Almighty; arrows that are sharp, and keen,
shot from a deadly hand, and a bow of steel; arrows that stick fast, Job 7.
and pierce the very joints and the marrow; the venom whereof drinks up the
spirits, the spirits of a Name and Family, when the light of it shall be put
out, Job 18 5.
and the sparkle of his fire shine no more. Who knowe's not that God does often
scourge the sin of the Father in the children? and, for the foul The crimes
here mencion'd, were Avarice, Oppression, Sacrilege; which (spoken only in
communi, and as a positive truth in Divinity) the misprision, or prejudice of
some did wire-draw and restrain too personally; and brought-home that to
particular Families, which was intended only ingenerall, and at large. And
therefore, if there be any bosom so guilty, as to eutertaine them otherwise,
I am sorry for the Application: the Author is innocent.
obliquities of the Predecessor, set's a rot upon the whole Posterity, when
the name shall moulder with the Body, and the Fortunes with the name; so that
the curse against the wicked man, runn's double; first, against his fortunes;
they shall dry up as a river, and shall vannish with noise like a great thunder
in vain; next on his Issue; they shall not bring forth branches, but are as
unclean roots upon a hard rock. Eccles. 40.13, 15. Here is a vane
conturbaris, indeed; and not barely so, but, an infructuose conturbaris, also;
not only a vain anxietie, but a fruitless; for, here is neither a
thesaurizas, nor a congregabis; no Riches left that were heapt up; or (if there
be) none to gather them.

Thus, they that sow vanity shall reap the wind; not a wind that shall lull
and whistle them, but a wind that driue's and scatter's; scatters them, as the
chafe from the face of the whole earth. And though they grow mighty in
possession, or name; so mighty, that in height they reach the very cloud's,
yet God shall persecute them with his tempest, Psalm. 18.12.
and make them afraid with his storm; at his presence, these clouds shall be
removed; and then, hailestones, and coals of fire. Or, though they aspire not
so high, but climb the mountains only (though some mountains (they say)
kiss the clouds, too) yet, tangit montes, and fumigabunt, God shall touch
those mountains, and they shall smoke; and as they smoke, vanish, and
vanishing, confess Tusolus altissimus super omnem terram. Thou, O Lord, art
above those mountains, and not only above them, but all the World beside.

And I could wish that my words were altogether at random here; and looked not
collaterally, both to the text and the occasion. Who see's not (and let me not
be thought rough, or uncharitable, in that I say, who see's not) that in latter
ages the Almightie's Besome has been here; and, in the circuit of a few
years, swept away many brave Worthies of the name; and not only his Besome,
but his Axe too, lopt off many a hopeful twig, and glorious branch; and now of
late, struck at the The Root (howeuer) is still green; and I wish heartily
that it may grow-vp, and bud, and branch, to the flourishing and perpetuity of
the Name; though some have barkt at my integrity, making my words here, a
churlish prophecy, of the extirpation of it, and sinall doom. But such
snatlers and closebiters of men's honors, I mustproclaime ignorant, or unjust,
or both; for, either they understood not what I spoke, or, if they did, were
injurious in their application. Hoc tu Roman caueto.
Stem, of the Family; and at a blow hewe'd down, one of the goodliest Cedars
in all our Libanus. The very stones and walls speak so much; those untimely
Blackes, and these sorrows. And yet (me thinke's) our sorrows are not as they
should be; our Firre-trees howl not that their Cedar is fallen, neither are
our Harpes (as yet) hung upon the willowes; but we can sing an Epithalamium,
when we should be sighing of an Elegy, as if our proiects could befoole the
Almighties, and 'twere in our power to raise or establish a name, when God
seeme's to threaten the pulling down. But (O thou altogether vanity) look up
to the Hills above, and to the Heavens above them; and there, to the maker of
them both; who sit's in his great watchtower, and obserue's all the passages
of the sons of men; and not only obserue's them, but laugh's them to scorn;
and, childing our presumptuous and vain designs, bidd's us look back to the
text here; where we may read the story of our wretchedness, and so
acknowledge, at length with our Prophet, that, Thou, O God, have made our days
as a span-long, and that our Age is as nothing before thee; and surely every
man in his best slate is altogether vanity.

I have done now with the text, and should begin with the occasion of it; the
death of our Honorable Friend; but I was commanded only for a Sermon, not for
a Panegyricke, that (I suppose) you might have had (here) in a more keen and
accurate discourse; mine (I confess) like my griefs, heavy, and bedewed.
True sorrow is more hearty, then Rhetorical; and not so fit for applause, as
for a groan. Your sauning eloquence playe's to much with the tongue, and
leaue's the inward man unsearched; but, my bosom is engaged here, and not my
lips; and that is too full to be emptied in this span-long of an Auditorie; the
world shall have it in an impartial Anniuersarie: or, should I vent my
respects, here I could be only your Remembrancer, not, your Informer.

The Country was not so much a stranger to his worth, but must acknowledge this
truth with me; that he was not guilty of any peculiar sin, either of
greatness, or of youth; no lofty-ones, of arrogance or scorn; no
grinding-ones, of cruelty or oppression; no flaming-ones, of riot, or of lust;
no base-ones of anxiety, or solicitude; no lewdones, of profanation or
debauchment; no biting-ones, of rancour, or detraction; no creepingones, of
Insinuation, or popularitie; no painted-ones, of ceremony, or hypocrisy; but
all his Actions went by the line, and the square, as if his life had been an
exact Epitome both of morality, and Religion. There was nothing mortal about
him, but his Body, and that was too frail a cabbonet for those rich eminences
to lodge in, Plin: Paneg.
so that, as Pliny told his Traian mortalitas magis finita est, quam vita his
life was not terminated, but his mortality; Goodness and virtue (which were
his being) have a kind of Divinity in them; and so, not mortal. Bonus a Deo
differt tantum tempore, says the Stoicke, Sen. Ep. 73.
Between God and a good man, there is no distinction but in time; nor in that
neither, if he mean (as it seeme's he does) a titularie God, Idem Ibid.
not an essential; for, nulla sine Deo men's bona, there is no good mind
without a God in it: and that is the reason (I think) great men were first
called Gods; for, greatness presupposes some raritie and perfection in it, and
where that is, there is a kind of God head. And, if it were ever in greatness,
it was here; whether you take greatness for the name, or for the spirit; not,
that he was either haughty or supercilious, but of a temper, truly generous,
and heroicke, and (what is above either) truly Christian. A fast friend, and a
noble brother, A munificent and open-handed Master; and (what I know, and
therefore speak, and speak that you should know, and so imitate) an
uncorrupted Patron; no firebrand in his Country, nor Meteor in his Church; a
flash, and falfe-blaze in Religion, he was so far from approving, that he
loathed; neither was he so benighted in his intellectuals, as to be led up and
down in a perverse ignorance and darkness, by an Ignis fatuus; your vocal
purity, and tongue devotion, and furious zeal, even when he was no more a
dying man, but a Saint (and the words of dying Saints are Oraculous to me) he
both censured and disclaimd; wishing the walls of our Jerusalem built up
stronger in Unity and Peace; and, a more temperate and discreet silence amongst
the wayward Hot-spurres of our Spiritual Mother. And, indeed, this Clamorous
Sanctity, this affected dress of holiness, without, is not the right dress.
Prou. 30.12.
There is a generation (says the Prophet) that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet is not washed from their filthiness; the ragge, or the menstruous
cloute, not so loathsome as some of these. Our bodies (you know) are called the
Temples of the Holy Ghost; our heart, the Altar of that Temple; true devotion,
the fire of that Altar; sighs, and groans, and sobs, the sacrifice for that
fire; These cast-vp the acceptable odor; these, only these, the sweet incense
in the nostrils of the Almighty. The Hecatombe, and outward pomp of
sacrifice, has too much of the beast in it, the many-headed beast, the
multitude; that, within, is of the spirit; and that of the spirit, is the true
Child's of God; And this our noble friend had, without gloss or varnish, his
life a recollected Christianity; his sickness, a penitent humiliation; and
his death, an vnbattered assurance of his richer estate in glory; Insomuch,
that I knew not, whether I might envy, or admire, that God had bestowed such a
plentiful mortification, on a Secular condition, and left Divinity, so
barren. No Viper in his bosom; nor Vulture at his heart; no convulsion or
gripe of Conscience; no pang of the inward man (so he confessed to me) for the
reigue of any darling sin. And (indeed) his private meditations, groans,
soliloquies, pensive eleuations of eyes, and spirit, rapture's full of
sublimitie, and contemplation (such as the heart could only eiaculate, and not
the tongue) undaunted resolutions and defiance of death, and all her terrors,
spoke him glorisied, before he died. And thus, having made a full peace with
God, and with the world, he sang his Nunc dimittis, and made a willing
surrender of his Soul into the hands of his Redeemer; where he has now his
Palm and white Robe, his Penny of true happiness, and Crown of ever lasting
glory; to which God bring us, with him, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Gloria in Excelsis Deo.

FINIS.
THE RICH MAN'S WARNING-PEECE. A SERMON, UPON OCCASION, FORMERLY PREACHED, AND
NOW published, by the Author, Humfrey Sydenham, late Fellow of Wadham College
in Oxford.

Monendi sunt diuites, qui tanta patiebantur pro auro, quanta erant sustinenda
pro Christo; inter tormenta, nemo Christum confitendo, amisit; Nemo aurum, nisi
negando, seruauit; quocirca, vtiliora erant (fortasse) tormenta, quae bonum
incorruptibile amandum docebant, quam illa bona quae sine vllo vtili fructu
dominos sui amore torquebant.

Aug. lib. 1. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 10. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston
for Nathanael Butter. 1630.

TO THE GREAT ORNAMENT OF HER SEX, AND NAME, MISTRESS ANNE PORTMAN, etc. THE
accumulation of Honors, here, and of Glory, in future.
My worthiest,
WHat you formerlie vouchsafed to peruse in a rude transcript; J here present
you in a character, like your self, and virtues, fair, and legible; J think
it my prime honor, that it must now wear your livery, and what shall
immortal it, your name; Had it nothing else to make it live in the opinion,
and esteem of others, this were enough to give it both countenance, and
eternity; Greatness can only patronize our endeauours, Goodness glorifies
them. Under that stamp and seal of yours J have adventured it abroad, that
you might know my respects are the same in public, which they were, lately,
under a private, though noble roof; J never yet whispered an observance, but J
dared proclaim it to the world, and then, too, when there might be some
pretense and color to suspect my loyalty; where I am engaged once in my
services, and profess them, J am not beaten off by the causeless distastes of
those J honor; you J ever did, and the name you beautify; on which, though I
am no longer an Attendant, J am still a votary, and such a one, whose knee
speaks as loud for it, as his tongue; his devotions, as his thanks; and both
these from a heart swept so clean of deceit, or fulsehood, that could it lodge
so much sophistry as to teach the lips to quauer, and dissemble, J had not
been thus (perhaps) under the furrows of a displeased brow, but might have
proved as fair in the smile and cringe of many, as J am now down the wind,
both in their countenance, and opinion. But, sincerity is the same, still,
whether in exile, or advancement, in disgrace, or honor; wheresoever I travel
J carry my self with me; I am not torn into distractions, and fears, not
parcelled (as others) into doubts, and hopes; but, where J am, J am in the
whole man; and, where J am, so, I am All yours; All in my moral, civil, and
divine obseruances, one that will thank you, honor you, and pray for you,
unfeignedly, willingly, constantly, whilst I am thought worthy of the name, or
attribute of

Your most humbly-deuoted Humfry Sydenham.

THE RICH MAN'S WARNING-PEECE.
PSALM. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not thy Heart upon them.


I Find no dispute here, about the title of this Psalm; it is David's to
Ieduthun; that Ieduthun who prophesied with the Harp, and with Trumpets, and
Cymballs, and loud instruments of Music, magnified the Lord, 1. Chron. 16.42.

The The^me and Subject of it is various, and mixed; not set mournefully to
strains of penitence or mortality, (as in others of his sacred Anthems) but to
Aiers of more spirit and life, such as would sublimate and intraunce the
Devotion of the Hearer. The former part whereof is key'd high, very high, and
reaches God, and his powerful mercies; the other tuned lower, to Man, and
touches on his frailties and weak deportment. That which concerns his God is
(as 'twere) the plaine-song; the ground and burden of it grave, and sober, but
full of majesty, My soul waits upon God, He is the Rock of my Salvation and
defense, at the second verse; but, The Rock of my strength, and Refuge, at the
seventh. That which concerns Man, is full of Descant, runs nimbly on his
state, degrees, condition; diuides between the humble, and the proud, and
censures both; Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
lie, verse 9. Thus having warbled sweetly about the heart and middle of the
Psalm; at length he shuts up his Harmony in Discord: In the front of this
verse He quarrels with the Robber, and the Oppressor; and at the foot thereof
(as if the Great Man were near allied them) He throws in a cavil concerning
Riches; where He first, put's the case, with a si affluxerint, If Riches
increase, then, the resolution or advice on it, nolite cor apponere, Set not
your heart upon them. These are the parts, plainly, without violence, or
affectation; so is the discourse on them; in the delivery of which, I must beg
that double charity which does commonly encourage weak men in their
endeavors; Patience, Attention: and first of the si affluxerint, if Riches
increase.

Riches have carried their weight of Honor and esteem through all Ages, Pats.
1.
and, almost, all conditions in them; but not always, at the same height;
Those of our Forefathers lay most in their Flocks, and Droues; the Fold was
their Treasure-house, and not, the Tent. The word poecunia, money, was not then
heard off, but Peculium, Gain, which (as Viues notes it upon Augustine) was
first derived from pecudes, Cattle, Jn lib. 7. de ciu. Dei cap. 12. Aug. etiam
lib. de Domo disciplina cap. 6.
because these were all the wealth of Antiquity; for, they were then (for the
most part) Shepherds. The glory and respect of Riches were near their
Meridian in the days of Solomon, when they first began to shine in their full
luster; before a few Asses laden with Lentiles and parched Corn, were thought
a large present for a King; Then, multitudes of Camels, with Spices, gold, 1.
King. 10.2.
and precious stones scarce worth acceptance; Of old, 1. King. 10.27. Exodus
30.18.
a few shekels of silver were a canonized treasure; Now, they were of no
repute, but as stones in the streets of Jerusalem. In fine, 1. King. 10.22.
Lauers of brass were in the beginning rich enough for the Tabernacles of our
God; but vessels of beaten gold must be here hammered, for the vtensels of a
King.

Riches are now at their high spring; every Tide wafts in silver, in ships of
Tarshish, and gold in the Navy of Hiram; Treasure flows in that abundance,
that it does no more satisfy, but amaze; a Queen beholds it, and there is no
spirit in her. 1. Reg. 10.27. From amazement in this age, it grows to
veneration in the next; that which was, erewhile, but an Ingot, or rude lump,
is, Now, trick't up into a Godhead; Gold shall be no longer for use, or
ornament, but for worship; and now the Nations begin to kneel to it, and give
it the devout posture of the whole man; the elevation of the eye, and
expansion of the hands, and the Hosanna of the tongue, and the Magnificat of
the heart; and thus, in a zealous applause of their new-got Deity, the Cornet,
the Flute, the Sackbut, the Psaltery, and the Dulcimer shall sound out their
loud Idolatry. Nay, the ancient Romans were grown so superstitious to their
mass of Treasure, Aug. lib. 7. de ciu. Dei cap. 12. and, de discipl. Christ.
tract. cap 6.
that they made not only money their God, but called God, money; so their
Jupiter was named pecunia, because there was (as they coniectur'd) a kind of
omnipotency in money, which though it creates not, yet it commands all
things. O magnam rationem Diuini nominis (says Augustine) hoc Auaritia Ioui
nomen imposuit: Avarice, no doubt, thus Christened Jupiter, at first, that Those
which affected Coin, should not seem to love every God, Aug. ibid.
but the very King of gods. Had He been called Riches, the Title had been more
passeable, and the devotion less sottish; for, Diuitiae are one thing, and,
Pecunia, another; we call the Good, and the Just, and the Wise, Rich; which
have little, or nothing but in virtue; the Auaritious, and Greedy, Poor;
because they ever want. Moreover, God himself we truly style Rich; yet not,
Pecunia, but, Omnipotentia; so says the Father in his seventh book De
Ciuitate Dei. cap. 12. And indeed, the God of our happiness we style
Omnipotence, and not Money; but, sometimes, to beautify and set out his
perfections, Riches. So we find, Riches of his goodness, Romans 2. and Riches
of his mercy, Romans 9. and Riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2. and Riches of his
wisdom, Romans 11. Lo, his Goodness, Grace, Mercies, Wisdom, and to show
their Height, and Greatness, and Immensitie, and Euerlastingnesse no thing to
express them, but Riches; which, if they afford such glory in the Metaphor,
no doubt, there is something of worth and estimation in the letter, too;
Riches, as they are Riches, have both their virtue and applause; for the Spirit
calls them Blessings, and Good things; but they are externa media, Good things
without us, which we may, vti, not frui, use only, not enjoy, or rather not
joy in them; if Delight, here, be not more proper then Joy; since Joy (for
the most part) points to things Spiritual; Delight, to pleasures Temporal.
Howeuer, Riches may sometimes lawfully touch, both with our Pleasure, and
Desire, so the Aim be not preposterous, and oblique; either, to make them as
Fuel for our Pride, or Bellows for our Lust, or Oil for our Concupiscence,
or Flames for our Ambition, or Smoke for our Uncharitableness. For, though
matters of Beneficence and gift look toward Riches, as their Source, and
Isntrumental cause; yet, commonly, where there is most of Fortune, there is
least of Charity, and so when there is Ability of Distribution, there wants
Will; and that ever strangles the Nobleness of Those which are to give, and
the shoutes and Benedictions of them which should receive. And this, I believe,
first gave life and breathing to that grey-hair'd paradox: Si opes sint bona,
cur non reddunt possidentes bonos? If Riches be good, why have they not
influence into him that ownes them, and so make the possessor good? Soul,
(says the Rich man in the Parable) Thou have much good, laid up for many
years, Luke 12.
sleep and take thine ease; mark the Paraphrase. Quid est iniquius homine,
qui multa bona vult habere, and bonus ipse esse non vult? Indignus es qui
habeas, qui non vis esse, quod vis habere: The Father in his 28. Sermon de
Diuersis. What a mass of iniquiquitie is man swollen unto, that still desires
much good, yet not to be good himself? He is unworthy to have any thing that
he might Be, which would not be what he would have.

Riches therefore, though they challenge the Name of good, yet there are such,
as both Good and Bad do indifferently inherit, and whilst they are good,
cannot denominate their Master good; and therefore to rectify this obliquitie,
Saint Augustine acquaints us with a Twofold Good; Bonum quod facit bonum, and
Bonum vnde facias bonum: There is a Good which does make good, and that is thy
God; and there is a Good by which thou may do good, and that is thy Mammon.
Do good; how? Hark, the Psalmist; He has dispersed abroad, Psalm. 112.
He has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, Psalm
112.9. Hoc est Bonum, hoc est bonum vnde sis Iustitia bonus; si habeas bonum
vnde sis bonus fac bonum de bono, vnde non es bonus: So the Father warbles, in
his third Sermon de verbis Domini. Behold, thou have large heaps of Treasure;
distribute them; in so doing, thou do enlarge thy happiness; Here is but
giving to the Poor; and then, Righteousness for ever. Lo, an exchange of
infinite advantage; weigh thy Disbursements with thy Gain, thy Diminutions
with thy Increase; thy store, perhaps, is somewhat thinner, but thy Justice is
enhaunc'd; That only is lessened which thou were shortly to lose; and this
improoued which thou art ever to possess. In fine, there is only a Dispersit,
or a Dedit, in respect of the gift; he has disposed, or given; no more; but
there is a Manet in aeternum: for the Reward of the giver, His Righteousness
endures for ever; for ever, why? The Anostle answers, He that has charity,
has God; 1. John 4
God dwells in him, and He in God: and where God dwells, there must needs be a
Manet in aeternum; for, God is eternity. A Rich man, then, if he have not
Charity, what has he? And a Poor man, if he have Charity, what has not? Tu
forte putas, Aug. sermon. 64. de Temp.
quod ille sit dives cuius Arca plena est Auro, and ille non est dives cuius
conscientia plena est Deo: Thou think, perchance, that He is Rich, whose
chests are thronged with gold, and he not Rich, whose Conscience is filled with
God; But the Father puts the Lie upon this foul misprision with an Ille vere
Dives, in quo Deus habitare dignatur, in his 64. Sermon de tempore. He is
truly Rich in whom God has vouchsafed to dwell; for, There is Satietie, and
full content, Metellus or Croesus not half so rich; and He truly poor, in
whom God has refused to dwell, for, There is nothing but Anxiety and
lamentable Indigence, Regulus, or Irus, not half so poor. Qui te, and alia
nouit, non propter illa beatior, sed propter te solum beatus: The same Saint
Augustine in the third of his Confessions, cap. 4.

How miserable then is the condition of those who suffer the current of their
Affections) to be inordinately carried from the euer-springing fountains
above, upon broken Cisternes that will hold no water? From the Creator of the
world, to Creatures here, of ouer-valued, and false esteem, a little
Idolatriz'd Earth, or magnified trash; a few garish Transitories, Riches but
improperly; for they have neither Truth, nor Certainty; their worth is lame,
and crutched merely upon opinion; their luster counterfeit, like those false
lights which delude the wandering Seamen; and betray them to shelues and
rocks, where both their Hopes, and they, are untimely split. But suppose those
Riches (as I suppose only) to be as true, as those Lights are false; yet thus
to indulge them is dangerous Idolatry, since that which is ordained for a
Servant, they make not only their Master, but their God. And indeed, Such may
be said to have Riches as we are said to have the Fever, when the Fever has
us; Sen. ep. 78.
They have not Riches, but Riches, them; for, They which are either transported
with their glory, or rapt with their possessions, do by Riches as birds do by
Daring-glasses, play with their own ruin; how-euer, such are their fair
allurements and inuitations, that Those who are only taken with the outside,
and Bark of things, are strangely infatuated: but in this, They resemble
little Children, which value every painted trifle, as a Treasure; a Bugle, or
glassie Carkanet, as precious as that of Onyx. And what difference is there
(says the Stoicke) between them and us, Nisi quod nos circa tabulas and
statuas insanimus, chartus inepti, we are madding after Statues, and Pillars,
more costly foolish, Illos, reperti in littere calculi leaves, and aliquid
habentis varietatis, delectant, they taken with stones and shells of various
colors, found on the Seashore; Sen. Ep. 119.
we, with pillars of Jasper, and Porphirie, from the Sands of Egypt, or Deserts
of Africa, to shoulder some Porch, or Dyning-roome, to banquet or revel in.
All this Equipage of Greatness is but a Glorious vanity, and that which the
Moralist call's Bracteata faelicitas, a spangled happiness, Sen. vt supra.
a leaf of gold laid on Iron, which for a time glitter's, and then rust's; a
gaudie Vane, or Streamer on the top of some Turret,, whiuer's and flicker's
with every blast; a quaint Jewel, hung loose in hair, which, as it dangle's,
falls; a very Glassie Pomp, cum splendet, frangitur; like Bubbles, which in
their swelling, break; Flattering and deluding Blessings, and such as prove
better to them that hope for them, then to those that do enjoy them; For,
instead of that Contentment which should assail them by the fruition of their
desires, here is nothing but Calamity and new torment; Care of their
preservation, and doubt of their disposal, and fear of their loss, and
trouble of their improuement; to these, lean watchfulnes, broken thoughts,
hollow resolutions, interrupted peace, besides a whole Host of selfe-vexations
and) the wheel the Rack not half the Torture. Thus, Gold is a
stumbling-Blocke to him that does sacrifice unto it, and very fools shall be
taken with it, (says Jesus the son of Sirach) shall be taken with it? nay,
shall be taken from it, even when he does sacrifice unto it; so says Jesus the
son of David, Fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, taken
from thee, two ways; First, thy soul from the riches of thy body, and then
thy soul from the body of thy riches; And therefore, there is a vae
Diuitibus, denounced against such, Amos 6.1.
Woe to you that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the mountains of Samaria,
which, though the Marcionite would make a vae, only of Admonition, and not of
Malediction; yet, Tertullian, in the chasticement of that error, says; that a
Cauete is always used in matters of Advice, but a vae never, but in those
thunderclaps of fury and malediction. So, we find only a Cauete against
Avarice, because That is the Semen, and first matter (as 'twere) of Riches,
Beware of Coueteousnesse; for, man's life consists not in Abundance. Luke
12.13. But there is a fearful vae against Riches, as though they still cried
for divine Castigations, Woe unto you that are rich, why? you have received
your consolation, Luke 6.24. your consolation, how? Ex Diuitijs, de gloria
illarum, and secularibus fructibus, of your riches, and their glory, and all
secular content, not otherwise. So says the Father in his fourth Book against
Marcion. Cap. 5. What folly is it then to pursue that with violence and
Intention, which when we have gained is no satisfaction, but a torment? what
madness thus to macerate and crucify the whole man for a few titular and
opinionated riches; of which he that carouse's and drinke's deepest is ever
thirsty? Nothing quenches an immoderate appetite; poculum respuit, quia
fluuium sitit (says Augustine). Cataracts and rivers are but draughts
competent for such concupiscences to swallow. Habes Aurum, habes Argentum,
concupiscis aurum, concupiscis argentum; and Habes, and concupiscis; and plenus
es, and sitis; morbus est, non opulentia, the same Father in his 3. Sermon de
verbis Apostoli. How miserable are those desires, which are not bounded by what
we do possess, but by what we can atchieue. If a man suppose that Fortune
he is Lord of, not voluminous enough, although he be Monarch of the whole
world; yet is he wretched: he is not happy, Sen. lib de paupertate.
that thinks himself happy; he that agrees well with his poverty is a rich
man, and he that agrees not well with his riches is a poor man; he is not
rich that still lack's something, nor he poor that wants nothing; vtrum
maius habere multum, an satis, it is the Stoics Dilemma; whether had thou
rather to have much, or enough? he that has much, desires more, which is an
argument, he has not yet sufficient; he that has enough, has obtained the
end, which never befalls a rich man. Seneca labor's to press this home to his
Lucillius; Ep. 119.
Set before me the reputed rich, Crassus, or Lucinius; let him calculate his
full Revenues, what he has in present, and hoped-for Possessions; this man
(if thou believe me) is poor; or (if thy self) may be poor; whether is he
Covetous, or Prodigal? if Covetous, he has nothing; if Prodigal, he shall
have nothing; The Gold thou cal'st his, is but his Cabonet's, Et Quis Aerario
inuidet? who would envy a full coffer? The man whom thou suppose'st to be
Master of his treasure, is but the bag that shut's it up.

Lo then, the base Idolatry of these times, and men, which not only raise
their Hecatombs to their Golden Saint, but Deifie the very Shrine that keepe's
it. A piece of wrinckled providence, or gray-hayr'd thrift; nay worse, a mere
decrepit Avarice; when for a little languishing and bedrid Charity, they
embalme the Honors and Memory of rich men with their precious Perfumes and
Ointments, such as should cast only their Odours on the Monuments of good men;
And not only so, but they advance their Statues and Pillars in our very
Temples, I know not, whether more to the dishonor of our God, or to the
Immortality of their own Name. What Is this but to turn Israelite again, and
take off from the glory of the Lord of Hoasts, to worship a Golden Calfe? By
the Law of Nature (says the Epicure) the greatest riches are but a composed
poverty; and by the Law of God, the greatest poverty is but ill-compes'd
riches; for he that pile's them by fraud or violence, builds Aauarice one
story higher, to oppression; and then not only Poverty, but Judgment
follows; God shall rain snares upon them, Psalm 18
That which should otherwise cherish, shall now entangle them; and then, Storm
and Tempest shall be their portion to drink, such a storm as will not be
allaid without a shower of vengeance. Hark, how it blowe's? Woe unto them,
That join House to house, and lay field to field, till they be placed alone in
the midst of the Earth; This is in mine ears; says the Lord of Hoasts; of a
truth, many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without an
Inhabitant; Ten Acres of vineyard shall yield one Bath, and the seed of an Omer
shall yield an Ephah: Is this all? No, the Thunder clap is behind, Hell has
enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, and their multitude
and their Pomp shall descend into it. Esaias 5.14. There is no misery to unjust
riches; no leanness of teeth like those which grow fat with the substance of
another; but, to them which grind Poverty by Extortion, and deuorant plebem,
sicut escam panis, eat up my people, as a morsel of bread, what Hell, here?
what Horror in after times? Oh, the fearful Eiulations some have shrik'd!
Would God had given me a heart senseless like the flint in the rocks of stone;
which, as it can taste no pleasure, so no Torment; no torment, here; but, when
the Heavens shall shriuell like a scroule, and the Hills move like frighted men
out of their place, what Mountain shall they get by entreaty to fall upon
them? what covert to hide them from that fury, which they shall never be able
to suffer, nor avoid? Judgments do not always follow Crimes as Thunder does
Lightening, Instantly; but, sometimes, an Age is interposed, as between two
Earthquakes; though they may escape the darts and wounds of temporal
persecutions here, yet the sting that lie's behind is Dreadful. They shall
suck the Gall of Aspes, Job 20.14.
and the Vipers tongue shall slay them.

Thus, we see, Riches and Blessedness do not always kiss; He Is not ever
Happy that is prosperous; the acquisition of much wealth, is no End of
misery, but a change: the Low-built Fortune harbour's as much Peace, as that
which is Higherroof'd; and has one advantage beyond it, it is less
wind-shooke. The humble Hysope and Shrub of the valley are not so exposed to
Tempests, as the Cedar in Libanus, or the Oak in Basan; they are threatened with
many a Cloud and Exhalation, which the other neither Fear, Epicurus.
nor Suffer. Contented Poverty (says the good Athenian) is an Honest thing;
but it is no more Poverty if is be content; we cannot say, he is poor that
is satisfied, but he that couet's more. He that is at peace with his desires,
and can compose himself to what Nature only requires from him, is not only
without the Sense, but without the Fear of misery; is he poor that has
neither Gold, nor Hunger, nor Thirst? plus Jupiter non habet. Jupiter himself
has no more; That is not little which is enough, nor that much which is not
enough; He that think's much Little, is still poor; and he that think's Little
much, is ever Rich; Rich in respect of Nature, though not Opinion. The man thou
cal'st poor, has, doubtless, something that is superfluous; and where
Superfluity is, there can be no want; where no want, no poverty; on the
otherside, the man thou stil'st Rich, is either Poor, or like a poor man; he
cannot improve his Store but by Frugalitie; and Frugalitie is but paupertas
voluntaria, a voluntary poverty, Seneca call's it so in his fifteenth Epistle
ad Lucillium. Let Us, then, Epist. 91^
borrow Advice from that sacred Heathen (pardon the Epethite, Seneca will own
it) and press it home to the practice of a Christian, Measure all things by
natural desires; only, beware thou mix not Vices with Desires; Nature
content's her self with a little, what is, beyond, or above that, is
impertinent, and not necessary. Thou art hungry, reach not after Dainties,
the Appetite shall make that toothsome, which is next; whether thy bread be
white, or brown, Nature question's not. Illa ventrem non delectari vult, sed
impleri. She would have the body fed, not delighted. Thou art dry; whether
this water run from the next Lake, or that which is arted by Snow, or
foreign cold, Nature disputes not; she labor's to quench thy Thirst, not to
affect thy Palate; whether the cup be Gold, or Crystal, Sabinian, or that of
Murrha, or else the hollow of thine own hand, it matter's not; Fix thine eyes
upon the End of all things, and thou will loath Superfluities: Number tibi cum
fauces vrit sitis Aurea quaeris pocula? Number esuriens, fastidis omnia praeter
pauonem? Hunger is not Ambitious, she looke's not after the quality of
meats, but the measure; how she may Fill the body, not pamper it; These are
torments of an unhappy Luxury, when we seek new ways how to provoke, and
glut the Appetite, and not only to refresh our Tabernacles, Ecclus 37.
but to cloy them. Delicates powered upon a mouth shut up are like messes of
meat set upon a grave, things only for Spectacle, not Repast. Of all
Gluttonies, that of the Eye is most Epicuricall, when it would still see
Dainties which it cannot taste, till the Desire has as much surfeited, as the
Body, and so we abuse the Bounty of a better Nature to satisfy the Lust and
Concupiscence of the whole man; and this Rapine and greediness of the sense,
is as unwarrantable, as that of fortune, which breake's down all banks of
moderation; and therefore, without either Moral or Divine prescription. There
can be no Virtue in Extreme; no good, which consist's not in exactness of
proportion, so that by the diminution or excess of that proportion, Vice
insinuates; insomuch, that in the exuberancie of these outward creatures, Sin
is conceived, Aquin. 2.2. q. 118. Art. 1.
a Capital, and Daring sin, when above a due equality, and measure, we
either acquire or retain them eagerly; And this the Schoole-man call's (...),
an Immoderate hunger, and persuite of temporals, in secunda secundae 118.
quaest. Art. 1. There is no outward state of life so blessed as that which
Diuide's between Penury and Abundance; the extreme on either side is
Misery. And therefore the wisest King that ever was, and the greatest both for
Treasure and Retinue, in his own desire of secular things, ever mixed his
Orisons with this Petition, Lord give me neither Riches nor Poverty, Sed
victui meo tribue necessaria, Feed me with food convenient (the English giue's
it) but the Latin, necessarium, is more Emphaticall; there are some things
Convenient for the Majesty of a King, which are not always Necessary for his
person; but Solomon, here, desire's only to have Nature accommodated, and not
State; Riches he would have none; and these are convenient for him as a King,
but something to feed him with, and that is necessary for him as a Man; an
humble request for so mighty a Potertate, and yet so much as he need's to beg,
though, not so much as God has purposed to bestow; his Blessings come
oftentimes in showers, when they are sued for but as sprinklings. In that
exquisite plat-forme and rule of Prayer prescribed us by our Savior, all
temporal desires are inuolu'd in this, Give us this day our daily bread; it is
Bread, only, we ask, and bread only, for a day, and these are Both
necessary; Necessary two ways; First, in respect of our selves, for Bread
(says the Psalmist) strengthen's the heart of Man; man's chiefest part, the
Heart; and that chief part, frail; and frailty needs strengthening every day;
Then, in respect of the command; it must be Bread, for a day, too; The Lord
bidd's the Israelites gather Manna, only for a day, and the Gospel enioynes
the Disciples, with a Nolite cogitare in crastinum, Care not for to morrow, but
let to morrow care for it self. Merito ergo Christi Discipulus victum sibi in
Diem postulat, qui de crastino cogitare prohibetur; says Cyprian; Cyp de Orat.
Dom.
He rightly demand's bread only for a day, who is forbid to provide any thing
for to morrow. I came naked out of my mothers womb (says Job) and naked shall
I return. We brought nothing into this world (says Paul) and nothing we
shall carry out; Nakedness? and Nothing? into the world? and out of it? What
then can we require here, but Necessaries? and what these are, the Apostle
giue's in two words, Victum, Tegumentum, Food and Raiment, and enioyne's
Content with these, 1. Tim. 6.8. But what food, what raiment must we be
contented with? Necessarium victum, Necessarium tegumentum, non inane, non
superfluum, Saint Augustine resolue's in his fifth Sermon, De verbis Apostoli,
Food and Raiment necessary, not Luxurient, not Superfluous; Nature require's
not the Latter, but if God sometimes bestow them, make those Superfluities
another's Necessaries, Sint tua superflua pauperibus necessaria; it is the same
Father's advice in the same Sermon. Mistake me not; I am no Disciple of Rome,
nor Athens, no Stoicke I, nor Jesuit, I hate a Cloister, or a Stoa; I like not
the Monk in his Monastery, nor the Cynicke in his Tub, nor the Anchoret in
his Cell; I loath the Penitentiarie and his water, the Capuchin and his Stony
Pillow; I pity the thredbare Mendicant, and the barefooted Pilgrim; such
wilful penancing of the body (for ought I read) God neither command's nor
approue's. A voluntary retirement from Society, or Fortune sauour's more of
Will, then Judgment, of peevishness, then Religion. If God send me Riches I
accept them thankfully, and employ them, in my best, to his service, and mine
own; But if by Casualtie, or Affliction, or some unhappy Accident, I am
driven to Indigence, or Calamity; or else, if God have proportioned me such
an humble Condition; I Will take no indirect course to any higher, but carry this
cheerfully, without Solitariness, or Discontent; and, as with the spirit of
old Attalus, so with his Language too, Torqueor, sed fortiter, been est: Sen.
Epist. 5.
occidor, sed fortiter, been est.

And hence, (no doubt) it was, that Augustine so magnified his Paulinus; who
having fallen from infinite riches to a retired poverty, Aug. lib. de Ciuit.
Dei, cap. 10.
when the Barbarians besieged Nola, (of which he was Bishop) spoiling all as
they went, as a general Deluge, and making him prisoner both to shame, and
want, thus powr'd-out his devout expressions to his God, Domine non excrucior
propter Aurum, etc. Lord, I am not troubled for gold, or silver; for where all
my treasures are, thou know: even there had he reposed all his, where He
advised to lay them, who foretold these miseries to fall upon the world. A
brave resolution, and worthy of that Crown, which wreathe's all Martyrdomes;
and yet but such as we, out of the honor of our Profession, should have, and,
in our fires of Trial, ought to use. That Christian who has sometimes shined
in the glory of outward Fortunes, and afterward endured the Batteries of some
temporal afflictions, and yet in the midst of these cannot awake his Harp,
and Psalterie, and sing with David, My heart O God is fixed, my heart is fixed,
I will give praise, Praise, as well for thy punishments, as thy Blessings, is a
very Coward in temptation, and unworthy either of his Countenance, or Colors;
He that cannot take up the Cross with patience, and loose all to find his
God, deserue's him not; Minus te amat, Aug. 10, Cons. cap. 9.
qui tecum aliquid amat, quod non propter te amat, says Augustine: He love's
thee little, who love's any thing with thee, that he does not love for thee;
All this shadow and froth of transitory things must vanish, for the hope of
our bliss in future; Master we have left all and followed thee (the Disciples
cry) What shall we have? What shall ye have? All things in having him, so
says Saint Cyprian, Cyprian. de Coen. Dom.
Cum Dei sint omnia, habenti Deum nil deerit, si ipse Deo non desit. Since all
things are God's, to him that has God, nothing can be wanting, except he be
wanting unto God; Nothing, says the Father? No good thing, says the Prophet,
The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord
shall want nothing that is good; Psalm. 34.10. Though all earthly persecutions
entrench thee, and Misery seems to come on like an Armed man; and thou art
fallen into the jaws of those enemie's, whose Teeth are Spears, and Arrows,
and their Tongue, a sharp Sword; yet Angels shall encampe about thee, and the
Lord of Hoasts shall be thy Buckler, and thy Shield; the Neighing of the
Horse, the Noise of the Trumpet shall not invade thee; or if They do, and at
such a strait, that the Arm of Flesh growe's weak, and all earthly
fortification, vain, yet his mercy is great unto the Heavens, and his Truth
reaches unto the clouds; the glorious Host above shall muster all their
forces to assist thee, the Stars shall fight for thee, and Thunder speak
loud unto thine enemies; Nay, God himself shall undertake thy quarrel, He
shall bow the Heavens, and come down; the Earth shall tremble, and the
Foundations thereof shall shake because He is angry; He shall set his
Terrors in Array, and fight mightily thy Battles, his severe wrath he shall
sharpen as a sword, and put on Jealousy for complete Armor; Lo, how he
breaks the Bow in pieces, and Knappeth the Spear insunder, and burns the
Chariots in the fire; Hailestones full of fury he shoots as Arrows, his right
aiming thunderbolts go abroad, and from the clouds, as a well drawn Bow,
they fly unto the Mark. Thus in thy Height of miseries, God shall be thy
Castle, and strong Tower; and under the shadow of his wings shall be thy
refuge, till these calamities be ouer-past. God never leaves His, in their
extremities; whether in the Cave, or in the Mountain; in the Den, or in the
Dungeon; he is always there, both in his Power, and Assistance, and,
sometimes, in his Person, too; when all natural supplies grow hopeless, God
purueye's for his children, by his Miracles; Rocks shall burst with water; and
Ravens provide Bread; and Clouds drop fatness, and Heavens showr'e Manna; and
Angels administer comforts; And at length when all these whirlewinds, and fires
and earthquakes of thy persecutions are gone by, God himself shall speak in
the still voice, Peace, peace unto thee; Peace as well in thy outward, as inward
state; he that has given thee Poverty, can give thee Riches, and (upon thy
Sufferings) will; But when they come, take heed of that disease which commonly
attend's those which are risen from a despised and mean condition; other goods
give only greatness of mind; Riches, insolence. And therefore the Apostle's
advice comes seasonably here, Be not high-minded, but fear; Fear, least that
God which bestowed them on thee for thy Humiliation, will take them off again
for thy Pride; and so, when Riches come, put not thy trust in them, and if they
increase, set not thy heart upon them: that is the second part, the resolution,
or advice given on the Case put, If Riches increase, set not thy heart upon
them.

Set not thy heart upon them. Pars secunda.

THe Rabbines, and Hebrews, of old, attributed the whole Regiment of man to
the Heart, and made that the Throne and chair of the Reasonable Soul; seating
in it not only the powers of understanding; Choice, but of Will and Action
too; So did the anncient Grecians; specially, their Poets. The Philosophers, on
the other side, place them in the Brain; and leave only the Affections to the
Heart; But, Divinity is more bountiful, the Scripture giving it the whole
rational power; understanding, will, judgment, consultation, thought,
endeavor; hence it is, that God so often scourge's the Hearts of men,
commanding us to confess, honor, love, and fear him with all our heart; And
therefore, that part is sometimes taken for the reasonable Soul; sometimes, for
the whole man; Hereupon the Prophet's Lacerate corda vestra, Rent your Hearts,
and not your garments; and This people honor me with their lips, but their
Heart is far from me; the Heart, the Shrine and Temple where I am truly
worshipped; that Holocanst and Oblation only which smoke's from this Altar,
beare's the acceptable Odor; all other Sacrifices are abominable; the Heart is
God's Jewel; he does appropriate it to himself, only, and wholly; the hand,
or foot, or eye are not forbidden to do their office, both in gathering
lawfully, and preserving riches; any member but the Heart may be thus employed,
that must not intermeddle; for this were to whore after a false Numen, and
Burn Incense to a strange God: It Is not the mere possession or use of riches
that offend's, but the Affectation; And to this purpose, Lumbard puts in his
Observation, with a non dicit Propheta, the Prophet saye's not, nolite habere,
but nolite cor opponere; In locum.
we are not forbidden riches; but when we have them, to set our Hearts upon
them; so that, the error hang's not upon those, but us; not on Riches, but
that which Idoll's them, our Heart. And therefore, Moses gave a stong Caveat to
the Israelites, that when their Folcks and herds increased, and their Silver,
and their Gold was multiplied, they should beware le^st their hearts were
lifted up, and so they should forget the Lord their God. Deuteronomy. 8.13.14. Those
sublunarie creatures raise not Distraction in us, so we make them not our
Center, if we rest not in them, if we can lock through them, to the Giver;
And, doubtless, we may entertain the vnrightous Mammon, not only as a
Servant, but a Friend, by no means, as a Lord. There is Virtue in the true use
of it, if there be a Qualification in our desires. And therefore, S. Augustine
disputing of that impossible Analogy between Heaven, and a Rich-man, a
Camel, and the Eye of a Needle, would have a Rich man understood there Cupidum
rerum temporalium, and de talibus superbientem, such a one, as ioynes Avarice
to Riches, and Pride to Avarice, in his 2. Book of Euang. quaest. Cap. 47. And
this is the Burden of his Interpretation in three several Tracts more, non
opes damno sed desideria, in his 10. Sermon de tempore; non Diuitiae, sed
Cupiditas accusatur, in his 5. Sermon de verbis Apostoli; in Diuitijs
reprehendo cupiditatem, non facultatem, in his first Book de Ciuit. Dei. Cap.
10. A moderate and timely care of necessary temporalls is not prohibited, but
the inordinate Appetite is cried down by the general voice and consent both
of Fathers and Schoolmen; if you require a Catalogue; view more punctually
Gregory de Valentia upon Aquinas 2.2.3. Tome 4. disputation, 5. question.
Hereupon, Sen. de Beat. vit.
the Moralists, and those of rigid and seuerer Brow, would have a wise man
pass by Riches, in contempt, Nonne habeat, sed nesolicitus habeat, not in
regard of their propriety, and possession, but the difficulty and eagerness of
the pursuit; which as he can manage without Indulgence, in their fruition; so,
without disturbance, in their loss; In what store house may Fortune better
look up her Tresure, then there, from whence she may fetch it without the
complaint of him that keeps it? M. Cato, when he praised Curious and
Caruncanius, and the voluntary and affected poverty of that Age, wherein it
was a Capital offense to have some few plates of Silver, Sen. Epist. 119.
Possidebat ipse quadragies sestertium, says Seneca, had his own store crammed
with many a Sesterce. A wise man, as he will not make Riches the Object of his
pursuit, so not, of his refusal, non amat Diuitias, sed mauult; non in animam
illam gazam, sed in domum recipit; nec respuit possessas Diuitias, sed
contemnit; it is Seneca's again, to his Iunius Gallio, he weigh's them so
euenly between, Desire, and Scorn, that he does neither vnder-valew, nor
indulge them; he make's not his mind, their Magazine, but his House, in which
he does not lock, but lodge them; he love's them not, properly, but by way of
comparison, not as they are riches, but as they are aloof from Poverty: Yes,
Stoicke, Sen. de Beat, vit. cap. 7.
as they are riches, they may not only be temperately loved and desired, but
also prayed for, prayed for as our daily bread; not absolutely, as for our
spiritual improuement, but by way of restriction; first humbly, with
submission to the will of God; then, conditionally, so they prove aduantagious
either to our civil or moral good. But here we must warily stee^re between
a vigilant providence, and a fretting solicitude, a discreet and honest care,
and that which is anxious, and intemperate; for, if they are pursued either
with unlawful, or unbridled desire; they lead our Reason captive, Blindfold
our Intellectuals, startle and disturb our sublimated, and better thoughts,
weane our Cogitations from Sacred project to matters of Secular employment,
steal from us the exercise of spiritual duties, and so damp and dead all the
faculties of the Inward man, that in way of Conscience or Religion, we are
benumbed merely; Naball himself not so stony and churlish, not half so supine
and stupefied as we. And therefore, your earthly Sensualists have this woeful
brand set upon them by the Spirit of God. They are men of this world, they have
their portion in this life only. Psalm. 17.14. Riches have nothing substantial
in them that may allure us, but our custom of admiring them, Non quia
concupiscenda sunt, Sen Ep. 119.
laudentur; sed quia concupiscuntur, laudata sunt, They are not praised,
because they are to be desired, but they are desired because they are praised.
To cut out our desires by weak presidents is at once folly and madness; it is
miserable to follow error by example; That this man hugg's his Mammon, is no
authority for my Avarice; I must chalk out my proceedings by the line of
precept, square them by the rules of Divine truth; and that tel's me Riches
are but snares, thorns, vanities, shadows, nothing. 1. Tim 6.9. Math. 13.22.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? says the Wise man; For,
certainly, Riches make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
heaven, Pro. 18. Mark, all their pomp is without certainty, or station:
Things not only fleeting, but voluble; they steal not from us, but they fly
away; fly away as an Eagle does, both with strong, and nimble wing; Their Ebb
is as sudden, as their flow doubtful; the Text only presupposes the one,
with a si affluxerint, if they flow about thee, as if their increase were
merely casual: But if they do, what then? Nolite cor opponere, set not your
heart upon them; They are transitory objects, they fly away, not only with the
pinions of an Eagle, but with the wings of a Dove, of the Dove, in the
Psalmist, whose wings were covered with silver, and her feathers with gold.
Riches (I confess) have their Beauty, and luster; but they are false, like
globes of Crystal, which though they take the eye both with variety and
delight of Objects, yet have of themselves but a hollow and brittle glory,
nihil ex his quae videmus manet, currit cum tempore: Winds and Seas are not so
roling and unstable as Riches are, when they begin to surge and swell the
Heart, that is set upon them: vides quia fluunt, Ambros. ad Mamme.
non vides quia praeter fluunt; fluenta sunt quae miraris; quomodo veniunt, sit
transeunt, et receduntvt discas superflua non acquirere, Lo, how the Father,
playing on the word, chide's his folly, and opening the stickle condition of
these sliding Temporalls, prohibite's all desire of unnecessary Treasure, to
sweat after superfluities, and vain Abundance, since the way to them is both
steep, and slippery, and like the climbing of a sandy hill to the feet of
the Aged. No man can be possessed of a peaceable and quiet life that toyle's
much about the enlargement of it. Seneca's habere quod necesse est, and quod
sat est, may well complete all earthly happiness, and terminate our desires in
way of riches, to have that which is necessary, and that which is sufficient;
But this latter we must bound again with the rules of Nature, not opinion. The
Epicure tells us, If we live according to Nature, we shall never be poor; if,
according to opinion, never rich. Our natural desires have their lists, and
Bounds; Those that are derived from false opinion, have no pale; to him that
goes in a right way there is an end; Error is infinite. As therefore there are
diverse sorts of Riches, so there are of Desires, too; there are Riches
natural, and there are Riches Artificial; there are Desires of Nature, and
there are Desires of Choice. Natural Riches, such as are surrogated to man for
the supply of natural defects; as meat, drink, clothing; Artificial; by
which Nature is not immediately relieved, but by way of consequence, as Coin,
Plate, Jewels, and the like, which the Art of man first found out for easier
traffic and exchange; or (as the vnhewed language of the School. man rough's
it) propter mensuram rerum venalium. Now natural desires shake hands with
natural Riches; they are not infinite, but have their measure, and growth, and
proportion with the other. Artificial Riches are without period, and come up
to those desires of Choice; which because inordinate, and not modified, are noe
less then infinite. He that drinke's of this water (says Christ, by
temporalls) shall thirst again, Ioh. 4. The Reason is, because their
insufficiency is most known when they are had, and therefore discouer's their
imperfection more; so that Natural Riches are more exquisite, because they
have natural desires which are infinite; The other not without Confusion and
Disorder, because their desires depend on Choice, which are mutable and
various; and so, Infinite. Aquin. secunda secundae, q. 1. art. 1. ad secundum.
Cato.
That Rigid censor of the Romans, was both Home, and witty, to the superfluous
vanities of his time, Any thing will suffice, if what we want we require of our
selves; he that seeke's for content, without him, loses both himself, and
it; not to desire, Vis fieri dives, Pontifice? nil cupias Mart, Sen. Epist. 119.
and have, are of a nere Blood - Quare igitur a fortuna potius impetrem, vt
det, quam a me, ne petam? says the Stoicke, Why should I rather desire of
Fortune, that she would give me? then of my self that I would not desire?
Riches have nothing solid in them; for if they had, they would sometimes either
fill or please us; but they play with our appetites as the apples did with the
lips of Tantalus, which he might kiss, not Taste; or, suppose, Taste them, it is
but as water to one sick of a violent fever, now drinking eagerly to allay his
thirst, enlarges it; and seeking something to cool his Torments, he enflame's
them. We are never in our selves, but beyond; Fear, or Desire, or Hope draw
us ever to that which is to come, and remove our sense and consideration from
that which is, to muse on that which shall be, even when we shall be no more.
Inuentus est, qui concupisceret Aliquid post omnia. There are some, that having
all things, have (notwithstanding) coueted somewhat; like wide-mouthed Glasses
brimb'd-vp with rich Elixars; put gold in them, They are never the fuller; And
this is a punishment ever waits upon unbridled, and immoderate Appetites; He
that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
Abundance, with increase, Eccle. 5.10. Miserable Desires, have miserable
effects; They degrade and deuest Man of that pre-eminence he has above other
Creatures, and bring him down to Beasts; nay, under them; For they having
quenched their Desires, by their Fruition, remain fully satisfied, till Nature
quicken again their Appetites, like plants in a fat soil, which never require
shewers, but in drought; those of Man are ever ravenous and insatiate, like
barren and thirsty ground, which even then lacks moisture, when ouer-flowed.
Thoughts which stream toward wealth, or Honor have no certain channel;
but, like a Torrent or full tide, either beat downe'or else overrun their
banks. There was never Mammonist, whose Excess of Treasure, or Extent of
Fortune, could limit his Concupiscence; but it might well rival the Ambition
of those Proud Kings of old, who not satisfied with the Glory of their own
Crowns, and having nothing more on earth to be desired, would counterfaite
the Lightning and Thunder, to have themselves thought powerful in Heaven also;
make him Lord of the whole Earth; give him her Mines of Gold, Coasts of Jasper,
Rocks of Diamonds; nay, all the Treasure the womb of the Earth, or bowels of
the great Deep have swallowed; yet, even in these floods, he thirsts, in
this surset, he is hungry, in these Riches, poor. O the Inexhaustednesse of
Humane Appetite. Quod naturae satis est, Homini no est. Sen Epist. 119.
Nature has not in her vast storehouse wherewith to supply our bottomless
Desires; those Desires, I mean, which attend our Choice; For as they depend on
the Imaginations of men, (which are fertile, and ever blooming) as this Power
represent's the forms and Images of infinite Objects, so our desires multiply
strangely to pursue all those things the Imagination has propounded; insomuch,
that we prosecute them (oftentimes) without Rule, or Measure, and there is
sooner an end of us, then of our Covetousness. I know there are Desires Innocent
enough, if they had their Bounds; But their Excess, and Restlesnesse, does
blemish their pursuit; the Chrysolite, the Berill, and the Sapphire, and all
the sparkling, and shelly Majesty, of Pearl, and Stone, are the Objects of a
harmless delight, if we could use them moderately; But, we suffer our selves
to be transported with such violent Affections, and we seek them with such
enraged heat, that it is rather Madness, then Desire; Nay, of all humane
Aspirations there are none so lawless, and Exorbitant, as those which wander
after Riches; For, whereas the Rest aim only at the Joy and Content which may
arrive them by the possession of their Objects, and so, lull, and slumber,
(like two loud and steep Currents, which meeting in a Flat kiss, and are
silent.) Those of Riches, grow more violent, by Abundance, like the flame of a
great fire, which increases by casting wood into it. There can be no true
Riches, without Content; and there can be no true content where there is still
a Desire of riches; will you have the Reason? the Moralist giue's it. Sen.
Epist. 112.
but not home, Plus incipit habere posse, qui plus habet, He that has much,
begin's to have a possibility, to have more; and thus, as our Heaps are
enlarged, so are our Affections, and They once Inordinate, the Heart is
instantly rent asunder with the whitle-winds and distempers of various lusts;
sometimes, it hunt's for Treasure, sometimes for Honors and Preferment, and
having gotten the possession of these, still fight's against her own
Satisfaction by desiring more; Insomuch, that if we could empty the Western
Parts of Gold, and the East of all her Spices; the Land of her vndig'd, and the
Sea of her shipwrack't store; if we could lay on our Mass to the very Stars;
yet Desire is as woman, and the Grave, as Death and Hell, which will not be
satisfied. Such are the restless wanderings of our Affections, set once on
Temporalls, that They find neither Bank, nor Bottom; there is no rest to
man's Soul, but in God's Eternal Rest; for there being no proportion between
Spirits, and Bodies; it is impossible that the infinite desires of the Soul
should be confined to Creatures here below, as Things too Languishing, and
Transitory, for such Divine Substances to reside in, with full satisfaction,
or final Rest: The heart of man, not fixed in the contemplation of Eternity,
is always erraticke, and unstable, Et omni volubilitate volubilius (says
Augustine) more voluble then volubilitie it self; It trauel's from one Object
to another, seeking rest where there is none; but in those frail and fleeting
Temporals, in which, our Affections are (as 'twere) shackled, and let bound, It
shall never find any Lasting and true Content; For, our Soul is of that vast
comprehensiuenesse, and our Desire of that wild Latitude, and Extent, that no
Finite Excellency or Created Comfort, can ever fill it, but it is still
tortured on the Rack of restless Discontent, and Selfe-vexation, until it
fasten upon an Object, infinite, both in Endlesnesse, and Perfection; only
admit it to the Face of God by Beatificall Vision, and so consequently to those
Rivers of pleasure, and fulness of Joy flowing thence; and then presently (and
never till then) It Is infinite desire expire's in the Bosom of God, and lie's
down softly, Bolt. walk with God, page 125.
with sweetest peace, and full contentment, in the embracements of everlasting
Bliss.

And now, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord. Thou whose Body
and Soul, and Desires are lumpish, Earth merely, thrice Earth; Raise thine
Affections from this Dull Element where they now grouell, and look up to the
Hills from whence thy salvation comes: why do they flutter here about
corruptible Glories? Why do they stoop to false and vain Comforts, such as
are not only open to Casualtie, but to Danger? Riches are to Both? to Both, in
a triple way; First, in their Acquisition, Secondly, Possession, Thirdly,
Deprivation. In their Acquisition, first; As the Partridge sits on eggs,
and hatcheth them not; so He that gets Riches, and not by right, shall leave
them in the midst of his Age, and at his End be a fool. Ier. 17.11. Next in
their Possession, where Moth and rust does corrupt them, and where Thieves
break through, and steal, Math. 6.9. Lastly, in respect of their Deprivation,
or Loss. He has swallowed down Riches, and He shall vomit them up again;
God shall cast them out of his Belly; the Increase of his house shall depart,
and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath, Job 20.15, 28. Lo, how
the Hand of Justice houers here, and with a Double Blow strike's through the
very Joints and marrow of the Worldling, even to the sundring and dissipation
both of his Posterity and Fortunes. His goods shall flow away, and the
Increase of his house shall depart; shall depart? whither? to the Grave; with
whom? (two lamentable Companions.) The Fool and the Beast that perishes. So
says the Singer of Israel in his 49. Psalm, thrice in that one Psalm, at the
sixth verse, He trust's in his wealth, and glorie's in the multitude of his
Riches; and at the tenth Verse, He is a fool, and brutish, and leaves his
goods to others. O vain Insolence? O transitory height? what? After all those
ouerflowings and swarms of Treasure, must he leave his Substance to Others?
Yea, to others, perchance, neither of his Tribe, nor Country, Please you to
look upon him at the eleventh Verse, his very heart is transparent, and you
may discover his inward thoughts. He conceiue's his house shall continue for
ever, and his Dewlling Place to all generations, and therefore calls his Lands
after his own Name; yet view him again at the fourteenth Verse. He is a
Beast, a silly one, a sheep laid in the grave, Death shall feed upon him, and
the upright shall have Dominion over him in the morning, and his strength shall
consume in the pit from his Dewlling Place. Once more, He is twice in that
Psalm styled A Man of Honor, but it is sauc'd with a Never thelesse, He
abides not, at the twelfth Verse; and He understands not, at the twentieth
Verse; and in both, He is a Beast that perishes. Mark, how the Spirit of God
paint's out this very Earth-worme, this great Monopolist of pelf, and Rubbish.
He is ignorant, Transitory, Sensual; He abides not, he understands not,
and (anon) he dies; Dies? no, perishes; perishes as a Beast does, as if the
Soul rotted with the Body, or his Memory with the Soul; no Remainder either
of Name, or Fortune, and which is worst, of Honor; so says the Text; What
though rich; and the Glory of his house increased? yet, He shall carry away
nothing with him, his Honor shall not descend after him, verse 17. what? carry
nothing away with him? not that Glorious Earth? that Gaudy Luggage his Soul
Doted on? that shining Saint? that Burnished Deity, which he could, at once,
both touch and worship? what? not the Cabonet he hugged and clasped? not the
Gold he Idol'd? nothing of Treasure, or Repute, or Name? Of neither; All these
false beams which were wont to dazzle him shall be now clouded in perpetual
darkness, where they shall never see light again; thus the Text doome's him,
at the nineteenth Verse of the same Psalm.

Seeing then, All earthly Dependences are vain and fragile, and there can be
no true peace but that which looke's upward; Take for Conclusion the advice of
Siracides, Lay up Treasures according to the Commandment of the most High;
Ecclus 39.
and they shall bring thee more profit then gold; Treasures of the most high?
What are These? How laid up? and where? The Commandment of the most High
tell's thee, Lay up for your selves Treasures in heaven, Bags which wax not
old, the good foundation against the time to come, the hold of eternal life,
the Everlasting Memorial before God; that Treasure which the Angel showed
Cornelius in the Vision; even thine Alms, and thy Prayers; not thy
large-lung'd Prayers, without Alms, such as the old Pharisee bleated in his
Synagogue, or the New one, in his Conuenticle; but thine Alms, and thy
Prayers, hand in hand, with one cheerfulness, and Truth; thy hearty Zeal
toward God, and thy willing Charity toward Man, and both these, in secret,
and without noise. Such, and only such, are Golden Vialls full of Odours, sweet
Incense in the Nostrils of the Almighty; They shall yield a pleasant smell, as
the Best Myrrh, as Galbanum, and Onyx and sweet Storax, and as the fume of
Frankincense in the Tabernacle. Here are Treasures which never fail, where no
Moth corrupts, nor Thief approaches; these shall fight for thee against
thine Enemies, better then a mighty shield, or a strong spear. If thou break
the Staff of thy Bread unto the hungry, and afflicted, God shall make fat thy
Bones, and satisfy thy Soul in Drought; Thou shall be like awatred Garden,
and like a spring whose streams fail not; Treasures thou shall lay up as
Dust, and Gold of Ophir, as the stones of the Brook; Thy Pastures shall be
clothed with flocks, the Valleys also shall stand so thick with Corn, that
they shall laugh, and sing; In fine; Thou shall take root in an honorable
place, even in the portion of the Lord's Inheritance, when thou shall be
exalted as a Cypresse-tree upon the Mountains of Hermon, like a Palm tree in
Engedy, and as a Rose plant in Jericho: And, at length, when the Glory of those
Earthly Mansions must be left, when thou can be no longer Steward, but art
to pass thy strict Account before the Great House-holder at the General and
Dreadful Audit, when the Book of all our Actions shall be vnclaps'd, thine
shall be found square, and even, and thou shall receive that happy Applause,
and Remuneration, Well done, thou good, and faithful Servant, Enter into thy
Masters Joy. Which the Lord grant for Christ Jesus sake, Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Rode caper vites, tamen hic cum stabis ad Aras,
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, crit.

FINIS.
WATERS OF MARAH, AND MERIBAH: OR, THE SOVRCE OF BITTERNESS, AND STRIFE,
SWEETENED AND ALLAYED, By way of Advice, Refutation, Censure, Against The
Pseudo-zelots of our Age: By HVMPHREY SYDENHAM, Master of Arts, late Fellow of
Wadham-Colledge in OXFORD.

Disposui nasum secare faetentem, timeat qui criminosus est; quid ad te, qui te
intelligis innocentem? De te dictum putae in quodcunque vitium stili mei mucro
contorquetur.

HIERON. ad MARCELLINVM. LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Allde, for Nathaniel
Butter, An. Dom. 1630.

TO THE FRIENDS INDEED, both of my Name, and Fortunes, Sir Ralph Sydenham, and
Edward Sydenham Esquire, Servants to his Sacred Majesty.
My dearly honored,
WHilst I labor to join you so closely in my respects, let me not sunder you
in your own, like two great men, who the nearer they are in place, the farther
off in Correspondence. I presume it is no Solecisme to link you together in one
Dedication, whom Nature has twisted so fast in one Blood, and Education in one
virtue, and Familiarity, (a knot, I hope, indissoluble) in one heart; It is not
my lowest glory, that I can boldly, and in a breath, speak Kinsman and Friend,
and Patron, and these three in two, and these two, but one; A rare harmony,
where Affections are so strung, that touch them, how, and where, and when you
please, they are still unisons. I have hitherto found them so in all my ways,
both of Advancement and Repute; and these set me up in a double gratulation,
and applause; in my Hosanna's, for you to my God, and then in my Reports to
men. This is my All of requital yet, and yours (I believe) of expectation,
which looks no farther then an ingenuous acknowledgement of your Favors, such
as the procliuity of your own worth has suggested, not any industrious
proseqution of mine, which could have been contented to have worn an obscurer
Title, but that it must now vaunt in a Rich one, That of

Your Seruant-Kinsman, HVM: SYDENHAM.

WATERS OF MARAH, AND MERIBAH.
TEXT, Romans 12.1. I Beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of God, to offer up
your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God which is your
reasonable service,


THe Text has a double forehead, one looks toward the Letter, the other,
the Allegory; that of the Letter glances on the Legal Sacrifice, by the Jew;
that of the Allegory, on the Spiritual, by the Christian; the one was a
carnal oblation of the Body only, the other a Mystical, of the Affections;
That spoke in the rough Dialect of the Law; Horror, Blood, and Death; This, in
the sweet language of the Gospel, Brethren, and Beseeching, and Mercies of
God. Here then is no Hecatombe or slaughter of the Beast, no Bullock or Ram,
or Goat slain for immolation, as of old; but the Sacrifice required here,
must be Living; it is a Body must be offered, and not a Carcass: here is no
death but of in bred corruptions; no slaughter, but of carnal lusts, and
concupiscences. Affections must be mortified, and not the Body; that subdued
only, and chastis'd, not slain; and yet still a Sacrifice, a Living
Sacrifice, a Sacrifice so living, that it is both Holy and Acceptable to God,
and so acceptable to him that he accounts it not only a Sacrifice, but a
Reasonable Service.

The words then, as they lie in their mass and bulk, are a Patheticall
persuasion and incitement to the mortification of the old man; pressed on by an
Apostolical power and Jurisdiction, and that of the great Doctor of the
Gentiles, Paul; Where you may observe, first, his manner of persuading, I
Beseech; Secondly, the Parties to be persuaded, Jew and Gentile, under an
affectionate, and charitable compellation, Brethren; Thirdly, the Argument or
motive, by which he does persuade, By the Mercies of God; Fourthly, the
Substance or Matter of that which he labors to persuade, To offer up your
Bodies a Sacrifice to God; Fifthly, the Modus or manner of it; that is various,
expressed by a threefold Epithete; Living, Holy, Accepble; Lastly, the
Antithesis, in the words following, (...). Reasonable Service.

These are the Parts offered to my difcourse, which upon the first perusal and
Survey, I thought particularly to have insisted on; But finding that I had
grasped more Materials, then I could sow and scatter in the Circuit of an
hour, I was enforced to bound my Meditations for the present with the two
former, leaving the remainder, till a second opportunity should inuit me
hither; And at this time only, I beseech you Brethren.

(...), in the Original; not Obsecro, Pars prima.
as the vulgar reads, but, Exhortor: Beseeching is too Calm and Gentle, and
therefore rather, I Exhort, Obsecro non satis apt. Annot. Beza in cap. 12.
Romans v. 1.
says Beza: But Exhortor used only in this place, elsewhere, Precamur, and
that from the same Idiom, by the same Translator. And indeed, Fairly and
Plausibly to exhort, is in a manner to beseech: Hortamur etiam sponte
facientes, quod decet. Bez. ibid.
For not only the Refractary, but the facile, and spontaneous, the voluntier
in goodness, we Exhort, and Beseech in the same Word. And if Multitude or
Number, do not too much alter the nature and signification of things or
Language, we shall make Beza's Exhortor, and Ierome's Obsecro, all one by the
same Pen, and Dialect; For in this place to the Romans, (...) in the Singular,
(which is rendered by Exhortor) to the Thessalonians, (...), in the Plural, is
translated, Precamur, by the same Beza, (...), We beseech you, brethren, Vide
Bez. ibid. et in cap. 12. Romans v. 2.
1 These. 5.14. So that it is probable, the Greecke word signifies Both, but,
here more openly to Beseech, then to Exhort; For Obsecro comes nearer to
Misericordia, in the Text, then Exhortor does, We Beseech ever by the mercies
of God; but, sometimes we exhort by his Justice; And in this sense, the Miracle
of the Greek Church, Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Aquin, Estius in cap. 12. Romans
v, 1.
will interpret it, and that for three Reasons, here Aquinas tells me; first,
to specify and open our Apostle's humility: (for so the Wise man) Cum
obsecrationibus loquitur pauper. The Rich man answers roughly, v. 23.
But, the poor man uses entreaties, Pro 18. Entreaties, not for his own
sake, but for God's, And therefore Obsecrare (says he) is nothing but, Aquin.
vt supra.
Obsacra contestari. Secondly, that He might rather out of love, move them by
gentleness and request, then, out of fear, command them by his power. And
this is not only his practice, but his precept, You that are spiritual,
restore him that is fallen, v. 1.
by the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. Thirdly, for the reverence he owed to the
Roman Jurisdiction, the great Senate to which he wrote (where there was both
gravity and State,) which he labors to win by persuasion, and not by violence.
And this also is not only his Custom, but his Advice; Rebuke not an Elder,
but Beseech him as a Father, v.
1 Timothy 5. So that whether in matters natural, or Civil, or Apostolical, the
Obsecro is both opportune and necessary: But in this last more especially: For
I Beseech you; is more insinuatiue, then I Exhort; and I Exhort, then, I
Command; And yet (as Aretius pathetically) In Apostolo obsecrante, Jn cap. 12.
Romans v. 1.
Deus est mandans, and obsecrans: In that the Apostle beseeches, God both
commands and beseechs too; not immediately, but by way of a Substitute: so Saint
Paul testifies of himself, We are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
(...), As though God did beseech you by us. We are the Instruments; He, the
mouer; we but the pipes and Conuoy; He, the Source and Cisterne; The waters of
Life run from him, by us; not by him. And therefore the Greek text has the
particle (...), Quasi, as it were, Bez Annot in 12. Romans v. 1.
because God does not really beseech us, but As it were beseech us in the
Person of his Ambassadors, for so it follows, We pray you in Christ's stead,
2 Cor. 5.20. So that there are Two here which beseech; God, and his Apostle.
Either had lawful authority to command; Aret. vt supra.
He, as a Creator in full right: This, as a Legate in his name; but they had
rather win fairly by a co^passionate persuasion, then harshly induce by a
rigorous command. And this way of instruction best suites with the stayednesse
and te^per of God's Ministers. Ne pro imperio dictatorie praecipiant, and
rigide postulent, quod lenitate, and precibus facilius obtinent ab auditoribus.
So Pareus. It Is true, In cap. 12. Romans v. 1.
that the Law, and the Interpreters of it, the Prophets, not only not Beseech,
but Command and terrify; and 'twas the way then; for, stiffe-neckes and stony
hearts, (as the Jews had) required both the Yoke, Pet. Mart. in locum.
and the Hammer. Neither did Christ himself (for any light we have from the
Evangelists) ever use this humility of Language. For, He taught as one that
had authority (says the text) and not as the Scribes. Mar. 1.22.
But after Christ, the Apostles; and after them the Fathers made it their
Rhetoric, the chief Engine of their persuasion through the general Current
of their Epistles: And indeed, a true Servant of the Lord (...), must not
strive: Non oportet litigare, Vide Bez Annot. in 2 Timothy 2.24.
says the vulgar, Non pugnare, Beza, Must be no Wrangler, nor fighter. 2 Timothy
2.24. A striker in the Church is dangerous: dangerous? intolerable, no less
then He that is contentious; For certainly they are Both of an Alliance,
Graec. Interpr.
Qui litigat verbis, pugnat: there is as well a striking with the Tongue, as
with the Hand, and sometimes a Word is smarter then a Blow, especially if it
do proceed from a mouth inured to bark which can naught but rail, when it
should beseech; A Servant you know, should imitate his Lord: Now, the Lord is
not the God of Tumult, but of Peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. And therefore, his sincere
and faithful Servant Saint Paul beautifies with a threefold Epithete (...), 2 Timothy 2.24.
Gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, Rare eminencies, and in that Orb
they move, spangle, and shine gloriously; He must be gentle, not to some only,
but to all (so says the text) to all, of all sorts, not the particulars of his
own Cut and Garb, but even to those Without. Next Teaching and not barely so,
but Apt to Teach, Estius in cap. 2. Epist. 2. ad Tim. v. 24. Sic etiam Aug.
lib. 5. de Bap. cont. Donat. cap. 29.
Apt as well for Ability, as Will; and to Teach, not to Compel; and sometimes
to learn too, as well as to Teach. So Saint Cyprian tells Pompeianus, Oportet
Episcopum non tantum Docere, sed and Discere, quia ille Melius Docet, qui
Discendo proficit. Lastly, Patient; patient two ways; in respect of
Occurrences and Men: of occurrences, first; Persecutions, Scoffs, Detractions,
are the Liueries of the Multitude, which He wears with as much humility, as
peace; 1 Cor. 4.12.
and of This, our Apostle, I know not whether Complains, or Glories,
Maledicimur and Benedicimus, We are reuil'd, and yet we bless, which some
Translations read, Vide Pet. Mart. in cap. Romans p. 3.
Blasphemamur and Obsecramus, We are blasphemed, and yet beseech; So that
Reuiling, it seems, is a kind of Blasphemy, and Beseeching, a kind of
blessing; He that reuiles a good man, blasphemes him, and he that beseeches an
evil, in some sort blesses him. Patient next, in respect of men; not only of
the Good; for, they seldom provoke distaste; but even of the wicked and
malicious, Non vt vitia palpet, aut dissimulet sed vt eos quamuis a veritate
proteruos, and alienos, Estius in 2. Tim. 2.24.
mansuetudine vincat; Not that He should dissemble or bolster vice, but that
the Straggling and Perverse he might reclaim with more facility and
meekness. Thus the Intelligent man ever applies his Sails unto the wind,
and as that turns, and blows, so He steeres. And this was the Spiritual
policy of Our great Doctor, Factus sum infirmus infirmis, vt infirmes
luerifacerem, 1 Cor. 9.22. To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the
weak; not weak indeed, (though the two Fathers, Cyprian, and Augustine read
it so,) but weak, Cyp. in Epist. ad (...). Aug. Epist. 9. ad Hieronym.
that is, As weak, the Original using the Aducrbe, de, Tanquam, as though
weak. For weak really he was not; So he professes of himself, We that are
strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, Ambros. in Psalm. 104.
Romans 15.1. Strong there; and yet, weak again, 2 Cor. 11. with a Quis
infirmatur, and ego non infirmor? Who is weak, and I am not weak, who is
angry, and I burn not; But this Infirmor has a Tanquam too, Estius in Epist.
1. ad Co. cap. 9. v. 22.
as well as the former; or whether it have or no, it Matters not, seeing the
sense is one; For He says, He became weak unto the weak; or else, as it
were weak, that is, like unto the weak; Like two ways; In mind and work;
In mind, by an Affect of Commiseration; In work, by a Similitude of Action;
as a Nurse does with her Child, or a Phisician with his Patient, And in this
sense, his Omnibus omnia factus sum, is to be understood also, I am made all
unto all, 1 Cor. 9.22. All unto All? how? not that he did Idol it with the
Superstitious, or Lewd it with the Profane, played the Cretian, with the
Cretian, or the Jew, with the Jew; Estius, vt supra.
But, He was made all unto All, partly by commiserating them, partly by doing
something like Theirs, which (notwithstanding) did not oppose the Law of God,
or else, (as Saint Augustine paraphrases it) Compassione misericordiae, non
similitudine fall aciae, or else, Non mentientis actu, sed compatientis
affectu, in his ninth Epistle to lerome, and more voluminously, August. etiam,
lib q. 83. q. 71.
in his book contra mendacium, 12. chapter.

Neither was he all, to All, in way of Conversation only, but also, in matters
of Discipline, and Advice; in which he deals with the Delinquent, as a
discreet Husbandman with a tender plant, or tree; He waters it, and digs about
it; and, if then it leaf, and bud only, and not fructify, He puts his Axe
unto it; not to root and fell it, but to prune it; He lops off a sprig, or a
branch, but He preserues the body; Thus, the Inordinate must be admonished
only, not threatened; (...), (says the Greek;) not, Corripite, or, Castigate,
(as Castellio, and Erasmus would have it) but, Monete, says Beza; Bez. Annot.
in 1. These. 5.14.
warn them that are unruly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. So also, the Feeble-minded must
be solac'd, and encouraged, not rebuked; (...), Consolamini; Comfort the
Feeble-minded, the same chapter and verse. Lastly, the Weak must not be
depressed but supported; Support those that are weak among you; (...),
Subleuate; hold up, Sustinete, infirmu^ opitulamini; sic ex Ambros. and Tertul.
Bez. vt supra.
as a Crutch does a Body that is lame, or a Beam a house that is ruined; which
word has reference to that (...) in the Acts, Suscipere infirmos, or
Sustinere; I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to
Support the weak, Act. 20.35. Here then are Weak, and Feeble-minded, and
unruly; and these must be supported, and comforted, and warned; no more; I
find no authority for Indignation; I do, for patience for patience to all
these; nay, to all men; in the heel and cloze of the same verse, (...). Be
patient toward all men, 1. These. 5.14. and not only so, but to all men, with
all patience too; so Timothy is advised (...), Exhort with all long-suffering,
and Doctrine, 2. Tim. 4.2. And indeed this Doctrine of Long-suffering, is a
Merciful Doctrine; we seldom find true patience without Commiseration; Mercy
is the badge and Cognizance of a Christian; It marks him from a Caniball, or a
Pagan; And doubtless, Those that have not this tenderness of Affection,
whether in the Natural, or in the Spiritual Man, are but (...), of Savage and
barbarous Condition, Tigers, and not Men; And therefore as Mercy diuides a Man
from a Beast, so does it a Christian from a mere Man. He must be Merciful,
Mat. 6.
as his Father which is in Heaven is Merciful. O how beautiful upon the
Mountains (says that great Oracle of God) are the feet of him that brings
glad tidings of good things, Esaias 52.7.
that preaches peace, that publishes salvation, that says unto Sion, Thy God
reigns? Esaias 52.7. Those were said to have beautiful feet amongst the
Hebrews, whose Messages were shod with loy, Estius in Romans cap. 10. verse. 15.
who spoke comfort to the people, and not Terror. Now, what such Joy and
Comfort to the Children of Sion, as the glad tidings of good things, those
excellent good things, Preaching of Peace, and Publishing of Salvation? How
beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that does it? Aug. lib. 32.
contra Faust. c. 10.
Quam speciosipedes? (as Augustine reads it) how Precious? or, Quam tempestiui
and Maturi? (as Tertullian) how Mature and timely? Tertul. lib. 5. contra
Marcionem. cap. 2. and 5.
(...) says the Septuagint, Quam pulchri? quam decori? how Fair, and Comely?
which some of the Ancients, (and with them, Leo Castrensis in Esaias 52.7.
S. Jerome) have read (...) (cutting off the three latter vowels) which they
expound sicut Hora, that is (as they say) sicut tempus opportunum, or, tempus
vernum, as the Spring time, when all things flourish; so that (making the Text,
mutilated, and imperfect) they would have the words run thus: Schol. Roman.
sequens septuagint.
Sicut hora super montes, fic Pedes Euangelizantis Pacem: As the Spring upon
the mountains, so are the feet of him that preaches peace; where all things
are green, and fragrant, when we are led into fresh, and sweet, and pleasing
pastures, the pastures of the Spirit; the Staff and Rod of the Lord to comfort
us, his Peace, and his Salvation, whereby we may walk cheerfully in the paths
of Righteousness, and so following the great Shepherd of our Souls (who will
feed us as his chosen flock) we shall graze at length upon the Mountains,
the euer-springing mountains, the Mountains of Israel.

And are the feet of him that preaches peace, that publishes salvation, so
beautiful? beautiful on the mountains too? what shall we think then of the
feet of those, the Black feet of those, who, like the possessed man in the
Gospel, still keep among the Tombs? tread nothing but destruction, Mark 5.2.
and the grave? and as if they still walked in the vale of darkness, and the
shadow of death, beat nothing but Hell unto their Auditors, which by
continual thundering of Judgments, so shake the foundations of a weake-built
faith, that they sometimes destroy the Temple they should build up; and in this
harsh and austere manner of proceeding, they oftentimes exceed their
Commission, when pressing too far the rigor of the Law, they trench on the
liberty of the Gospel, as the Disciples did, Luke 9.55.
who requiring fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans, 2. King. 1.10.
they text it with the severity of Eliah: As Eliah did unto the Moabites. But
the Lord of mercy is so far from approving this fiery zeal, that He not
only rebukes it, but the spirit that suggested it. You know not of what spirit
ye are; for the Sanne of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save
them, Luke 9.56. And doubtless, the destroying spirit is not the right Spirit:
The Holy Ghost (you know) appeared in the form of a Dove: and as the Dove is
without gall, so should the Organ of the Spirit be, the Preacher. Detrahendum
est aliquid seueritati, Aug. ad Bonifac. de Cor. Donat.
(says Augustine to Boniface) vt maioribus malis sanandis, charitas sincera
subueniat. Who would not tax it in a Judge as a crime and custom too unjust,
to be moved to choler against a Delinquent or Malefactor, when charity should
guide him, and not passion? He doubles the offense, that does both exaggerate,
and punish it; That Divine labors too preposterously the reformation of his
hearer, that chides bitterly, when he should but admonish, and admonish, Isid.
lib 3. de summo bono. cap. 2.
when he should Beseech. Qui veraciter fraternam vult corripere infirmitatem,
talemse praestare fraternae studeat vtilitati, vt quem corripere cupit, humili
cord admoneat, says Isidore. Sweet and mild persuasions, and the admonitions
of an humble heart, work deeper in the affections of men, then all the
batteries of virulence, and Inuection. Oil (you know) will sink into a solid
and stiff matter, when a dry and harder substance lies without, and can
neither pierce, nor soften it; That which cannot be compa'st by the smoother
insinuations of Advice and Reason, shall never be done by force; or if it be,
it is not without a tang of baseness: There is Something that is servile in
Rigor and Constraint, Char. lib. 3.
and takes off from the Prerogative and freedom of humane will. The Stoic
tells us, Facilius ducitur, quam trahitur. Seneca.
there is a kind of generousnesse in the mind of man, and is more easily led,
then drawn; Impulsion is the child of Tyranny, and holds neither with the
laws of Nature, nor of Grace. Deus non necessitat, sed facilitat. God does not
necessitate, or if necessitate, not compel man to particular actions, but
supples and faciles him to his Commands. And (doubtless) he that would
captiuate the affections of his hearers, and smooth and make passable what he
labors to persawde in the hearts of others, must so modifie and temper his
discourse, that it prove not bitter or distasteful; like a skillful Apothecary,
who to make his Confections more palatesome, and yet more operative, qualifies
the malignity of Symples, by preparing them, makes poison not only medicinable,
but delightful, and so both cures and pleases. I write not these things (says
Saint Paul to his Corinthians) to shame you, 1. Cor. 4.14.
but as my beloned sons, I warn you. He will not shame them; and at
roughest, He will but warn them; and that as Sons too, as beloved Sons;
And if this will not suffice, he will beseech them also: 1. Cor. 4.16.
I beseech you be followers of me, as I am of Christ, in the 16. verse of the
same chapter. Calmer admonitions are for the most part seasonable, when
reproves ouer-rough and blustering, not only not conform the hearer, but
exasperate him; and therefore what our Apostle advised the natural parents, I
may without prejudice, the spiritual. Parents, ne prouocetis ad iracundiam
filios vestros: ne despondeant animum: Parents, provoke not your children to
anger, lest they be discouraged, Coloss. 3. For, certainly, words are the
image of the soul, and if they flow from a gentle and meek mind, they
produce the like effects, Gentleness, and Meekenes; But from a swelling and
tempestuous spirit, they recoyle, as a piece that is ouer-charg'd, and start
back as a broken Bow; They provoke, nay, they discourage, and find no better
entertai^nement then the strokes of a hammer upon an anuile, which the more
violently they are laid on, the more violently it rebounds: and therefore Saint
Paul is so far from obiurgation, Philem. 7.8.
or menacing, that he will not so much as enjoin his Philemon, but labors
with an Obsecro, when he might have used a Mando: Though I might be much bold
in Christ to enjoin thee, yet for love's sake, I rather beseech thee, Phil.
7.8. So that where Love is, there is still an Obsecro; and where it is not,
there is commonly a Damno. Hence it is, that the Pulpit is so often the Mount of
Terror and of Vengeance, the Throne of personal eiaculations, the Altar, where
some belch nothing but fire and brimstone, vomit the Ite maledicti too
uncharitably, and (which is worst) too particularly; who scare and terrify,
when they should entreat, and in stead of Beseeching fall to Reuiling; Romans
12.11.
who under a pretense of feruency of the Spirit, and serving the Lord
sincerely, ransacke God's dreadful Artillery, and call out all his Instruments
of Justice to assist them; his furbisht sword, and glittering spear, his bow
of steel, and sharpe-set arrows, his horse with warre-like trappings,
neighing for the battle, his smoking jealousy, and devouring pestilence, his
flaming meteors and horrid earthquakes, his storm, his whirlwind, and his
tempest, floods and billones, and boylings of the deep, his cup of
displeasure, and vials of indignation, his dregs of fury, and besome of
destruction, his hail stones and his lightnings, his coals of Juniper, and
hot thunderboles. Thus in fearful harness having mustered up all God's
Judgments in a sull volly, they (at once) discharge them against the pretended
corruptions of particular men, whom their virulence labors rather to traduce,
then their Devotions to reform; And this is but a spirituall-distraction, a
devout phrenzy, a holy madness, through which (like the Lunaticke in the
Gospel) they fall sometimes into the water, Mark 9.22.
sometimes into the fire; Nothing will satisfy them, but floods and flames;
floods to o'er-whelme the sinner, or flames to martyr him; But Quis furor, o
ciues, quae tanta dementia?

Public reproves, when they are clothed with Terror, not only disparage,
but dis-hearten; They break the bruizedreede, Esaias 42.3.
and quench the smoking flax, run many on the shelues of despair, where they
make an unhappy shipwreck of their faith; and not of their faith only, but of
their body also, exposing it to poison, or the knife, to strangling, or to the
flood; to the wilful precipitation of some Tower or Cliffe, or the unnatural
butchery of their own hands; and so tormenting the body for the soul, by a
temporal death, at length they feel the torments both of soul and body by an
eternal death. Thus if Incisions be made too deep in the ulcers of the
Soul, and the spiritual wound searched too roughly, it more relishes of
cruelty, then of Love; and he that does it, rather preaches his own sin,
then endeavors to cure another; Qui delinquente superbo vel odioso animo
corrigit, Jsid. lib. 3. de summo Bono, cap. 91.
non emendat, sed percutit: Rebukes which taste of envy or superciliousnesse,
do not reform, but wound, and in stead of lenifying and making more tractable
indifferent dispositions, they stubborn them, knowing that reproves too
tartly seasoned: are the services of Spleen, and not of Zeal: it is called
(...), Zeal, from (...), the seething and boiling of a pot; Now, a pot (you
know) not temperatly fired, boyles over; and certainly if Moderation sometimes
blow not the Cole, but we make virulence the bellows of our zeal, it not
only seeths and rises to passion and distemper, but boyles over to Envy and
Uncharitableness; And therefore our Apostle (dividing the properties of true
Charity from a false zeal) makes this one Symptom of that great virtue,
Charitas non aemulatur, Estius in 1. Cor. cap. 13.3. Cyp. lib. de zelo and
Linore.
1 Cor. 13.3. (...) in the Original, non zelat: That is (as Cyprian reads)
non inuidet, enuies not; for zeal in her perfection, and as it leanes to
virtue, is but emulation, but screwed up to vice, it is envy; Envy? Nay it is
fury: Isid. lib. 3. de summo Bono. cap. 91.
Quicquid proteruus vel indignans animus protulerit, obiurgantis furor est, non
dilectio corrigentis, says the Father: what in way of Admonishment passion
produces, is Reuiling, and not admonishment, and does not touch so properly on
sincerity, as malice; And therefore Enuies and Euill-speakings, are linked with
Guile and Hypocrisy. By Saint Peter, Lay aside all guile, Hypocrisies, and
Enuies, and euill-speakings, 1 Pet. 2.1. A temperate reproof will mould and
work us to reformation, when an Inuectiue fires us: In cap. 5. Luae.
Illa pudorem incutit, Haec indignationem mouet; says Ambrose: That touches us
with remorce, and slumbers, and becalmes all passion; This kindles our
Indignation, and with that, our stubbournesse; For certainly harsh speeches
do not so properly move, as startle us, and are like sharp sawces to the
stomach, which though they sometimes stir the appetite, yet they gnaw; And
for this Error, some have censured Saint Chrysostom himself, That if He could
have moderated his zeal, and tempered his reproves with a little mildness,
(especially to the Empress Eudoxia) He might have done more service to his
Church, and rescued his honor from the stain both of Imprisonment and Exile.

I press not this so far (Beloved) to fat and pamper vice, or rock and lull
men in a careless sensuality; Though I do Beseech, yet I would not fawn:
This were to kill our young with colling them, and with the Iuie, barren and
dead that tree which we embrace. I know, a Boanerges is sometimes as well
required, as a Barnabas, a son of Thunder, as of Consolation; But these have
their vicissitudes, and seasons. There is an uncircumcised heart, and there is
a Broken Spirit: There is a deaf Adder that will not be charmed; and there are
good Sheep that will hear Christ's voice; For these, there is the spirit of
Meekness; for the other, loud and sharp Reproves; If Nabal's heart, be
stony, the Word is called a Hammer, let that batter it: If Israel have a heart
that is contrite and wounded, Gilead has Balm in it, and there is oil of
comfort for him that mournes in Sion. Thus, as our Infirmities are diverse, so
are the cures of the Spirit, sometimes it terrifies, sometimes it Commands,
sometimes it Beseeches; But let not us terrify when we should but Command; nor
Command when we should Beseech, lest we make this Liberty a Cloak for our
Maliciousness. 1. Pet. 2.16.
In all exhortations, first make use of the still voice; and if that prevail
not, Cry alowd unto the Trumpet; and if that be not shrill enough, raise the
Thunderclap; Aug. lib. 2. de sermon Domini in monte. se^m 1.
But this latter, Raro and magna necessitate, (says Augustine) seldom, and
upon great necessity; Ita tamen, vt in ipsis etiam obiu^ gatienibus non nobis,
sed Deo seruiatur intestinus; If we must needs lighten and thunder, let it be
as from God, not us, who are to scourge the sin, not the person, except upon
capital offenses, open blasphemies, Acts 15.
wilful prophanations. Saint Paul then may call Elymas the Sorcerer, the child
of the Devil, and Peter say to Simon Magus, Thou art in the gall of
Bitterness, and the very bond of Iniquity. Rebukes (I confess) too merciful
for the grand Disciples of Sorcerie, and Magic, and yet sour enough for
those other Nouices and Babes in the school of Christ; Though such also are
not only open to the Check, but to the Rod, Vultis vt in virga veniam? Shall
I come to you with the Rod, or in Love? 1 Cor. 4.21. To wound and offend a
little, to profit much, is to love soundly; Habet and amor plagas suas, Ambros.
super x. cap. ad Cor.
quae dulciores sunt cum amarius inferuntur: Love it self has her whips and
thorns, and the more they are laid on, the less they wound, to our Ruin,
though not our Smart. There is a sharpness of speech used to Edification, not to
Destruction, (says Says Paul,) 2. Cor. 13.10. A religious chastisement,
sometimes more profits, then a partial conniuence or remission; This may
perchance soften and melt a perverse nature, The other skums it; There is as
well a Cruel mercy in remitting offenses which should be punished, as a
merciless Cruelty in ouer-punishing others which might have been remitted;
And therefore it is an Evangelical Commandment, Si peccauerit in te frater
tuus, corripe eum, If thy brother sin against thee, reprove him; Reprove him?
how? openly? No; Secreto corripe (says Augustine) Reprove secretly. Aug. de
Verbis Dommi super illae verba, Si peccauerit in te frater suus.
For if thou art knowing his offense, and by way of a taunt or exprobration
do diuulge and blazon it, Non es Corector, sed proditor, (says the Father)
Thou art not a Corrector, but a Betrayer; or as Origin aggrauates it, Non
reprehendentis hoc, sed infamantis, Orig. in Leuit. cap. 23.
This is no part of Reproof, but of Defamation. A wholesome holy Reprehension
may be viciously applied, especially not ballac'd by those two great weights,
Chaerity, and Judgment: Judgment to mould it, and Charity to sweeten it,
otherwise we may Wound perchance, when we desire to Heal, and in stead of
reproving others, condemn our selves; And therefore that of Saint Augustine is
very Energeticall, Cogitemus cum aliquem reprehendere nos necessitas coegerit,
vtrum tale sit vitium quod nunquam habuimus, Aug. lib. de sermon. Domini in
monte. ser. 1.
and tu^ne cogitemus nos homines esse, and habere potuisse, vel quod tale
habuimus, and iam non habemus, and nunc tangat memoriam communis fragilitatis,
vt ill am correctionem, non odium, sed misericordia praecedat:) When necessity
impels us to reprehend another (as the Father will have no reprehension without
necessity,) let us consider, whether it be such a vice as we never had, and
then, welgh that we are but men, and might have had it; or whether such a one
as once we had, and now have not, and then let it whisper to us the common
frailty of mankind, that so Mercy and not Hatred may be the Rule and platform
of our Reproof. It Is true, the words of the Wiseman are compared to Goads and
Nails; and the Reason, or Moral rather, Greg. Hom. 6. super Euang. in illa
verba.
Gregory affords, Culpas delinquentium nesciunt calcare, sed pungere: Lapses
and deprauations, they will prick, and not smother. But take heed how they
prick too far, lest bleeding them, they rankle. Applications come too late,
when the part begins to gangrene; And therefore sometimes our Balsames are
opportune, sometimes our Corrasiues; How to time, and qualify them, the Divine
Moralist will prescribe you, Greg. Moral. lib. 29.
Regat Disciplinae vigor mansuetudinem, and mansuetudo ornet vigorem, and sic
alterum commendetur, ex altero, vt nec vigor sit rigidus, nec mansuetudo
dissoluta: Discretion must be the Guide to decline hatred, and avoid
negligence, to blunt and meeken Rigor, and to edge and embolden Softness;
that so we may not only rebuke Delinquents, as men merely, but sometimes
encourage them as Christians, and not always terrify them, as Aliens and
enemies to the Church, but, now and then Beseech them as our Brethren; so the
Charity of our Apostle runs in the words following, I beseech you Brethren.

Brethren.
Brethren? how? by Nature? or Country? Pars 2.
or Alliance? Neither; For, Aquin. part 3. q. 28. Art. 3. ad 5.
the Roman Church was then a mixed Church, a Throng of Jews and Gentiles
promiscuously; And these could not be properly his Brethren, either in respect
of Parents, or Nation, or Consanguinity; and therefore, Brethren, by Affection,
Singulari affectu, (says Aretius,) Aretius in cap: 12. Romans Pareus Ibid.
And so Pareus too, Fratres compellat, vt de amore eius frater no non dubitet,
He uses this sweet Compellation, Brethren, not (perchance) that they were so,
either by Grace, or Nature; but, Brethren, that they might not distrust his
brotherly affection; For though of old the word Fratres was a common Attribute
and name to all Believers; yet, not used to the Romans (here) because,
Believers, Sed vt fraternam beneuolentiam, Carthus. in cap 12. Romans v. 1.
and charitatem, in illis declaret suam, says Carthusian; Not so much to
manifest their faith, as his Charity; For though many of them were strangers to
him, and some his sworn enemies, yet notwithstanding their extremity of
hatred, he would not refuse to call them Brethren, that would be his
Executioners. Nay, such were his ouer-flowings of Zeal and Love; Love toward
them, for God's sake; and Zeal toward God, for theirs, that he will not only
expose his Body to tortures for them, but (if it were possible) his very Soul;
And lest this should be thought a Flourish merely, He calls his own Conscience
to witness it, My Conscience bearing me record, that I could wish, Romans 9.3.
that myself were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my kinsmen according
to the flesh, Romans 9.3.

Thus, the great Lamps and Beacons of the Church, as they have abounded ever in
Grace, so in Love too; their Charity went hand in hand with their Zeal, and
sometimes out-stept it; and indeed Charity is the very Salt of Religion, the
seasoner of all our Spiritual and Moral Actions; without which, even our
Devotions are unsavory, our Orisons distasteful; and therefore to this great
virtue, some have made three Stories or Ascents; Polan. Syrtag. lib. 9. cap. 10.
Dilection, Love, Charity; Dilection at the foot; Love in the midway; Charity
at top; That, the groundwork or foundation; The Other, the walls and body;
This, the roof and battlement; Dilection (say they) includes the Judgment of
the Chooser, and a separation of the thing chosen from others which are not;
Love follows Dilection, by which we are united in affection to the thing we
chose, and so love; But Charity is greater then both, by which we so embrace
the thing loved, that we endeavor always to preserve it in our love. Dilection
is an Effeminate, light and transitory affection; Love more Masculine, though
somewhat violent, and so unstable too; Charity, sober, and hung with gravity,
and inuolues both strictness of Tie and inuiolablenesse. Thus the Moralist
will Cryticke on the words; the Divine is not so curious; But if he find any
difference, He makes Love and Charity toward God, Polan. Syntag. lib. 9. cap.
10.
the causes of Dilection, and This the effect of the other Two, so Polanus. But
indeed Charity includes all, has a diverse Aspect, and casts every way, like a
well-arted eye in a curious Statue; stand what side of it you please, It seems
still to glance and dart upon you; Sometimes It looks ad nos, to us, and that
is our home- Charity, Charity to our selves; Sometimes supra nos, above us, and
that is toward God; Sometimes praeter nos, beside us, and that is toward our
enemies; Sometimes iuxta nos, with us, Aug. lib. 1. de Doct. Christiana. cap.
23.
and that is toward our neighbor; Sometimes extra nos, without us, and that is
toward the Infidel; Sometimes infra nos, below us, and that is toward the
world. What? Charity toward our Neighbor, the unbeliever, and the world? and
none toward the Text here, Our Brethren? Yes; Charity toward our Neighbor
includes that; or if it did not, Charity toward God commands it, Hoc mandatum
habemus a Domino, This command we have from God, that he that loves God,
should love his brother also, 1 John. 4.21. So that this Diligere Deum,
presupposes diligere fratrem; and this diligere fratrem, diligere proximum; and
this diligere proximum, diligere omnem hominem: so Saint Augustine, upon our
Sauiour's Diliges proximum tuum, thou shall love thy neighbor; Manifestum est
omnem heminem proximum esse deputandum, Aug. vt suprae.
1. Book de doct. Christ. 30. cap. So that, to love God, does insinuate to
love every man by the rules of Charity; not every man for himself only, but
for God, and therefore for himself, because for God; according to that of the
same Saint Augustine, Aug lib. 3. de Docl. Christiana. cap. 10.
Charitas est metus animi ad fruendum Deo, propter ipsum, and se; atque
prexime, propter Deum. Charity is a motion of the mind, by which we enjoy God
for himself, and our selves, and our Neighbor for our God. Thou shall love
thy God (says Christ) with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. As
thy self? how is that? with all thy heart too: so that He shares in thy whole
man, as well as God; but not so Extensiuely; God principally, thy Neighbor in
Subordination to him. And question less, Ratio diligendi proximum, Deus est;
hoc enim in proximo debemus diligere, vt in Deo sit: God is the Reason why we
love our Neighbor; for, in this respect we ought to love our Neighbor, that
he be in God; and therefore it is manifest that the same Act in Specie (says
Thomas) is, by which we love God, Aquin. secunda secundae. q. 25. Art. 1. Conct.
and by which we love our Neighbor, and so the very Habit of Charity must not
only extend it self to the love of God, but to the love of our Neighbor also.

Neither is this great virtue terminated here, but extends also to our very
enemies; and that not only out of command, because God enioynes it, but out of
Necessity, because Charity will enforce it. The very Laws of Charity will have
us love our Enemies, but not merely, as our Enemies; for, that were to love
another sin; but, in universally, as men, and partakers of our Nature; and, not
only, in this Generality of love neither; Aquin. secunda secundae. q. 25. Art.
2.
but sometimes, more personally, In articulo necessitatis, secundum
praeparationem animi (as the Schools flourish it) In an Article of Necessity,
by some mental preparation; To wit, That our mind should ever be so
prepared, that if Necessity did comply, we could love our enemy in Singulari
too, more specially, more particularly.

And not only, Thus, to our enemy, but the Wicked enemy. Charity binds there,
too; but there as before, Non culpa, qua peccatores, sed natura, vt diuinae
beatitudinis capaces. For there are two things considerable in the wicked man,
Nature, and Sin; According to Nature, which he has from God, he is capable of
Beatitude, and so, the Object of our Charity; But according to Sin, by which
he stands in Diameter, Debemus in peccatoribus odire quod peccatores sunt, et
diligere, quod homines sint beatitudini capaces. Aquin. secunda secundae. q.
25. A. 6.
and direct opposition to his God, and so finds an impediment of this
blessedness, he is rather the But and Aim of our hatred, then Commiseration.
And therefore, whereas the Prophet is often violent against the wicked man,
debarring him (as it were) of all Charity, with his Conuertentur peccatores in
Infernum, The wicked shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.17. It Is spoken per
modum praenunciationis, non imprecationis, by way of Prophecy, not Curse; and
therefore it is not Conuertantur peccatores, Psalm. 50.10.
Let the Sinners be turned; but Conuertentur, in the Future, They shall be
turned; or perchance too, per modu^ optationis; by way of wish, yet so, that
the desire of him that wishes, be not reser'd to the punishment of man, but the
Justice of him that inflicts it; Because God himself punishing, does not
rejoice in the destruction of the wicked, but his own Justice; or else, that
this desire be referred to the remotion of Sin, not the very Act of
punishment, that so the Transgression be destroyed, and yet the Man remain.
Secunda secundae. q. 25. A. 7. ad 3.
And there is Charity in this too, great Charity, that we wish the preservation
of the Sinner, when we desire the destruction of his Sin; But this is
Charitas secundum naturam also, which is not only exposed to Man, and the
worst of men, but to Creatures reasonlesse, nay, to the very Devils themselves,
whose nature we may even (out of Charity) love, forasmuch as we would have
those spirits to be conseru'd in suis naturalibus, Secunda secundae. q. 25. A.
11. Concl.
as they are naturally spirits, to the Glory of that divine Majesty that
created them, so Aquinas, secunda, secundae, quaest: 25. Art. 11.

Thus we have followed Charity in her largest progress, through heaven and
Earth, to the Horrid pit; From God, by men, to Spirits; if there be a place or
subject else where Goodness may reside or pitch on, Charity will dwell there
also: It bears all things, 1. Cor. 13.7.
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things; Are there
Prophecies? They shall fail. Are there Tongues? They shall cease. Is there
Knowledge? 1. Cor. 13.8.
That shall vanish; but Charity shall never fail, never in matters of Nature,
or Grace, or Glory; of the Law, the Gospel, or their Consummation; Charity
fulfils the Law, comprehends the Gospel, and compleats Both. All the Moral
virtues lie shrin'd here; Secunda secundae quaest. 65. Art. 3. Concl. August.
Sermon. 46. de Temport. 1. Cor. 13.23.
so Aquinas; all the Cardinal, says Augustine; all the Theological, Saint
Paul, though not ex confesso, yet by way of Intimation; for Faith and Hope are
not only with it, but under it: The greatest of these is Charity, 1. Cor. 13.
vlt. The greatest of these? All these, they are all in Charity, and Charity in
God; In God? God it self, God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells
in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.

It Is plain then, where Charity is, there is an habitation for the Lord; and
where it is not, there is a Thorow-fare for the Devil; Religion is but
rottenness without it, and all this front of holiness, but dross and
Rubbish: Tell me not of Faith, without thy works; nor of Prayers, without thine
Alms; nor of Piety, without thy Compassion; nor of Zeal, without thy Charity;
what is Devotion when it is turbulent, or Conscience when it is peevish? or
Preaching, when it is Schismatic? I love not Divinity, when it is stipendary;
nor purity, when it is factious: nor Reprehension, when it is Cruel; nor
Censure, when it is Desperate: Orall vehemence has more tongue then heart: and
therefore that Zeal which is ouer-mouth'd, we may suspect either for
counterfeit, or Malicious.

Believe not every spirit, 1. John 4.1.
(says Saint John) but try the spirits, whether they be of God or not for many
false Teachers are gone out into the world: Into the world, in all: Ages, and
all Churches: Let Us particularize in some, in that of the Apostles first, when
under a pretense of sincerity, and suppressing Innovation, (laboring to
establish the Jewish ceremonies more firmly,) there were some that subtly
cried down the very seeds of Christianity, as those false apostles did, which
came from Judea, unto Antioch, and taught the Brethren; That except they were
Circumcifed after the manner of Moses, Acts 15.
they could not be saved; whom Paul and Barnabas first, and afterward Peter
and James, and the rest at Jerusalem, both zealously did resist, and in their
Synod, or first convocation, powerfully suppress. But this Pseudo-zeale in the
time of the Apostles, did but smoke and sparkle (like fire under green wood,)
In that of the Fathers, it brake out into flames, when some turbulent and
discontented spirits, burning in hatred to the true Professors, or leaning
partially to some faction against the Church, notwithstanding out of a mere
tickling and itch of glory, offered themselves unto death, for the confession
of the name of Christ, Vide Estius in c. 13. ad Romans
as the Montanists, Nouatians, Arrians, Donatists, whom the Catholic Church
never honored with the Title of Martyrs, but reprobated and cast out as the
wilful Patriarchs of Schism and herefie; as Saint Augustine, and Saint
Cyprian more voluminously; The one, in his Disputation against the Nouatian;
the other, against the Donatist. And doubtless, Suffering is not always the
way to Glory; It Is not Passion, but the Cause of it, that both creates, and
crowns our Martyrdomes. Timeo dicere, Hieron. in cap. 5. ad Galat.
sed dicendum est; Jerome is loath to speak it, but he must: That those
Corporal tortures which for Religion we undergo, even Martyrdom it self;
if it be therefore undergone, to purchase Admiration and Applause of men,
frustra sanguis effusus est, That blood was spilt in vain. We honor not
Martyrs, because they suffer, but because for Christ, and his Church, they
suffer. It Is not thy carcass then, but thy Charity that casts up the grateful
Incense; and therefore those that glory in their wilful passions under a false
name of Martyrdom, Hear how Saint Augustine descants on: Ecce, venitur ad
passionem; Aug. sermon. 50. de Verbis Dom.
venitur and ad sanguinis effusionem; venitur and ad corporis incensionem; and
tamen, nihil prodest, quia Charitas deest, We offer our Bodies to the stake,
our Blood to the flames, our Lives to the fury of the Tormentors, all this is
nothing without Charity, it is that makes the Suffering glorious. 1. Cor. 13.4,
5.
If I give my Body to be burned (says Saint Paul) and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing, nay had I all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and have not Charity, I am nothing; Not, Nullus sum, but Nihil sum, Not so
much, not a Man, as not a creature, nothing.

Hearken then, thou son of Tumult, whose lips enter into contention, and
whose mouth calls for strokes; Thou which raisest tempests in Religion, Pro.
8.5.
and sowest thy Tares of Faction amongst the multitude; thou which bring in
the strange Leaven of New Doctrines, and colourest them with thy probable
allegations, whereby the Consciences of the Simple are entangled, and the peace
of the Church disturbed, though otherwise perchance, thou art punctual enough,
both in thy conversation and thy Tenants, have the gifts of Prophecy,
vnderstand'st all Mysteries and all Language, yet, because in some things thou
have made a breach of this Harmany in the Church, Schismatici, qui extra
Ecclesiam Catholicam, praesentem siniunt vitam, in ignem eunt aeternum. Aug.
seu potius. Fulgent. de fide ad Petrum Diaconum, cap. 38
thou art a Rebel both to it, and thy Christ; and except by Retractation and
Submission thou art recal'd to the Fold from which thou have wandered, thou
stand'st out-lawed and excommunicate to Heaven, and neither Imprisonment nor
Death can make atonement for thy Mistreadings. Is this harsh? It Is Saint
Augustines, and he will yet go farther: A Schism iticke brought unto the
stake, not for that Error which did separate him from the Church, but for the
truth of the Word and Sacrament which he does else maintain, suffering the
Temporal flames, to avoid the Eternal, and bears it patiently; though that
Patience be commendable, and a gift of God, yet (because in part a
Schismaticke) not of that kind of gifts which are imparted filijs Jerusalem,
but to those also which are filij concubinarum, (says the Father) which even
carnal Jews, and Heretics may have; and concludes at length, that This
suffering and patience nothing profits Him toward Heaven; but supposes that
the great Judgment will be in this more tolerable to Him, Aug. lib. de
Patientia, cap. 26.27.28.
Quam si Christum negando tormenta mortemque vitasset, Then if by denying
Christ, he had euaded the cruelty of his Death and Torment: in his Book de
Patientia, 28. chapter.

You have heard what primitive times have done for the bark and outside of
Religion; the very skin and shell of Christianity; Let us now compare them a
little with our own; and we shall find, that they have not any-whit gone
beyond us in the External profession of sincerity, tho in their suffering and
Tortures they have much. We have deceitful workers as well as they, 2. Cor.
11.13.
Transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.20.
which glory in appearance, and not in heart.

We abhor, That Age should out-doe ours, either in Hypocrisy or
profaneness; we have our Donatists and Catharists, and Anabaptists, as
plentifully as they; and some besides, They had not; the Brownist, the
Barrowist, and the Familist, and one more that both fosters and incloses all
these, (may he be whifper'd without offense, my Brethren) the Puritan; but he
will not be Titled so; the very Name hangs in his Jaws, and the chief way to
discover him, is to call him so; That fires and nettles him, and so repining at
the Name, he ownes it; and questionless it is his, though he shroud and veil
it under the word Brethren in the Text; whose Purity consists much in washing
of the out-ward-man; Vide To. Art. 19. A. 1. prop. vbi citat H. N. 1. exhort c.
1. 10. the Brownists to Cartwright, page 39. Barrow in his discovery, p. 33.
whilst their Tenants look toward a Legal righteousness, and a triumphant
and glorified condition of man here upon earth; professing by their open
Pamphlets, that the visible Church, the true visible Church, is deuoid of Sin
and Sinners, and for Manners cannot err; and therefore Paradox it, That the
Assemblies of good and bad together, are no Church, but Heaps of profane men;
as if in one field, Math. 25.
there were not as well Tares as Corn; in one house, vessels of wood and
earth, as of gold and silver; a Mixture of good and bad, Math. 2.3.
in all Congregations; which as an Emblem of the Church visible, our Savior
types-out in the parable of the Sower, the Marriage, and the Virgins; Math. 13.
Nay his Blessed Spouse, of her self, freely professes her deformity, Though I
am comely, I am black, Cant. 1.5.
O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, black as the Tents of Kedar. And yet These will
have her all clean and lovely, like a face without spot, or wrinkle; when we
know a Mole or Wart (sometimes) beautifies a feature; and in this War of
opposites, there is both gracefulness, and Luster; and therefore I suppose the
Church was first compared unto the Moon, not so much for change, as
obnubilation, being obuious to clouds, and Eclipses; and when it is at clearest,
it is not without a mole in her cheek neither, at leastwise, to an ocular
apprehension, or if it were all fair and Lucid, yet, it is by way of Influence,
beamed from a greater light, borrowed, not her own; so is this of the Church
too; one Sun of righteousness enlightens Both; and therefore, Woe unto them,
that call Light, Darkness and Darkness, Light; make a Church of it self shine,
which cannot, or not shine, which might, if they were not, by others;
dogmatically, and pere^ptorily laying down, that where Errors are, there is no
True Church, (when there was never any, nor will be, whilst it is militant,
without them;) But They are no more of the substance of our Religion, or any
Essential part of our Churches Doctrine, 'Ro. Artic. in the Preface.
then ill humors which be in, are of the Body, or Dregs in a vessel of wine,
part of the wine, or vessel.

It Is true, some Ceremonies we retain yet, as matters of Indifferency, and not
of Substance, and these (forsooth) are so heinous, that they are Thorns in
their sides, and prickles in their eyes; matter of Ceremony, is now matter of
Conscience, and rather then subscribe, Silence, Suspension, Imprisonment, they
venture on, and sometimes suffer too; where A Brethren-Contribution more fats
them, then all the Fortunes they were masters of before; and this (beloved)
cannot be zeal, but Schism, or if it be zeal, (...), Rom 10.2.
it wants Eyes, and Intellectuals, it is not according to knowledge; For what
Judgment would expose our Body unto prison? our Calling to the stain of
Separation, and Revolt, for a thing merely of indifferency and Ceremony? No;
there is more in it, then This; the Rochet, Tippet, and the Surplesse is not
that they shoot at, but the thing called Parity; Moses and Aaron they like not
for the Ephod, and the Rod; they speak power, and command, and so intimate
obedience; But these struggle for equality; the Ecclesiasticke Hierarchy they
would demolish, Episcopal corruption is the great Eyesore; Down with it,
down with it, even to the ground. And yet I dare say, there are some subtle
Pioners, and secret Mutiners in Commonwealth, pretending plausibly to the
flourishing of Religion, which, if they could once glory in that Babel they
endeavor to erect, they cared not, if Jerusalem were An heap of stones; It Is
impossible, that Civil Authority can ever subsist without the other; and if
there be once a full rent and flaw in Church-policy, what can we expect from
that of State, or either, but vast Anarchy, and Confusion?

Thus, he that strikes at the Myter, God grant he catch'th not at the Scepter,
and (if he could graspe it) the very Thunderbolt; no Bishop, no King, and so by
consequence no God; He proclaims himself the God of Order, and These would
make him the Father of Confusion; and so, in circumstance disgod him too,
seeing his greatest glory consists in the Harmony of his Creatures, the Peace
of his Church, and unanimity of his Saints and Servants; and therefore
(brethren) let me beseech you in the words of the Apostle, Mark them which
cause Divisions, Romans 16.17, 18.
and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have heard, and avoid them.
For, they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly,
and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16.17, 18, ver.

I have yet but Beseech't you in the words of an Apostle; Let me warn you also
in the Language of a Savior, Beware of Those which come to you in
sheeps-clothing, with such a Cast of Mortification and Integrity, as if their
conversation spoke nothing but Immaculatenesse, when within they are ravening
wolves: such as will not only tondere pecus, and deglubere; but deuorare too;
subvert whole houses for filthy lucre: Tit. 1.13.
You shall know them by their fruit; Their fruit unto the eye beautiful and
glorious, but to the finger, Dust and Smoke; or if not by their fruit, by
their Leaves, you may, a few wind-falne virtues which they piece and sow
together to cover their own Nakedness. Will you have them in their full
Dress and portraiture? Take the draught and pattern, then from the Pharisee,
Matthew 23. There the character is exact; where if you observe, They are twice
called Blind Guides: Blindness of knowledge brings on Blindness of Heart; and
therefore twice also Fools, and Blind; ver. 17.19. To this Blindness of
Heart, Fride is annexed; They make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the
Borders of their Garments; ver. 5. To this Pride, vainglory; They love
greetings in the Market, uppermost rooms at feasts, and chief seats in the
Synagogues; ver. 6.7. To this Vainglory, Hypocrisy; They make clean the
outside of the cup and platter, and for a pretense make long prayers; and all
to be seen of men, v. 14.25. To this Hypocrisy, Spiritual malice; They shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for they neither go in themselves, nor
suffer them that are entering, to go in, ver. 13. Lastly, to this Malice, there
is uncharitableness; They bind heaur Burdens, and grievous to be borne, and
lay them on men's shoulders, but they Themselves will not move them with one of
their fingers, ver. 4. Rare perfections, doubtless, for the Sanctified Child
of God! Observe the Catalogue, Blindness of Heart, Pride, Vainglory,
Hypocrisy, Malice, and Uncharitableness: Let us make it out, Envy, and all
Uncharitableness, and then Liber a nos, Domine, Good Lord, deliver us; deliver
us from all false-hood in his Services, and faction against his Church, that we
may be his Ministers in Sincerity, and not in show, as those false Teachers
were of old, or our Braine-sicke and discontented. Neotericks at the present,
whom Saint Paul discouers by a double Attribute, (...), and (...), vaniloqui,
and Seductores; unruly and vaine-talkers, and Deceivers, Titus 1.10. Estius in
cap. 1. Tit. v. 10.11.
They talk (it should seem) They do not Teach; and talk vainly too; and
not only so, but his vanity must be noised, Lectio Hieron. in 1. cap. Tit. v.
10.11.
unruliness goes with it, and Those which in their Doctrines are vain and
unruly too, sometimes prove Deceivers, Mentium Deceptores, (as Jerome reads it
on the Text) Deceivers of minds, 2. Tim. 3.6.
of weak and simple minds, Mechanics, and captived women, which have been
the disciples of all Schisms and all Heresies in all Ages. And such indeed are
the chiefest Proficients in their Schools now: for none are so pinned to the
strict observation of their Precepts, as these Silly one. There is nothing so
furious as an ignorant zeal, Vide 2. Tim. 4. ver 3.4.
so violent as a factious Holiness; and therefore when their Doctrines or
their practices are touched unto the Quick, and made (once) the subject of a
Pulpit Reprehension; their Charity is presently on the Rack; the Brass sounds
loud, and the Cymball tinckles shrill, their Censures are full-charg'd, and
come on like a peale of Great shot, thick and terrible.

The Cymball (as Caietan observes) was an Instrument of old, Vide Estium in 1.
Cor. 13.1.
Magis sonorum, quam musicum, not so musical as loud and of more noise then
melody, and such as women only used, both in their times of Triumph and
Devotion. A pretty Invention for weakness and childhood to play withal, and
be it spoken without disparagement of some glories in that Sex, a fit type of
women and their frailties; who, for the most part are taken rather with the
sound of things, then the things themselves, and are seldom without this
Instrument of Noise about them. The Tongue is their proper Cymball, Psalm. 150.
not the well-tuned Cymball David speaks of; but the Loud Cymball, with which
they do not so much praise God, as sometimes disparage men; Their Morality,
and their zeal are near one, a shrilnesse as well in their Devotion, as their
Actions, and their practice in both is a very Tinckling; Tinckling with their
Feet, lead the Dance to the next Conuenticle; Tinckling with the tongue too;
Great talkers, in Divinity; and if they could exchange a Parlour for a Church,
or a stool for a Pulpit, they would preach too, and ('it is thought) Edify as
much as their zealous Pastor. But Away with those Echoes in Religion, fitter
for Silence, then Reproof; and for pity, then confutation; and therefore
(once more) I Beseech you, and with the phrase of an Apostle too, Heb. vltimo.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines; Halt and limp not
between Innovation and an established Discipline. But (as Peter said to the
Cripple) In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk; Acts 3.6.
Return unto the Church, whence ye are straggling; not to your Stepdame, but
your mother, the Mother of whom you were borne and nursed; dry those tears she
sheads for you; peace those sighs, and groans, and complaints, which she
wailes for you; Fall upon those Arms which will embrace you, those Bowels
which yearne for you, those Paps which gave you suck. What went you to see? A
Reed shaken with the wind? Yes, a very Reed, shaken with every wind of
Doctrine; A Reed with a bruized stalk or broken Ear, no Corn in it; or if it
have, it is blasted with Sedition, fitter for the Dunghill, the^ the Granary.

Away then from Lebanon (my Beloved) from Lebanon; Look from the Den of Lions,
Cant 4.^.
and Mountains of the Leopards (where the peace of Religion is blood-suck't
and devoured) and come hither to the mountains of Myrrh; and hills of
Frankincense; The Altars of the living God, where the Incense of his Church
flames cheerfully, with no less truth of devotion, then unanimity. Lo, her
golden vials, full of odours, Sacrifices both devout and peaceable, Such as the
heart of his peole offer, and not the hands, only; Calves of our lips, and
groans of the Spirit, which touch both the ears and nostrils of the Almighty.
Let the voice of division, then, jarre no more amongst you, which if there were
nothing else to noise our frailties, were enough to speak bondage to the
flesh, and not yet, our freedom to the Spirit. For whence are strifes and
enuyings? are they not from your lusts? And whilst one says, I am of Paul, 1.
Cor. 3.4.
another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? Christ is not divided, Cant. 6.7.
his Church is one; My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of
her mother, the choice one of her that bare Her, Can. 6.7.

The Church, (you hear) is God's only one, his choice one; He has no more;
and we, though many, are but one neither, 1. Cor. 10.17.
the Churches one, Her choicest one, one Body, nay, one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.
Moreover, Christ's Spirit is but one; though it be in many, it is there still one
Spirit, no division where that is, but all peace; Ephesians. 4.3.
and therefore it is called the unity of the Spirit; and this unity must be
still kept in the bond of peace. Mark, here is no wavering, or Temporary peace;
but this peace must be still kept, and not slightly kept, but there is a Tie on
the keeping of it, The Bond of peace: Ephesians. 4.3.
and it is this Bond that makes the unity, and this unity that keeps the peace,
and this peace that preserues the Spirit, so that it is still an unity of
Spirit, kept in the Bond of peace.

Come hither, then, my Faithful Brother in the Lord, and let us no more
ceasure, but expostulate. Have Thou the true Faith thou so much gloriest in?
where is thy zeal? have thou true zeal? where is thy Charity? have thou true
Charity? why art thou Tumultucus? John 13.35.
By this shall you know (says Christ) that you are my Disciples, if you love
one another. Mutual agreement begets Love, and this Love makes the Disciple,
and this Disciple is known to be Christ's, by a Si diligeritis, only, if ye
love one another. And therefore in the first Dawne and rising of the Christian
Church, the chief thing remarked in it by the Gentiles, was the Christian
Love: Teytul. Apol. 36.
Vide vt inuicem se diligunt! vt pro alterutro mori sint paerati! as Tertullian
stories it. Lo how they Love! the Heathens cry, How ready to Dye one for
another! But this L^ue of the Brother unto Death, I press not here; (for the
very Infidels had their Commorientes, as well as we) but Love unto Sincerity
and Constancy, of which he that is destitute, falls short both in Religion, and
Morality. And therefore that Text in Saint Peter runs Methodically, Fear God,
1. Pet. 2.17.
Honor the King, but first, Love the Brotherhood; as if there could be no true
fear of God, or honor of the King, except there be first Love to thy Brother;
to thy Brother? nay, the Brotherhood: (...), says the Greek, Achava, the
Hebrew; Beza Annot. in 1. Pet. 2 17.
Brotherhood, for the company and conjunction of Brethren in the Church; and in
this, not so much a Conjunction of persons, as of Minds, otherwise it is no
Church. And therefore the multitude of them that believed at the Apostles
Sermon, were said to be of one Soul, and one heart, Acts 4.32. And this one
Soul, and one heart; S. ^aul calls one mind, and one Judgment: And this one
mind and one Judgment, must not be thinly mixed, 1. Cor. 1.10.12.
but perfectly icyn'd together, and so joined together, that there be no
Division among us; and therefore he coniures his Corinthians by the Name of
Jesus Christ; Romans 15.5, 6.
not only to Do, but to Speak the same thing. I Beseech you Brethren, by the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that there be
no Division amongst you, but that ye be perfectly joined together, in one
mind, and the same Judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.

Maximum indicium malae mentis fluctuatio; Sen. Epist. 121.
Reeling between opinion and opinion, is a Mental drunkenness and there is
no such Index of a Depraved Disposition, as wauing and vnsettlednesse. And
therefore the Stoicke describing the unconstant man, Senec. Jbid.
Thus lashes him, Nunquam eundem nec similem quidem, sed in diuersum aberrat;
He so trauerses and wanders in himself, that he is neither the same, nor
like, but diverse. So that the Wise man is the Man only of Resolution; for He
is one, and the same still: Praeter Sapientem n^mo vnus, Seneca tells his
Lucillius in his 126. Epistle. And doubtless, it is this one mind and one
Judgment, that makes both the discreet Meralist and the wise Christian:
Videmus qualis sit, quantus sit, and vnus sit: Epist. 26.
the same Seneca. Unanimity is the Soul of Brotherhood, whether in that of
Nature, or of Grace; And therefore, what Abraham, of old, said unto Let, is
worthy both of your memory and observation, Genes. 13.8.
Let there be no strife between me and thee, nor between my Heardsmen, and
thy Heardsmen; why? We are Brethren; as if the very word did inuolue union, and
where there was Brotherhood, there could be no strife; no not amongst their
very Heardsmen, that brawling Regiment, which, for the most part, are as unruly
as the Droues they keep; and in some things it is disputable, which is the
verier Beast; for they both go one way, Sen. Epist. 135.
non qua eundum est, sed qua itur, As the multitude treads, so they follow,
squadron'd into a Faction, as That is, not only in the State, but the Church
too; And so 'twas of old, in the time of the Apostles, Acts 14.4.
when at Iconium there was a great uproar amongst the Jews and Gentiles, about
the preaching of Paul and Barnabas; in stead of suppressing the fury of the
Tumult, the Rabble of the City was Divided, and part held with the Jews, and
part with the Apostles, Act. 14.4.

Thus popular conuocations were ever the Nurses of Distraction; and These, now
occasion the Hubub and Outcries in Our Church; the strife is not so much
between Lot, and Abraham, as their Heardsmen, the People more side it in
Religion, then their Pastors do; and that is the best Doctrine which They
fancy; not what the Others teach. And to this purpose, They have gotten, lately
into most Corporations of the Kingdom, certain Lapwing-Dinines, and
featherlesse Professors of their own Cut; prescribe them Principles which they
may not transgress; and not only their Posture, Habit, and Conversation, but
the very Method, Tone and Language cued them. Miserable Age, when Divinity
shall be thus slau'd to a Stipend and a Trencher! and the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, for a morsel of bread! or some Mechanicke, or Leane-cheek'd
Contribution, shall disparage the Powr^ and Sacredness of their Keys! But fie
on this Factious Holiness, this Iezebel in Religion, that smells too much of
the Painter, and his Varnish: Let it no more with uncharitable contentions, or
nouelty of Doctrine, or unseasonableness of suggestion, disturb the peace of
our Spiritual Mother; but let her sleep and rest sweetly in that Divine
truth, which she has received from Primitive plantations, and sealed since,
with the Blood of so many Martyrs. I tharge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, by
the Roes and Hinds of the field, that ye stir not, or awake my Love, until
she please, Cant. 3.5.

'Twas long since the complaint of a disconsolate Church, and ours has in part
revived it: Eccepace amaritudo mea amarissima, pax ab haereticis, pax a
paganis, bellum a filijs: O my bitter bitterness in the days of peace, peace
amongst pagans, peace amongst Heretics, but wars and struglings by the
twins of my own womb! My sons, my divided sons, are more unnatural then
all these. The Protestant, that has been so long the Star of the Reformed
Church, the Ensign and Standard Bearer of true Religion, must be now buffeted
and spit upon by the obloquy and scorn of vpstart Sectaries!

You then, that thus dig out the Bowels of your hallowed mother, and stick
your Daggers at her very heart; Sermon. 57. de Diuersis in Append.
Hark, Saint Augustine, the devout Saint Augustine, All those gifts and
rewards of Beatitude, which God has treasured up for his Children and Elect,
in pacis conseruatione promisit, are appropriate only to the Sons of peace.
And hence is our Saviors Beati pacifici, Blessed are the peacemakers; why?
They shall be called the sons of God. Aug. Sermon. 463. de Temp.
Non peruenitur ad vocabulum Filij, nisi per nomen pacifici, says the Father:
They had never been called the Sons of God, had they not been first the
sons of peace; nor entitled to the Attribute of Blessed, had they not been
formerly the Sons of God. And therefore it is the Substance of Christ's
valediction to his Disciples; John 14.27. Aug. Sermon. 63. de Temp.
My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: Proficiscens voluit dare,
quod desiderabat rediens in omnibus inuenire; the same Saint Augustine; He
gave to all, at his departure, what he desired to find in all, at his return;
his peace, his blessed peace: For where there is a Congregation of men, and not
of opinions, or of opinions, and not of love; Christ is not there with his Pax
vobis: so that where peace is not, there is no Christ; and where no Christ, no
Church. Thy Religion, thy Faith, thy Hope, are dead without it, thy Groans,
thy Sighs, thy Deuctions, are false and empty, like vaults that sound merely
from their hollownesse; thy self like an Instrument that is cracked, or a
string that jarr's. And therefore to the peace-lesse Brother, that of
Tertullian to the Gentiles, shall be both my Advice, and my Conclusion; Fratres
vestri sumus, Tertul. Apol. 36^.
iure nostrae Matris vnius; et si vos parum homines, qui mall fratres; at
quanto dignius, fratres and dicuntur, and habentur, qul vnu^ Patrem Deum
agnouerunt, qui vnum Spiritum biber unt sanctitatis, qui de vno vtero
ignorantiae eiusdem, advnam Lucem expauerint veritatis? Itaque, quia Anima,
ani^oque miscemur, nihil de rei communicatione dubitemus: Since we have one
God, our Father; one Christ, our Brother; one Church, our mother; one Spirit,
our Comforter; Ephesians. 4 vlt.
let us all have one mind, one heart, one peace, our Director; that so the God
of peace, which is above All, may be through All, Cant. 4.15.
and in us All. And then Arise, O North, and come, O South, and blow on my
Garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Cant. 7.12.
Arise ye Sovereign winds of the Spirit of God, and breath on this garden of
the Spouse, where the Pomegranates bud forth, and the tender grapes appear,
that the fragrant odours of these her Plants may be both increased and
dispes'd, and at length carried into the Nostrls of her well-beloued, who shall
bring her out of this Wilderness below, Cant. 3.6.
like pillars of smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Incense, which as swee^e
savors, shall ascend on high; where the Day breaks, and shadows fly away,
where Darkness is banished everlastingly, and the Sun of Righteousness
shines for evermore. To whom, etc.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Haec, at que huiusmodi verba obtrectantium, sieve non obtrectando, sed
quaerendo talia loquentium, operosius fortasse refellerem, nisi hae
disceptationes haberentur cuni viris liberaliter institutis; Aug. de Apoll. and
Apul. ad Marcellinum. Epist. 5. Respon.
FINIS.

