FIVE SERMONS, UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS, AND AT SAINT
MARY'S, IN OXFORD.

BY Humphry Sydenham, Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, LORD DANVERS, BARON OF DANCY, AND Earl of
DANBY; The glory of both Ages.
MY GOOD LORD,
THat service is most free of insinuatio^, which is so of attendance; whilst
others only look on your virtues, with your fortunes, and admire them, I both
weigh, and contemplate, and so honor you more than they by how much a just
speculation exceedes an outward and partial survey of men, and of their
actions. It Is my belief in that has armed my resolution in this bold tender
of my labors, which though I acknowledge unworthy either of your judgment, or
acceptance, yet the noble encouragements and fair interpretations you have
given those formerly delivered in your ear, have taught me a confidence that
you will entertain these also offered to your eye; a Judge more severe than
the other, because more subtle, and (what is more) more deliberate; howeuer,
did I not believe they would pass the mercy of an honorable perusal, I
should never have exposed them to the criticisme and comment of a censorious
Age, which vnderualues most things because they are common, and many things,
because they are good. Though mine can lay no title to the latter in respect of
their frame and structure, they may of the subject, that is sacred, and should
at least inuit acceptance, if not enforce it. As they are (most Noble Lord)
vouchsafe them entertainment; they were published at the importunities of some
private, but real friends, to whom they address themselves only for survey,
to you (now) for patronage, they may encourage my proceedings, but greatness
must protect them; your countenance they beg which if you daine to afford, you
no less crown them, than the Author, who in all humility deuotes himself

Your Lordships unfeigned honourer and loyal servant, HVM: SYDENHAM.

The ATHENIAN Babbler.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S in Oxforde, the 9. of July, 1626. being ACT-
Sunday.

By Humphry Sydenham, Master of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM-Colledge in Oxon.



LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T. FAUCET, for JOHN PARKER. 1627.

TO THE HOPEFVLL EXPECTATION, BOTH OF HIS NAME, AND Country, Sir HVGH PORTMAN,
BARONET, this.
MY HONOVR'D Sr.
HOweuer the publishing of other Labors may entitle me to Ostentation, this
cannot but touch upon Humility, since I have exposed that to the Eye only of
a Nation, which I had formerly to the Ear of a World, a University; a World
more Glorious then that which inuolues it, by how much it exceeds the other, in
her Judgment, in her Charity, and (what is Noble, too) her encouragement; of
the latter, I had some taste in the delivery of this, when I was a fitter
object of her Pity, then approbation, whether she reflected on Mind, or
Body, my Discourse, or Me. But that was the extension of her goodness,
nothing that my weakness could expect, or point at, but the Mercy of my
worthyer Friends, amongst whom, as, you were then pleased to approve it, so,
now vouchsafe both to peruse and Countenance; In that you shall glorify the
endeauours of him, who looks no higher, then the honor of this title,

Your Friend that ever serves you HVM: SYDENHAM.

THE ATHENIAN BABBLER.
Text. ACTS, 17. Verse. 18. Some said; what will this Babbler say?


THe Life of a true Christian the Apostle calls a continual warfare; The life
of a true Apostle the Christian calls a continual Martyrdom; Each act of it
has a bloody scene, but not a mortal; A few wounds cannot yet terminate his
misery, though they begin his glory. There are diverse tough breathings required
to the Celestial race; many a bleeding scarre to the good Fight, sweatings,
wrestlings, tuggings numberless to the crown of Glory. PAVL had long since
begun the course and finished it, and can show you a platform of all the
sufferings; the scrowle is ready drawn with his own hand, Verse. 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28.
you may peruse it if you please, 2. Corinthians. 11. where cruelty seems to be
methodicall, and torment accurate, persecution tumbles on persecution, as a
billow on a billow, this on the neck of that; one seals not the truth of his
Apostleship, Act. 14. v. 10.19. Act. 16.18.23.
many shall. He was but now at Lystra, where he cured a Cripple, and he is
stoned for it; by and by at Philippi he casts out a Devil, and he is
scourged. Here Is not all; sufferings of the body are not load enough for an
Apostle; if he love his Lord and Master (as he ought) he must have some of
reputation too; he that has been so long acquainted with the Lash of the
hand, must now feel that of the tongue too: Buffettings are not sufficient for
Disciples, they must have reuilings also for the name of JESUS. PAVL therefore
shall now to Athens (the eye of the learned world and seat of the Philosopher)
where he meets with language as perverse as the Religion, and amongst many
false ones, finds no entertainment for the true; The mention of a JESUS
Crucified stands not with the Faith of an Athenian, nor a story of the
Resurrection with his Philosophy. The Altar there consecrated to the unknown
will not so soon smoke to the jealous God. Act. 17.23.
The glorious Statues of Mars and Jupiter, cannot yet be translated to the
form of a Nazarite. It Is not a bare relation can plant CHRIST at Athens, it
must be Reason, the sinew and strength of some powerful Argument, and to this
purpose PAVL was but now in hot Disputation with the Jews there in the
Synagogue. Act. 17. v. 17.
By this time he has dispatched; for lo yonder where he stands in earnest
discourse with the people in the Market? The tumult is enlarged, and the
Athenian already tickled with the expectation of some novelty; Anon, the Gown
besets him, and all the rigid Sects of the Philosophers; as the throng
increases, so does the Cry; On that side, Censure, -- Some said he was a
setter forth of strange Gods, on this side, Prejudice, -- And some said, what
will this Babbler say?

In the division of which tumult wilt please you to observe mine.

1. The persons Prejudicate, maskt here under a doubtful Pronoune, Quidam -
some, - (...), - some said. - 2. The person prejudiced, clothed in a term of
obloquy and dishonor, (...) - Babbler, - What will this Babbler say? Thus the
Field stands pitched where we may view the parts, as the persons, In a double
squadron, no more. PAVL and his Spirit in one part of the Battalio; Epicures,
Stoickes with their Philosophy, in the other, the rest are but lookers on, no
sharers in the conflict. Heeres all; All that is natural from the words, and
not wrested; For (mine own part) I Will not pull Scripture into pieces, digging
for particulars which are not offered, for that were to torment a Text, not
divide it. I affect nothing that is forced, love Fluentnesse, and (what the
majesty of this place may (perchance) look sour on) plainness. Howeuer, at
this time, I have a little endeavored that way, that those of Corinth and
Ephesus may as well hear PAVL as these of Athens. I come not now to play with
the quaint ear but to rub it, nor to cherish the dancing expectation of
those Athenians which cry - News, Act 17. v. 21.
News, - but to foil it. And this is well enough for a Babbler, that is the
doom at Athens, mine, now, and justly too. I may not expect a greater mercy of
the tongue thence, then an Apostle had, especially when a Stoicke reigns in
it. Whose Religion (for the most part) is but snarling, and a maine piece of
his learning, Censure; But let us hear first what he can say of the Babbler,
next, what the Babbler will say. I begin with the persons preiudicate, (...),
Some said.

Pars 1.
Some? what some? The front of this verse presents them both in their quality,
and number; Philosophers. What of all Sects? No. - Verse. 17.
Certain Philosophers - of old, (...), since, by the modesty of PYTHAGORAS a
little degraded of that height, as if it trenched too near upon ambition to
entitle themselves immediately unto Wisdom, but to the love of it, In cap. 17.
Act.
and therefore now, (...), yet still of venerable esteem amongst the
Athenians. ARETIVS calls them their Diuin^^; BRENTIVS, their Patriarchs and
their Prophets, Each word they spoke was as canonical as Text, and they
themselves both Masters of it, and of the people. Of these there were diverse
Sects, two (here) specified. Epicures, Stoickes; these were extremes in the
rules both of their life, and tenent; Aretius in cap. 17. Act.
the Epicure in the defect, the Stoicke in the excess. Between them both were
the Peripateticks and the Academicks, better mixed and qualified in their
opinion, stooping neither to the looseness of the one, nor the austeritie of
the other; but of these no mention in the Text. The Areopagites (intimated in
the foot of this Chapter) were not Philosophers, but the Athenian Judges, some
say, others, their Consuls, or their Senators: In the street of Mars (where
the Athenians brought PAVL, Act. 17. v. 22.
and enquired of his Doctrine) was their Tribunal, where they sat upon their
more weighty affairs, and, Genesis not. ibid.
of old, arraigned SOCRATES and condemned him of impiety. But I have no
quarrel to these, since I find they had none to the Apostle; The Stoicke and
the Epicure are the sole incendiaries and ringleaders of the tumult, whom the
very Text points out in this, - (...) - some said, - men as opposite in their
opinion, as to the truth; one seated his chief happiness in the pleasure of
the Body, the other in the virtues of the Mind. The Epicure attributed too much
to voluptuousness, Aretius in cap. 17. Act.
the Stoicke to the want of it; that would have a vacuitie of grief both in
mind, and sense; this taught his - (...) - a nullitie of all affections in
either. These are the broad and common Differences in their opinion, and such
as here tread opposite to the Doctrine of Saint PAVL; but there are others
more cryticall and nice, which not finding touched by the pen of the Holy
Ghost, I presum^^ to enquire after in their own Schools, in Zeno's Stoa for
one, and in Epicurus Garden for the other. A travail somewhat unnecessary for
Athens amongst Philosophers, where they are daily canuast. Yet (perchance)
there may be - some Nobles here of Berea, Verse. 17. Verse. 4.
and Chief women of Thessalonica, which have received PAVL with all
willingness - which know them not. I shall be only your remembrancer, their
informer.

Epicures (for I begin with them, they have the precedence in the Text)
challenge both name, and pedigree, from EPICVRVS the founder, and Father of
that Sect. He was borne at Athens seven years after the Death of PLATO,
where he lived, taught, dyed. He wrote 300. Books in his own Art, without
reference to a second Pen, and (what is strange) observation; no sentence, no
precept of Philosopher, but his own; those of DEMOCRITVS, de Atomis, and of
ARISTIPPVS, de Voluptate, Lib. 2. Hist.
DIONISIVS HALICARNASSEVS calls his. His deportment and way of carriage in
matters of Morality was very remarkable. Lib. de Epicur.
In Parents pietas, in Fratres Beneficentia, in Seruos mansuctudo. ('It Is the
triple commendation LAERTIVS gives him,) And in lieu of these, and the like
virtues, his Country afterward erected many brazen Statues, and ATHENAEVS
wrote certain Epitaphes to the perpetual embalming both of his name and
honor. He was one it seems more irreguler in his tenent, then his life,
abstenious he was, moderate, in his repast, A Fero sic in Locum.
in his desires, - Oleribus vtens exiguis, HIEROME says, and he confesses
himself in his Epistles, that Temperance was his Feast, the lowest stayre of
it, Allexand ab Alex. lib. 3. Genalium Dierum. Cap. 11.
Parcemonie: Aqua contentus and polenta. His place of teaching was in Gardens,
and the manner not only to the capacity, but the Disposition of his hearer.

The whole Fabric of his precepts he builds Anima mox vt exierit veluti
fumus vento diuerberata, dissoluitur, But the Soul is no sooner separate then
blown away, like smoke scattered by the wind. So S. AUGUSTINE relates the
opinion in his Tract. De Epic. and Stoic. 5. Cap. On this foundation was raised
their great opinion, that Man's chiefest happinesses consisted in the pleasure
of the Body. The rest of that was the end of all Blessedness, For to this
purpose do we all things, In Epistol ad Herodotum.
that we may neither be disturbed nor grieved, ('it is EPICVRVS own Doctrine.)
Yet every pleasure is not so magnified, as that of the Palate by superfluity,
of the Body by effeminatenesse; But, when after-a-long tolleration of sorrow a
greater pleasure ensues, when the Body is no more beaten with grief, the Mind
vntost and free from all waves of perturbation, there was the true Happiness.
He was blessed that enjoyed those Delights in present; future, they neither
believed, nor cared for, Death was the slaughterman of all: And therefore
SENECA calls the School of the Epicures; Delicatam, Senec. lib. 4. de Benefic.
and vmbraticam, apud quos virtus voluptatis ministra. For if the Soul also
perishes with the Body, the dirge and requiem that they sing, is Ede, Bibe,
Lude, Eat and Drink, for to morrow we shall Dye; and after Death what
pleasure? And therefore we find their usual Epicaedium (...), - Death is
nothing to us, for what is dissolved wants sense, Lib. 3. Pyrron. Hypotyp. cap.
24
and what wants sense is nothing to us. For if Man be composed of Body and
Soul, and Death be the dissolution of both, the burden of their song runs
instantly, Cum sumus, non est mors, cum autem mors est, non sumus, so SEXTVS
EMPIRICVS; Moreover, they would have the Soul a kind of body, otherwise (say
they) it would neither do nor suffer. Incorporeum, with them, is all one with
Vacuum; and therefore, the Soul (they said) was composed of Atoms, and when
the Atoms in a man were dissolved, then the Soul dyed, as EPICVRVS himself in
his Epistle to HERODOTVS.

The other foundation is on Gods part, for the Epicure grants there is a GOD,
but denies his Providence; howbeit, under a glorious color - Deum ad Coeli
cardines obambulare, Gualt. in Locum
and nulla tangi mortalium cura, as if, forsooth, it would not stand with the
majesty of the world to regard what is done in those sublunary parts, Jn
Apolog. aduers. gentes. cap. 24.
and so make God (as TERTVLLIAN complains) Otiosum, and inexercitum neminem in
humanis rebus, - happily conceiting it might detract somewhat from his delight
and pleasure, to molest himself with the care of this nether World. Above all
things this moved him most, - Homines Religiosos, - that the most Religious men
were most of all afflicted, whereas those which did either wholly neglect the
Gods, or serve them but at their pleasure, came into no misfortune, or at least
no misfortune like other men. And, in fine, Ipsa etiam Templa fulminibus
conflagrari, - he observed that the Temples also raised for the honor of the
Gods, and dedicated to their service were oftentimes burnt with fire from
Heaven. Out of which premises the silly Heathen gathers this desperate
Conclusion: Allexand ab Alex. lib. 3. Genalium Dierum. Cap. 11.
Surely the Almighty walks in the height of Heaven, and judges not; Tush,
GOD cares not for those things.

Stoickes (so derived from Stoa where ZENO taught, the Master of that Sect)
were of a more sour and contracted brow; their severity drew their name into a
Proverb, Stoicum supercilium, grauitas Stoica: their Precepts were for the
most part but a Systeame of harsh and austeere paradoxes. A wiseman is then
blessed, Tull. 5. de Finibus and 1. Academ.
when under the greatest torments. Metellus lives not more happily then
Regulus. A wiseman is free from all passions. He is a fool that does
commiserate his Friend in distress; Lypsius in maenuduct ad Stoitam Phylosoph.
Mercy and Pity are diseases of the mind, and one with the species and
perturbations of grief, Mental sicknesses disturb no wise man's health. He
can neither err, nor be ignorant, nor deceive, nor lie. He is alone to be
reputed rich, a Master of his own liberty, a King, without sin, equal to
GOD himself; Hoc est summum bonum, quod si occupas, incipis Deorum socius
esse, non supplex, it is SENECA'S Stoyicisme, in his 31. Epistle. In all
Virtues they held a paritie, Tull. 1. de not. Deorum.
and so in Sins too, He no more faulty that kills a Man, then he that cuts
off a Dogs neck. Touching GOD and the nature of him, they strangely varyed.
Some thought him - an immortal living Creature, Tull. lib. 1. de not. Deorum.
a perfect rational and a blessed; others granted him a Being and Providence;
but this Providence they vassal to their Stoyicall fate, Diogen. Laert. in
vita Zeno^. lib. 7
and make Gods government not free and voluntary, but necessitated and
compelled. Vt Deus ipse sati necessitate constrictus cum Coeli machina
violenter ferretur, (so CALVIN. In 17. cap. Act.
) Touching Man, they taught that his chiefest Happiness was placed in the
Minds virtue, which opinion though it show fair and glorious, In Locum.
tends but to this - Quemvis mortalem faelicitatis suae artificem esse posse,
(says BVLLINGER.) Every man should be the contriuer and squarer out of his
own Happiness; and thus weak man is hereby blown up with a proud
confidence, that, being virtuous he should be adorned with the spoils of God,
- Est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum, ille naturae beneficio, non suo
sapiens est. I forbear to translate the proud Blasphemy, it is SENECA'S in his
53. Epistle. But me thinks this vaunting Stoicke might easily have been taken
down by his own Principles, for ask but any of them, how long their soul
shall enjoy that supposed happiness. TVLLY makes answer for them, 5. de
Finibus.
- Diu mansuros aiunt animos, semper negant, - Like long-liued Crows, they
last out some years after the bodies Death; but by their own confessions grow
old continually, and dye at last; and then wherein may the Stoicke brag more
then the Epicure? In this, little. They both held, Laert. lib. de Epicur.
the Soul was of it self a body; the Stoicke did extend it a little further,
and then, obnoxious to corruption, too. And yet ANTIPATER, and POSSIDONIVS
(chief members of that Sect) said, the Soul was a hot spirit, for this made
us to move and breath; And all souls should endure till that heat were
extinguished, CLEANTHES said, Sextus Emper. Pyrron. Hypol. cap 24. lib. 3.
but CHRYSIPPVS, only wise-mens. Thus some are as giddy in their opinions, as
sottish; others, as detestable, as giddy; one dotes on the world, and would
have it to be - Animal rationale, - The universe must have a Soul, that
immortal, and the parts thereof, Animantium animae. A second falls in love
with Virtues, and would have them to be glorious living Creatures; but this
fool SENECA lashes with an - O tristes ineptias, ridiculae sunt, in his 113.
Epistle. A third adores the Stars, and would have them nourisht, the Sun
from the Sea, the Moon from the lesser waters. A fourth grows salacious, and
hot, and would have a community of Wives, to Wisemen, of Strumpets, to the
residue. A fifth, yet more devilish, will have a liberty of Bed from the
Father to the Daughter, from the Mother to the Son, from the Brother to the
Sister, and so back again: and to make all completely heathenish (and I
tremble to breath it in a Pulpit) A Son may participate of the body of his
live Mother, and eat the flesh of his dead Father, (...) detestabile; Cries
SEXTVS EMPERICVS - Zeno approbat quod apud nos Sodomitae, - in his 3. Book
Pyrroniarum Hypotyp^si^v. Cap. 24.

Thus, with as much brevity as I could, I have traced out the principal
positions of these divided Sects. Worthy ones no doubt, to bandy against the
sacred Fundamentals of an Apostle, yet if it now please you to follow them, -
E^ stoa, and hortis, in Synagogam, - From their Gallery and Garden where they
taught, into their Synagogue, you shall overtake them there all flocked
together about S. PAVL, Act. 17. v. 17.
and (as the Text describes it) encountering him. Here is just matter for
observation, if not for wonder. Epicures, Stoickes, men which jarre as much as
any that bear the name of Philosophers can do amongst themselves, are ready
(nevertheless) to meet in a tumult and join forces against an Apostle,
strange, did we not know that the wisdom of this world were enmity against
GOD, and that - CHRIST unto the Jews a stumbling Block, 1. Cor. 1.23.
unto the Grecians foolishness. What the ground was which should occasion this
assault, S. AUGUSTINE conjectures to be (and it is not repugnant to the drift
of the Text) Quid faciat beatam vitam? What might make a man most happy? The
Epicure he answers; Voluptas corporis, the pleasure, Calvin. in Locu^.
but with this limitation, the honest pleasure of the body. The Stoicke he
says, - Virtus, - The virtue of the mind; August. Tract. de Epicur. and
Stoicis, cap 7.
the Apostle replies - Donum Dei, it is the gift of GOD: LYRA adds, that from
thence the sequel led them to the Resurrection. Lyra in cap 17. Act.
For the Epicures joy could last no longer then his subject; his bliss must
dye with his body; and the Stoickes foresaw not the Souls immortality, and
therefore could not promise everlasting Happiness. But the Apostle he
preaches a Resurection of body and soul, and by that Eternal life, Act 17.18.
and so by consequence everlasting Happiness through CHRIST, both of Soul and
Body. This seems to have been the subject of their Dispute, but their
Arguments I can by no means collect; Be like they were so silly, that they
were not thought worthy to be enrolled amongst those more noble Acts of the
Apostles, only their impudence, that is so notorious that it may not be
omitted. For on what side soever the victory goes, theirs is the triumph; the
cry runs with the Athenian, the Philosopher has non-plust the Divine, and
the Apostle bables. Thus the wicked have bent their bow and shot their
arrows, even bitter words, bitter words against the Church and her true
members in all Ages. The natural man led on by the dull light of reason,
making Philosophy his Star, endeauours with those weak twinklings those
lesser influences to obscure the glory of the greater light, that of Divine
truth; so it was in the first dawne and rising of the Church. IANNES and
IAMBRES, the great Magitians of Aegipt, withstood MOSES working miracles before
PHARAOH. But all the spells of Magic with their black power, never wrought so
mischieuously against the Church as the subtle enchantments of the Philosopher.
Christianity never felt such wounds, as from the School of the Athenian. The
Seminary of the wrangling Artist; the Epicure, Stoicke, Platonist; they were
Philosophers, that is enough; they not only strugled to oppose Fundamentals of
Faith, but to destroy them. Every age of the Church, and almost every place of
it will give us a world of Instances; one Alexandria affoords an Aetius and a
Demophylus, against CHRIST; one Constantinople, a Macedonius, and an Eurox,
against the Holy Ghost; One Ephesus, an Anthemius, and a Theodore, against the
Virgin MARY; One Athens (here) an Epicure, and a Stoicke, against PAVL; Nay,
the sophistry of one perverse but nimble Disputant, has cost more lives then
are now breathing in the Christian world, and opened such a sluice and Arch
through the body of the Eastern Church, which was not stopped again almost in
the current of 300. years, when down it blood ran swiftly from the butcheries
of Valens and Constantius, and the limbs, the thousand limbs of slaughtered
Infants swam with the violence of the Torrent, even then when Christianity
groaned under the merciless inventions and various tortures of the Arrian
Massacre and persecution. Philosophers were the first Patriarchs of that
Heresy, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
and hence I suppose was that Edict of Constantine, that as a badge and
character of their profession, they should be no more called Arrians, but
Porphirians, the venomous brood of their cursed Master, and one that then blew
the coal to most combustions of the Primitive Church; For at the Council of
Nice (the place, and means ordained by that good Emperor for the suppression
of Arrius, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Anno Christi, 325.) some, if not of his name yet of his profession, (for they
were Philosophers) trooped thither in droues and multitudes, not only to
oppose the Bishops, but to vpbraid them. Odio imflammati quod superstitiosa
Gentilium religio antiquari caeperat, - as Ruffinus, lib. 1. cap. 3. And before
that (in the Apostles time) about the year of CHRIST 75. they went about from
City to City with this pretext only to reform public misdemeanors, and to
that purpose had certain Sermons to the people, for rectifying their
Conversation in morrall cariages, and so seemed industrious to reduce them to a
better form, but the maine project was to confront the Apostles doctrine, and
establish them more immoueably in the former superstition of the Gentiles, thus
did Dyon, Apollonius, Euphrates, Demetrius, Musonius, Epictetus, Lucian, and
others, as Baronius in his first Tome 777. page nay, Ad Annu^. 75.
the very dregs of them (says the Antiquarie) the Cynicke; and the Epicure, so
violent (here) against PAVL. Hos prae caeteris infestos sensit Christiana
religio. - These were the heathen Ianizaries, the chief Soldiers and
speare-men against the Christian Faith, when at Rome the sides of that Religion
were struck through with their blasphemous Declamations, Et petulantiu^ eorum
calumnijs and dicterijs misere proscindebatur, Baron. Ad Annum, 164.
the same Baronius in his second Tome, page 154. Thus all violent oppositions
of Christian truth had their first conception in the womb of Philosophy; The
Fathers which traffick't with the tumults of those times, said in effect as
much, - Omnes haereses subornauit Philosophia, - MARCION came out of the
School of our Stoicke, CELSVS, of the Epicure, VALENTINVS, of that of PLATO;
all heresies were the flourishings and trimmings of human Learning. Inde
Aeones, and formae nescio quae, and Trinitas hominis apud Valentinum. Thence
those Aeones (I know not what Idaeas,) and that triple man in Valentinus, he
was a Platonist. Thence Marcions quiet God, it came from the Stoickes; And the
Soul should be made subject to Corruption, - is an observation of the
Epicures, and the denial of the Resurrection, the joint opinion of their whole
Schools. Lib. de Praescript. aduers. Haeres.
And when their - Materia prima is matched with God, it is Zeno's Discipline,
and when God is said to be a fiery Substance, Heraclitus has a finger in it,
Comment. in Nahu^. ad cap. 3.
thus Tertullian. S. Hierome keeps on the Catalogue - inde Eunomius prefert.
Thence Eunomius drew his poison against the Eternity of the Son of God, For
whatsoever is begotten and borne before it was begotten, was not; Thence
Nouatus blocks up all hope of pardon for offenses on Gods part, that he might
take away repentance and all suite for it, on ours. Thence Manichaeus double
God, and Sabellius fingle person; and to be short - De illis fontibus vniuersa
dogmata argumentationum suarum riuulos trahunt: - Menandrians, Saturnians,
Johan. Baptist. Chrispus de Ethnic. Philos. Caute Legend. Quinar. 1.
Basilidians, Ammonians, Proclians, Iulians, and the residue of that cursed
Rabble, had from thence their conception, birth, nourishment, continuance.
Hereupon the great Doctor of the Gentiles, writing purposely of their Wisdom,
alleges no other reason why they were not wise unto Salvation, but the
wisdom of this World. The world through Wisdom knew not God. 1. Cor. cap.
1. verse. 20. And therefore he prescribes the Collossians a - Cauete ne vos
seducat, Colos. 2.4.
- Take heed least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit.
Fuerat Athenis, De Praescript. aduers Haeres.
S. PAVL had bin at Athens (says Tertullian,) and knew by his often encounter
there, how desperately secular and profane Knowledge wounded Divine truth.
Insomuch, that the Father is of opinion. Vna hac sententia omnes haereses
damnari, in his 5. Book against Marcion, 19. Chapter.

But whilst we go about to vindicate our Apostle, let us not be too
injurious to the Philosopher; The Epicure and the Stoicke had their Dross and
rubbish, yet they had their Silver too, which had past the furnace, tried and
purified enough for the practice of a Christian. Though they had Husks and
Acornes for their Swine, yet they had Bread for Men. It was not their
Philosophy was so pestilent, but the use of it; our Apostle reprehends not the
true, but the vain; no doubt there is that which is Sanctified, as well as the
Adulterate, otherwise the Fathers would never have styled Divinity,
Philosophy; That is a glorious ray sent down from Heaven by the Father of
Light; This but strange Fire, some Prometheus stole thence, and infused into a
piece of babbling clay which circumuents weak men, and under a shadow and
pretext of Wisdom, oftentimes carries away probability for truth. And it was
this latter that inflamed the youth of AUGUSTINE to the study of it; but he was
soon cooled when he descried the other; Cap. 4.
then - Nomen Christi non erat ibi, - in the 3. of his Confessions. And the
words - (...) were not now to be read in the great Peripatetique. - Insomuch,
that that former asseueration of his - Phylosophos tantum extuli, quantum
impios non oportuit, - he recants in the first of his Retractations; Cap. 1.
and against the Academicks he is at once zealous and peremptory. - Hujus
mundi Philosophiam sacra nostra meritissime detestantur, Lib. 3. cap 19.
- Our sacred Discipline utterly detests Philosophy; But what? The Philosophy
of this world, which I know not whether it has more convinced, or begotten
error, or improued us in our knowledge, or staggered us. In Col. cum Trypho
Indaeo.
And therefore Justin Martyr, after his Conversion from the Philosopher to the
Christian, complained he was deluded by reading Plato; and Clemens
Alexandrinus reports of Carpocrates and Epiphanes, who reading in PLATOES
Commonwealth that - Wives ought to be common, taught instantly their own to
follow that virtuous principle, Ad Annu^. 120.
it is Baronius Quotat. in his 2. Tome, page 76. Thus the Gold which SOLOMON
transports from Ophyr, hammered and polished as it ought, beautifies the
Temple, but if it fall into the hands of the Babilonians they work it to the
Ruin of the City of GOD.

And by this time PAVL has past his encounter, and begins now to suspect the
censure of the Philosopher. He that enters the Synagogue at Athens is to
expect nimble Ears, and sharp Tongues. If he Dispute, he must hazard an
absurdity; if he Preach, he Babbles. What he does on the one side less
affectedly, and plain, the Epicure wrests instantly to the censure of a Bull,
what more tiersely, and polite; on the other, the Stoicke to a strong Line.
Thus between the acuteness of the one, and the superciliousnesse of the
other, PAVL shall not escape his lash; but the comfort is, except that the
Parallel (here) exceeds the pattern, our Critics are not numberless; only,
(...) - some said; and these some (too) very probably, but Philosophers; that
is, - Gloriae animalia and popularis aurae atque rumoris venalia mancipia, as
HIEROME characters them. Creatures that will be bought and sold for popular
applause; and when those factions are thus met, that is the issue? All they
leave behind is but a mere saying, - (...), - some said, - and not said only
of late, but done too, done violently against PAVL, not only at Athens, in the
Synagogue, Act. 17. v. 22.
but in the hill of Mars too, the place of their consultation, where if the
rude Epicure and the Stoicke cannot cry him down enough, at Corinth, Jews
shall rise against him, and bring him to the judgment seat before Gallio the
chief Deputy, for doing things otherwise then the Law; but maugre all their
spite, it was found (said the Text) but a - cavil of names and words, Act.
18.5.
- and he is dismissed the Tribunal with consent of the judge, and little glory
to the Persecutor; The story you may find in the 18. of this Book, the
application nearer home, thus. There is an outside austeritie which looks
grim upon offenses, and pretends strangely to public Reformation; but the
heart is double, and the design base, when it is not out of zeal to the
common cause, but envy to the person. There are some which can harbor cleanly
an inueterate grudge, and like cunning Apothecaries guild handsomely their
bitter Pills; but when occasion of Revenge is offered, like Wind that is crept
into the Cauernes of the earth, it swells and struggles, and shakes the whole
mass and bulk till it has vent, which not finding close enough by their own
persons, they set their Pioners a digging, and their Moles are heauing under
earth, thinking to blow up all unseen. There is no malice so desperate as that
which lies in ambush, and with her fangs hid, that project is ever merciless,
though the stroke miscarrie.

Beloved, if Athens be thus an enemy to Athens, and will nurse up Snakes in
her own bosom, and vultures for her own heart, what can she expect from the
lips of Aspes, and venom of sharp set Tongues, which cry of her as they did
sometimes of Jerusalem, - Down with it even to the ground? - The Virgin
daughter is become an Harlot, the rendeuouz of the Epicure, the Synagogue of
Lewdness, the Pappe of exorbitancie, - (...), - Some said it. Some, that not
only went out from us, but were of us too, but whilst here little better,
then professed Epicures, at Rome (lately) bold Stoickes, and in a beardlesse
austeritie, cry down the Discipline of Athens in open Senate; There are some
so ambitious of the thing called Honor, (indeed but a mere tympanie, and air
of true Honor) that they will venture for it through the jaws of Perjury,
forgetting the loyalty they owed to their sometimes Mother, and the fearful
engagements made her by way of Oath for the vindicating of her honor; but
these have said, and had they said truly, it had been in such a high
injustice, and in sons too broadly discouers their little truth of affection,
and less of judgment. As for those ignorant cries, the monster multitude
casts upon Athens, here, she has made the object both of their scorn, and
pity. The wounds, the unnatural wounds from her own NERO so touch our
AGRIPPINA.

And now the Epicure, and the Stoicke, have said, said, and done what they can,
against PAVL, and against Athens; you have heard their violence; please you now
turn your attentions from the Philosopher to the Divine, and hear - What the
Babbler will say.

What will this Babbler say?
A GOD, at Myletum? at Lystra, Pars 2. Act 28. verse. 6. and Cap. 24, 12.
MERCVRIE? and at Athens, a Babbler? Sure men's censures vary with the place, and
as the Clime is seated, so is the opinion: Had they steept all their malice and
wit in one headpiece, and vented it by a tongue more scurrilous then that of
RABSHEKEY, they could not have profaned the honor of an Apostle with a term
of such barbarousnesse and derogation. Babbler; A word so foul and odious, of
that latitude, and various signification in the original, that both
Translators, and Expositors, H^sichius - (...). - Leonardus Aretinus. Beza in
locum, Vetus lectio.
have been plunged strangely and divided in the apt rendering it in a second
Language; to omit the vulgar ones of - Nugator, Rabula, Garrulus, Blaterator, -
as of those which follow the heel and tracke of the Letter, merely; others,
which more closely pursue the Metaphor give it us, by - Seminator - verborum, -
a sower of words; Erasmus in locum.
others - Semini - verbius - a seeder of them, a third sort, - Seminilegus, - a
gatherer of seeds, - and this latter seems to Kiss and affie nearest with
the nature of the word (...), Caietan in locu^.
an Atticke one, (says Cajetan) metophorically applied (here) and has
reference to those (...), Aretius in locum.
certain Birds ( Aretius tells us) so called, - (...) - from gathering of
Seeds, or - (...) - from sowing of Speeches, - though this latter deriuation
affect not some, as doubly peccant, in the Etymon, and the Metaphor; for then
(...) had been more genuine, Beza vt supra.
so Beza. Birds they were of vile esteem amongst the Athenians, vselesse,
neither for food, nor song, - Sed garritu perpetuo laborantes, - so continually
Chattering, that they did rack and perplexe the ears of all that heard them,
insomuch that it grew prouerbiall amongst the Atticks, Athanaeus citatur ab
Erasmo in locum.
that he that was loud in his discourse, or impertinent or profuse, was
instantly - (...), which seems to sound one with that (...) Athanaeus touches,
- (...) - quoted by Erasmus. The first (for ought I read) that ever made use
of the word in this disgraceful way was Demosthenes, Aretius and Erasmo in
locum.
and he flung it upon Aeschines, who being an Athenian, dropped it (be like)
afterward amongst some of the Philosophers, and a Stoicke takes it up and
bestows it here on an Apostle. It was well shouldered from the Philosopher to
the Divine; but, me thinks it should not stick there. Babbling ill becomes the
lips of the Leuite; and it cannot hang truly upon that tongue which has
been touched with a Coal from the Altar; and sure justice cannot put it on us,
it must be malice, or prejudice, or both, and both have done it, not only on
us, but that great Apostle PAVL himself, though choycely verst in all ways of
Learning, a known Scholar, a professed Disputant, a great Doctor of the
Gentiles, brought up at the feet of Gamaliell, one that had done so many
Miracles to the Conversion of many, astonishment of all, yet he cannot pass
an Athenian without his lash, a Philosopher without his Quip, - where the Gown
is so frequent hard baulking the Cryticke; Lyuie will not like Trogus, nor
Caligula, Lyuie; Athanaeus, Plato, or a third Athanaeus; Tully, Demosthenes, or
the Lypsiaen, Tully; so many fancies, so many censures, - no avoiding them at
Athens. Nay, were PAVL a second time to arrive it, he might yet perchance
meet with an Epicure or a Stoicke, would have a fling at him with his Quid
vult Seminilegus iste? What will this Babbler say? And this Venom toward PAVL
swells not only at Athens, but at Dirbe, and Lystra, and the chief Cities of
Lycaonia; scarce one in a Kingdom but would jerke at a Paul; and if he chance
to come before Foelix the Governor, some black-mouthed Tertullus will be
bawling at the bar ready bill'd with a false accusation, Act. 24.5.
- This man is a mouer of Sedition, goes about to pollute the Temple, a chief
maintayner of the Sect of the Nazarites. - Thus secular malice (through all
ages) has opposed the true members of the Church, and if it cannot disparage
the honor of their title, it will spitefully plot the traducement of their
honor. - Up thou Baldpate, 2. King. 2.23.
Up thou Baldpate, Children can cry at Bethell; - and, He is factious, he is
uncomfortable, he is a Babbler, at Athens, is the popular and common Vogue.
Here is a large Field offered me through which I might travel, but this is
not my way, it is too trodden; every Hackney rodes it, I have found out as
near a cut, though the passage may seem more stony and uneven; thither bend
I, where I shall show you, how in Divine matters we may be said to Babble?
how in Secular? in either how not? The Symptoms of that Lip-disease, the
danger, the judgment on it, the cure. Let the Epicure, and the Stoicke,
(awhile) lay by their censure, and hear, now - What this Babbler will say? -

Hooker, lib. 5. Eccles. Pol.
Speech is the very image whereby the Mind and Soul of the speaker conueyeth
it self into the bosom of him that hears. Charron, lib. 3. Wisdom.
The Stern and Rother of the Soul which disposes the hearts and affections
of men, like certain notes to make up an exact harmony. But this must be soft
and gentle then, not ouerscrued; It is with Speech, as it is with Tunes, if
keyed too high, rack no less the Instrument then the ear that hears them,
when those which are lower pitched make the harmony both full, and sweeter; your
tumid and forced language harrowes the attention, when the facill and flowing
style does not so much inuit applause, as command it; it is a gaudy, but an
emasculate and weak eloquence, which is dressed only in a pomp of words, and
glories more in the strength of the Epythet, then the matter; this is the Body,
the other but the Garment of our discourse, which we should suite as well to
every subject, as occasion; sometimes more liberally, sometimes more
contractedly, least we be said to Babble, Heccatus.
- for it is true what Archidamus told the Orator of old, - They which know how
to speak well, know also their times of silence. - And (indeed) to speak
appositely and much, is not the part of one man, Ecclus. 21.25.
I am sure, not of a wiseman. - The words of him which has understanding,
are weighed in the balance. - Mark - weighed, in the Balance. - Here is
deliberation of speech, evenness - Pone Domine custodiam ori meo, Psalm. 141.3.
- was the Prayer of David, - set a watch before my lips. And in the Law of
Moses, the Vessel that had not the covering fastened to it was unclean; and
therefore the inner-Parts of a Fool are resembled to a broken vessel, which
has neither part entire, nor covering, He can keep no knowledge while he
lives, Ecclus. 21.14. Plutar.
Hereuppon those more nobly bred amongst the Romans learned first to hold their
peace, and afterward to speak. De 3. plici Custodia: ling. man. meant.
- For Vnde illi cura Cordis (says Bernard) cui ne ipsa quidem adhuc oris
circumspectio? He is an ill treasurer of his own thoughts, that keeps not
the doors of his lips shut; and that heart is never locked fast upon any
secret, where a profuse tongue lays interest to the Key.

And therefore, Nature has provided well by fortifying this member more then
any part of the Body, setting a garrison of the strong and stout men about it,
Eccles. 12. doubly intrenching it with lips and teeth, not so much to oppose
a foreign invasion as to allay mutinies within, for the tongue is an unruly
member; and sides much with the perverseness of our will; and therefore Reason
should keep strict sentinel upon it, and as well direct, as guard it. Nature
has proportioned us a double Ear and Eye to a single Tongue, and Reason
interprets instantly - We should hear and see twice, ere we speak once. And
indeed our Tongues would follow our sense (says Augustine) and not our will,
Ad Fratres in Erem. sermon. 2.
and the Father puts the Fool handsomely upon him, - Qui non prius verbum
ducit ad linguam rationis, quam educat ad linguam oris. -

Let Reason (says the Son of Syrach) go before every enterprise and
counsel to every Action, Ecclus. 37.16.
- to every virtuous action, Aristotle Elluc. lib. 3.
(besides the latter of these) the Philosopher allows a double Aduerbe, -
Scienter, Constanter. - So that every discreet design must have besides
Reason, Knowledge, Counsel, Constancy; Reason and Knowledge, the pole and
card to direct it; Counsel, Constancy, to steer and ballace it. Hence it is
that the tongue of a Wise man is in his heart, Ecclus. 21.
and where the heart of a Fool is, no ignorance so womanish but tells you.

So that the observation of S. Bernard comes seasonably here, Bernard vt sup.
- Non personam tibi velim suspectam esse, sed linguam, praesertim in
sermocinatione communi, - In common talk we are not to heed the person so
much as the tongue, for by the babbling of that we may roue at the weight or
weakness of the Master; for commonly he that nothing but talks, talks
nothing, nothing of bulk or substance, shells only and barks of things
without their pith or kernel.

To avoid then this disease of Babbling and profuse emptying of vain words,
Mark, 9.
the Disciples were prescribed, Leuit 12.13. Colos. 4.6.
- their - Habete Sal in vobis; - and Salt (you know) was commanded of old, not
only to Men, but to Sacrifices and Words. Ad Fratres in Erem. sermon. 2.
That to words (not sauoured aright) S. Augustine calls; - Sal insatuatum ad
nullum condimentum, - it seasons nothing as it should do, every thing relishes
amiss it touches. For the Babbler does not measure words by their weight, but
by their number, neither regards he what he speaks, but how much; Thus whiles
he labors to persuade the ear, he wounds it, and to inuit his hearer, he
torments him. In the Leuiticall Law, the man that had - Fluxum seminis, - was
unclean; - And Gregory turns the Allegory, on the dispencers of holy
Mysteries. - GODS Word is the Seed, the Preacher the Sower of it; August. in
Parab. semi^an.
or, as The Father has it on the Parable, - Cophinus seminantis, - the
Seedesmans basket. - If he be then - Jncaute loquax, - vnpremeditately
babbling. - Non ad vsum generis, sed ad immunditiam semen effundit, - and such a
one in Primitive times was called - Semini-verbius, Greg lib. 2. Past. cap. 4.
- the Father tells us in the 2. part of his Pastorals, 4. Chapter. And no doubt
he that sowes overmuch by the Tongue shall seldom fructify, except the seed
be choice and orderly disposed, Charron. lib. 3.
Speech being the more exquisite communication of Discourse and Reason, which
as it should not be too coursely open, so not inuolued; Themistocles. -
Hence the Athenian compared it to a rich piece of Arras drawn out in variety
of Stories, which displayed, opened both delight and wonder, but folded up,
neither; For, it is with Speech as with some Aromaticks and perfumes, which in
the mass and role smell little, but beaten abroad fill the room with
fragancy. Matter wound up in obscurity of language grows to the nature of a
Riddle, and is not so properly Speech, as Mystery; Things that hammer only on
our ears, not our interlectuals, are no more words, but sounds, mere -
babbling - air (only,) beaten with distinctlesse and confused noise, nothing
of substance in it for matter, or for form; And the man that affects such
marticulatenesse, hear how Gregory plays upon, Nazian. in Praefat. Apol.
- Ego solertiae nomine admiror, ne dicam, stultitiae. A Wiseman (says the
Philosopher of old) when he opens his lips, Socrates.
as in a Temple we Behold the goodly similitudes and images of the Soul, -
And indeed that Eloquence that is made the object of our sense, and
intellectuals carries with it both majesty and imitation, when that which
runs in a mist or veil, Censure for the most part, sometimes, Pity. Let the
Babbler then that thus speaks in a Cloud, - Pray that he may interpret, 1.
Cor. 14.13. 1. Cor. 14.13.^
it will require a Comment from his own industry; others, are too dull to
undertake a task of such an endless travail. It is a preposterous way of
interpretation, when the gloss grows obscurer then the Text; Sermons which
were first intended for the illumination of the understanding, are at length
grown like those answers of the Oracles, both intricate and doubtful, They
will require the heat of a sublimated brain, either to apprehend their
raptures, or to reconcile them. But why at Athens such prodigies of Learning?
Such monsters of affectation? Why this elaborate vanity? This industrious
Babbling? Let it no more touch the gravity of the Typpet, or the Scarlet, as
fitter for a Deske then a Pulpit, and a lash, then a reproof. But, soft
Stoicke. Let me not be censured here too hastily a Babbler. I am not so much a
friend to the slouenly discourse, as to loath that which has a decent and
modest dress; words apt and choice, I hate not, only those tortured, and
affected ones; I prefer S. Augustines golden Key before his wooden, though
this may unlock Mysteries as well as that; yet would I not give way to the
kick-shawed discourse, where there is commonly more sauce then meat; or, as
Quintillian spoke of Seneca, - Chalk without Sand, - more of luster then of
weight; It is the well wouen and substantial piece taskes me, yet that too,
not without the flourishings and intermixtures of discreet language. For it is
here as it is in Needle-workes, where we allow light colors, so the ground
be sad. The Brestplate of Judgment which Aaron wore was made with
embroydered works, Exodus 28.15.
and in the Ephod, there were as well diversities of colors as of riches, -
Blew silk, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen. - That then of Epiphanius
is worthy both of your memory and imitation, - whose works were read of the
simple for the words, of the Learned for the matter. - So, - he that will not
run the censure of a Babbler, must have as well his deepes for the Elephant,
as his shallowes for the Lamb; Knowing that some are transported with heat of
fancy, and others with strength of judgment, and it is in the choice of
either, as in that of Stuffes, which some buy for the roundnesse and substance
of the thread, others for the lightness of the color. Matter not clothed in
handsomeness of words is but dusted treasure, and like some Gardens where
there is fatness of earth, no Flower. Your embellisht phrase without
sollidnesse of matter, but - Copiosa aegestas (as Saint Augustine styles it) a
gaudie poverty, and like some unhappy Tillages, where there is more of Poppie
and Darnell, then good Corn; But, where the materials are clean, the language
keem'd, there is the workmanship of an exact Penman; If they are both well
mixed and cemented, there is a choice masterpiece, Apelles himself has been
there.

And howeuer, the discourse that is so brusht and swept others have thought too
effeminate for the Pulpit, yet, in some it is no way of affectation, but of
knowledge. High fancies cannot creep to humble expressions, and the fault is
oftentimes in the prejudice or weakness of the receiver, not in the
elaboratenesse of the Penman. Sermons are not to be measured by their sound,
or the haste and uncharitableness of a dull organ; the Ear is a deceitful
one, full of winding and uncertain doors, and often carries false messages to
the Sense, the Eye as it is a more subtle organ, so a more certain, and though
that be sometimes deceived too when it is not master of the distance, yet upon
stricter perusal of the object, it gives you vncorrupt intelligence, when
words pass (for the most part) by our ears like tunes in a double consort,
which we may hear, not distinguish.

And yet notwithstanding, though at Athens amongst Philosophers, this polite
way of discourse may be passable, and draw on sometimes approbation, sometimes
applause; yet at Ephesus (where PAVL is to encounter Beasts) it is but mere
Babbling; Act. 26.13.
And to what purpose those lofty varieties, in sprinkled Congregations?
Raptures and high visions are for Cesarea, Act. 28.14.
when PAVL is to speak before Agrippa, thinner exhortations will serve the
Brethren at Puteoli. - And when all those descants and quauerings of the
plausible and harmonious tongue shall loose their volubilitie and sweetness,
and forget to warble (as the time will come (the Preacher tells us) when all
those Daughters of Music shall be brought low) the plain long must take at
last, Eccles. 12.
that which is set to every capacity and ear; and yet will afford you, as
well her varieties of satisfaction, as delight; to the judicious sollid
fluentnesse, to apprehensions lower-roofed ways more trodden to advise, and
comfort; to the weak and Soule-sicke, the still voice, to the obstinate, and
remorselesse, louder sounds; perchance this thunderclap may breed a shower,
that shower, a sunshine. Tears and Comfort are the successory children of
reprehension, sometimes, the twins; Let the sword of the Spirit then cut both
ways, but more to reproof, then menacing; master thy Vinegar with Oil, so
thou shall not so much sharpen the heart of the Sinner, as supple it; some grow
more refractary by rebuke, and some more flexible; For, it is with the word of
a Preacher, as it is with Fire, which both mollifies and hardens Steel,
according to the variety of heates. If we derive only from one Throne coals
of fire, and hot Thunderbolts, we kindle despair in him we teach, not
reformation; It is the temperate and gentle fire sparkles into zeal, when that
which is too high and turbulent grows at an instant both flame and ashes. Let
the Righteous smite me friendly (says the Kingly Prophet) but let not their
precious balmes break my head. Psalm. 141.5.
- I allow reprehension a Rod, but not a Fleyle, a hand to (lash the
transgressions of the time, not as some do to thresh them.

PAVL will prescribe the Spiritual combatant a Sword, but not a Spear;
Achillis.
except he had the Grecians, - which would both wound and cure. Marah may have
bitter waters, but Gilead must have balm too for the broken heart. Where
sins are full kern'd and ripe, I deny not a Sickle to cut them down, but the
sinner, whither as Corn for the Barn, or Chafe for the fire, I leave to the
disposal of the great Haruestman.

In the apparition of GOD to Eliah, on Mount Horeb, (you know the Text, 1.
King. 19.11.12.
and therefore guess at the allusion.) A strong wind rent the Mountains, and
brake in pieces the Rock, before the Lord; but the Lord was not in it, and
there was a great Earthquake and a Fire, but the Lord was not in it. And in
those winds and fires, and earthquakes which are both seen and heard on our
Horeb here, the Lord oftentimes is not in them, for then the mountainous and
rockie heart would be cleft a sunder, now it is vnbattered and rib'd with
Adamant proof against persuasion,

Knowing that these are but Men of Thunder, counterfeit thunder too, and there
is a GOD that rules the true, his hot bolts and coals of Fire they quake and
tremble at, not those fire-workes, and squibs, and flashes here below, which
spleenaticke men fling about (as they think) to terror, but they return by
scorn. Be^nard de tripl^ci Custod.
It is true (says Bernard) - Sermo est Ventus, but it is not always, - Ventus
vrens, - surge Aquilo, veni Auster, perfla hortum meum, and fluant Aramata
illius, - Arise O North, and come O South (the one (you know) is moist, and the
other cold) yet both of these must blow on the garden of the Spouse, that the
Spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.6.
Cant. 4.6. In the Song of Moses, did not Doctrine drop as the rain? and
Speech still as dew? as the shower upon Herbs? and as the great rain upon
the Grasse^? Deuteronomy. 32.2.
I confess, on Synay once there was a thick Cloud, Lightning and Thunder, and
the mountain smoaked; Exodus 20.18.
but the Text says, - The people fled from it. - But on mount Tabor, the
Cloud was bright, the Sun clear, and a Voice heard in stead of Thunder, and
then the Disciples cry, - Edificemus Domine, Mat. 17.2.4, 5.
- Let us build here.

Amongst the numberless Gods the Heathens had, and the diverse ways of
Sacrifice they appeased them with, the Romans had their - Hostiam Animalem, -
in which the Soul only was consecrated to GOD, (...) the Host they offered
must be pure and choice, not of Bulls or Swine, as creatures fierce and
unclean, but of Kids and Lambs, more innocent and mild, and of these too,
such as were not lame, or diseased, or had - Caudam aculeatam, or, - Linguam
nigram, Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 12
- says my Antiquary. You see stings in the tail, and blackness in tongue
are exempted here and thought unfit for this sacrifice of the Soul.

Let the virulent Babbler leave the Letter and take the Allegory, and he has
applied; - For venomous and foul language does exasperate and obdure even
those which the modest and gentle pierces. Let Billows beat against a Rock,
they fall back without wounding it, yet if moderate and gentle drops fall on a
Stone they hollow it, not by violence, Jn Praefat. Apolog.
but the often Distillation. Sheep (says Nazianzene) are not to be governed
by rigor, but persuasion; all those impulsions of necessity and force, carry
with them a show of tyranny, and hold neither with Nature nor observation,
Idem Ibid.
- Non secus ac planta per vim manibus inflexa, - says the Father. Bend a
Plant (and it is with most men as it is with plants) it turns again. There
was never disposition, not cowardly and base, that violence could work upon.
Ingenuitie if it be not always voluntary, it may be led sometimes, but
never drawn; And therefore Peter feeds his Flock, not by constraint, but
willingly, and (as your common Bablers never do) not for filtby Lucre, but a
ready mind. 1. Peter, 5.2. 1. Pet. 5.2.
And indeed it is this filthy-Lucre - has occasioned so many Bablers in our
Church, those that will say any thing for the inhauncement of their profit,
the improuing of their Stipend; Brey at Universities for a morsel of bread;
give blows against Learning, make scarres in the face of Knowledge, cry down
the use of Arts, or what is curiously strung in secular Learnings, abandon them
from the lips of the Preacher, and confine him only to a sacred dialect
without intermixture of profane Knowledge, or sleeke of humane Eloquence; No
marrow of the Father, no subtilty of the Schoole-man, no gravity of the
Philosopher, no policy of the Historian; thereby depriving the Church of
variety of Gifts, and manacling and pinning the Holy Ghost to a defect of all
outward ornaments, as if that wind which blows where it list were forbad to
breath any where but in their newfangled and braine-sicke endeauours.

Hence it is, that the distribution of holy Mysteries grows so to contempt,
the dispencers of them entitled to terms of obloquy and scorn, exposed to
the Paraphrase and Comment of the jeering adversary. Our Athens disparaged,
Learning of no price and value, Preaching, Babbling, and the main reason and
inducement why the whole body of Arts thus reeles and wauers. I have at length
met the Babbler, I desired to grapple with, and we must exchange a few blows
ere we part, in which I shall be home without much flourish. Stoicke, once
more forbear. Stand aloof till we have past this Duel, then let thy censure
fall, as the wounds do, Justly. Suppose we then a man harnessed and clad with
all the glories and habiliments of Nature, besides the rich dowry and treasure
of Art and Knowledge, yet say I not that this man without a supernatural light
from the Scripture, is able to utter those Mysteries as he ought, either in
their strength, or decency. Doubtless, the best of ours, either for depth of
Knowledge, or sublimitie of Invention, or accuratenesse of Composure, or
cleanness of Zeal, are comparatively mere Bablings, and fall many bows
short of those inspired ones of old; neither are they Gods word (says Hooker)
in the same manner that the Sermons of the Prophets were, Lib. 5. Ecclest.
Polit.
no they are ambiguously termed his Word, Doct. Cowels Defense, in the Chapter
of Preaching.
and are no more the same, then is the Discourse the Theme, or the Line the
Rule, by which it is drawn; yet have they a peculiarity both of virtue and
success; strange prerogatives over the sudden passions and affections of most
men, whom they not lead only but entangle, and not fetter barely, but
entrance; in a word, they reign over us and establish a violent empire and
command over our very Souls. Divinity we confess the sovereign Lady and
Queen of all Sciences, Arts (if you approve the style) her Maids of honor.
Are we not sacriligious then to the state of Sovereignty when we rob it of
her train? The chiefest complement of Greatness is the retinue, take away her
equipage you disnoble it. Bar sacred Learning of the attendance of that which
is secular, Arts, Sciences, you disrobe it, strip it of its glory. Divinity
(says Basil) is the fruit, Arts as the leaves, and leaves are not only for
ornament but succor.
* Certain truths in her cannot fully be discovered without some measure of
Knowledge in them all. The Axioms and principles of Humanity though they a
little run by those of Divinity, yet they do not thwart them, there may be
difference, no contrariety, no not in those things which seem to carry a show
of contrariety. Reason our Mistress tells us, - Verum vero consonat, - and
Truth stands diametrically opposed to Falsehood, not to a second truth; for -
Vero nil verius, - Philosophical truths challenge the same sowrce and pedigree
Theological do, the same fountain, and Father, GOD, and are of the like
Truth, though not of the like Authority.

Hence flows that admirable consent and harmony between the natural
patefactions of GOD, and the supernatural; Amand. Polan. lib. 2. Logic. fol.
213.
for from God is both Reason and Scripture, and Reason being obscured by Sin,
and blemished by her many errors, the Scripture does vnscale and beams
again, and so sets her free from her former obliquities and digressions, De
Fuga saculi. Cap. 3.
the light of Nature being dimmed (says Ambrose) was to be cleared by the
Law, the wrests of the Law by the Gospel, so that Grace does not abolish
Nature, but perfect it, August. in Psalm. 10^.
neither does Nature reject Grace (says Augustine) but embrace it. Nay, my
Author (and I have gleaned I confess some few ears of Corn from his more
plentiful crop) quotes Tertullian too very appositely, Theolog. Logic, page 200.
(and it is like Tertullians both for the marrow and the reach.) - God first
sent Nature to be our Schoolemistresse, being after to send Prophecy, that
thou being first the Disciple of Nature, might afterward the more easily
be induced to believe Prophecy. We may not think then the Ipse Dixit of the
Philosopher, or the weighty depositions of profane Authors, to be mere
Chimaeraes, fruitless Fancies, Bablings of no consequence; though some of them
were not true Visions, yet they were not all stark Dreams, PAVL then would
never have confuted the Idolaters of Athens with their own Act. 17.28.
Text, - Some of your own Poets have said it; There may be much Hay and
Stubble amongst them, but there is some Gold, and precious Stones; try them, if
they endure not the touch, throw them by as metals too course and drossie; but
if there be rich Oar mixed with veins of Earth, why not separated? Why not
purged by the fire of Gods word? Why may not this stranger to Israel, her head
shaven, and the hair of her eyebrows cut be admitted into the Sanctuary? If
one Copernicus be troubled with the Vertigo, and would have the earth run
round as his head does, shall a whole Sect of Aristotelians be liable to a
disease of giddiness? Though a Stoicke or an Epicure oppose PAVL, yet at
Athens there were Academickes, and Peripatetickes, Philosophers too, without
their tumult, and for ought the Text caueat's me to the contrary, they were
his Conuerts too. And it is evident that the Apostles, and after them the
Fathers, Doct. Cowell.
made Arts the Chief weapons against the Enemies of the Church, for as some
opinions would not be convinced without humane Learning, August.
so others affections would not be persuaded without that eloquence, thus they
wounded the Heresies and Apostasies of their times, when the Revolted Julian
was impelled to say; Greg. Nazian.
- We are struck through with our own Darts. - All Science whatsoever is in
the nature of good; and good is good, wheresoever I find it. August. de
Baptist. contra Dotist. l^b. 6. cap. 2.
Upon a withered branch (says Augustine to his Donatist) a Grape sometimes may
hang, shall I refuse the Grape because the staulke is withered? If on a
tempestuous shore I meet by chance a rich piece of Amber, or richer Pearl,
amongst oar, and shells, and froath, and sands, shall I refuse either for the
stench of the place or the companions? I have seldom read of any thing but a
foolish Cock that refused Treasure, though on a dunghill. I know Heathens had
their slime and mud, and some of their streams ran impurely, yet they had
their Crystal fountaynes too, especially the Platonists, of which we might
draw, and drink, and drink our fill, and drink as our own, too, ( Augustine
says) they being in the tenure of unjust possessors. August. lib 2. de Doct.
Christiana cap. 40.
For as the Israelites (it is the Fathers similitude) took from the Egyptians
their Idols, and Rings, and silver, and Gold, and bestowed the same upon the
adorning of the Lords Tabernacle, which they had abused by pride and riot, to
the beautifying of the Temples of their false Gods, and did this - Non
auctoritate propria sed praecepto (says the Father) not by the instigation of
their own will, but by mandat, sic Doctrinae omnes Gentilium, non solum
simulata and superstitiose figmenta, etc. So all those Doctrines of the
Gentiles (their superstitious fictions expunged and laid by) their liberal
Disciplines and Precepts of manners (which were their Gold and Silver) may be
reduced to the use of sacred Learning, and a Christian may challenge them - Ad
vsum justum praedicandi Euangelij, - they are the Fathers own words. -
Howeuer he puts in a caveat by the way - a - sed hoc modo instructus, - the
Divine that is thus accommodated when he shall address himself to the use
and search of these heathen treasures, - Illud Apostolicum cogitare non cesset,
1. Cor. 8.
- Scientia inflat, charitas aedificat, - in his Lib. 2. de Doct. Christian.
40. Cap. I never yet read that the true use of secular Learning took from the
glory of that which was Divine, I have, that it has added, nor that any thing
gleaned and picked, and culled with a clean hand was distasteful unto GOD, I
have that it was approved. I know there is a Venomous eloquence (as Cyprian
wrote of that of Nouatus) and this perchance the Babbler himself uses, Epist.
ad Cornel.
when he leads silly Creatures captive, but it is odious both to GOD and Man,
and has been the maine Engine in all Ages by which Schisms and Heresies have
wrought. In those Sacrifices of old, Leuit. 4.5. You know whatsoever was
unclean, was an abomination unto the Lord; the Offering it self must be
without blemish, the Altar seven days cleansed before it was laid on, the
Priest too washed before the Congregation, ere he dared to immolate; and why
not so in this Holocaust and Sacrifice of the lips? Why not the Offering
without blemish, the Altar cleansed, the Priest so in his Discourse too, that
what is kindled here may burn as a sweet Incense unto the Lord? smells that
are unsavory never touch his nostrils, sounds harsh and jarring, never his
ears; and therefore, the Bells of Aaron were of pure Gold, Greg Nazian. Apolog.
- Ne subaeratum aliquod tinniat in Sacerdotio, - says Gregory.

It is a sullenness, or rather policy, most in our age have got, that what is
in a way of eminence and perfection, they censure as a piece of affectation or
curiosity, when (God knows) it is but to color some sinister pretense, and
for a fairer varnish of their own weaknesses. You know the story of the
Painter and the Cock, and the Boy that kept the live ones from his shop least
coming too nigh, the unskillfulness of that hand should be discovered, which
had drawn the other at so rude a posture.

There is a malicious ignorance possesses many, by which they undervalue all
things above their sphere, and cry down that industry or Art in others, which
is beyond the verge and fathom of their own abilities. But why should Moles
repine that other see? Or Cripples murmr that others halt not? Toll quod
tuum est and Vade. Hierom. ad Colphurnium.
Yet lo how even those last and gasping times keep up with the manner of
those of old, both in their spleen and weakness. There be (says the Father
to his Marcellinus) that account inciuilitie of Manners and rudeness of
Speech, true Holiness, Hieronimus.
- and with such, - Quis non Vicus abundat? Would I could not say, - Quae
Academia? These Cynickes are in every Tub, these Stoickes here at Athens. But
why should the talk of such be a burden in our way? Learning unto a Wiseman
is as an ornament of Gold, and like a bracelet on his Arm, Eccles. 21.15.
but Fetters about the feet, and Manackles about the hands; of whom? of him
that (but now) was the burden in the way, the Fool, Ecclus. 21.21.
whom least we should leave without his companion, Syracides brings home to
the gates of the Babbler, and I will leave him there, - As a house that is
destroyed, Ecclus. 21.18.
so is Learning to a Fool, and his Knowledge is but talk without sense,
Ecclus. 21.18. the tail of the Verse carries the sting; for much of our
Bablers knowledge is little better then - Sermo sine sensu, Words without
Salt, Speech without Ballace. And yet (good Lord) how these lamps burn in our
Tabernacles, these Bells sound in our Sanctuary? They are the thunderbolts of
our Congregations, the Hotspurres of our Pulpits. Against the sins of the
time they clacke loud, and often, but it is like Mills driven by a hasty
torrent, which grind much, but not clean; And indeed it is not much they
grind neither, in substance, but in show, neither is the labor so
superlatiue, as the noise. Some that have been conversant in the trade, say,
that Corn that is clean and massy, will lie long in the womb and body of
the Mill and requires all the industry of stone and water, and will not be
delivered without some time and travail, when grains which are mixed and
course, run through with less difficulty, and more tumult. The Babbler will
apply. Thus we see empty vessels sound much, and shallow streams run swift
and loud, but on barren grounds, when those deeper ones glide slowly, as with
more gravity, so more silence, yet on fat soyles, and so the neighboring
Fields grow fertile with their abundance. If all truth of Religion reigned in
the Tongue, and the subduing of our manifold rebellions in the mortification of
the Look, there were no sanctity but here. - But the heat of this man's
zeal, is like that of Glass, which will be blown into any form according
to the fancy of him that blows it, sometimes into that of a Serpent, sometimes
of a Dove, but more often of a Serpent, then of a Dove, not for the wisdom of
it, but the venom. Every word is a sting against the Church, her Discipline,
truth of Government, He Babbles shrewdly against each Institution of it,
State, Ceremonies, makes them adulterate, the dresses of the Great whore, and
sets all without the walls of reformation, which Wheel and Role not with the
giddiness of his tenants. The Golden-mouthed Homilist in his fourth upon the
Acts, Chrysostom.
speaking of that miraculous way of the Holy Ghosts descent upon the Apostles
in the day of Penticost, observes nimbly, thus; - There came a sound from
Heaven, - As it were - of a Rushing and mighty wind, and there appeared to
them Cloven tongues, - As it were - of Fire, - Recte vbique additum est, -
Velut - nequid sensibile de Spiritu suspicareris, - says the Father. - And
indeed, in those phanaticke Spirits, though the Tongues be fiery, and the
voice as the Winds, rushing; yet in themselves there is nothing sensible; For
as those which appeared to the Apostles, were but - Velut igneae, Chrysostom
Homil, 4. in Act.
- and Velut flatus, - so this orall vehemence is but - Velut Zelus, and Velut
Indignatio, - False fire, or, at best, but some hot exhalation in the brain
set on fire by continual motion and agitation of the Tongue, and there it
burns sometimes to the madness of the Professor, most times, of the
Disciple. Again, these Tongues are said to sit upon the Apostles, - Sedendi
verbum stabilitatem ac mansionem denotat, the same Father - sitting presupposes
Stabilitie and Mansion, but most of these have neither, either in their
opinion, or course of life, but as the contribution ebbes or flows; so they
hoyse, or strike sail, either way, sometimes for the wide main, sometimes for
the next harbor. Again, the Apostles are said there, to be filled with the
Holy Ghost. - Recte repleti, non enim vulgariter acciperunt gratiam Spiritus,
sed eosque vt implerentur, the Father still. - Where the Spirit powers out it
leaves no part empty, it does fill, fill up even to the brim, gives power of
speaking roundly, and fully; where it does give power, - no Rhumaticke
Enthusiasmes, no languishing ejaculations, but such as the Spirit indeed have
dictated, such as flow from lips immediately touched with the true Cherubin,
and a Tongue swollen with inspiration. Again, the Tongues which sat upon the
Apostles were cloven Tongues, Vide Geneua Notes in 2. chap. Acts.
other tongues, Verse. 4. and S. Mark calls them new Tongues. They were not
confined then to a single dialect to Babbling merely in our Mother tongue, but
the Text says they had diverse Tongues, of the Parthian, and Mede, and Elamite,
Phrygian, and Pamphilian, and of those of Lybia which is beside Cyrene, And in
those and (other Tongues too) they spoke the wonderful works of God. Act.
2.11. Lastly, this Vision they saw when they were in the Temple, not in a
Cloister, a Barn, a Wood, a Conuenticle, and they were in the Temple with one
accord too, with one Office, one Spirit, one Mind, one Faith; not here a
Separatist, there a Brownist, yonder a Familist, near him an Anabaptist, but
as their Faith was one, so was their life, and (if brought to the test) their
death too. That was not Religion with them which was divided, Plin. lib 18.
cap. 2.
nor that not unity of opinion which they would not burn for. Some Heathens
have showed such resolution and truth even in their false Religion; such were
those - Aruales Sacerdotes - of old amongst the Romans, Caesar. lib. 3.
Galli.
the Solduni amongst the Aquitans; the Aegiptians also had their (...), so
called, because, promiscuously enjoying each others benefits, as in one
Religion, so in one Love, they would dye together; Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 1. Cap.
26. and Cap. 12. lib. 3.
such were the Hunnes, Hyberi, Cantabri, and others, which were joynt-sharers
of each others miseries, and fortunes; and if one by disaster or disease met
with Calamity, or Fate, the other sought it. --

-- Placidamque petunt pro vulnera mortem. If in matters therefore as well
Morrall as Divine, there was such reciprocation of old; and not only in
Religions, which were tainted, and smelt not of the true GOD, but in that too
which has been touched and influenced by the Spirit of the Almighty, there
was such punctual correspondence then, why such combustion now? Why those
daily scarres and wounds both by the Tongue, and Pen? Why so much gall in our
Pulpit, such wormwood at the Press? Why those Ciuill-warres in our own
tenants? Such stabbings in particular opinions? Such heart-burnings in our
Brethren? to the great disquiet of our Mother, Church, and her Son they so
labor to disinherit, the Protestant, the wounded Protestant, who has been
now so long Crucified between the - non - Conformist and the Romanist, that at
length he is enforced to fly to Caesar for sanctuary, and in the very rescue
and Appeal, like the poor man between Jerusalem, and Jerico, he falls into
the hands of Thieues, two desperate cut-throates and enemies to the Truth, and
him, the Pelagian and the Armixian. But no more (beloved) of those Daggers and
Stillettoes to our own breasts by the cruelty of our own Tribe; Know,
dissension is the very gate of ruin, and the breach at which destruction
enters. Ciuill-warres are as dangerous in matters of Religion as State, and
prove the Earthquakes both of Church and Commonwealth. The story of the
Romans shafts is both old, and trodden, but very pertinent; in the Bandle they
never felt injury of hand, one by one were the conquest of a finger, and
Tacitus speaks of Apronius Soldiers; - Satis validi si simul, etc. as long as
they marched in their combined ranks they stood aloof all danger, but, these
divided, they grew the prey and slaughter of the Adversary; and thus - Dum
singuli pugnunt, vniuersi vincuntur. A mutiny or rent in an Army is the
Soldiers passing bell, Death follows, or despair of victory, when those
which are knit-vp in one heart of courage and affection trample on distrust as
if they had already worn the palm and glory of their Triumph. A^^ it speeds
no better in a divided Church, where Scismes and Factions like so many rents
and breaches, have hewed-out, a way to her overthrow and ruin. No more
struglings then by unnatural twins in the womb of our Rebecca. No more
war in her members, no more Bablings in their tongue, no more venom in their
Pen, to the great advantage of the Adversary, whose artillery is ready, his
bow bent, the arrow on the string and malice leuelling at the very bosom of
the Church, (I pray God, not of the State too) and waits only opportunity to
loosen it. But let us with all humbleness of mind, meekness, Ephesians. 4. ver.
2.3 4.5.6.
long suffering (supporting one another through love) endeavor to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, knowing there is one Body, one
Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one GOD, and Father of all, who is
above all, through all, and in you all.

And now PAVL has bin at Athens, past his bickerings with the Epicure, and the
Stoicke, had their censure, - He is a Babbler. - He is now rigged for Corinth,
and by this time arrived there, where I leave him - Jn earnest Disputation with
the Graecians in the Synagogue. Act. 19.5.
The Stoicke is returned to his Porch too, the Epicure to his Garden. But here
is an Athens too, though no PAVL, or at least no such Paul; and yonder sits a
Stoicke and he whispers to his Epicure, - What will this Babbler say? He says
- Glory to GOD on high, in Earth peace, goodwill toward men. He says, hearty
and true Allegiance to his Sovereign, - wishes the budding and continuance of
a temporal Crown here, and the assurance of an immortal one hereafter. -
He says, flourishing to his Church, his Commonwealth, his People; swift and
fierce destruction to his Enemies foraigne, and (if he have any such)
domestique. - He says courage to his Nobility, unity to his Clergy, love to
his Gentry, loyalty to his Commonalty. In fine; He says prosperity to Athens
(here) unanimity, true brotherhood, happy success to your studies, to your
designs; and The grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to you all, and with you all.
Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
FINIS.
JACOB and ESAV: Election. Reprobation.

OPENED AND DISCVSSED BY WAY OF SERMON AT PAVLS CROSS, March 4. 1622.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

August. lib. 7. de Trinitate. Qui videt haec, vel ex part, vel per speculum
in aenigmate, gaudeat cognoscens Deum, and gratias agat, qui vero non, tendat
per pietatem fidei ad videndum, and non per caecitatem ad calumniandum.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO MY MOST HONOVR'D FRIEND William Brouncker Esquier, This.
Sir:
WHere I owe a just service, and would publish it, I less fear the censure of
vainglory, than of unthankfulness; you know the age is both tart, and
nimble, in her Paraphrase on those which would be Men in Print; I have found
it; yet will rather hazard the imputation of a weak man, than an ungrateful:
Howeuer, I desire not so much to expose my labors to the world, as my
loyalty, that others might take notice how much you have been mine in your
cherishing of those, and how I am ever yours in my expressions of this. He that
does but tacitly acknowledge the bounties of a noble friend, in a manner
buries them, when he that proclaims them, has in a part requited; he has
repayed his honor, and therefore him, and so has satisfied, though not
restored. If this public thankfulness of mine, for those daily favors, shall
meet with so merciful an interpretation of yours, I esteem not any rigid one
of the times; I cannot gloze with them, nor you, yet shall endeavor to be
reputed one of those who unfeignedly honors you, and will do, whilst I wear
the name, and title of

Your ever friend, and servant HVM: SYDENHAM.

JACOB and ESAV.
ROMANS 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will, he
hardens.


THe Text holds some Analogy with the Times we live in, fraught with no less
subtilty, than danger; and as an vndiscreeter providence is soon oreshot in
those, so in this too. We are not here then to cheat our Auditory with a thin
discourse; Mystery is our Theme and subject, the very Battlement and Pinnacle
of Divinity, which he that too boldly climbes, falls headlong into error. A
task, though perchance disproportionable to youthful undertakings, and may
from such challenge the censure of a vainglorious enterprise: yet give me
leave to return, though not satisfaction, answer. In sacred Riddles what we
cannot resolve, give us leave to contemplate; and what not comprehend, admire:
where our pencill fails us to limme in so curious a Portraiture, we will play
Timanthes, and shadow with a veil; and when our reason is once non-plust, we
are hushed in a contented wonder. Where we may behold the Almighty (in a full
shower) pouring down his blessings upon some, scarce deawing or sprinkling
them on others; softning this Wax, and hardening that Clay, with one and the
selfsame sun, (his will) and yet that will not clouded with injustice. Here
is that will not only stagger, but entrance a carnal apprehension; Not a
circumstance which is not equally loaded with doubt and amazement, and whose
discussing will no less inuit than command attention. That which in common
passages of Divinity does but transport our thought, in those more mystical
will captiuate: Every word is knotty, and full of brambles, and requires the
hand of an exact industry.

It behoues us then to be wary of our choice, how either we traffic here with
corrupt antiquity (where but to taste were to surfeit) or with that modern
Navy of Expositors, where mixture of opinion will rather cloy than feed, and
confound than inform our understanding. I desire not to paraphrase on a
reverend error, nor to chastise there where I beg information. I shall only
request gray hairs thus far to dispense with me, that where their Candle
burns dimly and uncertainly, I may borrow light of a more glorious flame. Not
then to beguile time and so noble an attention with quaintness of preamble, or
division; The parts here are, as the persons, and their condition, Two, Mercy
for whom he will, and they are Sheep; Hardening for whom he will, and these
are Goats. Let us first put them on the right hand, and we shall find a Venite
Benedicti. Come ye blessed, here is mercy for you; After, these on the left
hand, and we shall meet with an Ite maledicti, Go ye cursed, here is hardening
for you: Both which, when we have in a careful separation orderly
distinguished, we shall make here the will of the Almighty as free from
injustice, as there his censure, He will have mercy on whom he will, etc.

PART. I. He will.
THat the will of God is the principal efficient cause of all those works
which he does externally from himself, so that there is no superior or
precedent cause moving and impelling it, shines to us no less from the
eternity of his will, than the omnipotency; for with that double attribute
Augustine does inuest it in his 2. book contra Manichaeos, cap. 2. And seeing
there is nothing before his will, as being eternal; nothing greater, as being
omnipotent; we infer with that learned Father, that Neque extra, vel vltra
illam causa inquirenda; There is no cause either without, or beyond it, that
being the source and fountain of all causes, as by a more particular survey of
Gods works we shall discuss hereafter. For illustration. In his eternal
decree, why are some marked out as inheritours of his Sion? others again
expulsed, and banished those blessed Territories? they as vessels of mercy, for
the manifestation of his goodness; these of fury, for the promulgation of his
justice? Doubtless the will, and the bene-placitu^ of the Almighty as the
primary and immediate cause, whereof if there be any more subordinate, they
have all alliance and dependancy on it, Tanquam a principali intention primi
agentis. Like inferior Orbs which have their influence and motion from a
higher mouer. I need not travail far either for proof or instance; our
Chapter is bountiful in both. What was the cause that God did choose Jacob and
reject Esau? The mediate and secondary cause, was, because he loved Jacob, and
not Esau. But why is his love incommunicable, and as it seems, in a partial
reservation, peculiar to that more than this? I know not a more plausible and
higher motive than his will. Insistendum ergo in particulas, cuius vult, and
quem vult. Our enquiry here must be cautelous, and slow of foot, lest we run
violently into error. Here is a cuius vult only for him that he has mercy
on, and but a quem vult for him he hardens; vltra quas procedere non licet,
says Calvin. Here is the utmost Verge and Pillar where reason durst to coast;
what is beyond is either unknown, or dangerous; how ever some vainglorious
brains (ambitious of mysterious and abstruser knowledge) have inscribed here
their Multi pertransibunt, and augebitur scientia. But in so stickle and
dangerous a torre^t, how are they o'rewhelmed at last? and whilst they so
ventrously climb this steeper turret, thrown desperately into heresy? For
mine own part, I have ever thought curiosity in divine affairs but a quaint
distraction, rather applauding an humble (yet faithful) ignorance, than a proud
and temerarious knowledge. And had some of the Fathers been shot-free of this
curious insolence, they needed not have retreated from former Tenants, and so
much indeared posterity, no less in the reuiew than retractation of laborious
errors: Amongst whom S. Augustine (though since entitled Malleus Haereticorum)
shared not a little in the 83. of his Questions, and 68. Where expounding our
place of the Apostle, would thus vindicate the Almighty from injustice; that
God foresaw that in some, Quo digni sunt iustificatione; that in others, Quo
digni sunt obtusione; so making Gods will to depend on a foreseen merit. A
position that does not only repugne the discipline of holy story, but thwarts
the maine tide and current of orthodox antiquity, as in a fuller discourse we
shall display anon: and therefore in his 7. Book de Praedestinatione
Sanctoru^, cap. 4. he does chastise his former tenants with a Deus non elegit
opera, sed fidem in praescientia; That God did not elect Jacob for foreseen
works, but faith. But because in says there is as well a merit, as in works,
he once more rectifies his opinion in the first of his Retractations and 23,
where he does peach his sometimes ignorance, and ingeniously declares himself,
that -- Nondum diligentius quaesiuit, nec inuenit mysteria, he had not yet
thoroughly sifted that of the Apostle, Romans 11.5. That there was a remnant
according to the election of grace, which, if it did flow from a foreseen
merit, was rather restored than given, and therefore (at last) he informs his
own judgment, and his Readers thus; Datur quidem fideli sed data est etiam
prius ut esset fidelis; Grace is given to the faithful, but it is first given
that he should be faithful, Hence Lumbard in his 1 book, 41 distinction,
pathetically, Elegit quos voluit Deus gratuita misericordia, non quia fideles
futuri erant, sed ut essent, nec quia crediderant, sed ut fierent credentes.
God out of the prerogative of his will, and bounty of his goodness, has
chosen whom he pleased, not because they were faithful, but because they
should be, and not of themselves believing, but made so. And therefore, that Vt
sim fidelis, 1 Cor. 7.25. bears a remarkable emphasis. I have obtained mercy
that I might be faithful, not that I was. Here the Pelagian startles, and
lately backed with a troop of Arminians, takes head against this truth,
fancying and dreaming of certain causes without God, which are not subsisting
in God himself, but externally moving the will of God to dispose and determine
of several events, laying this as an unshaken principle, Fidem esse
conditionem in obiecto eligibili ante electionem; That faith and obedience
(foreseen of God in the Elect) was the necessary condition and cause of their
election. I intend not here a pitched field against the vpstart Sectarie, for I
shall meet him anon in a single combat: my purpose now is to be but as a scout,
or spy, which discouers the weakness of his adversary, not stands to
encounter. And indeed both the time and place suggest me rather to resolve,
than debate; and convince, than dispute an error. That faith then, or any
praeexisting merit in the person to be elected, was the cause of his election,
is neither warrantable by reason nor primitive Authority. For God could not
foresee in the elect any faith at all, but that which in after times he was to
crown them with, and therefore not considerable as any precedent cause of
election, but as the effect and fruit, and consequent thereof.

The primary and chief motive then is that (...), Ephesians. 1.5. the good
pleasure of Gods will, which, prompted of it self, without any reference to
praeexisting faith, obedience, merit, as the qualities, cause, or condition of
it, has powered grace on this man more than that; Non solum in Christo, Synod.
Dort.
sed per Christum. And therefore (as that late venerable Synod has awarded
it) Non ex illis conditionibus facta est, sed ad illas; That election was not
framed of these conditions, but to them, as to their effect and issue. And if
we commerce a little with passages of holy story, we shall find that our
election points rather to the free will of God in his eternal council, than
to any goodness in us which God foresaw: so Acts 13.48. where we read of the
Gentiles, that many believed because they were ordained to eternal life, and
not therefore ordained because they formerly believed. And if we will not
suffer our minds to be transported either with scruple or novelty, the text
is open, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us before the foundations of the world were
laid, that we might be holy, not that we were. And in this very Chapter, verse
23. The vessels of mercy are first said to be prepared to mercy, then called: and
therefore Saint Austin in his 86. Tract upon John, out of a holy indignation,
does check the insolence of those, Qui praescientiam Dei defendunt contra
gratiam Dei; Which in matters of salvation, obscure and extenuate the grace of
God with the foreknowledge of God: for if God did therefore choose us, because
he did know, and foresee that we would be good, he did not choose us to make us
good, but we rather chose him, in purposing to be good, which if it did carry
any show either of probability, or truth, we might question our Apostle, who
in his 8 here, and 29. no less persuades, than proves, that those which God
foreknew he did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son, and
therefore God did not choose us, because before election there was a conformity
in us, but because from all eternity he did elect us, in time he made us
conformed to the image of his Son. Whereupon St. Augustine in his fifth book,
contra Iulianum, 3. chapt. thus, Nullum elegit dignum, sed eligendo effecit
dignum. God in the choice of his Elect, found none worthy, but in the choosing
made them worthy. Moreover, our election, which is of grace (as I yonder
proved) could not stand if works and merits went before it. Haec quippe non
inuenit merita, sed facit; Grace does not find works in us, but fashions them,
according to that of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.13. God has from the beginning
chosen you through sanctification of the spirit, and not of works. Nay, some
here so much abolish and wipe off all claim of merit, that they admit not
Christ as the meritorious cause of our election. Indeed, say they, the
Scripture is thus far our Schoolmaster, That we are justified by the blood
of Christ, Synod. Dort.
and reconciled to God by the death of his Son: but where are we informed
that we are elected through his blood, or praedestinated by his death? Indeed,
in the 3 of John 16. we find a -- sic Deus dilexit, -- God so loved the world
that he gave his Son. So that, not because Christ died for us, God loved, and
chose us, but because God loved and chose us, therefore Christ died for us. For
so Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us, that whilst we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. In matters therefore of election, we acknowledge
not a cause more classicke than the Cuius vult here specified, He will have
mercy on whom he will. Insomuch that in the parable of the householder, Matthew.
20. I find but a sic volo, as a sufficient and just cause of his designs. I
will give to this last as much as to thee; and yet this Will so clothed with a
divine justice, that God is not said to will a thing to be done, because it is
good, but rather to make it good, because God would have it to be done. For
proof whereof, a sweet singer of our Israel instances in those wonderful
passages of creation, where it is first said that Deus creauit, God created all
things, and the Valde bonum comes aloof, he saw that they were all good, and
the moral portends but this, That every thing is therefore good, because it
was created, and not therefore created because it was good; which does wash,
and purge the will of the Almighty from any stain, or tincture of injustice;
for though that be the chief mover and director of all his proiects, as the
prime and peremptory cause, doing this, because he will, yet we find not
only sanctitatem in operibus, but justitiam in vijs. The Lord is righteous in
all his ways, and holy in all his works. Hereupon that great treasurer of
Learning and Religion, Zanchius in his 3 book, de Natura Dei, and 4 chapter,
diuides between the cause of Gods will, and the reason of his will: That
though there be no superior cause of it, yet there is a just reason, and a
right end and purpose in it. Morl. Clean. Lep.
Hence S. Jerome, Deus nihil fecit quia vult, sed quia est ratio sic fieri; God
does nothing because he will, but because there is a reason of so doing, in
regard whereof it is not simply called (...), the will of God, but (...), the
good will of God, Ephesians. 1.11. So that in his sacred resolutions and
designements, though we meet (sometimes) with passages, wound up in darkened
terror, the cause whereof we may admire not scan; yet the drift and maine
ends of the Almighty have been so backed with strength of a just reason, that we
may rather magnify his goodness than tax his power; and applaud the calmnesse
of an indulgent mercy, than repine at the lashes of an incensed justice.
Equity and goodness are children of one burden, both the lawful issue of his
will, which though foul mouths of libertines have strangely bastardized,
making that the throne of tyranny, which is the rule of justice, yet let them
know that of Augustine to his Sixtus; Iniustum esse non potest, quod placuit
Iusto. To be God, and to be unjust, is to be God and not God. So fair a
goodness, was never capable of so foul a contradiction, and therefore (as the
same father prosequutes) Iniquitatem damnare nouit, non facere: God knows how
to judge, not to commit a crime, and to dispose, not mould it, and is often the
father of the punishment, not the fact. Hence it is, that the dimnesse of humane
apprehension conceaues that (oftentimes) a delinquency in God, which is the
monster of our own frailty; making God not only to foreknow, but predestinate
an evil, when the evil is both by growth, and conception ours, and if ought
savor of goodness in us, Gods, not ours, yet ours too, as deriuatiue from
God, who is no less the Patron of all goodness, than the Creator, and it is
as truly impossible for him to commit evil, as 'twas truly miraculous to make
all that he had made good. And therefore Tertullian, in his first book de
Trinitate, makes it a Non potest fieri, a matter beyond the list and reach of
possibility, that he should be Artifex mali operis, the promoter and enginer
of a depraved act, who challenges to himself the title no less of an
unblemished Father, than of a Judge. Our thoughts then should not carry too
lofty a sail, but take heed how they cut the narrow straights, and passages
of his will. A busy prying into this Arc of secrets, as it is accompanied with
a full blown insolence, so with danger; Humility (here) is the first staire
to safety; and a modest knowledge stands constantly wondering, whilst the
proud apprehension staggers, and tumbles too. Here Is a Sea vnnauigable, and a
gulf so scorning fathom, that our Apostle himself was driven to his (...), O
depth, and in a rapture, more of astonishment, than contemplation, he styles
it, (...) (...), voluntatis suae mysterium, or (as Beza translates it,)
Sacramentum, the Sacrament, and mystery of his will, being so full of unknown
turnings, and Meanders, that if a naked reason hold the clue, we are rather
inuolued, than guided in so strange a Labyrinth.

To enquire then the cause of Gods will, were an Act of Lunacie, not of
Judgment; for every efficient cause is greater than the effect, now there is
nothing greater than the will of God, and therefore no cause thereof. For if
there were, there should something praeoccupate that will, which to conceive were
sinful, to believe blasphemous. If any then (suggested by a vainglorious
inquiry) should ask why God did elect this man, and not that? we have not
only to resolve, but to forestall so beaten an objection: Because he would.
But why would God do it? Here Is a question as guilty of reproof, as the
author, who seeks a cause of that, beyond, or without which there is no cause
found, where the apprehension wheels, and reason runs giddy in a doubtful
gire: Compescat se ergo humana temeritas, August.
and id quod non est non quaerat, ne id quod est non inueniat. Here a
scrupulous and humane rashness should be hushed, and not search for that which
is not, lest it find not that which is. For as the same Father, in his 105
Epist. Cur illum potius, quam illum, liberet, aut non, scrutetur (qui potest)
iudiciorum eius tam magnum profundum, sed caveat praecipitium --. Let him that
can, descry the wonders of the Lord in this great deep, but let him take heed
he sink not; and in his answer to the second question of Simplician: Quare
huic ita, and huic non ita, homo tu quis es qui respondeas Deo? and cur isti
sic, illi aliter? Absit vt dicamus Iudicium luti esse, sed figuli. Why God does
to this man so, and to that not so, who dare expostulate? and why to this man,
thus, to that, otherwise? far be it, that we should think it in the
judgment of the clay, bur of the potter. Down then with this aspiring
thought, this ambitious desire of hidden knowledge, and make not curiosity the
picklocke of divine secrets; know that such mysteries are doubly barred up in
the coffers of the Almighty, which thou may strive to violate, not open. And
therefore if thou will needs trespass upon deity, dig not in its bosom; a
more humble adventure suits better with the condition of a worm, scarce a man,
or if so, exposed to frailty.

It Is a fit task and employment for mortality, to contemplate Gods works,
not sift his mysteries, and admire his goodness, not blurre his justice; And
it has been ever the practice of primitive discipline, rather to defend a
disparaged equity, than to question it, for so that reverend Father (who ever
mixed his learning with a devout awe) in his 3 book, cont. Iulianum, and 18
chapter, Bonus est Deus, iustus est Deus, potest aliquos sine bonis meritis
liberare, quia bonus est, non potest quemquam sine malis damnare, quia iustus
est. God is equally good and just, he can save some without reference to
desert, because he is good, he cannot damn any man without a due demerit,
because he is just: Nay had God delivered all mankind into the jaws of
destruction, we could not touch him with injustice, but rather admire so dark
and inuestigable an equity, which we may illustrate by worldly passages and
humane contracts. If I were bankrupt of instance, S. Augustine could relieve
me. A great man (says he) lends two sums of money, to two several men, who
can tax him of obdurateness, or injustice, if at time of repayment he forgive
this man his debt, and require satisfaction of that? for this lives not in the
will and disposal of the debtor, but of the creditor. So stands the case
between frailty and omnipotency. All men (which through Adam became
tributaries to sin and death) are one mass of corruption, subject to the
stroke of divine justice, which, whether it be required or given, there is no
iniquity in God, but of whom required, and to whom given, it is in such debtors
insolence to judge, lest God return their sauciness with a -- Non licet mihi
quod volo facere? as the householder did the murmuring laborers in his
vineyard. Is thine eye evil, because I am good? And indeed I display not a
higher cause of election, and reprobation than divine goodness, which that
learned Schoole-man, Part. 1. quaest. 23. art. 5. does not only illustrate but
prove no less by similitude, than argument. For God (says he) made all things
for his goodness sake, that in things by him made, his goodness might
appear, but because that goodness is in it self, one, and simple: and things
created cannot attain to so divine a perfection, it was necessary that that
goodness should be diversely represented in those things, and hence it is that
to the complement and full glory of the universe, there is in them a diversity
of degrees required, of which some possess a lower, and some a higher room;
and that such a multiformitie may be preserved in nature, God permits some
evils to be done, lest much good should be anticipated: -- Voluit itaque Deus
in hominibus, quantum ad aliquos, quos praedestinet, suam repraesentare
bonitatem, per modum misericordiae, parcendo illis, quantum vero ad alios, quos
reprobet, suam ostendi bonitatem per modum iusticiae, puniendo eos. God in
those he elects, would show his goodness by way of mercy in sparing these,
in others he reprobates, his goodness too, by way of justice in punishing
them. And therefore our Apostle here not only magnifies the riches of his
glory upon vessels of mercy, verse. 23. but his long patience too, to vessels
of wrath, verse. 22. So that in his house there are not only those of gold and
silver, but of wood and earth too, and some to honor, some to dishonor, 2 Timothy
2.20. Of which if any mutinous or saucy ignorant desires a reason beyond Gods
will, I have no answer but that of Augustine, in his 22 Sermon, de verb Apost.
Tu ratiocinare, ego mirer, tu disputa, ego credam: altitudinem video, ad
profundum non peruenio; Dispute and reason he that durst, while my thought and
belief stand at a bay, and wonder; I see there is a height, but cannot reach
it, and know this gulf, not fathom it. For as in things natural (it is
Aquinas similitude) when all the first matter is uniform, why one part of it
should be under the form of fire, another under the form of earth, there may
be a reason assigned, that there might be a diversity of species in things
natural: but why this part of matter should be rather under the form of fire,
and that under the form of earth, depends only on the simplicity of Gods will;
and as it hangs too on the will of the Architect, that this stone should be
rather in this part of the wall, and that in another, although reason and art
require that other stones should be in one part of the Edifice, and other in
another. Neither is there for this iniquity in God, that he does not proportion
his gifts in a strict equality, for it were against the reason and truth of
justice, if the effect of Praedestination should be of debt, and not of grace;
for in those thing which are of an unrestrained freedom, every man (out of the
jurisdiction of his own will) may give to whom he will, more or less,
without the least disparagement of justice: And therefore to those recoiling
dispositions which mutter at a free bounty, heaped on others without refere^ce to
desert, I will usurp that of the Parable, Toll quod tuum est, and vad^. And
yet notwithstanding though the will of God be the independent prime cause of
all things, so that beyond it there is no other cause, and without it there is
no reason of Gods actions; yet it is not the sole and particular cause, for
there are many secondary concurring with the first, by the mediation whereof,
the will of God brings his intendments to an issue. As in matters of our
salvation the will and working of man shakes hands with that of God, for though
without him we find a Nil potestis facere, Ioh. 15.5. Ye can do nothing; yet
assisted by his will, and the powerful and effectual operations of his grace,
our will cooperates with Gods. Else how could David pray to him to be his
helper, unless he himself did endeavor something? or how could God command
us to do his will, except the will of man did work in the performance of it?
Lumb. lib. 1. distinct. 42.
It is true (says S. Augustine) we find a Deus operatur omnia in omnibus, but
we no where find a Deus credit omnia in omnibus. Nostrum itaque est credere,
and velle, illius autem dare credentibus, and volentibus facultatem operandi:
To will, and to believe is ours, but to give the faculty of operation to them
that will and bleeue, is Gods. I have labored more than they all, yet not I,
but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Why God therefore does save some
men, there is more to be alleged than this, God would have them to be saved;
for if this laurel do beautify our triumph we must encounter, he that will
have this Crown must tug for it, and this prize, must wrestle, Qui creauit te
sine te, non saluat te sine te. He that has created thee without thy self,
will not save thee without thy self. And therefore those whom God from all
eternity has destined to salvation, he has in a like privilege destined to
the means: But why those means, not communicable to all, many a busy
endeavor has strugled for a reason, not compast it. Out of more than a double
Jury of Interpreters, which I have (not with a little distraction) observed,
wauing here in doubtful opinion, Hugo de Sancto Victore gives thus his
verdict. Gods grace is indifferently exhibited to all men, to the elect and
reprobate, but all do not equally lay hold on it. Some no less neglect, than
repulse Gods grace, and when its comfortable beams shall shine upon them, they
shut their eyes against it, and will not behold it, and God in justice
with-drawes his grace from these men, because they withdraw themselves from
his grace. Est enim in gratia quemadmodum in solis radio (says he) There is a
proportion betwixt the rays of the Sun, and the eye, and betwixt the soul
of man, and the grace of God. The eye is ordained by nature to be the organ of
the sight, and yet the eye cannot see except the Sun enlighten it; neither
can the Sun make any thing else see but the eye in man, for it may shine upon
our hand or foot, nevertheless the hand or foot shall see nothing: so the
soul has a possibility to merit by her natural abilities, but that
possibility shall be vain and fruitless, unless it be quickened by the
powerful operation of Gods grace, which grace, if it shall once actuate it,
then the soul will be able to attain to that double life of grace here, of
glory hereafter. Vnde totum est ex gratia, sic tamen vt non excludatur meritum.
Whence he would have all to hang on grace, yet so that we exclude not merit.
But this inference is many stories above my reach, and in the greenness of my
judgment, there is little truth in the consequence, and palpable contradiction
in the consequent. For how can the merits of man challenge any thing, if all
flow from the grace of God? Yes (says Hugo) even as a weak child which cannot
yet go alone, should be led by the Nurse, a man cannot say that the child
goes of himself, but by the assistance of the Nurse; and yet the Nurse could
not make the child go, unless he were naturally inclinde to that motion: so
the soul of man is said to merit by the aid of grace, and by her own natural
inbred ability, but all the glory of the merit must be ascribed to God, because
the soul can do nothing without the support and grace of God. Whence I can
gather no truth but this, that in solo homine sit petentia logica ad salute^.
That a man only maybe saved without apparent contradiction; no unreasonable
creature is capable of that everlasting blessedness and beatificall vision;
and the soul of a beast is no more able to see God, than a senseless stock
to behold a visible object. For man only has a passive power to salvation,
and man before his conversion has a passive power only. And therefore the
similies before proposed, if they be referred to the soul before the
conversion, are false, and bear no proportion, for then the soul is stark
blind, and dead in trespasses, and cannot look on the grace offered, or move
one jot in the course of Christianity: But after the conversion when God speaks
Ephata to the soul, be opened, when the understanding is illuminated, and
scales of error once drop from the eyes, then it may hold some correspondency
with truth. As therefore in matters of our conversion, so of election too, all
hangs on Grace, and this grace in a holy reservation limited to a narrow Tribe,
for the cuius vult here insinuates no more, and He will have mercy on whom he
will, sounds in a direct aequiualence with this, He will have mercy only on
some; of which some there is a definite and see number, incapable of
augmentation, or diminution, howeuer those new sprung Sectaries, Arminians.
out of a turbulent brain and thirst of cauillation, blaspheme the eternity of
Gods decree, making our election mutable, incomplete, conditionate, subject to
change and reuocation, and what other stranger birth and prodigy of opinion,
which I conceive not without a holy impatience and indignation. And whereas our
Fathers of old have maintained, even to the sword and faggot, the decree of
election to be no less eternal than irreuocable, these would feign lull our
belief with innovation of vpstart discipline, altering no less the number
than the condition of the elect into the state of reprobate, and of the
reprobate into the elect. And (as the Devil did to Christ) they urge Text and
reason for it. For God (say they) cannot give grace to whom he does give grace,
which if he should do an elect may be damned; and he can give grace to him
he does not give grace too, which if he do, a reprobate may be saved, and so a
reprobate may become an elect, and an elect a reprobate. Thus they shoot by an
indirect aim, and sail by a wrong Compass, for we enquire not here of Gods
power, but of his will, not what he can do, but what he has resolved to do.
Again, it seems no consequence, God can save or damn a man, therefore this
man can be saved or damned, Hugo de Sancto Victore in cap. 9. ad Romans
Non enim posse Dei sequitur posse nostrum, Gods power stands not in relation
to ours; as if God would otherwise redeem mankind than by the death of his
Son. (As there was another means possible (says Austin) but not more
convenient.) That therefore mankind could otherwise be redeemed; and if God
had this in his power, that it should be therefore in man's too? Could not God
(if he would) have saved Judas? does it therefore follow that Judas could be
saved? No, for though this be too ragged and stony for a popular capacity to
dig through; yet if we look back a little into the mysteries of Gods
decree, we shall find that which will no less relieve our understanding,
than remove our scruple; where things from everlasting have such a doom, which
is not malleable either by change or reuocation, For the Lord of hosts has
determined, and who can disanull it? and his hand is stretched out, and who can
turn it away? Isay 14.27. Seeing then that election is from eternity, and that
not obnoxious to mutability or corruption, we neither curtaile the elect of
their primative glory, nor of their number. Which though they be a little
flock, (in respect of that herd and large drove of the damned) yet in those
sacred volumes of Gods diuiner Oracles, we find them numberless. So Apoc.
7.9. These things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which none could number
of all nations and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their
hands. Whence those Factors for the Romish See, would hew out a way to
universal grace; making our election general, manifold, indefinite, and
would have Christ's death no less meritorious, than propitiatory for the sins
of the whole world. A quaere long since on foot between Augustine and
Pelagius, and since in a fiery skirmish between the Caluinist and the
Lutheran, out of whose mud and corruption there has been lately bred the
Arminian, a Sect as poisonous as subtle, and will no less allure than betray
a flexible and yielding judgment. For our own safety then, and the easier
oppugning of so dangerous a suggestion, let us examine a little of the extent
and bounds of this grace, which Divines cut into these three squadrons, in
Gratiam Praedestinationis, vocationis, and iustificationis. Gratia
Praedestinationis, is that of eternity, the womb and Nursery of all graces,
whereby God loved his elect, (...). Gratia vocationis, a secondary grace, by
which God calls us, and by calling prescribes the means of our salvation. And
this grace has a double prospect. Either to that which is external, in libro
Scripturae, or creaturae, where God did manifest himself as well by what he
had made, as by what he had written; or to that which is internal, of
illumination, or renouation, of that in the intellect only, which a reprobate
may lay claim to, of this in the heart, which by a holy reservation and
incommunicablenesse is peculiar to the elect. Gratia iustificationis, which is
not a grace inherent, but bestowed, and stands as a direct Antipode to humane
merit. Yet not that (...) which the Schools christen with a gratia gratis
data, any gift which God out of his free bounty has bestowed upon us beyond
our desert, as Prudence, Temperance, and the like; for in these the heathen had
their share, whose singular endowme^ts have made posterity both an admirer, and
a debtor; but (...), Gratia gratum faciens, a gift perfect, and sanctified,
which does so qualify the receiver, that he is not only acceptable, but
glorious in the eyes of the bestower, as Faith, Hope, and the third sister
Charity, which no less reconcile than justify us before God.

We conclude then, that the external grace which the creature affords us, is
not limited to a private number, but to all; yet we deny the power and virtue
of salvation in it. We allow a sufficiency of redargution for conuicting the
heathen, who when they knew God, worshipped him not as God, and therefore are
both desperate and inexcusable. Moreover the grace which the Scripture
affords us, as it is not universal, so not of absolute sufficiency for
salvation, but only in genere mediorum externorum, (as the Schools speak)
because it does prescribe us the means how we may be saved, but it does not
apply the means that we are saved. Again, that grace of Illumination is more
peculiarly confined, and if by the beams of that glorious Sun which
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, we attain to the knowledge of
the Scripture, yet the bare knowledge does not save us, but the application.
But the grace of regeneration is not only a sufficient, but an effectual
grace, and as it is more powerful, so it is more restrained; they only partake
of this blessedness, whom God has no less enlightened, than sanctified, and
pointed out, then sealed, men invested in white robes of sincerity, whose
delinquencies, though sometimes of a deep tincture, are now both dispe^sed
with, and obliterated, not because they were not sinful, but because, not
imputed: so inuolucrous, and hidden are Gods eternal proiects, that in those
he relinquisheth, or saues, his reason, is his will; yet that as far
discoasted from tyranny, as injustice. The Quare we may contemplate, not scan,
lest our misprision grow equal with our wonder. And here in a double ambush
dangerously lurk the Romanist and the Arminian, men equally swollen with rancor
of malice, and position: and with no less violence of reason, than
importunity, press the virtue of Christ's death for the whole world. Alas! we
combat not of the price and worth of Christ's death, but acknowledge That an
able ransom of a thousand worlds; but the ground of our duel tends to this,
whether Christ dying proposed to himself the salvation of the whole world. We
distinguish then -- inter (...) Christi, and gratiam Christi. The merits of
Christ and the gracious application of those merits. His merits are able to
allay the fury of his incensed Father, and reconcile unto him the very
reprobates: but the application of those merits are restrained to the Elect,
for they only are capeable of so great a blessedness. For proof whereof we
have not only that venerable Bench and Council of Fathers and Schoolmen, but
also a higher court of Parliament to appeal unto, the Registers and penmen of
sacred Chronicles, Evangelists, and Apostles, which punctually insinuate Christ's
death only for his own, for his Church, for his Brethren, for those whose head
he was, laying down his life for some, and shedding his blood for some, for
his sheep, his little flock, his peculiar Priesthood, his tabernacle, body,
spouse, his Canaan, Sion, Jerusalem, his Ambassadors, Saints, Angels, in a word
this Cuius vult, The Elect. I Will not beat your ears with a voluminous citation
of text and Fathers, I Will draw only one shall out of this holy quiver, and
direct it to the Roman adversary, which if he shall repel or put by, I Will
proclaim hereafter a perpetual truce. The maine and chief cause that impeld
Christ to die, was his love, John 15. But Christ loved not all, but his own
Ephesians. 5. Therefore Christ died not for all, but for his own. The Jesuit here
retraicts, and we have none now left to encounter us but the Arminian; who
(like a cunning Fencer) has many a quaint flourish, and with a false blow
sometimes staggers, not wounds his adversary. The part most endangered, is the
eye of our intellect, and judgment which he thus dazzels with a subtle
nicety. Moulin in his Anatomy of Arminianisme.
That Christ has obtained reconciliation for all, for Saul and Judas, but not
as they were reprobates, but as they were sinners; For God (says he) did
equally intend, and desire the salvation of all, and the reason why they were
not saved was their incredulity, and misapplying of this gracious
reconciliation and atonement. Thus they would betray weakness into the hands
of error; and for a fairer gloss, and gilding of this their treachery, they
distinguish -- inter Impetrationem, and applicationem; Pretending that Christ
did impetrate reconciliation for all, but the application of that leanes wholly
to the elect. How crazy and ill tempered this position is, we will declare
briefly. First, we deny that Christ by his death has impetrated
reconciliation for all, for Saul, or Judas: Neither can our thought, much less
our belief give way to so strange a Paradox, Idem ibidem.
That remission of sins is obtained for those whose sins are not remitted,
or that salvation was purchased for those whom God from all eternity had
decreed to condemn. Again, we acknowledge Christ's death sufficient for all,
all bel^euers, nay all, if they did believe. But that Saul or Judas or the
residue of that cursed Hierarchy should reap the benefit of his Passion, we
utterly disclaim as erroneous and heretical. For if Christ by his death has
reconciled Judas, how is it that Judas suffers for his sins? for we cannot
without impeachment both of his mercy, and justice too, say that Christ
suffered for Judas his sins, yet Judas is damned for those sins; And since
Christ as he is God, has from euerl^sting destined Judas to damnation, how
is it that the same Christ, as he is man, and mediator between God and man,
should reconcile Judas whom from eternity he had reprobated? Again, if Christ
has obtained reconciliation for all men, then none shall be borne without the
covenant of Christ, so that of the Apostle will be false: That, By nature we
are all borne the children of wrath Ephesians. 2. And can we truly be styled the
children of wrath, if reconciliation be obtained for all men without exception?
And if all infants borne without the covenant are reconciled, Cur non clementi
crudelitate in cunis ingulauimus? (says the learned Moulin) why do we not in
a merciful cruelty murder them in their cradles? for then their salvation
were sealed; but if they survive, they are nourished in Paganism, infidelity,
which are the beaten roades and highwayes to destruction. And if we scan (says
he) the nicety of these words, the obtaining of reconciliation to be applied,
and the application of reconciliation obtained, we shall find it a mere
curiosity to barrow and perplex the brain, and torture the understanding,
since Christ has never obtained that which he has not applied, neither has
he applied that which he has not obtained. Yet these men either of a
headstrong opinion, or learned madness, are so violent in the prosecution of
their tenants, that no strength of answer will satisfy their objection, nor
modesty of language suppress their clamor, but a foul mouthed Forsterus
will bray out his witty spleen with an -- Error, and furor Zuinglianorum. His
reasons are as slender as they are many (the vertigoes and impostures of a
giddie brain) fitter for silence, than rehearsal, and for scorn than
confutation. We apply then; Is grace universally bountiful, and mercy
open-brested unto all? What mean then those Epithites of outcast, cursed,
damned, and that triple inscription of death, hell, and damnation? are they
either of policy or truth? Are they things real, or fancied only to
bug-beare and awe mortality? What would the Throne portend? Judge, adversary,
Sergeant, prison, or those horrid tones of worm, fire, brimstone, howling,
gnashing? Is the Scripture the Anuill of untruth, or are these things no more
than feigned and imaginary? What will those flames of your threatened purgatory
prove at last, but the Chimaera and coinage of a phantasticke brain? And a 500
years indulgence, but the sharke and legerdemaine of your Lord God the Pope?
Either your opinion is sandy, or your prison, both which must fleet with your
holy Fathers honor, if the arms of mercy be expanded to all. Again, are the
merits of Christ appliable to all? Swear, whore, drink, profane, blaspheme,
and (if there be in that Alcharon, and cursed roll, a sin of a fairer
growth) baffle the Almighty at his face. Think thou that heaven was ever
guilty of such treason against her Sovereign? or that it will ever entertain
a guest so exposed to the height of dissoluteness and debaushment? No, thou
must know that one day there will be a dreadful summons, either at those
particular accounts, at the hour of Death, or at the general audit of the
last trumpe, when thou shall meet with a new Acheldema and vale of Hinnom,
places no less of terror than of torment, the fiery dungeon, and the burning
Tophet, where the fury of the great Judge reaks in a flood of brimstone, and
his revenge boiles in a fiery torrent, limitlesse, and unquenchable. On the
other side happily may thou slumber, without howl, or skreeke of conscience,
thou wounded and dejected spirit; Thou whose glorious ornaments are but
sackcloth and ashes, and thy choicest fare but the bread of sorrow and
contrition. Know there is balm of Gilead for the brokenhearted sinner, and
oil of comfort for those which mourn in Sion. Behold, how thy Savior comes
flying down with the wings of his love, and sweepes away thy sins that they
shall neither temporally shame thee, nor eternally condemn thee. Who shall
wipe off all tears from your eyes, and lodge you in the bosom of old Abraham,
where there is bliss unspeakable for ever. And thus I have showed you the
happiness of sheep under the state of mercy; Time bids me now to reflect on
the misery of Goats, as they are under the condition of hardening.

PART. II. He hardens.
WHat? he that is rich in goodness, and his mercies above all his works? he
that mournes in secret for our offenses, and vows that he desires not the
death of a sinner, will he harden? How can this stand either with his promise,
or mercy, or justice? Gods unrevealed proiects are full of wonder, which if our
apprehension cannot diue to, our beliefes must sound. Occulta esse possunt,
iniusta non possunt, fraught they may be with sullen and darker riddles, never
with injustice. Let us first then take a survey of Man's heart, and see to what
miseries the hardness of it has expo^de our irregular predecessors, and after
try whether we can make providence the mother of so deformed an issue. And here
awhile let us observe S. Bernard tutoring his Eugenius, Cordurum, a heart,
which the softer temper of Gods working spirit leaves to mollify, and its own
corrupt affections begins once to mould. Like that of Naball, to be all stone,
becomes at last so cauterized, Vt semetipsum non exhorreat quia nec sentit,
that it is so far from starting at its own ugliness, that it is
non-sensible of deformity. And hence Theodoret defines it to be prauam animi
affectionem, a corrupt and depraved affection of the mind, which if man once
give way to, he is so screen'd both from Gods mercy and truth; that though it
be about him, and in the masterdome and dominion of his best sense, Non ceruit
tamen, nec intelligit, yet his eyes are as blind intelligencers to believe, as
his understanding. And against such that sweet singer of Israel breaks out
into his passionate complaint, Vsque quo filij hominum, vsque quo? O ye sons
of men, how long will ye turn my honor into shame, how long? and that of the
Protomartyr Stephen, in his Oration to the refractary Jews. Dura ceruice, O ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised of heart and ears, ye do always resist the
holy Ghost. And indeed such hearts are but the Wardrobes and Exchequers of
future mischief, whose keys are not in the custody of the Almighty, but
thine own bosom. For so that great Doctor of the Gentiles, Secundum
impoenitens cor tuum thesaurisas iram: According to the impenitency of thine
own heart, thou treasurest up wrath (to thy self) against the day of wrath.
How then can that eye which should be fixed either on the tenderness or mercy
of his Creator, glance so much on his injustice, as to make that the Midwife of
so foul a progeny? Obduration was never the child of goodness, neither can
a sin of so base a descent lay claim to omnipotency. It stands not (I dare
say) with Gods power, I am sure, his will, to reconcile two enemies in such an
extremity of opposition. Do sweet water and puddle flow immediately from one
and the selfsame spring? light and darkness from the selfsame Sun? I
know there is a stiff-necked and blindfold Tribe, which God has left, not
made the story of his vengeance; whose affections are too dull and drousie in
his service. Men crest-fallen in devotion, whose hearts are so dead in their
allegiance to him, that they seem spiritlesse, having all the powers and
faculties of their soul benumbed, and their conscience without pulse or
motion. And of these the Prophet, Inorassatum est cor populi. Their heart is as
fat as brawne. These stick not to belch open defiance in the face of the
Almighty, and with those Miscreants in Job, are ready to expostulate with
eternity. Quis est omnipotens vt seruiemus ei? Who is the Lord that we should
serve him? Such have forehead of brass, which no shame can bore through: and
(as the Prophet spoke of Judah) a face of whoredom which refuses modesty. But
Saint Gregory in his 10. Homily upon Ezechiel, has proclaimed their doom.
Frontem cordis in impudentiam aperit culpa frequens, vt quo crebrius
committitur, eo minus de illa committentis animus verecundetur: Frequency of
sinning does flesh us in immodesty, assiduity, in impudence. Offenses that are
customarie are not easy of dimission, and if thou once entertain them as thy
followers, they will quickly intrude as thy companions. Sins that are fed
with delight, with use, are as dangerous as those of Appetite: which oftentimes
prove no less inseparable, than hereditary; to do well is as impossible to
these, as not to do ill; So can assiduity make a sin both delightful, and
natural. Can the Aethiop change his skin, and the Leopard his spots? then
may ye also do well which are accustomed to do evil. That sin then is
irrazable which is so steeled with custom, and may undergo the censure of
that sometime City of God; Insanabilis est dolor tuus: Thy sin is written
with a pen of iron, and with a claw of a Diamond is engraven on the table of
thy heart. How then can we without sacrilege, and robbing of divine honor,
make God the father of so foul and unwashed a crime? Obduration is the issue
of thine own transgression. Perditio tua ex te, o Israel: If destruction dog
thee, thank thy corrupt affections, not blame thy maker, for he does but leave
thee, and they harden. To lay then (with some depraved libertines) the weight
and burden of our sins on the shoulder of Predestination, and make that the
womb of those foul enormities, may well pass for an infirmity, not for
excuse, and indeed thus to shuffle with divine goodness, is no less
fearful, than blasphemous. For, though God from eternity knew how to reward
every man, either by crown, or punishment --. Nemini tame^ aut necessitate^,
aut voluntatem intulit delinquendi, yet he never enjoined any man either a
necessity, or a will to sin. If any then fall off from goodness, he is
hurried no less with the violence of his own persuasion, than concupiscence;
and in those desperate affairs, Gods will is neither an intermedler, nor
compartner, Cuius open scimus multos, ne laberentur, retentos, nullos, vt
laberentur, impulsos (says Augustine.) By whose hand of providence we know
many to be supported that they might not fall, none impeld that they should.
And in his answer to that 14. Article falsely supposed to be his, Fieri non
potest, vt per quem a peccatis surgitur, per eum ad peccata decidatur: for one
and the selfsame goodness, to be the life and death of the selfsame sin,
is so much beyond improbability, that it is impossible. If any then go onward
in the true rode of divine graces, no doubt but the finger of the Almighty
points out his way to happiness; but if he wander in the by-pathes of a
vicious and depraved dissoluteness, his own corrupt affections beckens him to
ruin. To love then his children, and neglect his enemies, does neither impair
Gods mercy, nor impeach his justice. But why God should love this as his
child, neglect that as his enemy, Nec possible est comprehendere, nec licitum
inuestigare --, is beyond all lawfulness of inquiry, all ken of apprehension.
Let this then satisfy our desire of knowledge, Et ab illo esse, quod statur,
and non esse ab illo, quod ruitur: That his providence is the staff and crutch
on which we so lean that we yet stand; our corrupt affections, the bruzed and
broken reed on which, if we do lean, we fall. If any stagger at those
vnfathomed mysteries, and his reason and apprehension be struck dead at the
contemplation of Gods eternal, but hidden proiects, let him season a little
his amazement with adoration, and at last solace his distempered thoughts with
that of Gregory, Qui in factis Dei, etc. In the abstruse and darker mysteries
of God, he that sees not a reason, if he sees his own infirmity, he sees a
sufficient reason why he should not see. Me thinks this should cloy the
appetite of a greedy inquisition, and satisfy the distrust of any, but of too
querulous a disposition, which, with the eye of curiosity prying too nicely
into the closet of Gods secrets, are no less dazeled than blinded; if not with
profanation, heresy. Divine secrets should rather transport us with wonder,
than prompt us to enquiry, and bring us on our knees to acknowledge the
infiniteness both of Gods power and will, than ransacke the bosom of the
Almighty, for the revealing of his intents. Is it not blessedness enough that
God has made thee his Steward, though not his Secretary? Will no Mansion in
heaven content thee, but that which is the throne and chair for omnipotency to
sit on? No treasury, but that which is the Cabinet and storehouse of his own
secrets? Worm, and no man, take heed how thou struglest with thy Maker;
expostulation with God imports no less peremptorinesse, than danger; and if
Angels fell for pride of emulation, where will thou tumble for this pride of
inquiry? As in matters therefore of unusual doubt, where truth has no
verdict, probability finds audience, So in those obstruct and narrow passages
of his will, where reason cannot inform thee, belief is thy best
intelligencer, and if that want a tongue, make this thy interpreter; so thou
may euade with less distrust, I am sure, with more safety.

And at last when thou have scanned all, what either scruple or inquisition can
prompe thee to, in a dejected humiliation, thou must cry out with that Jewish
penitent; Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. Yea, but how shall we here
clear God from this aspersion, when the Apostle is the Herald to his guilt?
whom he will he hardens: Indurat is an active, and does always presuppose a
passive; And if there be a subject that must suffer, there must be a hand too
that must inflict. How then can we quit the Almighty of the suspicion either of
tyranny or injustice, since he is said to send on some the spirit of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and that great Trumpet of Gods displeasure, Esaias in his 63. brings in
the Jews, no less muttering than expostulating with God, Quare errare nos
fecisti Domine? Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our hearts from thy fear? These instances (at the first survey,) bear terror
in their looks, and like sophisticated lights in a dark room, make things
seem more ugly than they are; and are but false bills, preferred against a
spotless innocent, which, without search, may convince of public crime, but
narrowly scanned, absolve him, no less from the act, than the thought of guilt.
How God therefore in this is liable to censure and misprision, and how both a
beholder, an intermedler of depraved actions; vouchsafe me a little your
attentive patience, and I doubt not, but I shall inform the understanding of
the shallow, and to the portion of my weak Talent, will strive to satisfy the
waueringly judicious. Whom he will he hardens. Some (too nicely tender of the
honor of their maker) have given way to an interpretation more modest, than
authenticke, and interpret -- indurare -- for duritiam manifestare, so that God
is not properly said to harden the heart, but rather to manifest how hard it
is, And to this opinion Saint Augustine is a close adherent in his 18 Question
upon Exodus. But this holds not with the purpose of God, nor with the scope and
meaning of the Text, which if we compare with others of that nature, we shall
find that Gods will has rather a finger in this, than his promulgation: for
so in the 10 of Joshua we read, that 'twas the will and the sentence of the
Almighty, that the Canaanites should be hardened, that they might deserve no
mercy, but perish. Others there are (whose opinions border nearer upon truth)
which would have God to be said to harden -- non effectiue, sed permissiue; Not
by way of Action, but permission, and so Damascen in his third book de fide
Orthodoxa, cap. 20. Where his words run thus. Operaepretium est agnoscere --.
It Is a matter no less worthy of knowledge, than observance, that it is the
custom of the Scripture to call Gods permission, his action. So we read that
God sent his enemies the spirit of slumber, which is not to be ascribed to God
as an agent, but as a permitter. This gloss suits well with the approbation of
Saint Chrysostom; who speaking occasionally of that of the first of the
Romans, Deus tradidit illos -- God gave them up unto vile affections, he
there expounds -- tradidit, by permisit, which he thus illustrates by a
similitude --; As the General of an Army, in the sweat and brunt of a bloody
day, if he withdraw his personal directions from his soldiers, what does he
but expose them to the mercy of their enemies? not that he led them into the
jaws of danger, but because they were not backed by his encouragement: So God
in this spiritual conflict, he delivers us not into the hands of our
arch-enemie, he leaves us to our own strength, and our corrupt affections drag
us thither with a witness. And hence that dicotomy of Caietan claims his
prerogative, that God does harden Negatiuely, but not Positiuely, which
distinction though it be sound and Orthodox, yet it does not exempt us from
scruple, for God has more in the stiffeneckt and perverse, than a naked and
bare permission, otherwise we should too weakly distance obduration from a
lesser sin, for every sin God permits, and as Saint Augustine in his
Enchir. 96. cap. Nihil fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat,
vel ipse faciendo. There Is nothing done without the consent and approbation of
the Almighty, and that either by his person or substitute. If God therefore be
only said to harden man because he permits him to be hardened, why should he
not be likewise said to steal, because he permits man to steal? No doubt
therefore but God has a greater ore in this sin of hardneing, than in
offenses of a lesser bulk. And therefore Saint Augustine in his 3. lib. cont.
Iulianum, 3. cap. with many a sinewed allegation proves, that God does concur
to the excaecation and hardening both of the mind and heart, -- Non solum,
secundum patientiam, and permissionem, sed potentiam, and actionem. Not
according to his patience and permission only, but his power and action: Which
position he thus (after) qualifies with a distinction. Obduration is not only
a sin, but a punishment of a sin. Now, that which is in obduration merely
of sin has it is pedigree and original from man only; but that which is of
punishment for that sin, from God. And therefore I cannot but approve of that
of Isiodore, Qui iusti sunt, a Deo non impelluntur, vt malifiant, sed dum mali
iam sunt, indurantur, vt deteriores existant, -- According to that of Paul, 2
These. 2. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they might
believe a lie, that all might be damned that believe not the truth, but have
pleasure in unrighteousness. I have as yet but touched the bark and skin of
the controversy, the pith and the kernel is yet vnchewed, and that is, --
Whether God here (as he is said to harden) be the cause of our transgressions.
Which quaere admits a three-fore distraction, and difference of opinion. Two of
them are extremes, and by hot opposition each of other, they have both lost the
truth, the third runs in a midway, and ever directs to safety. Florini^
(whose opinion posterity records as the monument of a seduced error) with no
less peremptorinesse than blaspemy has arraigned the Almighry, and made him
not only the permitter, but the Author of our sins. The Seleuciani, after him,
were poisoned with that heresy, and the Libertines labored in the defense
thereof. Manes, and his disciples, dreampt of a summum malum, and upon that
fantasy grounded their assertion, that God the summum bonum, is to be seen
only in our good actions, but every depraved Act had its deriuation from their
summum malum. But those of a more solid and well tempered judgment, whom the
influence of the Spirit had taught a moderation, or the danger of Inquisition
forbad curiosity, dare not with Florinus impute (here) sin unto God, yet
maintain against the Manichees, that God is not a bare and idle spectator, but
powerful over, although no actor in the sin, Not in the sin, as it is
merely a sin, but in the sin as it is a punishment of sin. And therefore
in every transgression of ours, there are four thing, remarkable, 1
Subiectum, seu materiale, he subject in which sin subsists, and that is
twofold. 1 Substantia, the substance, or rather the faculties of the
reasonable soul, in which original sin is so riueted, that the natural man
can by no means purge himself of that hereditary contagion, or Actio bona, on
which all our actual sins are grounded. 2 Formale, the formalitie, or
obliquity of the action. For every sin is (...), the transgression of the
Law, and in the sinner there is nothing sin but this. 3 Reatus, The guilt of
this enormitie, which makes us liable to eternal death. 4 Poena, the
punishment inflicted upon the guilty, whether temporal, or eternal, or both.
Now we may not charge God with the obliquitie of the action, for that
proceeds from a perverse, and a seduced will, but the substance of the action
(as the Schoolmen speak) that has its original from God. And therefore we
consider sin, either vt malum culpae, as it is a violation of Gods law, or vt
malum poenae, as a punishment laid upon us for the violation of that Law: So
Romans 1.25. The Gentiles turned the truth of God into a lie, There Is malum
culpae. And it follows immediately at the 26 verse, For this cause God gave
them up into vile affections, There Is malum poenae. Now God is author of the
second, not the first. If mists still hang on the eyes of clouded error, I
thus dispell them with that of Hugo de Sancto Victore -- Deus malis potestatem
solam tribuit, non voluntatem, quia licet ex ipsius permissione sit, quod malum
possunt, ex inspiratione tamen non est quod malum volunt. God only gives power
to the wicked, not will, that although it be by his permission that we can do
evil, yet it is not by his inspiration that we will do evil. And therefore
as the Schools do commonly distinguish of the decree of God, so must we of
the execution or that decree, which is either pe^ efficientiam; when the divine
power does work any thing with, or without the creature, or secundum
permissionem, when the creature has leave to work without the guidance of
that power. Neither will it savor of impertinence, if we insert here that
distinction of Gods providence in efficientem and descrentem: Into a releeuing
and forsaking providence, for whenever God withdrawes his especial aid and
assistance from us, man is hurried where his own corrupter appetite, not Gods
grace carries him. Adam fell as soon as the influence of Gods grace ceased,
and without the supportance of the same grace we all fall, with no less
certainty of peril, than danger of restitution. When the Sun sets, we see
darkness follows immediately upon the face of the earth, and yet the Sun is
not the efficient cause of darkness, but the deficient; so when the Sun of
righteousness shall forsake us, the darkness of error, must needs possess
the understanding, and the will must mistake in her choice and execution. She
must nec^ssitate consequentia, non conseque^is. The necessity is grounded on a
consequent in Logic, not any influence in Nature. And here we may borrow a
true glory for that in the 2 Acts, where it is said that Christ was delivered
into the hands of the wicked, by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God. We must not think that God was the letter in this villainy, that he
conspired with Judas in his treason, or with Pilate in his bloody sentence: But
that he only gave way to their attempts, and offered them to crucify the Lord
of glory. Yea, but why did not God curb them in their cruel proceedings: Why
should his conniuence betray the blood of innocence? Saint Austine shall answer
for me. Qui^ mel^^^ iudicauit de malis beneifacere, quam mala nulla esse
permittere. To extract good out of evil was peculiar only to omnipotency and
goodness; and therefore no less solid than charitable is that caveat of Du.
Blesses -- Male quaeritur, vnde malum officiatur. It is an ill curiosity to
seek an efficient cause of ill. Let this then satisfy modest enquiry that it
is with the sinner as with an untuned Instrument, and the Musician, the sound
is from the finger of him that touches it, but the ^arring from the Instrument.

That our discourse then with the time may draw toward a Period, we inuolue
and wrap up in this one distinction the very juice and substance of the
controversy. Sin is considerable two ways, ante commissionem, before the
Commission, Sic se Deus habet negative, tum respectu voluntatis, tum
productionis. God does neither work with us, nor countenance us in the act of
sinning. Post commissionem, after the Commission, sic Deus determinat, and
ordinat peccatum. God sets bounds to the malice of wicked men, and so mannages
the disorder in sin, that contrary to the nature of sin, and the intent of
the sinner, it shall redound to his glory.

We inculcate then, that God is not the author, but the orderer of sin. He
causes the work, not the fault; the effect, not the delinquencie, working by,
not in mischief. Wherein, according to the rules of Logic, the final and
impulsiut causes ever so distinguish the actions, that two doing the same thing
to a diverse intent, are notwithstanding said not to do the same. So God gave
his Son, and Christ himself, and Judas Christ, (says Augustine) why is God
here holy, and man guilty? Nisi in re vna quam fecerunt, non est causa vna ob
quam fecerunt. I shut up all with that state of Fulgentius in his first book
ad Mancinum cap. 1^. Where having long houered over this question, An
peccatafiant ex praedestinatione? He at last thus resolves it. Potuit Deus,
sient voluit, pradestinare quosdam ad gloriam, quesdam ad poenam, sed quos
praedestinauit ad gloriam, praedestinauit ad iustitiam, quos autem
praedestinauit ad poenam, non praedestinauit ad culpam. God when he saues any
man does predestinate him as well to the means, as to the end. But in the
reprobation of a sinner, God destines the sinner only to the punishment;
foreseeing, but not determining those sins which shall in time draw Gods
punishments down upon him.

Do our corruptions harden then, and God punishes? Take heed you Pharaohs of
the world, you which persecute the poor Israelite in his way to Canaan, spur
not the goodness of the Almighty to revenge, or justice. Laesa patientia sit
furor --, trample too much on the neck of patience, you will turn it to fury.
It is true, God has leet of Lead (clemency intermixed with slownesse of
revenge) but he has hands of iron, they will grind and bruise into powder,
when they are dared to combat.

Sera venit, sed certa venit vindicta Deorum. Procrastination of divine justice
is ever waited on no less with a certainty of punishment than ruin. What
shall we do then (wretched, miserable that we are) or to whom shall we fly
for succor? The good S. Augustine tells us, -- a Deo ^a^o, ad Deum placatum
--, from the tribunal of his justice, to his throne of mercy, and compassion.
That of Anselmus was most admirable -- Et si Domine ego commisi vnde me damnare
potes, tu tamen non amisisti, vnde noc saluare potes --. O blessed Jesus,
though I have committed those transgressions for which thou may condemnemed,
yet thou have not lost those compassions by which thou may save me. If our
souls were in such a straight, that we saw hell opening her mouth upon us,
like the red sea before the Israelites; the damned and ugly fiends, pursuing us
behind, like the Egyptians, on the right hand, and on the left; death and sea
ready to ingulse us, yet upon a broken heart, and vndisguised sorrow would I
speak to you in the confidence of Moses -- Stand still, stand still, behold
the salvation of the Lord. Thou then which art oppressed with the violence and
clamor of thy sins, and want an advocate either to intercede, or pity,
hear the voice of the Lamb, -- Cry unto me, I will hear thee out of my holy
hill. Is any heavily laden with the weight of his offenses, or groans under
the yoke and tyranny of manifold temptations? -- Come unto me, I will refresh
thee --. Does any hunger after righteousness? behold, I am the bread of life,
take, eat, here is my body. Does any thirst after the ways of grace? loc, I am
a living spring, come; drink here is my blood, my blood that was shed for many
for the remission of sins; for many, not for all. Has sin dominion over
thee? or does it reign in thy mortal heart? are the wounds of thy
transgressions so deep that they cannot be searched? or so old, that they
corrupt and putrify? where is the Samaritan that will either bind them up, or
power in oil? But art thou not yet dead in trespasses? are not thy ulcers past
cure? are there any seeds of true life remaining? is there any motion of
repentance in thy soul? will thy pulse of remorse bear a little? haste thou
but a touch of sorrow? a spark of contrition? a grain of faith? know there is
oil of comfort for him which mournes in Sion. Not a tear drops from thee with
sincerity which is either vnpittied, or vnpreserued, -- God puts it into his
bottle. On the otherside, is there a Pharaoh in thee? an heart vnmollified? a
stone that will not be bruized? a flint vnmalleable? I both mourn for it, and
leave it: But is this heart of stone taken away, and is there given thee a
heart of flesh? is it soft and tender with remorse? truly sacrificed to sorrow?
know there is balm of Gilead for the broken heart, balm that will both
refresh and cure it. Thou then which groanest in the spirit, and are drawn
out, (as it were) into contrition for thy sins; thou which have washed thy
hands in innocence, go cheerfully to the altar of thy God, unbind thy
sacrifice, lay it on. But have thou done it sincerely? from thy heart? lurkes
there no falsehood there? is all swept clean and garnished? does the
countenance of that smile as cheerfully, as the other seems to do of the
outward man? if so. thy fire is well kindled, the Altar burns clearly, the
savor of thy incense shall pierce the clouds. But is this repentance
disguized? has it a touch of dissimulation in it? is not thy old rank or
clean disgorged, but must thou again to thy former vomit? hypocrite, thy
Altar is without fire, thy incense without smoke, it shall never touch the
nostrils of the Almighty, thy prayers in his ears sound like brass, and
tinkle like an ill-tuned Cimball; all this formality of zeal is but a disease
of the lip: give me thy heart my son, I will have that, or none, and that
clean too, washed both from deceit, and guilt. That subtle fallacy of the eye
pointing toward heaven, that base hypocrisy of the knee kissing the earth,
that seeming austerity of the hand martyring thy breast, gains from me neither
applause, nor blessing; the example of a Pharisee could have chid thee to such
an outside of devotion, -- Qui pectus suum tundit, and se non corrigit,
aggrauat peccata, non tollit, says Augustine, where there is an outward
percussion of the breast, without remorse of the inward man, there is rather an
aggrauation of sin, than a release; these blanchings, and guildings, and
varnishings of external zeal, are as odious in the eye of God, as those of
body in a true Christian; this gloss, this paint of demureness speaks but
our whoredoms in religion, and the integrity of that man is open both to
censure and suspicion, that is exposed either to the practice of it, or the
approbation. A villain is a villain howsoever his garb or habit speak him
otherwise, and an hypocrite is no less, though sleeked over with an external
sanctity, and dressed in the affectations of a preciser cut. Let us be truly
that what we seem to be, and not seem what we are not; let there be doors and
casements in our breasts that men may see the loyalty twixt our heart and
tongue, and how our thoughts whisper to our tongue, and how our tongue speaks
them to the world. Away with those Meteors and false-fires of Religion, which
not only by path us in a blinded zeal, but misleade others in our steps of
error. Let us put off the old man in our pride, vain glory, hypocrisy,
envy, hatred, malice, and (that foul disease of the times, and us)
uncharitableness; and let us put on the new man in sincerity, faith,
repentance, sobriety, brotherly, kindnesses, love, and (what without it
disparages the tongue both, of men, and Angels) charity; then at length all
tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and we shall receive that everlasting
benediction. -- Come ye children, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. -- To which, the Lord bring us for Christ Jesus
sake, to whom be praise and power ascribed now, and for evermore. Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
FINIS.
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE ARRIAN.

His Beginning. Height. Fall.


In a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, June 4. 1624.

Being the first Sunday in Trinity Term.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO MY APPROVED WORTHY FRIEND Mr. Francis Crossing; This.
SIR;
I Was never yet so preposterous in my respects, as to value the worth of him I
serve, by the title, but the disposition; He is noble to me, that is so in his
actions, not his descent; those high-swolne privileges of blood and fortune
are (for the most part) tympanies in greatness, prick them, and they prove
winds of honor, not substances. Had I been ambitious of a high Patronage,
this weak piece I send you might have worn an honorable inscription, but I
have that within me which chides those insolences, and tells me that the name
of friend sounds better than of Lord, and he is less mine that does only
countenance me, than he that feeds me; He only deserves to be a protector of
my Labors which has been a cherisher of my fortunes; to you then this at
once flies for Patronage, and acceptance, desiring you to receive it as a
monument of his thankfulness, who ever deuotes himself

Your most-most respective HVM: SYDENHAM.

THE ARAIGNMENT OF THE ARRIAN.
JOHN 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.


Never age afforded a perfection of that eminency which was not exposed to
envy, or opposition, or both. Truth is the child of virtue; and, as the
inheritresse of all her glories; so, her sufferings. Now, virtue grows by
unjust wounds, and so does truth too; and like steel that is be^^^, springs
the other way. She shows her best luster upon encounter, and like the Sun
shines brightest betwixt two clouds, malice, error; both (here) conspire to
ouercast and darken the glory of those beams which enlighten every man that
comes into the world, the suns of righteousness. It has ever been the
stratagem and project of that Arch-enemy of man, for the advancement and
strengthening of his great title -- The Father of lies --, either to strangle
truth in the conception, or smother it in the birth. If he miscarry in his own
particular undertakings, he will suborne his Factors, Scribes and Pharisees;
and these not only to question; but to oppose a deity, fit agents put upon
such a damned design, for it is theirs no less by debt, than parentage; -- Ye
are of your Father the Devil, v. 44. He has bequeathed you a prodigiouslie,
and you would feign practice it on the Savior of the world, laboring to
nullify his acts, blemish his descent, imposture all his miracles. Where were
they ever seconded, but by the finger of a God? or, where contradicted, but by
the malice of a Jew? could the powers of the grave, and the shackles and bands
of death be dissolved, and broken by the mere hand of Beelzebub? or a dead and
stinking carcass, enliued and quickened by a Samaritan and his devil? could
the kingdom of darkness, and all those legions below, fetch a soul out of
the bosom of your Abraham, and re-inthrone it in a body four days entombed?
no, that -- Magnus hiatus inter te, and nos --, returns the lie upon all
hellish power, and the prince thereof. -- Between you, and us, there is a
great gulf fixed, Luke 16.26. Why then exclaim you on the injustice and
falsehood of his testimonies? Opera que ego facie --, the works which I do
bear witness of me. Look on them, and if they vnscale not your wilful
blindness, the axioms and principles of your own law will convince you. It is
written in your Thalmud, -- That the testimony of two men is true --. Behold
then out of your own blood, and Nation, two strong evidences against you, Jews
both, and both speak him a true God, -- A virgin shall conceive and bring
forth a Son, and his name shall be called Emmanuell, God with us, Isa. 7.14.
This is our God, and there shall be none in comparison of him, Baruch 3.36. Why
then are ye so startled at his naming Abraham? or why does your indignation
swell, that he says he is before him? Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and saw
it, and was glad, verse. 56. (My day of eternity, and my day of incarnation,
with the eye of faith.) Why enquire you into the number of his years? a whole
age to him is as an hour, two thousand years but as a minute, and all the
wheels and degrees of time within his span, and as a nunc or instant; before
Abraham was, before the world, before all time I am. Jew, take his word, it is
orthodox, or if not, his asseueration: and if that be too slight and single,
lo, he doubles it, Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am.

And now thou that sit in the chair of Moses, hear what S. Augustine
tells thee, -- Appende verba, and cognosce mysterium --, the words (indeed) are
of a narrow circuit, yet they shrine and inuolue a mystery, and carry with them
both majesty and depth, like rich stones set in Ebonie, where though the ground
be dark, yet it gives their luster and beauty clearer; learn here then both
propriety, and weight of language, and how to critic between a God, and thy
own frailty. -- Intellige, fieret, ad humanam facturam, sum vero, ad diuinam
pertinere substantiam? -- Was, points only to a humane constitution, -- I am,
to a divine substance, and therefore the original has a -- (...) -- for
Abraham, and an -- (...) -- for Christ. Divinity is not cloistered or confined
to time, either past, or future, but commands all as present; and therefore not
-- I was, but -- I am. Neither do the Latins give Abraham an -- esset, but a
-- fieret, nor Christ a -- fui, but a -- sum. Hereupon the full tide of
Expositors, besides Ego latius extendo, Call. in 8.10.
M. Calvin, and his Marlorate, (who though they a while divide the stream,
yet at length they meet in the same channel, and so make the current a little
fuller) wave this way, and send us to that -- I am, of Exodus, in the 3. chap.
14. verse. where we find the root with an ^^ieh, Asher Ehich, which though
the Chaldee renders, -- Ero qui ere, I will be that I will be -- (which indeed
is the genuine signification of the original) yet the vulgar Edition gives it
in the present, -- I am that I am -- and the Septuagint -- (...), -- I am he
that is- (it being both frequent and necessary with the Hebrews to place the
future for the present) and by this they imply -- Gods eternal and
unchangeable being in himself. The Thalmudists also (whose authority must
pass for current, where there is no power to contradict, or scanne) allow
this, -- Ehieh -- as much as -- S^^ -- F^i -- ere- the comprehension of three
times, past present, and to come: So the Rabbis in Elleshemoth Rabbi upon this
Text, read; -- I that have been, and I the same now, and I the same for time
to come. Howeuer the Chaldee Paraphrast labors an indifferency, and has
charity enough to afford both interpretations, -- He that was, and hereafter
will be. -- Ad de notandam aeternitatem eias (says Jonathan) to show the
eternal being of him who alone can say -- Sum, ero- I am, and I will be; for
he is the very source and fountain of all life and essence, In whom we live,
and move, and been our being --, and by reason of this ^riplicity of time, and
power, Vatablus would derive Ihehouah from this word -- E^ich (though some of
the Hebrew Doctors fetch the pedigree a little higher) from -- Hanah, -- He
was, and tells us that by the first letter is signified, he will be, and by the
second -- Ho, -- He is; and to this Rabbi Bechai seems to assent, in his 65.
page upon Exodi^. But howeuer they war a little in the deriuation, they do not
in the substance, proportioning both this triple priuiledg, and where there is
such an immensity, we cannot but make a God, and where such a God, eternity.
All things besides him once were not, and being, are limited in their natures,
neither could possibly persist, unless God preserved them; many also have lost
or shall loose their proper essence, and whilst they remain are obnoxious to
daily fluctuations; only God eternally -- Is -- without beginning, limitation,
dependence, mutation, end, consisting only of himself, and all other
creatures of him, and therefore this -- Ehieh -- I am -- is a peculiar
attribute of omnipotency, not determining any other, but indeterminatlie
signifying all manners of being, for so it imports -- The very immensitie of
Gods substance, -- and to this with an unanimous consent all interpreters
subscribe, and the whole quire of Fathers. I have now brought -- Ehieh -- close
up with Jehovah, this -- I am -- with him that is - First- and Last, so that we
may here rather challenge than borrow that of the Apostle; Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Where S. Chrysostom will put
Christ upon that triple prerogative to make him a complete God, too. -- A
yesterday, for time past, - to day- present- for ever, to come, though I meet
here (as I shall in every cranny and passage of my discourse) a violent
opposer, Eniedinum Samosatenianus, who limits the Apostles -- Heri -- and Hodie
-- ad Rem nuperam, and recentem-, so in Job (he says) men are called --
Hesterni -- by the Greeks, (...) -- yesterday- and to day -- for their
brevity of life; but this interpretation is no less bold than desperate, and
that (...) -- which follows in the original, will cut off all comment and
gloss of transitorinesse -- The same for ever -- and therefore we find him
clothed with peculiar titles of the Almighty, and by Saint John four several
times fronted with an (...), -- from him that was, and is and is to come; -- so
that if any murmuring unbeliever should recoile in the acknowledgement of
Christ's divinity; he beats on again, a third and a fourth time, that if he
cannot pierce the stony heart by a single persuasion, he will batter it by
inculcation. Howeuer the malice or perverseness of most ages have brought this
truth not only upon terms of scruple, but opposition, so that now it is
grown disputable, whether Christ suffered more in his body by the fury and
violence of the hand, or in his divinity by the scourge and sting of venomous
and deprauing tongues? one would have him, no God, another no man; this again
would have him a mere man, and that denies him a true body; one strips him
quite of flesh, another clothes him with it, but makes it sinful; this would
have him an Angel, that little better than a devil, or at least that he used
one. One, no body, another (I believe) nothing -- Est illud mirabile (says
Athanasius) Cum omnes haereses inuicem pugnent, in falsitate omnes consentire
--.

Every head is frantike with a strange opinion, and that with some wild
fancy, which all meet in the same Improbabilitie and (which it ever breeds)
falsehood. Error and infidelity may blow on divine truth, and shake it too,
but not overthrow it; it is founded on such a Basis and sure groundwork as is
subject neither to battery nor undermining. The Rock, Christ. The Jew and the
Arrian lay on fiercely here, not only to deface this goodly structure, but to
demolish it, and ruin (if possible) his divinity; but lend me a while your
noble attention, I Will show you with what weakness they come off, what
dishonor. In the traversing of which give me leave to make use of that
Apology which in the same subject Saint Ambrose did to Gratian, -- Nolo
argumento credas (sancte Imperator^) and nostrae disputationi; scripturas
interrogemus, interrogemus Apostolos, Prophetas, Christum. Lean not so much to
my strength of Argument and disputation, as to a sacred authority and proof,
Let us ask the Scriptures, Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles,
Christ; let me add (for so both my task and industry require) Fathers,
Councels, Rabbis, Schoolmen, Histories sacred and profane, let us give
antiquity her due, and not in a lazy thirst drink of the stream, (which is
either troubled or corrupt) when we may have our fill at a clear fountain;
to traffic here at home with a few modern Systeames, is no small sin of
the age only, but our profession too, if we can fleyle down the
transgressions of the time in some few stolen Postellism^s, and piece a sacred
line with a worme-eaten Apophthegme, so it be done in a frequent and hasty
zeal, we are the Sages and the Patriots of the time, and the lights no doubt
of this under firmament; but our discourse grouels not so low; we are here to
tread a maze, and thread a Labyrinth, sometimes on hills of ice, where, if we
slip in the least punctum, we tumble into haeresie; sometimes with Peter in the
deep, that if the hand of Christ did not a little succor us, we should sink
into infidelity. I will ballasse my discourse with as much cautelousnesse as I
may, and where I meet with difficulties which are stony and untrodden, if I
cannot fairly master them, I will oppose them with my best strength, and if
not find a way smooth to satisfaction, dig on; I may perchance awaken
haeresies, but I will lull them again in their own slumber, I will only pull
aside the veil and show you their ugliness, and shut them up in their own
deformities. I know I am to speak to an Auditorie, as well seasoned with
faith, as understanding, and yet (perchance) not without some mixture and touch
of weakness. Here are shallowes then for Lambs to wade, and deepes for
Elephants to swim, passages which lie level with humble capacities; others
which will venture to stand up with riper judgments, if they stoop sometimes and
seem too low for these, and mount again and prove too high for others, it was
ever my desire to keep a correspondence with the best, and so to make use of
that of Augustine, -- Non fraudabo eos qui possunt capere, dum timeo superfluus
esse auribus eorum qui non possunt capere --. Yet come I not to fill those
ears which are picked and dressed for accuratenesse I am so far from laboring
to please such, that I intend to vex them; if any charitable ear be prone to
a four discourse, pitch that attention here one hour, and I shall make good
my promise out of the words of the Text.

Before Abraham was, I am. And here we are first to enter lists with that
capital and Arch-enemy of Christ, the vexation of the Fathers, and the
incendiary and firebrand of the Eastern Church, the Arrian, who out of an
envious pride is at once bountiful and injurious, willing to inuest Christ
with the title (...), but disrobes him of that glorious, and his own (...),
granting him a like essence with the Father not the same: equal to him in
power, not eternity; but give me leave to strip one heriticke to cloth
another, and put on ours what Tertullian did on Marcion -- Quid dim idias
mendacio Christum? why do thou thus peece-meale and mince a deity, and half
god (as it were) the Son of the Almighty? -- Totus veritas, he is the spirit of
truth, and oracle of his Father, the brightness of his glory, in whom are hid
all the treasures of Wisdom, knowledge, by whom God made the world.

It were too bold a solecisme to rank transitorinesse with what is sacred, or
that which is fleeting with euerlastingnesse, what below eternal dare we make
compatible with omnipotency?

An eternal Intellect, most perfect, and such is God, requires an object
equally perfect, and eternal, which from God, holding a relation to God, can
be nothing but God it self; and seeing that no Intellect can conceive without
the image of that object which it conceiues, it will follow of necessity that
God, since from all eternity he knew himself most perfect, should conceive
and bring forth in himself a most perfect image of himself, his Son. There
is no act of understanding without imagination, which naturally presents an
image, by so much the more perfect, by how much the object, whose image it is,
is more divinely excellent. And this is that the Apostle glanc't at, when he
styled Christ, -- Characterem hypostasis patris -- the express image of his
Fathers person, a son so begotten of and in the substance of the Father, that
there can be nothing from it, diverse, or repugning. Seeing then, in God to
understand and to be are not so much parallels, as equals. Keck. Syst. Theol.
l. 1. ca. 2.
Intelligi autem sit ipsum filij esse -- as the School speaks -- strength of
consequence will induce, that the substance of Father and Son, sound one both
in power and euerlastingnesse; in fine, for as much as the understanding of God
is from eternity, active, nay, the very act eternal, and that understanding
cannot be without an Image, It follows that this Image which was conceived,
the Son, was equal to that which did conceive, the Father, so that the
eternity of God the Son, and his equality with God the Father does arise
from that essential Identitie of both, for where two persons shall agree in
the same essence, if the one be infinite, the other must rival in the same
eternity.

Here is the Rock then on which we build our Church, and the sure Basis where
we foot and fasten our belief. -- The Son is begotten of the essence of the
Father, and always begotten, Tom. 2. hom. 6. in Ierem.
-- Non quod quotidie renouetur illa generatio, sed quia semper est, -- says
Origin, not because it is daily renouated, but because it ever -- Is -- or
rather -- Was. For Saint Gregory in the 29 of his Morals, the first Chapter,
plays as well the Critic, as the Divine, and is no less nice, than solid,
-- Dominus noster Jesus Christus in eo quod virtus and sapientia Dei est, de
patre ante tempora natus est, vel potius quia nec coepit nasci, nec desijt,
dicam verius, semper natus, non possumus, semper nascitur, ne imperfectus esse
videatur -- Our Lord Jesus Christ in that he is the power and wisdom of God
is said to be borne of the Father before all times, or rather because there was
no beginning or end of his generation, we may speak more congruously, he was
always borne, not - Is-, for that presupposes some imperfection, and as the
same Father prosecutes. Vt aeternus designari valeat, and perfectus, and semper
dicimus and natus, quatenus, and natus ad perfectionem pertineat, and semper ad
aeternitatem.
That we may declare him both perfect and eternal, we allow him as well a -
semper- as a - Natus- for as much as - Natus- has reference to perfection, -
semper-, to eternity. Howeuer S. Augustine in his exposition of that of the
Psalmist, -- Ego hodie, genui te- Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, Psalm. 2. says that - Hodie- praesentiam significat and in eternity,
neither is the time past any thing, as if it should cease to be, nor time to
come, as if it were not yet, but only the time present, Because whatsoever is
eternal always - Is- yet at length he understands that place -- de
sempiterna generatione sapientiae Dei -- And Lombard descants on it in his
first book ninth distinction, who would have the Prophet to say -Genui- ne
nouum putaretur, -hodie ne praeteritae generatio videretur: I have begotten
thee, lest it should be thought new, to day, past, and thence out of the
authority of the Text or the interpretation concludes a perpetual generation
of the Son from the essence of the Father.

But here the Heretic interposes, and thus subtly beats at the gates of
reason. A thing that is borne, cannot be said that it was ever, for in this
respect it is said to be borne, Lib. 12. de Trin.
that it might be. S. Hillarie, by a modest answer or confutation rather,
limits his proposition to things merely secular, which borne here in the
course of nature, must necessarily call on time, and tell us they sometimes
were not, it is one thing then to be borne of that which always is not,
another of that which always was, for that is temporary, this eternal.

If then it be proper to God the Father, always to be Father, it must be to
God the Son, always to be Son, so the Evangelist. Ioh. 1. v. 31.
-- In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was
God, and the same was from the beginning; erat, erat, erat, erat, en quater
erat, vbi impius inuenit quod non erat? Saint Ambrose in his first to Gratian
5. c. and indeed it was not without a mystery when in that glorious
transfiguration on Mount Tabor, Peter saw Christ with Moses, and Elias (when
his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as Snow) what did
that vision portend? Ambros. vt supra.
Nisi vt appareret nobis quod lex and Prophetae cum Euangelio congruentes
sempiternum dei filium quem annunciauerant, reuelarent. But that it should
appear unto us that the Law and the Gospel going hand in hand with
Evangelical truth (for under Christ and Moses and Elias, Aug. in orat. ad
Catech. cap. 6.
Saint Augustine also shrines those three) should reveal unto us the
everlasting Son of God, whom they had both foretold and shown. And lo yet,
as if these were not Oracles loud enough for the promulgation of such a
Majesty, the voice of the Almighty fills it up with a - Hic est meus
Dilectissimus- This is my beloved Son, My Son of eternity, -- Ego ex vtero
ante Luciferum genui te --. Psalm. 34. And a son of mine own substance, -- Ex
ore Altissimi prodiui -- Wis. 7. -- primogenitus -- before the day was, I am
he, Esaias 43.13. -- Vnigenitus -- A just God, and a Savior, There is none
beside me, Esaias 45.21. A Son begotten, not created, not of grace, but nature,
before, not in time.

Hereupon Christ taking his farewell of his Disciples, John 20. shows them
this Interuallum and distance of generation and adoption: I go to my Father,
and your Father, and to my God and your, not to our Father, but to mine and
yours. This separation implies a diversity, and shows that God is his Father
indeed, but our Creator; and therefore he adds. My God and your God; Mine by a
privilege of nature, yours of grace; Mine out of the womb (as it were) of
euerlastingnesse; yours out of the jaws of time. Yet the Heretic would feign
sell us to unbelief and error, by cheating Christ of an eternal birthright,
tossing it on the tides of time, and so make him a creature, and no God.

Here to dissent merely were both perfunctory and dull, such a falsehood
merits rather defiance, than denial, -- Negamus? Amb. vt supra.
potius horremus vocem-. Errors that are so insolent are to be explos't, not
disputed, and spit at rather than contrould. Confutation swayes not here, but
violence, and therefore the Apostle drives this blasphemy to the head, Coloss.
1.15. Where we find Christ styled primogenitus vniuersae Creaturae, The
firstborn of every creature; not the first created, -- Vt genitus pro Natura,
and primus pro perpetuitate credatur --. says Ambrose; borne presupposes
divine nature- First, perpetuity, and therefore when the pen of the Holy Ghost
sets him out in his full glory, he gives him this title -- haeredem omnium --,
Col. 1.
- The heir of tall things, by whom God made the world --, Amb. 1. de si. ad
Great. cap. 2.
To make the world, and to be made in it, how contradictory? Quis Authorem
inter opera sua deputet vt videatur esse quod fecit? says the Father. Was
there ever malice so shod with ignorance, which could not divide the Artificer
from his work, the Potter from his clay, the Creator from the thing created?
hear him speak in whose mouth there was no guile. - Ego and pater vnum sumus,
Ioh. 10. I and the Father are one. Vnum- to show a consent both of power and
eternity, -Sumus- a perfection of nature without confusion. Again, - Vnum
sumus- not - vnus sum- (so Augustine descants) - Vnum- to confute the Arrian,
Orat. ad Catech. cap. 5.
- Sumus- the Sabellian, the one disiointing and seuering the times of Son
and Father, the other confounding their persons. - Vnum- than, to show their
essence one, -Sumus- the persons diverse.

I could wish that we were now at truce, but with these there is neither peace
nor safety, but in victory; we are still in the Front and violence of our
Adversary, who puts on here as Philip did to Christ, with a -- Domine ostende
nobis-Lord show us the Father, and it suffices us, but observe how the Lord
replies, and in his reply controules, and in his controulement cure's? Have I
been so long time with thee, and have thou not known me Philip? I came to
reconcile thee to the Father, and will thou separate me? Why seek thou
another? he that has seen me, has seen my Father also. Audi Arriane quid
Dominus? (says Augustine) si errasti cum Apostolo, redi cum Apostolo- Hark
Arrius how the Lord rebukes him, and if thou have digrest with an Apostle,
return with an Apostle, so his check shall be thy conversion. But whilst we
thus shoulder with the Arrian, the Sabellian lies in ambush, who now comes on
like lightning and thunder, but goes off like smoke; for looking back to
those words of our Savior, he runs on boldly to his own paradox, and by
this harmony of Son and Father would persuade us to a confusion of their
persons; but the Text bears it not, and one little particle shall redeem it
from such a preposterous interpretation; for it runs not with a -- Qui me
videt, videt patrem, -- He that sees me, sees my father, as if I were both
father and son, but with a- Qui me videt, videt-and-patrem,- He that sees me,
sees my father also. Vbi interpositio vnius sillabae, and, patrem descernit,
and filium, teque demonstrat, neque patrem habere, neque filium, August. in his
contra 5. host. genera cap. 6. It is a rare opinion that has not something to
hearten it either in truth or probability, otherwise it were no less
erroneous, than desperate. But here there can be no color or pretense for
either, where both Divinity and Arts breathe their defiance; that two natures
should dissolve into one person, religion contradicts; two persons into one
nature, reason; but two persons into one person, both reason and religion. --
Dixit Dominus Domino meo -- says the Psalmist, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
at my right hand. Hark Sabellius, here is a Lord and a Lord, two then, not
one; where is now thy confusion of persons? Ego Deus solus, and non alius extra
me, Deuteronomy. 32.12. I am God, and there is none beside me-. Arrius where is thy
God of eternity, and thy God of power, thy God of time, and operation, and thy
God from the beginning? Audi Israel, Dominus noster Deus vnus --, The Lord our
God is God only, no rival, no sharer in his omnipotency, for if temporary,
how a God? if a God, how not eternal? if eternal, how not one? Thou allowest
him the power of God, but not the eternity, the operation, not the time; what
prodigy of error? what dearth of reason? what war of contradiction? what is
this but to be God, and no God? temporary, and yet everlasting? Opinion once
seeded in error, shoots-out into heresy, and after some growth of time,
blasphemy. Who (besides an Arrian) could have thus molded two Gods out of one?
except a Tritheite, or a Maniche? Who (scarce so grossly neither) deny them
not an equality of time, but condition, coeternall, but this good, and that
evil. Thus men ouer-borne with the strength of a self-conceit, are so
precipitated and drawn on with the swindge of an unruly fancy, that leaving
the road and usual ways of truth, they run into bypath of error, and so at
length loose both their judgment, and their faith. Some have been so busy
with stars, that they have forgotten him that gives them influence; and like
curious Lapidaries, dally so long with sparkling objects, that they loose the
light of that organ which gives life unto their Art. Learning (indeed) in many
is a disease, not a perfection, a mere surfeit, rather vomited, than emptied,
nothing passes but what is forced, and as sometimes with a fit of weakness,
so of pity. A greedy knowledge feeds not our understanding, but oppresses it,
and like a ravenous appetite chewes more to poison, than to nourishment. Were I
to drink freely of what is sacred, I should desire that which flows, not that
which is pumped for, waters that are troubled yield mud, and are oftentimes
as well the bane of the receiver, as the comfort. A Pioner or bold myner which
digs on too far for his rich vein of Ore, meets with a dampe which choakes
him; and we may find some dispositions rather desperate than venturous, known
more by a heady resolution, than a wise cautelousnesse, whom we may resemble to
that silly and storme-tost Seaman, who diued so long for a piece of his
shipwrackt treasure, that either want of air, or ponderousness of water
deprived him at once of life and fortune. Arrius has been so long conversant
in the school of Philosophy, that he forgets he is a Priest, and now makes
that the Mistress of Divinity, which was before the handmaid. S. Augustine
therefore in his Oration ad Catechum. expostulates with the heretic, and by
way of Prosopopeia does catechize him thus, -- Credis in Deum patrem
omnipotentem? Do thou believe in God the father Almighty, and in his son
Jesus Christ our Lord? I believe, thou say: here, then thou art mine against
the Pagan, and the Mohammedan. Do thou believe that the God and man Christ
Jesus was conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary? I believe;
thou art yet with me against Photinus, and the Jew. Do thou believe the
father to be one person, and the son another, yet father and son but one
God? and this also; here thou art mine too against the Sabellian. -- Age si
mecum es in omnibus, quare litigamus? says the Father, if we are one in all
these, why contend we? Let there be no strife between thee and me, for we are
brethren. But it will fall out here anon as between Lot and Abraham, by reason
of our substance we cannot dwell together, we must part anon. Tell me then how
is the son equal to the father, in operation or beginning, in power or
eternity, or both? In operation and power, the heretic allows, but not
eternity; for how can that which was begotten be equal to that which was not
begotten? Yes, eternity, and greatness, and power in God sound one, for he is
not great in one thing, and God in another, but in this great, that he is God,
because his greatness is the same with his power, and his essence with his
greatness. Seeing then the son is coequall in respect of power, he must be
coeternall too in respect of euerlastingnesse. Here the Arrian is on fire, and
nothing can allay or quench these flames but that which gives them an untimely
foment, Reason. To prove a principle in nature is both troublesome and
difficult, but in religion without the assent of faith, impossible: In matters
of reason, it is first discourse, then resolve, but in these of religion, first
believe, and the effect will follow, whether for confession of the truth, or
conviction of error, or both. The greatest miracles our Savior did in way of
cure or restoration was with a -- si credas-, and that to the living, and the
dead, and between those, the sick. To the Centurion for his servant with a --
sicut credis-, As thou beleeuest, so be it unto thee, Matthew. 8.5. To the Ruler
of the Synagogue for his daughter, with a- Creed- too, -- Fear not, but
believe, Mar. 5.36. To all that are dumb, or blind, or lame in mysteries of
Divinity, as to those dumb, or blind, or lame in body, with a - Vtrum
creditis? Do you believe these things? then your faith has made you whole,
Matthew. 9.28. but if we meet with unweildy dispositions, such as are not only
intractable, but opposite to the ways of faith, we shall rather drag than
inuit them to belief; howeuer the Father labors here by a powerful
persuasion, and where he fails in the strength of proof, he makes it out by
way of allusion, which he illustrates by a similitude of fire and light, which
are distinct things, one proceeds from another, neither can the one be possibly
without the other, the father he resembles to the fire, the son to the light,
and endeauours to derive it (though obliquely somewhat) from sacred story in
Deuteronomy. 4.24. God is called a fire, -- Thy God is a consuming fire; in Psalm. 8.
Christ the light, Thy word is a light unto my steps: With this double stone he
batters the forehead both of the Sabellian, and the Arrian; first of the
Sabellian, for here are two in one, fire and light, yet two still not one, why
not so with Son, and Father? The Arrian next, for here also is one borne of
another, yet the one not possibly to be borne without the other, neither of
them first or last; fire and light coeuall, Father and Son, so too. The
similitude iarres only in this, those are temporary, and these eternal, --
pater ergo and filius vnum sunt (says the Father) -- Sunt-dico, quia pater and
filius, -vnum- quia Deus; dualitas in prole, vnitas in deitate, cum dico
filius, alter est, cum dico Deus, vnus est. cont. 5. host. genera cap. 7. What
more obuious and trodden to the thinnest knowledge, than that there is here -
alius and - alius, but not - aliud-, as in bells of equal magnitude, and
dimension (pardon the lowness of the similitude) which though framed out of
the same mass, and Art, where the substance and workmanship are one, yet the
sound is diverse; for though of Son and Father the substance be one as God,
yet the appellation and sound is diverse, as Son and Father.

The Heretic either impatient of this truth, or ignorant, once more makes
reason his vmpire, but how sinisterly, how injuriously? that which should be
the mistress of our sense, and the Stern and arbitresse of all our actions,
must now be a promotresse and baud to error. It is bold expostulation that
runs us on these shelues of danger, and has been the often wrack of many a
blooming and hopeful truth. There are errors besides these desperate, of
will, of understanding, which sometimes are rather voluntary, than
deliberatiue, and ballaced more by the suggestions of a weak fancy, than any
strength of judgment; If our thoughts the^ still lie at Hull in those shallowes
of nature, where we coast daily about sense and reason, how can we but dash
against untimely errors? but if we keep aloof in principles of Religion,
where those winds of doubt and distrust swell and bluster not, faith will be at
last our waf^er unto truth. Let Us not then any longer root our meditations in
valleys under us, but look up to those hills from whence our salvation
comes. Let Us converse a little with Prophets and Evangelists, and those other
Registers and Secretaries of the Almighty. - In te est Deus, and non est Deus
praeter te, Esaias 45.5. Infidel, either deny a divinity of Father, or Son, or
confess an unity of both; for one thou must do; of the Son thou can not,
for there is a God in him, the Father, Pater qui in me manet ipse loquitur, the
Father that is in me he speaks, and the works which I do he does, Ioh. 10.
of the Father thou dare not, there is a God in him the Son, -I am in the
Father, and the Father in me, Ioh. 14. Here then is both a propriety of
nature, and unity of consent. God in God, yet not two, but one, fullness of
divinity in the Father, fullness in the Son, yet the Godhead not diverse, but
the same, so that now there is no less a singleness of name than operation.
And therefore those words of the Apostle, though in the first encounter and
suruay, they offer a show of contradiction, yet searched to the quick and
kernel, are not without a mysterious weight, Romans 8.32. It is said of the
Father, - Filio proprio non pepercit, sed pro nobis tradidit. He spared not his
own Son but gave him for us all to death; yet Ephesians. 5. It is said of the
Son, - Tradidit semeteipsum pro nobis --, -- He gave himself for us --,
Here is a double -- Tradidit -- an a -- pro nobis --, and a -- se pro nobis-,
if he was given of the Father, and yet gave himself, how can it follow, but
that there must be both a simpathy of nature and operation? And indeed it were
a mere sacrilege and robbery of their honor, to deprive them of this so
sacred a correspondence. We allow to all believers but one soul and one heart,
Acts 4 to all those that cleave to God one spirit 1 Cor. 16. to husband and
wife one flesh, to all men in respect of nature, but one substance; If in
sublunary matters (where there is no alliance or reference with those more
sacred) Scriptures approve many to be one, shall we riffle the Father and the
Son of the like Jurisdiction, and deny them to be eternally one, where there
is no jar of will, or substance? Hear how the Apostle does chalk out a way
to our belief, by the rules of divine truth, 1 Cor. 8.6. There is one God
which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we of him, and one Lord Jesus
Christ by whom are all things, and we by him. Here is - Deus- and - Dominus-,
a God and a Lord, and yet no plurality of Godhead, and an - ex quo- and a -
per quem, -of whom and by whom, yet a unity of power, for as in that he says
one Lord Jesus Christ, he denied not the Father to be Lord, so by saying one
God the Father, he denied not the Son to be God. -- In te igitur est Deus per
vnitatem naturae, and non est Deus praeter te propter proprietatem substantiae.
Ambros. lib. 1. de fide ad Gratian 2. cap. With what sacred inscriptions do we
find him blazoned, the engraven form of his Father, the image of his
goodness, the brightness of his glory? and with these three of an Apostle,
Esaias 9.6.
a Prophet ranks other three not subordinate in majesty, or truth; as if the
same inspiration had dictated both matter and form. Counselor, the Almighty
God, the everlasting Father, the everlasting Father in a double sense, either
as he is author of it, as Iuball was said to be the Father of Music when he
was but the Author or inuentor, or in respect of his affection, because he
loves with an everlasting love; yet some leaning on the word of the Greek
Interpreter (...), which the vulgar renders, -- Pater futuri seculi -- would
restrain it only to the life to come, In cap. 9. Esaias.
but Calvin extends it to a perpetuity of time and continued Series of all
ages; And the Chal dee translation (which with the Hebrew is most authentic)
seems not only to assent to it, but applaud it too. - Nomen eius ab ante
mirabilis consilio, Deus fortis, permanens in saecula saeculorum. Howeuer the
Septuagint (terrified with the majesty of so great a name) give it us by --
Magni consilij Angelus --; which words though they have no footing in the
original, yet both Augustine and Tertullian approve the sense, taking --
Angelus -- for -- Nancius --, so that Christ took not upon him the nature of
an Angel (as some would injuriously foize upon Origens opinion) but the
office, by which as a Legate or mediator; rather he appeared to those
Patriarchs of old, Abraham and the rest, Genesis 18.3.

I have once more brought Christ as far as Jacob and Abraham, but the Text
tolls me a little farther, and so does my adversary too, till I have verified
in Christ the strength of that voice, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Jacob. We may not leave him here with the bare title of an Angel, we must go
higher, to that of the Son of God, where we shall lagain meet our implacable
Arrian in his violent opposition. If there be a Son, he must be borne, if
borne, there was a time when there was no Son, for to be borne, presupposes a
beginning, and that time. Saint Augustine divided (as it seems) between pity
and indignation, answers. Qui hoc dicit non intelligit etiam natum esse, deo
sempiternum esse --. To be borne with God, is to be eternal with God, and he
opens himself by his old similitude, Sicut splendour qui gignitur ab igne, as
light which is begotten of fire, and diffused, is coeuall with the fire, and
would be coeternall too if fire were eternal, so the Son with the Father,
this being before all time, the other must kiss in the same euerlastingnesse.
The Father thinking his reason built too slenderly does buttresse (as it were)
and back it with the authority of an Apostle, 1 Cor. ^
such an Apostle as was sometimes a persecutor, and therefore his authority
most potent against a persecutor, where he styles Christ, the power and
wisdom of God. If the Son of God be the power and wisdom of God, and that
God was never without power and wisdom, how can we scant the Son of a
coeternitie with the Father? For either we must grant that there was always a
Son, or that God had sometimes no wisdom, and impudence or madness were
never at such a growth of blasphemy as to belch the latter. If the reverend
allegation of a learned Prelate, or those more sacred of an Apostle, cannot
bung up the mouth of a malicious Heretic, hear the voice of a Prophet, and a
Father warbling upon that too. Before me there was no other God, and after me
there shall be none, Esaias. 43.10. Quis hoc dicit, pater, an filius? (says
Ambrose) who is here the speaker, the Father or the Son (he comes over him
with a subtle Dilemma:) if the Son, thus he says, -- before me there was
no other God, if the Father, -- After me (says he) there shall be none, for
both the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father must be known, when
thou namest a Father, thou have also designed a Son, because no man is a
Father to himself; when thou namest a Son, thou confessest also a Father,
for no man is son to himself, the Son therefore can neither subsist
without the Father, nor the Father without the Son, the one being from
everlasting, we may not depose the other from the like omnipotency. If truth
thus twisted in a triple authority of Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, cannot
allay the turbulency of a contagious heretic, hear the voice of him who
spoke as never man spoke; never Father, Apostle, Prophet, (if at length such an
authority be passable with an Arrian) the Lamb of God; O Father glorify me
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was, Ioh. 17.5. Hear thou Infidel? a Son, and glorified, with the Father
before the world? what chinke now, what by-path for evasion where thou art
compassed with such a cloud of witnesses?

Tell me devil (for heretic is to cheap and low an attribute, when thou art
grown to such a maturity and height of profanation) was there a time when
omnipotent God the Father was not, and yet was there a God? Gird now up thy
loins, and answer if thou can, for if he began to be a Father, then he was
first a God, and after made a Father, how is God then immutable, how the same,
one, when by access of generation he shall suffer change? Grant me then a God
eternal, and thou must a Father, and if a Father, a son too, they are
relatiues, and cannot digest a separation either in respect of time, or power.
And this thou did once subscribe to (and I know not what deuillish suggestion
wrought thy revolt) in an Epistle to Eusebius, if the authority of Brentius
will pass for classical, where thou could afford him the style of (...),
plenus Deus, vnigenitus- and a little before that he had his beginning, (...)
-- ante tempora, ante saecula, why should thou now then rip up the womb of
Deity, and enquire how he was begotten? how borne? and when? as if thou
labouredst to bastard his descent, and make it temporary. Do not, do not out
of the custom of humane generation tie eternity to time, or manner, and so at
once vomit error and blasphemy. Hear the voice of the Lord thundering unto
thee, Cui me similem existimas? who is like unto me, or to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? Me ante montes generauit Dominus, before the mountains were
settled, or the hills raised, I was brought forth. Ambros. 1. de fide, cap. 5.
Habeat ergo generationis inusitatae gloriam, qui habet potestatis inusitatae
gratiam. He that has an unwonted Jurisdiction in respect of power, it were a
derogation too capital to lessen his prerogative in way of birth; observe what
pomp he carries of antiquity, what descent, how derived? by Heralds of no
mean rank, a King, and a Prophet, and a Prophet that is a King, I was set up
of old, from everlasting, Prou. 8.24. His goings forth have been from
everlasting, Mich. 5.2. Thy throne is established of old, thou art from
everlasting, Psalm. 93.2. Hark, from everlasting, from everlasting, from
everlasting, one ecchoing to another, as if the same pen had been as well the
directrix of the languages, as the truth. If thou shall then hereafter ball an
eternity with a -- quando, or a -- quomodo natus? Amb. vt supra.
I go one with the Father still, Quid te ista quaestionum tormenta delectant?
Audis Dei filium, aut dele nomen, aut agnosce natural? -- Quaeres that are to
nice rather torment the understanding, than inform it, and are more apt to
puzzle our Judgment, than to rectify it. Subtilty of questions (I know not
whether) it has more convinced, or begotten error, or improued us in our
knowledge, or staggered us. And hence I suppose was the substance of the
Apostles advice to the Romans, He that is weak in faith receive you; but not
to doubtful disputations, Cap. 14.1. Curiosities of question have ever been
the engines and stales to heresy, and therefore some of the Fathers have
nicke-named Philosophers with an -- Haereticorum Patriarchae -- It is no less
a policy than right in sadder learning to give Divinity the chair, Tertull.
for if Arts with their subtle retinue once invade it, sense and reason will
hiss faith out of doors. And therefore we find the same Apostle vehement in
his -- Canote ne vos seducat, Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy
and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ, Coloss. 2.4. In matters of faith he that plays either
the Philosopher, or the critic displaies neither his Judgment, nor his
Religion, for the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20.
Considera (says Augustine) quod voceris fidelis non rationalis, Faith, not
reason, is our anchor in this depth, and belief, not scruple is our steersman
to our port. Wisdom, I mean that which is worldly and feathered (as it were)
with transitorinesse, must now stoop to simplicity, strength to weakness. How
does the Apostle iumpe with us? He has chosen the foolish things of this
world to confound the wise, and the weak things the mighty, 1 Cor. 1.27. Hence
it is that the kingdom of heaven belongs unto children, Matthew. 19.13. And God
has hid it from the prudent, and revealed it to babes, Matthew. 11.25. And
therefore S. Augustine makes a proud knowledge strike sail to a modest
ignorance in his 188. Sermon. de Temp. -- Meum est pie ignorantiam confiteri,
quam temere mihi scientiam vendicare. In sacred matters your nimble Cryticismes
are as obnoxious to desperatnesse, as danger; to be curious (here) is to be
quaintly mad, and thus to thrust into the bedchamber of the Almighty is a
frantic sauciness. Who can unlock those Coffers of omnipotency, Esaias 45.2.
but he that breaks in pieces the gates of Brass, and cuts in sunder the
bars of Iron? Who those Cabinets of abstruser knowledge? Jdem, ibid.
but he that gives thee the treasure of darkness, and hidden riches of secret
places? How can our low built apprehensions but flag in the expression of such
a birth, when we find a Prophet so transported with contemplation of it, that
he dares the world with an Interrogation, -- Generationem eius quis enarrabit?
Who shall declare his generation, Esaias 53. Yet we have met with some
supercilious and daring wits, which venture here to untwist this mystery of
generation, as if they would calculate an eternal birthright, leaning upon the
authority of S. Hierom in his Commentaries upon Eccl. 1. where he asseuers,
that in sacred Scriptures -- Quis oftentimes is not put for an impossibility,
but a difficulty. And he instances in this -- Quis -- of Esaias, Generationem
eius quis enarrabit? Lib 1. did. 19.
But Lumbard does both vindicate and interpret the Father, thus, -- Non dicit
quod generatio filij aeterna. -- He says not that this eternal generation of
the son of God can descend to any mortal capacity in an absolute and full
knowledge; but in some measure and degree, for so the Apostle does peece-out
our perfection here, We are happy in part, and know only in part, not a hair,
Orat. contra Arrianos.
not a feather as we should. Dic mihi (says Augustine) altitudinem Coeli,
profundum Abyssi, etc. Show me the height of Heaven, and the depth of Hell,
number (if thou can) the sands of the Sea, the drops of rain, or the hairs
of thine own head. Plane me out by some perfect demonstration the truth of
those things which grouell here below, and I will believe thy knowledge may
aspire to those which are above; but thou have no power of compassing the one,
nor possibility in the atchieuement of the other. For when all thy faculties of
understanding, will, have fluttered so high as the wings of nature can eleuate
and mount them to, yet thou will at last make up the story of Icarus, and
find that these are but waxen plumes, and will melt at the presence of those
glorious beams, and so thy fall will be as dishonorable as thy attempt was
peremptory; for if the great Doctor of the Gentiles (rapt up into the third
Heaven) said that he heard words inexpressible, which no tongue dared to
utter, how can thou dissolve and untie -- Paternae generationis Arcana -- (as
Ambrose styles them) those knots and Riddles of eternal generation, which can
never bore a humane intellect, nor lie within the verge of mortal
apprehension? Mihi enim impossible est generationis scire secretum (says the
Father) men's deficit, vox silet, non mea tantum, sed and Angelorum, supra
potestates, and sepra Cherubin, and supra Seraphin, and supra omnem sensum, in
his 1. de fide ad Gratian. c. 4. It is not then so much ambition in our desire,
as madness, to attempt the knowledge of that where there is an impossibility
of revelation. Those enterprises are temerarious and ouer-head-strong, which
put on where there is not only danger, but a despair of conquest. How can
reasonable man but lie buried under the weight of such a mystery, at which
those grand pillars of the Church have not only shook but shrunk? How must
we be struck dumb when the tongues of Saints and Angels stutter? How our
minds entranced, when the glorious host of Heaven, and all those feathered
Hierarchies shall clap their wings? All reasons tongue-tied, all apprehension
non-plust, all understanding darkened; so that I may now speak of this
metaphorical depth, as Job did of that other natural, -- Thou have made a
cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band.

Mysteries carry with them such an awe and Majesty, as if they would be
obeyed, not disputed, and assented to, not controuerst. In secrets without
bottom (such as carry the stamp of sacred) except faith holds us up like
children we swim without bladders, and must either dabble to the shore, or
sink, reason has not an hand to lend us. Faith and reason in respect of
mystery, are as a wheel and a bucket at a deep well; faith has both the
power and safety of descent, and nimbly fathoms it, whilst reason wheele's,
and rounds it, and is strangely giddied in a distracted Gyre. And indeed who
durst laue such an Ocean, Esaias 44 7.
but he that says to the deepes be dry? or can shut up the seas with doors,
that they break not out, and say, Job 38.8.
hither shall thou come, no farther, there shall thy proud waves stay? What eye
that looks on the Sun, and dazels not, Ecclus 10.19.
but he that sees from everlasting to everlasting? and sends out lightning that
they may come and go, and say, here we are? The star-gazer and bold figure
flinger are at a stand here, why look thou up thou proud Astrologer? you men
of Galilee, why gaze you into heaven? Thus says the Lord of hoasts, he that
formed thee from the womb: Esaias 44.24, 25.
I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches out the heavens alone,
that frustrateth the tokens of liars, and makes diuiners mad, that turns
wisemen backwards, and makes their knowledge foolishness. Thou, O Lord, shall
have them in derision, thou shall laugh the heathen to scorn, for the sin of
their mouth, and the words of their lips they shall be taken in their pride, as
the dust (O Lord) shall thou drive and scatter them, and in thy wrath thou
shall consume them, that they may know, that it is God that rules in Iaacob,
and to the end of the world.

Arrius is now in his pomp and height of glory, and flourishes like a green
bay tree, anon look after him, and he is no where to be found. He is up
yet, but it is with the proud man in the Psalms, in slippery places, and
(anon) with him, how suddenly destroyed, perished, and brought to a fearful
end? The whole Eastern Church is now in a strange combustion, and he must
kindle it, by and by those flames shall light him to his own ruin. Heresy
may root and bud, and branch, and grow to a goodly height, but the hand of
vengeance houers over it, and when it strikes, it fels it at a blow, and it
comes down like a pine from a steep mountain, which in the fall shatters
both the branch, and body. It is here, as with mists and fogges which we see
first rise as in a thin smoke from a low Fen or Valley, but gathering strength
climb the mountain, and at last so thicken in one body of vapors that they
seem to dare the Earth with a second night, till the Sun (recovering height
and power) by the virtue and subtlety of his beams does dissipate and open
them, and they are seen no more.

Will you have a president? we find Arrius at first a mean Priest of
Alexandria in Egypt, a man keen and subtle, as well in wit as learning,
Specie, and forma magis, Lib. 1.
quam virtute religiosus, sed gloriae, and nouitatis improbe cupidus, (says
Ruffinus) In virtue not so much refined as in the deportment of the outward
man, which promised a set gravity, though no truth of Religion, in a thirst and
pursuit of honor and novelty, strangely violent, -- Dulcis erat in colloquio,
persuadens animas, and blandiens. In his discourse no less sweet, than
powerful, and where he gains no conquest by persuasion, he mines by flattery;
Thus by the sorceries and enchantments of a voluble tongue, simplicity is
betrayed, and under a pretext of truth, silly women (who are ever most affected
with leuity and change) are first led captive; and these for the enhancement
and propagation of their new doctrine, commerce with their allies, and these
tickled with new fancies, applaud the design, entertain the novelty,
conuenticles are both consulted on, and summoned, and in a shorttime, Aduers.
Haeres.
- Septingent as virginitate^ professas in vnam contraxit -- So Epiphanius --.
Their Religion is yet in the blade, and green only in a few she disciples,
anon it grows by their league with others, Eudoxius, Eunomius, Amb. 1 de side
cap 4.
Aetius and Demophilus, plura nomina, sed vna perfidia-; Coheires though not to
the same title, the same villainy; so that those dangerous tumults in the body
of the Church could not but now startle the head and governor. Constantine is
informed of those pernicious and desperate proceedings, who calls a Council of
318. Bishops for the condemnation of the heretic. Some conversant in
subtlety of question (as there was never opinion so deformed, but found a
Champion to propugne it) favored Arrius; but at length most of them decreed
with one mouth Christ to be (...), 17 a while stick fast to the opinion of the
Heretic, 11 whereof by the menacing of the Emperor subscribed, Manu solum,
non mente, and the other 6 are now with Arrius upon terms of exile; they
betake themselves to Palestina, where partly by strength of Argument, partly by
the insinuations of a smooth tongue, they gain other Bishops to their opinion;
Anon, Constantius, and Valens Emperors; some they seduce by subtilty, some by
gifts, some by power, some by cruelty; those that affied constantly to the
profession of Christ's divinity, they invade by persecution, and all the witty
tortures that malice or tyranny could devise, are now put in practice, for the
torment of those professors; insomuch that the hearts of their very enemies,
could not but thaw into pity to hear the cries, but constancy of little
children under the barbarous hands of their merciless tormentors. Christianus
sum, Christum verum Deum, credo, and adoro, as the author in his historia
tripartita de persequutione Vandalorum.

This heresy now is full blown, and at the growth; one Act more makes it
ripe, and ready for the sickle. Alexandria is yet infected, and foul dregs of
Arrianisme reign not only here, but in the neighbor Provinces; Insomuch that
Alexander (then Bishop) daily pestered with those damned innouations, on a
Sunday, (for so my Antiquary tells me) earnestly prayed that God would either
take him away lest he should be defiled with the like contagion, or that he
would show some miracle, Epiphanius.
either for the conversion or confusion of the Heretic. Not long after the
desires of the holy man were accomplished, and in such a way of judgment, that
the relation would suit better with a ring of Scauengers than a noble throng,
his bowels burst, as sometimes Judas did, Et sic finem adeptus est, in loco
immundo and graneolenti, -his death was equally odious with his life, and that
with the place he died in, no sad retinue or pomp of exequy to embalme him, no
hearse or winding sheet, but his own intrailes, and grau'd up with excrements,
instead of earth, an end as odious, as untimely, as if it proceeded from the
hand of vengeance, and not Fate.

And so Saint Ambrose dilates on it -- Non est fortuita mors vbi in sacrilegio
pari, poenae parile processit exemplum, 1 de fide cap. 5.
vt idem subirent suppliciu^, qui eundem Dominum negauerunt and eundem Dominum
prodiderunt --. It is no casual, but a destinated end, that in a like
sactiledge, there should be a like example of punishment, and so both meet in
one way of ruin which had denied and betrayed their Master.

I have now brought this heresy to her grave, but the funeral of this is the
resurrection of another, and the reintertainment of that of a third. No part of
Christ (either in respect of his divinity, or manhood) but is the mint of a
new heresy, which (if I should endeavor (here) either to confute or open)
would prove an undertaking fitter for a volume, than a discourse, and for a
Library, than a volume. It cost the hours of an entire age, and the sweat and
elaboratenesse of all the Fathers. Those few sands which are now in their
constant course will be run out in the very nomination of Marcionites,
Valentinians, Hebionites, Apollinarians, and the residue of that cursed rabble,
and so I shall be cast upon your censures, if not as I have been weak, yet as
I have been tedious. I will then open the mouths of very heathens, and they
shall both speak, and confirm this truth, and no less appose our
adversaries, than convince them, an authority I know not how unsavory or
unseasonable to a divided Auditory, where a profane quotation sounds sometimes
as heathenish as a tradition, which in the very name is cri'de down as
apocryphal, and Romanish; but I must put that upon the hazard, not esteeming
the froth either of popular censure or approbation.

Heathens indeed are little above the condition of beasts, if that only
actuate a man which animates a Christian, the soul of faith; yet if God please
to cast his pearls before these swine, wherefore has he made us Lords over
them, but to vindicate those hallowed and precious things from the hands of
unjust possessors? Praeclara Ethnicorum dicta Theologica abijs, tanquam
iniustis possessoribus, in vsum nostrum transferenda. It is Augustines in his
second book De doctrina Christiana. 4. chap. Divine truth in Heathen mouths
is like the Jewels in Egyptian hands, their wants no Alchimist to refine the
mettle, only some discreeter Israelite to transfer the use; he that was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel preaching to the ignorant Idolaters of
Athens, concludes against them from the mouth of their own Poets, -- (...), as
some of your own Poets have said, Acts 17.28. Text enough to gain, I say, not
authority, but applause to his discourse, and to convince the Heathens shame,
if not their faith. Diue with me a little farther into their secrets, and we
shall find amongst much Hay and Stubble, some Gold and Precious stones,
doctrines which want no truth to make them sound, only divine authority to
make them authentic. It was not impossible that the true light which shines
on every man that comes into the world, should glimpse into those that sat
in darkness, and in the shadow of death; For old Simplicianus in S. Augustines
Confessions 8. Book 2. Chapter, gives encouragement to a particular enquiry,
and concludes in certain books of the Platonists -- Deum insinuari, and eius
verbum --. And of this God, and the Word, the very Philosophers were not
ignorant, for we meet with a Hermes, and a -- Zenon, stiling the maker and
orderer of the Universe -- (...) -- The Word -- which they enlarge with other
attributes of -- Fate, necessity, God -- and what savors a little of a
heathenish relic -- Animu^ Iouis -- taking -- Jupiter -- in the sense that
they do God as Lactantius in his 4. book de vera Sapient. cap. 9.

But why do we rob them of their maiden honor, and take their sayings upon
Tradition merely? let them speak themselves in their peculiar and
mother tongue. Numenius, a famous Pythagorian (one, who twixt Plato and Moses,
put no difference but of Language, calling Plato-Mosen, Attica Lingua
Loquentem, -- Moses speaking the Atticke Dialect) Deus primus (says he) in
seipso quidem existens, est simplex, propterea quod secum semper est, nunquam
diuisus; Secundus, and tertius est vnus: The first God is always existent in
himself, simple, indivisible, the second and third one; and a little after, he
calls this first God -- Creantis Dei patrem, -- The father of the creating God.
Had they all adored what he here acknowledged, a Trinity in unity (so to be
worshipped) I should then propose their precept not only to be embraced, but
their practice to be imitated. Search on, and lo that rich mine of Truth is
not yet at her dross, or bottom, for Heraclitus next, one who was wont to
call S. John, Barbarian, that Evangelist to whom belonged the Eagle, as well
for sublimity of Style, as Contemplation; he -- censet verbum Dei in ordine
Principij, atque dignitate constitutum, apud Deum esse, and Deum esse, in quo
quicquid factum sit, fuerit viuens, and vita, and ens, tum in corpora Lapsum,
carnemque indutum, hominem apparuisse, ostendens etiam tunc naturae suae
magnitudinem: Hark how the Frog chaunts like the Nightingale, (It is
Maximilians, Ethnici audiendi, non tanquam Philomelae, sed Ranae) and curiously
counterfeits her in every strain? How closely this obscure Heathen follows
not only the Gospels truth, but the phrase too? In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and was God, all things were made by him, every
living Creature, life, and thing, then this Word was made flesh, and appeared
man, and even then showed the glory of his nature. How sweetly he warbles with
his Barbarian, as if by an easy labor of Translation he had bereft him both
of Truth and Eloquence? I marvel not now at that Testimony of Basil the
Great, upon those words, In principio erat verbum -- Hoc ego noui, multos etiam
extra veritatis rationem positos -- I have known many (says he) and those put
without the pale and list of divine Truth, men merely secular, advancing and
magnifying this piece of Scripture, and at length bold to mix it with their
own decrees and writings. And S. Augustine seconds it with an instance, --
Quidam Platonicus, -- A certain Platonist was wont to say that the beginning
of S. John's Gospel was worthy to be written in letters of gold, and preached
in the most eminent Churches and Congregations, in his 10 book de Ciuitate Dei,
c. 29. O the divine raptures and infusions, that God does sometimes betroth to
his very enemies! who can but conceive that as the very worst of men have
knowledge enough to make them inexcusable; so the best of Heathen had enough to
make them Saints, were their faith that he should be their Savior, as great as
their knowledge, that he was the Son of God. With what rich Epithites they
bedecke and crown him. -- Mentis Germen, Verbum Lucens, Dei Filius, (it is his
saying, who (I know not by what search) found out almost all Truth, Mercurius
Trismegistus) the minds blossom, the word that gave light, the son of God.
What else did S. John add, but that the word was light? And S. Augustine gives
this farther testimony of that heathen, that he spoke many things of Christ in
a propheticke manner -- eadem veritate, licet non eodem Animi affectu -- with
the same truth the Prophets did, but not with the same affection --
pronunciabat illa Hermes, Dolendo, pronunciabat haec Propheta, Gaudendo -- in
his 8. book de Ciuitate Dei, 23. chapter. And why should we bar some of
their Philosophers of a propheticke knowledge, when a Poet shall fill his
cheeks with a -- Chara Deum Soboles, Magnum Iouis incrementum --? And if we
look back to those Oracles of old, the Sybills sacred Raptures, we shall
find them more like a Christians Comment, than a Heathens Prediction.

Tunc ad mortales veniet, mortalibus ipsis
In terris similis, natus Patris omnipotentis
Corpore vestitus --
Whereof if we enquire a little into the original, Saint Augustine will tell
us that the Greek coppies give us (...) -- Jesus Christ, the Son of God, In
oration. contra Arrian.
the Savior; and it is not only probable, but evident, that the Gentiles had
a knowledge of Christ as he was the Word, as it appears by that of Serapis
unto Thulis, (...), etc.
King of Egypt. And it is strangely remarkable: what wonderful Titles, and
inscriptions, the Platonists dedicate to his name and memory, with which as
(with a wreath and Laurel) they girt and beautify his Temples, - Dei verbum,
Mundi Opifex, Idaea boni, Mundi* Archetypum, moderat or Distributor, Imago
primi entis, rationalis Creaturae exemplar, Pastor, Sacerdos, vlna bumens, Lux,
Sol, coelumque candens, mentis germen Diuinae, verbum Lucidum, filius
primog^nitus, primi dei semper viuentis vmbra, vita, splendour, virtus, candor
lucis, character substantiae eius, and the like, which could not but flow from
a heart divinely touched, and a tongue swollen with inspiration, as Rosselus tells
us in his Trismegisti Pimandrum, 1 book, 107 page. For these and the like
sayings, some of the ancient Fathers have coniectured that Plato either read
part of divine story, or whilst he traveled in Egypt, had a taste of sacred
truth, out of the sayings of the Hebrews by an Amanuensis, or interpreter; For
then many of the Hebrews (the Persians reigning) wandered in Egypt.

Moreover, Aristobulus the Jew who flourished in the time of the Machabees,
writing to Ptolomy Philometora, King of Egypt, reports that the Pentateuch
before the Empire of Alexander the Great, and the Persian Monarchy was
Translated out of Hebrew, into Greek, part whereof came to the hands of Plato
and Pythagoras; and he is after peremptory, that the Peripateticks out of the
books of Moses, and the writings of the Prophets drew the greatest part of
their Philosophy, and it may seem strange what the Jewish Antiquary traditions
of Clearchus (the most noble of that Sect) who in his first -- De somno --
brings in his Master Aristotle relating that he met with a certain Jew, a
reverent and a wise man, with whom he had much conference concerning matters
both natural and divine, and received from him such a hint and specialty of
choicer learning which did much improve him in his after knowledge, especially in
that of God, as Josephus lib. 1. contra Appionem, and Eusebius in his 11 de
praeparat. Euangelica. 6.6. Clement. Alexandrin. 5. Stromaton-.

And thus I have at length (though with some blood and difficulty) trauersed
the opinions of the ancient, and showed you the errors of primitive Times in
their foulest shapes. I have opened the wiles and stratagems of the adversary,
and how defeated by the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; what
Bulwarks and Rampires the Fathers raised for propugning of Christ's divinity,
and how besieged by cursed heresies, with what success, what ruin.

Let us now return where we began, and place Christ where we found him, before
Abraham, before the world, where (me thinks) he now stands like a well rooted
tree in a rough storm, where though winds blow on him so furiously, that he is
sometimes forced to the earth (as if he were merely humane) yet he bends
again, and nods toward heaven (to show that he is divine, and but a plant
taken thence grafted in our Eden here) where though tossed up and down with
blasts of Infidelity, yet when the envy of their breath is spent (as we see a
goodly Cedar after a tempest) he stands strait, vn-rent, as if he scorned the
shocke of his late churlish encounter, and dared his blustering Adversary to a
second opposition.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
FINIS.
Errata in the Babbler.
PAge 6. line 9. read irregular. ibid. l. 11. r. abstemious; in the margent in
the same page, r. Alexand. in marg. p. 8. r. Alexand. p. 7. l. 16. r. (...). p.
8. l. 25. r. austere. p. 14. l. 3. r. Ianisaries. p. 23. l. 27. r. should. p.
33. l. 35. r. mists. p. 37. l. 18. r. others. p. 41. l. 7. r. per vulnera. p.
13. l. 27. r. moral.

Errata in Moses and Aaron.
PAge 25. line 7. read Lure. p. 24. l. 31. r. and. ibid. l. 32 r. having. ib.
l. 34 r. are. p. 21. l. 21. r. crime. p. 18. l. 25. r. from. p. 19. l. 14.
after the words Rabbi, Rabbi, read on out of the Text, viz. they Bind heavy,
etc. p. 18. line 8. read so.

Errata in Jacob and Esau.
PAge 2. line 11. read these. p. 6. l. 10. r. quality. ib. l. 28. r. hereupon.
p. 11. l. 32. r. become. p. 12. l. 32. r. ignorance. p. 19. l. 22. r. both
dispenst with. ibid. l. 35. r. duel. p. 33. l. 24. r. consequence.

NATVRES OVERTHROW, AND DEATHS TRIVMPH.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF SIR JOHN SYDENHAM, Knight, at Brimpton,
the 15. of December. 1625.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

Studeat quisque sic delicta corrigere vt post mortem non oporteat poenam
tolerare.

August. lib. de vera and falsa poenitentia. LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER.
1626.

TO MY MVCH RESPECTED KINSMAN, John Sydenham, Esquire, This.
SIR;
THere is as well an obedience in matters of desire, as command, and with me a
request has ever been of larger authority than a Mandate. You were pleased
(formerly) to importune me for a transcript of this Sermon; now, for the
impression of it; I have obeyed you in either; but I fear 'twill loose some of
the luster in the perusal, which it found in the delivery. I am not so happy a
master of my Pen, as of my tongue, nor you (perchance) of your ear, as of your
eye, that, some tinckling fancies may (at once) take and delude: this, is more
subtle, and perspicacious, and will not be gulled with the bark and shell of
things, but pierces the very kernel, and the marrow; It Is sometimes with the
ear, and eye of a Scholar, as with his fancy, and his judgment; the one has
many a cheat put upon it by weak impostures, which the other both discouer's,
and reiects, and sometimes (as it does here) pittie's. What you shall meet with
of vigor, and solidity, entertain, cherrish, it is yours; yours first in the
birth, and occasion; now, in the protection, nourishment; what, more
languishing, and abortiue, lay on the author, it is mine, like me, I Will father
it; Howeuer, 'twill implore your charity, the charity of your fair
interpretation, not of your benevolence; which if you shall vouchsafe, you have
nobly rewarded the endeauours of

Your affectionate kinsman, HVM: SYDENHAM.

NATVRES OVERTHROW, AND DEATHS TRIVMPH.
ECCLES. 12.5. Man goes to his long home, and the mourners walk about the
streets.


MOrtality love's no descant; your plain song suits best with blacks, that
which is grauly set to compunction, sorrow, tuned heavily, to sighs, and
lamentations. What should warbling aires with darted bosoms, and vnbalmed
hearts? what your quaint and youthful raptures, when -- Mourners walk about
the streets? If Zion be wept for, harpes must be hung upon the willowes; sad
objects require furrows in the cheek, and rivers in the eye, and we then most
honor the exequies of our friends, when we embalme the deceased with our
tears. Away then with ears wantoned to looser Sonnets; offend not with
unchaste attentions these hallowed anthemes, here is broken harmony; dirges as
sullen, as they are sacred; panting and heart-broke elegies, such as should be
rather groaned, than sung. Ask the Preacher (here) and he will tell you.
Eccles. 12.41.
-- The daughters of Music are brought low, and the years draw nigh, when we
shall say, we have no pleasure in them. He storie's of a Sun, verse. 2.
and Moon, and Stars which are obscured, and of clouds that return not
after rain; as if the world were at her last pang, and gasp, and ready for
her funeral. Behold! the little world is -- The keepers of the house have
trembled, Verse. 3.
the strong men bowed themselves, the grinders ceased, and those that look out
of the windows, darkened; the Almond tree does flourish, and the grasshopper is
a burden, and desire shall fail. -- Because -- Man goes to his long home,.3.
and mourners walk about the streets. --

Without any rack, or violence to the words, they offer themselves to this
division. Division.
1 the subject, Man. 2 his condition, transitory condition, expressed by way of
pilgrimage --, -- Goes --. 3 the non vltra, or terminus ad quem, of this his
pilgrimage --. To his home- enlarged with an epithet -- Long home --. 4 the
state and ceremony, it there meets with. -- And the mourners walk about the
streets --. Pars 1.
Of these in their order: first of the subject, Man.

To dwell with circumstances, and ouerslip the maine, was ever an emblem of
negligence, if not of weakness; each fabulist will tell you of a dog, and a
shadow, and what they moral. He that iangles (merely) about nominalls, where
matters of realitie and substance fleet by, may speak himself a Grammarian,
or a Sophister, scarce a Divine. Of the name of Man, its source, and pedigree,
I list not to discourse; not an ignorance so untaught, or understanding dulled,
but would forestall me, or should I (by chance) meet with some intellectuals,
so thin and tender, that could not (as it is a chance I should) scarce an
object but would be both your spokesman, and remembrancer; yonder sad
spectacle, that earth, this stone would tell you -- Homo ab humo, from the
ground, Adam ab Adamah, from the earth, red earth, not that more solid part of
it, but the brittlelest, dust, so the curse runs, -- Dust thou art, and to
dust thou shall return --. In the word Man, in the various acceptance of the
word Man, Am. Pol. c. 35. Syntag.
(wherein some syntagmaticall Divines have unprofitably toiled) I Will not
curiously or impertinently travail, but without any figurative, or
metaphorical sense, take it properly, and literally, as the Text gives it me,
-- Man -- that is, a reasonable living creature, or rather a reasonable living
soul, for so the Spirit of God Christens it, -- The man was made a living
soul, Genesis 2.7. and the same periphrasis the Apostle uses too, 1 Cor. 15. The
first man Adam was made -- (...) -- in animam viuentem, or anima viuens -- A
living soul -- verse. the 45. yet in the 44 of the same Chapter, he calls him,
(...) -- a living body. Either cote he is justly blazoned by, so we give the
difference, rational, a difference so specificall, and proper, that it diuides
him from any other; for reason is an intellectiue power, peculiar to man only,
and not communicable to a second creature; by which (...), or (as the Scholeman
terms it) discurrit; out of one thing he deduces another, and orders this, by
that, both in method and discretion. Hence it is called (...), and the work or
office of it, (...), Jdem, vt supra.
discursus -- propter animae celeritatem --, for the volubilitie and
nimblenesse of the soul, by which it trauerses and moves from one object to
another, from effects to causes, and back again, from all things to every
thing, and from that (almost) to nothing. And as man was prerogatiu'd above
others, in respect of perspicacitie, so of Empire, and dominion, Fer. in Genesis
for whereas in other passages of creation, we find a kind of commanding
dialect, -with a - fiat lux, and a - producat terra-. Let there be light, let
the earth bring forth, Genesis 1.27.
In that of Adam, words more particular, of deliberation, and advice. -- Let us
make man --, Man, a creature of those exquisite dimensions, for matter of body,
of those supernatural endowments, of soul, that now omnipotency bethinkes it
self, and will consult. The privy Counsel of Son, and Holy Ghost, is
required to the moulding and polishing of this glorious piece. Contra Philo.
Angels may look on, and wonder; touch, or assist, they may not; no, not so
much as to temper or prepare the mettle. Here is work only for a Trinity. A
task for Jehovah himself, Pur. Pilg.
for Jehovah Elohim, the Father, by the Son, in the power of the Spirit. No
doubt, somewhat of wonder was a proiecting, when a complete Deity, was thus
studying, it is perfection, somewhat, that should border upon euerlastingnes,
when the finger of God was so choicely industrious, and lo what is produced?
Man, the masterpiece of his design and workmanship, the great miracle and
monument of nature, not only for external transcendencies, but the glory and
pomp of inward faculties, stamped and engraven to the image of his God, through
the righteousness of an immortal soul; besides, a body so symmetriously
composed as if nature had lost it self in the harmony of such a feature. Man,
the abstract, and model, Greg. Naz.
and brief story of the universe, -- the vtriusque naturae vinculum --, the
cabbonet and storehouse of three living natures, Beasts. Angels. Men.
sensual, intellectual, rational, the Analysis, and resolution of the
greater world into the less, the Epitome, and compendium of that huge tome,
that great Manuscript and work of nature, wherein are written the characters
of Gods omnipotency, and power, framing it, disposing it, all in it, to the
use and benefit of man, of man, especially, of man, wholly; other creatures
paying him an awful obedience, as a tribute, and homage, due to their
commander in all things, so near kin to Deity, that Melanthon, makes him a
terrestrial transitory God: having little to divide him from a - Numen-, but
that one part of him was mortal, and that not created so, but occasioned,
miserably occasioned, by disobedience.

A little forbidden fruit (from the hand of a frail creature) shall
disinherite it of an eternal privilege, and man is now thrust out of the
doors of his everlasting habitation for two pretty toys, an Apple, and a
Woman; howeuer death hung not on the fruit, (says Chrysostom) but the
contempt, which was not so voluntary, as suggested; fond man, that is thus
cheated of an assurance of immortality, by a false persuasion that he shall be
immortal, that - critis sicut Dij -- has dampt all; the Serpent persuades
him, -- if he do but taste, he shall be as God, when he has tasted, finds
himself worse than man; a worm indeed, no man. Thus he is at once fooled out
of euerlastingnes, and the favor of his Maker: the anger of the Lord is now
sore kindled, and his fury smoaks in a double curse against him, and what he
was framed of, earth; that which has (hitherto) voluntarily presented her
fruitfulness, in herbs, and plants, and all things requisite for his
sustenance; now, undressed, and not watered in the bubble and sweat of an
industrious brow, affords him nothing but thorns, and thistles; just reward of
disobedience, barrenness, and death. Lamentable felicity, which (at height) is
but conditionary, and then fatal. There is no misery so exquisite, as the
sense of a lost happiness. Calamity is supportable enough, where there is not
felt, or seen, a more honorable condition; but, to be tumbled from a bliss
we were sometimes master of, is a punctual wretchedness. Man, but now on the
pinnacle and spire of all his glory, in a moment shamefully thrown from it, and
with him, all posterity. But lo, there is mercy even in justice, and life in
the very sentence and iaw of death. -- The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head --. She that was (ere-while) a chief instrument in his fall,
shall be now a maine agent in his restauratio^, not to that state wherein he was
created, but to that wherein he shall be glorified. The soul (through faith,
and grace) shall still be preserved immortal, but the body must lessen of it is
primitive condition, the soul as a Sun that is eclipsed, or clouded, shall
shine again, the body, like some meteor, for a time exhaled, falls to the
earth from whence it came; and as some metals (laid for a space in the bosom
of the ground) grow more refined, and purified, so shall the body, interred a
natural one, rise a glorious. In the Interuallum, as a punishment for
transgression, it shall resolve into what it was made of, and it must go to
its long home, the grave; where we have now brought it, and would have laid it
in, but that the captious heretic violently withstands it, and thus he
interposes. If man return into earth, as he is earth, then he was mortal
before he sinned, and so death seems to be of nature, and not punishment. --
It is not answered by denial, but distinction, and we must (here) critic
between mortale, mortuum, and mortiobnoxium, mortal, dead, and liable to
death. We call that dead which is actually deprived of life; subject to death,
what is within the fathom and command of deaths power, and tyranny for sin,
though not actually, yet in time. Mortal, two ways, either for that which by
a necessity of nature ought to die, or for that which as the merit and reward
of sin, can die. The body of Adam (before sin) was of it self mortale (as
mortal is taken in the last sense) because mutabile, and that is mutable,
which of it self can suffer change, although it never do, as the good
Angels, and God only is immutable, -- Per se, and natura (as Augustine
speaks in his book de vera Relig. cap. 13.) But the body of Adam was not
morituru^, to die, if he had not sinned, but by a glorious change, without
death, had been translated by God into an everlasting incorruptibility. It was
sin then that made man obnoxious to the stroks of death, not any condition,
or necessity of nature, and therefore I know not whether I may call it an
error of the Pelagian, or a blasphemy, who would have Adam (had he not
transgressed) die by the law of nature. Hence he might infer, that death was
not a punishment for sin, and so by consequence, Christ not died for it; but
we find this (by a Council) long since doomed for an heresy, and an heavy
Anathema laid on the Patron of that tenent in Concilio Mileuitano cap. 1. and
more particularly by Augustine in his first book de Peccatorum meritis and
remissione cap. 2. You see then that death and all corporal defects, were
scourges following the disobedience of the first man, not occasioned by any
impulsion or languishment of nature, and Aquinas will reason it thus, -- If a
man for an offense be deprived of some benefit that is given him, the wanting
of this benefit, is the punishment of that offense. To Adam in his state of
innocence there was this boon conferred from Heaven, that as long as his mind
was subject unto God, the inferior powers of the soul should be obedient unto
reason, and the body unto the soul. But, because the mind of man (by sin)
did recoile and start back from this divine subjection, it followed, that
those inferior powers also would not be totally subject unto reason; whence
grew so great a rebellion of the carnal appetite, that the body (too) would
not be totally subject to the soul. Upon this breach death enters, and all
that pale band of diseases, and corporal infirmities, for the incollumity and
life of the body consists in this, that it be subject unto the soul, -- Sicut
perfectibile suae perfectioni, -- as the Schooleman speaks, as a thing
perfectable to its perfection. On the other side, death and sickness, and
languishments of body, have reference to the defects of the true subjection of
the body, to the soul. And therefore necessity of consequence will induce,
that, as the rebellion of the carnal appetite to the spirit, was a punishment
of our first fathers sin, so, mortality, and all corporal imperfections too,
as the Schooleman punctually in his 2a. 2ae. 164. quaest. 1. Artic. The curse
then due to the lapse of our first Parents houers not over the soul only,
but, for it, the body; the body (before) in a blessed way of incorruptibility,
but, not of it self, but from the soul, so Augustine tells his Dioscorus, --
Tam potenti natura Deus fecit animam, vt ex eius beatitudine, redundet in
corpus, plenitudo sanitatis, and incorruptionis vigor -- in his 56 Epistle. His
body then was not indissoluble by any vigor of immortality existing in it
self, but there was (supernaturally) a power in the soul, divinely given, by
which man might preserve his body from all corruption, as long as it remained
subject unto God. And the Schooleman has good ground for it; for, seeing the
reasonable soul does exceed the dimensions and proportion of corporal matter,
it was convenient, that, in the beginning, there should be a virtue given it,
by which the body might be rescued from all infirmities, and conserved above
the nature of that corporal matter, as the same Aquinas par. 1. quaest. 97.
Art. 1. The whole man then (mixed of body and soul) was in the creation in a
glorious state of immortality, but it was with a -- Quodammodo -- (as Augustine
tells us, de Genes. ad Lit. lib. 6. cap. 25.) not absolutely, -- Ita vt non
posset mori, -- but conditionally -- poterat non mori --. It is true, he had a
power not to dye, if he had not sinned; but it was a necessity he should die,
when he had; otherwise God had been as unjust to his promise, as he was
severe in his command, for so the charge runs, Genes. 2.
-- At that day thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death --. He has
eaten, therefore he must die -- But from whence comes this death? from God or
from himself? or both? originally from neither; not from God, he cannot be the
cause of it, death being a privation only, having name (says Augustine) but
no essence; besides it is an Omen, and an ill to nature. Whatsoever God made,
had an essence, was a species, good; the Text tells us so, six times tells us
so, in one Chapter, Genes. 1. God made the firmament, and it was good, He made
the earth, and it was good; in a word, he saw all that he had made, -- Et erant
valde bona -- they were very good --. Genes. 1. vlt.
We may not think then that God therefore created man, that he should die; or,
because death followed his disobedience, God was the cause of it. Death may be
an instrument of his justice, not an effect of his producing. It is one thing
to give the sentence of death, another to be the author of it. Indeed
Augustine says ( lib. 1. Retract. cap. 21.) that death (as a punishment) has
reference to God, not, as an obliquity; Aquinas.
and the Schooleman is at hand too, with a distinction for a twofold death,
one, as an ill of humane nature, or a defect incident from man's transgressio^,
that, he dares not lay on the Almighty, the other, as it has some species or
resemblance of good, to wit, as it is a just penance for his rebellion, this he
does in his 2a. 2ae. 164. quaest. Art. 1.

As therefore in the creation of the world God is said to make light, and to
separate it from darkness, Genes. 1.
not to make darkness, as if that were of it self some blind mass and
Chaos, and therefore God chid light out of it; so in the creation of man God is
said to make life (God breathed into him the breath of life) not death, nay he
does separate that light from this darkness, and does chide life not out if
it, but from it, with a -- Cave ne manducas -- take heed thou eat not, for if
thou do, -- morte morieris -- thou shall die the death. That therefore of the
wise man will vindicate the Almighty from this misprision, -- God made not
death, Wisdom 1.13, 14.
neither has he pleasure in the corruption of the living, for he created all
things, that they might have their being, and the generations of the world were
healthful, and there was no poison of destruction in the^.

The womb then of this great plague of man the Apostle rips up, -- When lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is perfected,
brings forth death, Iam. 1.15. The birth then of sin is through a
conception of lust, and the strength of death through a perfection of sin.
Lo then the cause of this great calamity discovered! but how came that?
originally from the man? no. How then? -- Through the envy of the devil came
death into the world, the 2. Chapter of the same book, Aug. in locum.
verse. 24. And therefore Saint Augustine calls it, -- mors-a morsu -- from the
biting of the Serpent. And our Savior tells us, -- Ille homicida ab initio,
John 8. -- He was a murderer from the beginning; whence perceiving man (by his
then obedience) advanced to that place from which he was headlong'd, now
dissolues, and breaks into secret envy; this envy wrought deceit, deceit
concupiscence, that, disobedience, disobedience, sin, sin, death. So that the
envy of the devil is the source and springhead, deceit, the Conduit,
concupiscence, the pipe, the waters conveyed in it, disobedience, sin, the
Channel or Cisterne into which they fall, death. Tell Adam then of the
forbidden fruit, he lays it on his wife, -- The woman gave it me. Ask the
woman, she puts it on a third, -- The Serpent seduced me --.Ask the Serpent,
there it stays, and in stead of an answer, we find a curse, -- Because thou
have done this, Genes. 3.
upon thy belly thou shall creep, and dust thou shall eat all the days of thy
life. The man then all this while grows not obnoxious in respect of seduction,
but assent, the woman of both; so the Apostle -- Adam was not deceived, -- sed
mulier in praeuaricatione sua -- the woman being deceived was in the
transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14. If God then ask Adam -- number comedisti? Have thou
eaten of that tree of which I commanded thee thou should not eat? He answers
not with a -- Mulier seduxit, -- the woman has seduced me, but only with a --
dedit -- she gave me, and I did eat. If he ask Euah, -- Quid fecisti? Woman,
what is this that thou have done? she as empty of any other evasion, as of
strength, lays all on the shoulders of the seducer, -- with a -- Serpens
seduxit me, -- the Serpent seduced me. God inquires no farther, but sentences,
Vt supra.
-- I will put enmity betwixt her seed and thy seed, it shall break thy head,
and thou shall bruise his heel, as it is nimbly observed on the 2. Egidius de
Roma.
book of the Sentences, distinct. 22.

Thus, with some blood, and travail, I have showed you man, in his original,
height, fall; how created, in what glory throned, how suncke, what the sin,
the occasioner, the punishment; whence he was, what he is, whither he must;
earth, from earth, to it; thither he shall without repriuall, the sentence is
past, the executioner ready, and he must go, for -- Man goes, that is my
second part, his transitory condition expressed by way of pilgrimage. Goes.

PARS II. Man goes --.
RAre expression of his frailty here, if it may not be more properly said -- he
is gone, then that he goes. Our days (says the Kingly Prophet) are gone
even as a tale that is told, Psalm. 90. A tale, of no more length than certainty.
Again, they are days, not years, as if our being (here) depended upon
moments, more than time, or if time, that which is present, not in future;
Days are enough, and years, too much, or had we both, lo, they are gone,
gone even as a tale that is told, a tale, as momentary, as vain. Seneca tells
his Polybius only of three parts of life answerable to those of time, past,
present, to come, What we do, God knows is short; what we shall do,
doubtful; what we have done, out of doubt; so that our best piece of age is
either transitory, or dubious; and where a wise man discouers either, he will
at least suspect change, if not slight it. Pitch man at highest, rank him with
Kings, Prophets, Priests; and we shall there find him on his hill of ice,
whence he does not slip so properly, as tumble: one says he is a shadow,
another a smoke, a third a vapor, brave resemblances of his station (here)
and durability, when the best commendation we can bestow on either, is -- they
pass, or else they fade, -- As if it were a sin to say, they Are, but they
Have been. The Grecian then scarce shot home to the frailty of man, when he
calls him (...) -- A creature of a day, -- he did, that named him -- Hesternum
-- yesterday --, We are but as yesterday, and know nothing, Job 8.9. Alas
poor man, no better than a watrish Sun between two swollen clouds, or a
breathless intermission between two fevers, misery, and fatc. Lo how they
kiss? Man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live, and is full
of misery: accurate calamity; in method, borne, a short time to live, full of
misery; and to make frailty complete, the thing Woman is inserted too.- Man
that is borne of a woman, etc. David was too prodigal in his similitude, when
he beat out the age of man to the dimensions of a span; an inch, a punctum, had
been bountiful enough, the least Atome types out his glory here, his glory of
life here, it is breath on steel, no sooner on than off; Sunne-burnt stubble,
at once flame, and ashes. We are at a good key of happiness, when we can say
-- we are transitory -- we have scarce (sometimes) so much life as to know we
die, even in the very threshold and porch of life, death strangles us; as if
there were but one door of the Sepulcher, and the womb; so that man is but a
living ghost, breathing dust, death clothed in flesh and blood.

He goes, vanishes rather, vanishes like lightning, which is so sudden, and
so momentary, that we more properly say we remember it, than that we see it.
How is it then, that life is sometimes spunne to the crimson, and sometimes the
silver thread, from the Down and tender wool in childhood, to the Scarlet in
the manly check, and the tinsell and snow in old age? Indeed, the white head,
and the wrinkled countenance, may read you the Annals of threescore and ten,
perchance calculate our life to a day longer; what is beyond is trouble, and so
was that, and yet has not this man lived long? - diu fuit, De breuit. vitae
cap. 3.
non diu vixit-, Seneca replies, How can thou say he has sailed much, whom a
cruel tempest takes immediately, as soon as he is of the Havens mouth? and
after many a churlish assault, of wind, and billow, much traversing his way,
wau'd, and surg'd to many a danger, he is at length driven back the same rode,
but now he went out by? this man has not sailed much, but has been much
beaten. And indeed we have here but our - tempestuosa interualla-, it is not
life truly, Idem Ibidem.
but calamity. A well gloss'd misery, gaudy unhappiness, glorious vanity, a
troubled Sea, tormented with continual ebbes, and flows; sometimes we are
shipwracked, always toss't, and thus exposed to daily blustrings, we find no
Haven but in death. Hereupon the Grecian called the first day of man's life,
(...), - a beginning of conflicts-; So that we shall meet with more troops of
sorrow, (here) than we have means either to resist, or to appease them.

Considerest thou not (says that grave Philosopher) what a kind of life it is
nature presents us with, Seneca ad Lucit. Epist. 70.
when she would tears should be the first presages of our condition in this
world? How pretily Augustine embleames it in his tender infant, -- Nondum
loquitur, and tamen Prophetat, cries are the first Rhetoric he uses, by which
e're he can speak, he prophesies; and by a dumb kind of divination, waile's
out the story of man's sorrows here. And now his odours, savors, lassitudes,
watchings, humors, meats, drinks, repose, all things, without which he could
not live, are but the occasion of his death. And therefore that famous Roman,
receiving sudden tidings of the death of his only Son, answered without
distraction nobly. -- I knew when I begat him he should die --, life being
nothing else but a journey unto death, a going to the long home. It is a little
part of it we live, the whole course of our age, being not life, but time
rather; which we cannot recall being spent, or cause it for present, not to
spend, but it treades by us, without noise, and so swiftly, that it is here
when we expect it coming, and gone by us, when we think it is at us. Man goes
--, Goes as some curious watch does, wound up (perchance) for an hour, at
most, for a day, and then, it is down; which time, if it minute right, it is a
rare piece; sometimes, by distemper, it runs too fast, sometimes set back,
by the providence of the keeper, sometimes, again, it beats slow, like a
dying pulse, by and by, it stands still, as if the whole machine languished;
anon some wheele's amiss, or a spring broken, and then we say it is not down,
but disordered, so disordered, that it is beyond our Art of rectifying, it must
be left to the skill of the maker; who, to joint it the better, sunders it, and
to make it more firm, for a while destroys it. The great Enginer and framer
of the world, will have it so done to our fleshly tabernacles, who by the
workmanship of death, shall take the whole fabric of the body into pieces,
and for a time, lay it by in the grave, till against the great and appointed
day, he shall new wheel and joint it, and set it more gloriously a going, by
the virtue of the resurrection. So that man not only goes, (as I told you)
but is gone, twice gone, dissould, by the frailty of the body, to the
captivity of a grave, rebodied with the soul, to the honor of a
resurrection. You see then, man is still in a place of fluctuation, not
residence, and he is said to soiourne in it, not to inhabit. Seneca Epist. 70.
ad Lucilium.
We sail by our life my Lucilius, (says that Divine Heathen, let no squemish
ear cavil at the title, for it belongs to Seneca.) And as in the Seas the
shores and Cities fly; so in this swift course of time, we first loose the
sight of our childhood, and then of our youth, and at length discover the
straits of old age, at which whether we shall arrive, or no, it is doubtful;
and when we have, dangerous. That late famous (but unfortunate Historian) who
had run through all ages of man, History of the world, lib. 1.
and almost all conditions in them; speaks here not like a speculatiue, but a
practicke and experienced man, and resembles his seven ages, to the seven
planets; whereof, our Infancy is compared unto the Moon, wherein we seem
only to live, and to grow as plants do. Our second age to Mercury, in which
we are tutored and brought up in our first Alphabet and form of discipline.
Our third age, to Venus, the days of our love, daliance, vanity; the fourth
to the Sun, the shining, beautiful, glorious age of man. The fifth to Mars,
in which through fields of blood, we hew out a way to honor and victory, and
wherein our thoughts travail to ambitious ends. Our sixth age to Jupiter,
wherein we begin to take a strict calculation, and account of our misspent
times, and bud, and sprout up to the perfections of our understandings. The
seventh, and last, to Saturn, wherein our days are sullen, and ouercast, in
which we find by trodden experience, and irrepairable loss, that our golden
delights of youth, are now accompanied with vexation, sorrow; our lackies and
retinue, are but sicknesses, and variable infirmities, which whispering unto us
our everlasting habitation, and long home, we at length pass unto it, with
many a thorny meditation, and perplexed thought, and at last by the industry of
death, finish the sorrowful business of a transitory life.

Seeing then our bodies are but earthen cottages, houses of dust, and teneme^ts
of clay, the anuils which diseases and distempers daily hammer, and beat on;
since our life does pass away as the trace of a cloud, Wisd. 2.
and is dispersed as a mist driven by the beams of the Sun, why do we crown
our days with rose buds? why do we fill our selves with voluptuousnes, costly
wines, and ointments? why say we not to rottenness, Job 17.14.
then art my father? to the worm, thou art my mother, and my sister? Why do
we pamper, and exalt this journey man of corruption? this drudge of frrailtie?
this slave of death? why do we not remember the imprisonment of the soul? and
that which Cyprian calls, her gaole-deliuery? why call we not our actions to the
bar? arraigne them? check them? sentence them? why do we not something that
may entitle us to Religion, while it is called to day? Fool, this night shall
thy soul be taken from thee, this hour (perchance) this minute, nay this
punctistitium of it. Who would not speedily draw water out of a river, which he
knew would not continue long in it is running? Who would not suddenly extract
somewhat from those wholesome fountains which should cherish and refresh the
thirsty and barren soul? Seneca Epist. 7. ad Lucilium.
why do we gasp, and pant, and breathe for a little air, which nature (for a
time) fann's upon us, and takes off at her pleasure in a moment? why steer we
not with desire to our long home? why prepare we not for our progress, since
we must needs thither? why crush we not this cockatrice in the egg, M^rs.
and so forestall the venom of that eye whose darting is so fatal? Shall I
believe (says Seneca to his Lucillius) that fortune has power in all things
over him that lives, Epist. 71.
and not suppose rather it can do nothing to him that knows how to dye? It Is
not good to live, but to live well; and therefore a wise man lives as much as
he ought, not as much as he can. We see the frailty of others hourly brought
upon the Scene, and how the daily traffic of disease with us prompts us our
mortality. Those glorious bulwarks, and fortresses of the soul, are but
sanctuaries of weakness; languishing, crazie, and battered constitutions, but
natures warning pieces, the watch-words of a frail body, which keep strict
Sentinel over the soul, lest it steal from it, unawares, and so the great
enemy both invade, and ruin it. How frequent even amongst Pagans have been
their -- memento mori'es --? and a deaths head (you know) was a chief dish at
an Egyptian feast. So should that (yonder) to every recollected Christian, but
such presents (as those) have been of late no great dainties with us, a
service of every day, almost of every place (the whole land being little better
than a Charnell-house) and we cannot but see it, and chew on it too, if we be
not dust already, and that fly in our eyes, and blind us, and so the complaint
of Cyprian whip us home -- Nolumus agnoscere, quod ignorare non possumus.

Why should then this sad tole of mortality dishearten us? groans, and
sighs, and conuulsions, are the bodies passing-bels, no less customary, than
natural; and, more horrid in the circumstance, than the thing. -- Pompa mortis
magis terret quam mors ipsa --, the retinue and complement of death, speak
more terror, than the act. The Adversary, the Judge, the sentence, the Iailor,
the executioner, more daunt the malefactor, than the very stroke, and cleft of
dissolution. Seneca ad Lucil. Epist. 52.
Are we so foolish (says the good Heathen) to think death a rock which will
dash or split us in the whole; no, it is the Port which we ought one day to
desire, never to refuse; into which (if any have been cast in their younger
years) they need repine no more than one which with a short cut has ended his
Navigations. For there are some whom slacker winds mock, and detain, Idem
Ibidem.
and weary with the gentle tediousness of a peaceable calm; others swifter
wafted by sudden gusts, whom life has rather rauish't thither, than sent;
which had they a time delai'd, by some flattering intermissions, yet at length,
must of necessity struck sail to it. Quae nunc abibis in loca, pallidula,
rigida, nudula?
Some faint-hearted Adrian will (to his power) linger it, and fearfully
expostulate with a parting soul, as if the divorce from the body were
everlasting, and there should not be (one day) a more glorious contract; when
an heroike Cannius shall rebuke the tears in his friends cheek, and thus
bravely encounter death, and him -- Why are you sad? enquire you whether souls
be immortal? I shall know presently. Brave resolution, had it been as
Christian-like, as 'twas bold.

Again, some effeminate Rhodian will rather languish under the grindings of a
tyrant, than sacrifice the remainder of a famin'd body, to an honorable death,
when a confident Hilarion, shall dare all those grisly assaults, -- Soul get
thee out, thou have seventy years served Christ, and art thou now loath to
die? Once more, some spruce Agag, or kem'd Amalakite would be palsiestrooke
with an -- amaramors --, Death is bitter, death is bitter, 1 Samuel 15.32. When a
Lubentius, and a Maximinus have their breast plate on, with a -- Domine parati
sumus --, We are ready to lay of our last garments, the flesh --. And indeed
(says Augustine) Boughs fall from trees, and stones out of buildings, and why
should it seem strange that mortals die? Some have welcomed death, some met it
in the way, some baffel'd it; in sicknesses, persecution, torments. I instance
not in that of Basil to the Arrianated Valens, ('it is too light) that of
Vincentius was more remarkable, who with an vnabated constancy, thus stunn's
the rage of his merciless executioner. -- Thou shall see the Spirit of God
strengthen the tormented more, than the devil can the hands of the tormenter.
And that you may know a true Martyrdom, is not dash't either at the
expectation, or the sense of torture, a Barlaam will hold his hand over the
very flame of the Altar, and sport out the horridness of such a death with
that of the Psalmist. -- Thou have taught my hands to war, and my fingers to
battle. Seeing then we are compassed with such a cloud of witnesses, what
should scare a true Apostle from his -- Cupio dissolui --? Let us take his
resolution, and his counsel too, -- lay aside every weight, and the sin that
does easily be set us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, Heb. 12.1. There is no law so inviolable, as this of Nature, that of
the Medes and Persians was but corrupt, to this -- Statutum est omnibus semel
mori -- Every true Christian knows it, and fears it not so much out of
opinion, as nature; and why should nature do it, since it is called our home,
our long home, whither it is as certain we shall go, as doubtful, when; and
therefore I must now press you with Paul's Obsecro vos tanquam aduenas --, I
beseech you as strangers, and pilgrims upon earth, look not back to the
onions, and flesh pots here; put forward for your last habitations, know you
must at length to them, there is no by-way to avoid them, for -- Man goes to
his long home --, that is my third part, the -- terminus ad quem --, of this his
travail. -- His long home.

PARS. III. His long home.
LOng home. A periphrasis not of death so properly, as the grave, the
bedchamber of the body when it is dead; or rather, the bed it self (for so Job
styles it) -- Thou have made my bed ready for me in the dark, deaths
withdrawing room, corruptions tyring house, natures Golgotha, her exchequer of
rotten treasures, hid there till the day of doom, Regia Serpentum, (as the
Son of Syracke call's it) the randeuouz of creeping things, and beasts, and
worms, Ecclus 10. and 11. verse.

Come hither then, thou darling of the world, thou great favorite of flesh,
and blood; thou whose honors (here) are as blooming, as the Lillies, and roses
in thy youthful cheek; know, Image, though thy head be of gold and thy body
of silver, thy feet are but of clay, and they will lead down to this chamber
of death, where thou may behold the glory of thy ancestors, as Augustine did
at Rome, that of Caesar's in his sepulcher. -- An eyelesse, cheekelesse,
worme-gnawne visage; naught but rottenness, and stench, and worms, and bones,
and dust, and now -- Vbi Caesaris praeclarum corpus (says the Father) vbi
diui^iarum magnitudo? vbi caterua Baronum? vbi acts militum? vbi apparatus
delictarum? vbi thalamus pictus? vbi lectus Eburneus? vbi regalis thronus? vbi
mutatoria vestimentorum? vbi magnificentia? vbi omnia? Sibi pariter defecerunt,
quando defecit spiritus, and eum in sepulchro, trium brachiorum, reliquerunt
cum faetore, and putredine --, in his 48 Sermon, Si saltem opus illud sit
Augustini.
ad fratres in eremo. Crown, and Scepter, and Robes, and Treasure, and Sword,
and Spear, and Valor, and Youth, and Honor, and (what the world could not
(but now) either master or contain) his body, trencht in a grave of six
cubits, no more, there Caesar lies in earthen fetters; and so shall all
dissolved bodies too, till that fearful arraignement at the great assizes. In
the mean time, the soul shall be either wafted hence into Abraham's bosom,
or else hurried to that cave of darkness, and everlasting horror; no third
place, to purge, and refine it, after death; no Romish trapdoore (through which
a bribed indulgence may presume to fetch it of at the pleasure of a cheating
Consistory) but it has here -- suum Purgatorium --, One of their
Purgatory-mongers tells me so, nay tells a Cardinal so, and bids him pray with
Augustine, Cupraeus de 4. hom. nouissimis. Ser. 3. page 56.
-- Domine hic ure, hic seca, vt in aeternum parcas.

Thus you see, Man is now brought to his -- long home --, his soul gone to
it is place of rest; but we may not yet interre the body; that we shall do,
anon; some ceremony remains to be performed first; for loo, how the Mourners
walk about the streets? That Is my last part; the state, and ceremony man
meets with: in the consummation of his pilgrimage. -- The mourners walk, etc.

PARS IIII. The mourners, etc.
THe triumph, and honor, death challenges in the solemn interment of the
deceased, has been a ceremony no less venerable, than ancient. Demptis 306.
Annis. Solomon enim vixit anno mundi- 2930. Josiah, Anno mundi. 3324. Jacob
2108. Chyt^aeus in Chronol.
'Twas almost 3000 years ago, the Mourners (here) walked about the streets;
after them those of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Mogiddo, when all Judah and
Jerusalem, mourned for Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. before both for Jacob, in Goren
Atad, beyond Jordan -- where they mourned (says Moses) with a great, and sore
lamentation, Genesis 50.10. Such a pomp of sorrow as was a president to all
posterity; forty days the body was embalmed, than threescore and ten more,
mourned for, before the Funeral, seven after; against the day of interment,
all the tribes must be summoned, their families, their allies, and their
retinue; only their herds, and their little ones, left in Goshen. I read of
no wife, or daughter absent, no trick of Religion, or pretense of retired
sorrow, to keep them of these public exequies, to whine a dirge or requiem in
a corner. No doubt they sadly followed the hearse even to the sepulcher,
thinking a tear wrung over a parting bed not half so emphaticall, as that
which is dropped into the grave. Besides, Joseph himself must be sent for out of
Egypt; no imploiment at court keeps him of these great solemnities, but he^
goe's up to Canaan, with all the servants of Pharaoh, and all the Elders of his
house, and all the Elders of the land o^ Egypt, and all his brethren, and his
fathers house, and his own too; and they buried him (says the Text) in the
ca^^ of the field Machpela, which Abraham bought of Ephron the Hittite, before
Ma^^e, Genesis 50.13. And indeed, 'twa^ a religious providence the old Patriarchs
had, in purchasing a possession place for their burial, and posterity (a long
time) kept it up, even to superstition, thinking their bones never at rest,
till they were laid in the Sepulcher of their fathers, which honorable way of
interment, in these tympa^ous and swelling times of ours, (wherein we war
more about matters of title, than religion) were a good means to preserve our
names from rottenness; if our contention, and pride, and riot, have left so
much of a devoured inheritance as will serve the dimensions of a dead body.

Some noble mansions of the kingdom (heretofore) have now, scarce, that
happiness. A green turfe, or a weather-beaten stone, will cover that body,
which (ere while) a whole Lordship could hardly cloathe; and that life which
swome in Tissues, and Imbroideries, in death (scarce) finds a black to mourn
for it about the streets. Sad Hearse that has nothing to wait on it to the
grave, but the ruins of a family, naught to weep ore't, but the blubbrings
and languishments of a gentile blood, far more wounding and deplorable, than
the condition of some noble caitife, who rather than he will allow death the
least triumphs in his funerals, will have his treasure, honor, religion too
(if he had any) eathed up together in his -- Long home: -- a ditch were
fitter, and some unnatural, gouty fisted heir would like it well; ours does
not, you see, the -- Mourners have walked about the street -- It Is well, and an
act no less of duty, than religion; and those which have been zealous in it
heretofore, have worn the two rich Epithetes of charitable, blessed, --
Blessed are ye of the Lord, 2 Samuel 2.5.
(says David to the men of Iabesh Gilead) that you have showed such charity to
your master Saul, and buried him. Buried him, is not enough, it is too naked and
thin a ceremony, except these Mourners too walked about the streets. My Son
(says Tobit) when I die, bury me honestly, Tob. 14.10. And Iaakob (on his
deathbed) coniur'd, his Sons to interre him in a prescript solemnity, and
therefore the Text says, -- They buried him as they had sworn unto their
father, Genesis 50.6, 12. And indeed those -- Officia postremi muneris- (as
Augustine calls them) those solemn rites which we strew on the funerals of
our deceased friend are no effect of courtesy, but debt, and from an able
successor, no less expected, than required. -- My son (says Syracides)
pour thy tears over the dead, and neglect not their burial, Ecclus. 38.66.

And therefore those dispositions are little below barbarous, which snarle at a
moderate sorrow, or decent interment of the dead, and had never so much
learning, or at least so much charity, as to interpret that of the Apostle, --
Let all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14. Had not our Savior
all the Ceremonies of this - Long home? the clean linnaen clothes? the sweet
ointments? the new Sepulcher? these Mourners (too) about the streets? He then
that in a wayward opinion shall disallow of either, may well deserve the honor
of Icholakims funeral, which is not to be named without pity, and some
scorn, Ier. 22.19.
for the Text says -- he was to be buried like an Ass --. And, for my part, I
wish him the happiness of an Anchoret, his Cell be his Church, and he himself
both Priest and Grauesman, not a tear to traile after him to his long home,
nor a Mourner -seen- about the streets.

It has been a custom of some barbarous Nations (but in this not so
despicable) to howl their dead to their long home; others dropped them in with a
tear only, no more -- In ignem posta est, fletur (says the Comicke.) That of
the Romans was too gaudy a sorrow, and comes well home to the excess of pomp
in the fate of great ones, now, who though in their life time have slau'd
themselves to the world by an ignoble retrait to obscurity, and miserable
thrift, yet at their farewell, and Going hence, to give the times a relish and
taste of their generousnesse, the - Mourners shall walk about the streets. A
monument must be built, a statue raised, Escutcheons hung, for the embalming of
his honor, whose name (sometimes) deserves more rottenness, than his carcass.

That worth is canonical, and straight, which is inrol'd, and registered in the
impartial hearts and memories of the people, not in a perfidious Tombe-stone,
or perjured Epitaph. A virtuous life is a man's best Pyramide.

Be thy actions vnblemish'd, squared out to Religion, virtue, Every heart's a
Tomb, and every tongue an Epitaph. And thus ballac'd thou need'st not fear
any flotings of the times, any moth or gangrene either on thy state, or name;
but when death shall take down those rotten sticks wherewith thy earthly tent
is composed, thy gray hairs shall go in peace to their long home, and the --
Mourners shall walk about the streets.

They have walked now, and done their deuoyer in their last way of ceremony.
But where is the body I promised you to interre? sure some Disciple stole't
away by night, and laid it in its long home, where it is now under the bondage
of corruption. But there is somewhat left behind which I would willingly
preserve from rottenesse, his name: to which, though I may lay some challenge
in respect of blood, little of acquaintance; that, being as great a stranger to
me, as the passages of his life, or death; so what I shall speak, is both
traditionary, and short, very short, thus.

He was a man of more reservedness than expression, both in his act, and
word, and of the two, he had rather do courtesies, than profess them. His
outward deportment, and face of carriage (where not known) sour, and rough.
In his passions (for which the remainder of their age in a discontented
contemplation of their misfortunes; and (I pray God) not in murmuring against
his Church. And this has occasioned a maine revolt and apostasy of some from
the bosom of this our Mother, where not finding shelter under those wings
which had bred them, flutter abroad in other Provinces, and at length trained
up to the Romish Cure; witness those many Proselytes they have gained from us
(not for matter of conscience, but of fortune) who now steeping their pens in
Wormwood, and whetting their tongues keener than any Razor, have wounded and
struck through the sides of their sometimes Mother, to her great prejudice and
dishonor. Where the fault lies, he that has but sle^derly traffiquc't with the
occurrences of the time, may judge. Spiritual promotions are slow of foot, and
come for the most part haltingly, or in a by-way. A calamity which best ages have
been obnoxious to (those of the Fathers) but by them cried down with as great
violence, as detestation. (S. Ambrose will tell with what justice, Ambros. de
dign. Sacerd. cap. 5.
I cannot, it makes me tremble) -- Videas in Ecclesia passim quos non merita,
sed pecuniae ad presbyteratus ordinem prouexerunt, nugacem populum, and
indoctum, quos si percunctari fideliter velis quis eos praefecerit Sacerdotes,
respondent mox and dicunt, Episcopus, and aes dedi, quod si non dederim hodie
non essem --. The words are broad enough in their Mother tongue, they need no
renderer, but an applier, if there be any guilt here so past blushing, that can
do it, let it thaw into horror to reade-on the Father in his -- de dignitate
Sacerdotali cap. vlt.

I have been too tedious here, you will say, too bold; but I have done nothing
but what Moses should, followed the commandment of my God, he bad me go, I
have obeyed him, and he has promised to assist me, for he will be in my mouth,
that is my second circumstance, -- Go, and I will be in thy mouth, and will
teach thee what thou shall say.

And here I should say more, but time has silenced me; a second opportunity
may perfect all, in the mean time, I shall beg Gods blessing for you, and your
charity to these. To God the Father, etc.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. Amen.
FINIS.
MOSES and AARON OR THE AFFINITY OF Civil and Ecclesiasticke power.

A SERMON INTENDED for the Parliament held at Oxon, August. 7. 1625.

But by reason of the sudden and unhappy dissolution, then, not preached, but
since upon occasion, was; at St. MARY'S in Oxford, the 26. of February. 1625.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO MY MVCH DESERVING FRIEND AND BROTHER, FRANCIS GODOLPHIN, Esquire, This.
MY DEAR SIR;
Whilst others declaime (too justly) against the dull charities of the times,
and the coldness of affection in their Allies, and blood, I cannot but
magnify their worth, in you, where I have met a virtue, scarce exampled by a
second, friendship in a brother. I thought it a high injustice to smoother such
a miracle, and therefore have here set it upon record; that, as the age may
blush at her other prodigies, so glory here, that she has (at length) brought
forth one who has not lost either his Nature to his alliance, or piety to his
Country. A goodness seldom paralelled in these days of ours, these
degenerate days of ours, when we may find a more natural correspondence, a
liuelier heat of affection, amongst those of savage and barbarous condition,
than in the bosom of our own Tribe and Nation. But I may not tax, when I am
to salute, it is out of the road of gratulation; this is intended so, A mere
declaration of my thankfulness for all those your noble Offices of a real
brotherhood, which though I have not power (as yet) to satisfy, I shall have
ever will to acknowledge, and in that loyalty I persist,

Your most respectfully engaged, HVM: SYDENHAM.

Moses and Aaron OR The affinity of Civil and Ecclesiasticke power.
EXODUS 4.12. Go, and I will be in thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall
say.


HOw strangely God compasses what he proiects for his, by the hands of an
obscure Agent? Cap. 3. v. 9.10.
Israel has been long enough under the groans of Egypt, it shall be now
vnyoakt from that heavy servitude; and this must be done by no trodden means,
or ordinary instrument, But one that Israel and Egypt too shall stand amazed at
to see in such a power of substitution, A shepherd. Cap. 3.8.
Moses a feeding his fathers flock, not far from Horeb, the mountain of the
Lord, Cap. 3.1. Cap. 3.4.
when suddenly a voice does at once astonish and inuit him, Moses, Moses.
'Tshould seem the affairs were both of necessity and dispatch, when the
person to be employed was thus pressed by a double summons: Cap. 4 18.
what shall he do now? His flock must be left with Iethro in Midian, and he
shall to Court, there to ransom an engaged and captived Nation, from the
shackles of a Tyrant; Cap. 2.17.
A simple design for one seasoned in the course conditions of an Hebrew and a
Midianite: Men known more by the largeness of their folds, than any eminence
for matters of state, most of them being heardsmen, or shepherds. But see how
God will extract wonders out of improbabilities, and miracles out of both:
Moses shall first see one, Cap. 3.2. Cap. 3.3.
and then, do many. Behold an Angel of the Lord in a flaming fire in a bush,
the bush burned (says the Text) and the Bush was not consumed. A vision as
strange as the project he is now set upon, and does not so much take, as
stagger him. That it burned and consumed not, rauishes his eyes only, how it
should burn and not consume, his intellectualls; So that he is now doubly
entranced, in the sense, and in the thought. But there is more of mystery
inuol'd here than the Prophet yet dreams of or discouers. God in his affairs
requires both heat, and constancy: men of cold and languishing resolution are
not fit subjects for his imploiments, but those which can withstand the shocke
of many a fiery trial; they whose zeal can burn cheerfully in the services
of their God and not consume. Moses, therefore shall now to Pharaoh, with as
many terrors as messages. Cap. 5. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Ten times he must bid the Tyrant let Israel go: every Iniunction shall find
a repulse, every repulse, a plague, and every plague, a wonder. Somewhat a
harsh embassy to a King, and cannot be welcomed but with a storm, whose
disposition is as impatient of rebuke, as not inured to it. Those ears which
have been sleekt hitherto with the supple dialect of the Court, (that oil of
Sycophants and temporizers) will not be roug'ht now with the course phrase of a
reproof, much less, of menacing. There Is no dallying with the eye of a
cockatrice; I am sure none, with the paw of a Lion; Ruin sits on the brow of
offended Sovereignty, each look sparkles indignation, and that indignation,
death. Moses is now startled at the employment, Cap. 3.11.
and begins both to expostulate and repine. -- Who am I that I should go unto
Pharaoh? I am not eloquent, Cap. 4.10.
but of slow speech and of a slow tongue --? Good Lord! In a Prophet what a
piece of modesty with distrust? will God employ any whom he will not
accommodate? He has now thrice persuaded Moses to this great undertaking, The
other as often manifests his unwillingness by excuse, as if he would either
dispute Gods providence, or question his supply. We find therefore this
diffidence checked with a new insinuation of rectifying all defects. Cap. 4.10.
-- Who has made man's mouth, or who makes the dumb or the deaf, or the
seeing, or the blind, have not I the Lord? Why should any further scruple or
doubt assail thee? I that am the God of the Hebrews will protect thee; let no
wauerings of Israel, or terrors of Egypt any way dismay thee: particular
infirmities in thine own person I will mould anew to perfection, Cap. 14.14.
or if those vacillations and stutterings of the tongue yet dishearten thee,
Lo Aaron the Levite is thy brother, I know that he can speak well, take him
with thee, and this rod too, wherewith thou shall do wonders as dreadful as
vnpattern'd. Deliver Pharaoh roundly my commands, if he will not vndeafe his
ear upon their first Alarm, I will bore it with my thunder. Why stand thou
then any longer so divided? Go now, and I will be in thy mouth, and teach thee
what thou shall say --.

Moses, is dispatched now, has his commission sealed, each particle of his
message punctually delivered him, wherein (as in all saecular and subordinate
Embassies) we find A command, Division.
A direction, and a Promise. The command, Go; The Promise, I will be in thy
mouth; The Direction, teach thee what thou shall say. So he that is singled out
to any service of his God for the advantage of his Israel, must not give back
or waver, Go --. If a willing obedience second this command, God promises to
assist, I will be in thy mouth; if there, be not dash't at the slownesse or
vnprouidednesse of thy speech, I will teach thee what thou shall say. Once more
is there a retired worth, which desires to sit down to obscurity, and seems
unwilling to the public services of his God, hear thou not this
proficiscere from heaven? Go. But have thou once undertook them? be not
discouraged, here is an -- aperiam, too --. I will be in thy mouth; but am I
welcomed there with reverence, and awe? speak boldly then, for, Ego instruam,
I will teach thee what thou shall say --, Go then. But let us first clear the
passage. It Is not my intent to show you Moses here in the storms and troubles
of the Court and State, but of the Church. I may not be too busy with the
riddles and Labyrinth's of the two first; the times are both rough and touchie,
I will only show you a far off, how this Proteus and that Camelion vary both
their shape and color. Moses was indeed forty years a Courtier, and the
better part of his life a Statesman, yet he was a Priest too (and so I follow
him) if you dare take the authority of Saint Augustine, who though on his
second book on Exodus 10. quaest. gives Moses barely Principatum, Aug. lib. 2.
in Exodus quaest. 10. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
and Aaron ministerium, yet in his Commentaries on the 98 Psalm, he thus
interrogates, Si Moses Sacerdos non erat, quid erat? numquid mayor Sacerdote?
and the sweet singer of Israel, put's Samuel among them that call upon Gods
Name, and Moses and Aaron amongst the Priests, Psalm. 99.6. -- I have now
removed all rubs and obstacles, the way is smooth and passable, what should
then hinder Moses any longer, Go, --.

Command and obedience are the body and soul of humane society, the head and
foot of an established Empire, Pars 1.
Command sits as Sovereign and has three Scepters, by which it rules,
Authority, Courage, Sufficiency.

Obedience, as 'twere the subject, and bears up it is allegiance with three
pillars, necessity, profit, willingness. Sometimes command grows impetuous
and rough, and then it is no more Sovereignty but Tyranny --. Again,
Obedience, upon distaste, is apt to murmr, and grows mutinous, and so it is no
more a subject, but a Rebels where they kiss mutually, there is both strength
and safety; but where they scold and jar, all grows to ruin and
combustion. And this holds not only in matters Civil, but in those more
sacred. Command from heaven presupposes in us an obedience no less of
necessity, than will, and in God, infallibility both of power, and
encouragement. Faintness of resolution, or excuse, in his high designements,
are but the Teltales of a perfunctory zeal, howeuer they pretend to
bashfulnesse, or humility. Ier. 1.
I cannot speak Lord, or, I am unworthy, were but course apologies of those
that used them, Romans 1. Exodus 3.
when God had either matter for their emploiment; or time; And the Quis ego
Domine? of Moses, here, finds so little of approbation, that it meets a
check; the Text will tell you in what heat and tumult, with an -- Accensus
suror Iehouae, Cap. 4.4.
the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and it should seem, in such
violence, that Abulensis, after much trauerse, Tossed. in cap. 4. Exodus
and dispute makes that tergiuersation of his little less than a mortal
sin, and some of the Hebrews have strangely punished it, with the loss of
Canaan, persuading us, the maine reason why he came not thither, was his
backwardness in obeying this -- proficiscere, Go. Perer. in Exodus
But that is a Thalmudicall and wild fancy, fitter for such giddy enrolements,
than the ears of a learned throng. And as Moses may not but obey when God
lays his command on him, so he must not go without it. Matthew must be
called from his receipt of custom; Mat. 9.9. Gal. 1.5.
and he is not honored with a true Apostleship, who wants his -- vocatus sicut
Aaron. That of God to the Pseudo-prophets, was a fearful Irony, -- I sent
them not, Ier. 14.
but they ran --, voluntaries (it should seem) find here neither
countenance, nor entertainment, but whom God has pressed and sealed to this
great warfare; yet the other, notwithstanding, in the field, and seasoned once
in battle, the retrait is more dangerous, than the adventure.

Esaias cap. 6.
We find Esaias more active and forward than any of the Prophets, and yet that
spontaneousnesse not chid; who (as if he would anticipate the care and choice
of God in his own affairs) makes a hasty tender of his service, 5
with an -- Ecce ego, 8
mitte me; yet, he had his former convulsions, and pangs too of fear, and
diffidence; Woe is me, 5
for I am a man of polluted lips. But see how God hammers and works what he
intends to file, either in person, 7
or by substitute? an Altar must be the Forge, and a Seraphin the workman, who
with his tongs ready, and his coal burning, shall both touch those iniquities,
and purge them, and then, and not till then, here am I, Lord, send me. As
therefore to stand still, when God sends out his proficiscere, argues a rustie
and sullen laziness, so to run when he sends not, arrogancy, and
presumption. That zeal is best qualified, which has the patience to expect
God's summons, and then the boldness to do his errand.

Aqui. 2a. 2ae. qu. 185. art. 1.
The Schooleman in his 2a. 2ae. 185. question, being to deal of religious
persons, strains not the Myter from his discourse, but moderates the quaere by
dividing it, and thinks to take away all scruple by making two, whether it be
lawful to desire Ecclesiastical honor (Episcopal he Epithites) or to
refuse it being enjoined? Greg. de Val. in loc. Aqui. did. 10. q. 3. par. 2.
Gregory de Valentia (his Amanuensis here) turns the perspectiue from the
object upon the Agent, viewing as well the party desiring as the thing
desired, where, though he descrie height of sufficiency in personal
endowments: Quaer. 1.
one Cap-A-Pe, in all points canonical, yet he allows not a bait for his
eager appetite to feed on; a disopinion'd vnder-valued man may not desire it
for the dignity, nor he that is fortunetroden for the revenue. Be the person
otherwise never so completely accommodated, yet the irregularity in his
appetite strangles his other eminencies, and so he is (at once) unworthy, and
incapable. Reason and conscience, will betroth Honors to desert, which yet
they divorce from the immodesty and heat of the desire; for, if
super-intendencie be in the appetite more than the office, it is presumption.
Aquinas does censur't so, Aquinas vt sup.
a common practice of the Gentiles, reproou'd in the Disciples; Ye know their
Princes love to dominere, Mat. 20. if the honor be superior, it is ambition,
and so merely pharisaicall, -- They love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and
chief seats at Synagogues, Matthew. 23. If the revenue, it allies to
covetousness, Matthew. 23.
and differs from the sin of Simon Magus thus, he proffered money for the
gifts, these covet the gifts for the money.

On the other side, Quaer. 2.
to reject the Ephod wherewith authority would inuest thee, checkes doubly the
refuser, in ways of charity, humility. Charity seeks no more her own, Aquin.
and Greg. vt sup.
than her neighbors good; now the charity we owe unto our selves, prompts us
to search out -- Otium sanctum (as Augustine phrases it) a holy vacancie from
these public cures, but that to the Church binds us to undergo. -- Negotium
iustum, Aug. 19. de Civil. D^i cap. 19.
the imposition of any just employment, -- quam sarcinam si nullus imponit,
intuendae vacandum est veritati, si autem imponitur, sustinenda est propter
charitatis necessitatem, the Father in his 19. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 19. Again,
humility tie's us in obedience to Superiors, so that as often as we disobey
them we do oppugn it, and this (in respect of God) is not meekness, but
pertinacy, Magn Gregor. 1. pars Past. cap. 6
-- Tunc ante Dei oculos vera est humilitas, cum ad respuendum hoc quod
vtiliter subire praecipitur, pertinax non est --, Gregory 1. part of his
Pastorals 6. Chapter.

To avoid then all occasions of public service for the Church, under a
pretense of humility or reclusenesse, speaks (too broadly) the delinquent,
refractarie. Your Anchoret that digges his grave in speculation merely, and
your Moale that is eathed wholly in an affected solitariness, are not liable
so properly to obscurity, as death; such elaboratnes tends not to perfection,
but disease; and we find an Apoplexy, and sleep, no less on their endeauours
than in their name; all knowledge is dusted with them, and it is no more a
nurserie of virtues, but a Tomb. And (indeed) such Silkewormes spin themselves
into Flies, disanimate, heartlesse Flies, life neither for Church, nor
Commonwealth. The Laurel and honor of all secular designs is the execution,
and the happiness of those sacred ones is not entailed barely to the knowledge
of them, but to the fac and viues. And that, not at home only, in thy
particular intendments, but abroad also in thy services for the Church; so that
he that retraits at any Alarm or summons of his God, for the common affairs
of the Church, to hug and enjoy himself in his solitary ends, runs
himself on the shelues of a rough censure, that of the Father to his
Dracontius, Athan. in Epist. ad Drac. Episc. fugient. pars 2. editio vltima.
-- Vereor ne dum propter te fugis, propter alios sis in periculo apud Dominum.
To stand by, and give aim only, whilst others shoot, and thou thy self no
markman, proclaims thy laziness, if not thy impotency. What a nothing is thy
arm? thy bow? thy shaft? if not practiced, not bent, not drawn up? or if so
glorious a mark, the Church? why not leueld at? either she must be unworthy of
thy travel, or thine of her. If therefore this thy Mother implore thy aid (so
Augustine counsels his Eudoxius) on the one side, August. Epist. 81.
hand not with ambition; on the other, lean not to a lazy refusal, weigh not
thine own idleness with the necessities and greatness of her burdens, to
which (whiles she is in travel) if no good men will administer their help,
Certe quomodo nasceremini non inueniretis; God must then invent new ways for
our new birth: the Father in his 81. Epistle ad Edoxium.

You see then our Moses may not hastily thrust himself upon those weighty
designs without authority and commission from his God, and yet once summoned,
not recoile; but thus having his Congedeleere and warrant from above, we must
now account him in the place of God, God indeed, with a -- sicut -- the Text
tells us so, thrice tells us so, God to Aaron, God to Israel, God to Pharaoh.
Exodus 3.4, 5.
'Twere then too high a sacrilege to rob him of any title or prerogative,
which should wait on the greatness of such a person. Let Us give him (what all
ages have) Eminency of place, Office, their attendants, Honor, Revenue. I
shall dwell my hour with the two first, with the latter only, in Transitu, and
upon the by, they being inuolued in the two former. And that I may punctually
go on, I will touch first (where I should) with the Eminency -- Go. --

Which as it was sacred in the first instaulement, Eminen. 1. par.
so in the propagation most honorable to the times of Heathens. Tert. de
Coron. militis cap. 10.
For Tertullian (speaking of the magnificence and pomp which attended their
superstitions) tells us, that their doors, and Hoasts, and Altars, and dead,
and (what glorifies all) their Priests were crowned: in his Corona militis cap.
10. And the first crown which the Romans used, was their spicea Corona, given
as a religious ensign in honor of their Priests, -- Honosque is, Pliu. lib.
8. cap. 2.
non nisi vita finitur, and exules etiam, captosque comitatur -- says my
Histostorian, naught but death could terminate this honor, which was their
companion both in exile, and captivity. They wore the name of Aruales
Sacerdotes, Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 1. cap. 26.
first instituted by Romulus, and Acca Laurentia, his Nurse, who, of her twelve
Sons having lost one, he himself made up the number with that title. But
here is not all, -- Terminorum sacrorum, and finium, iurgijs terminandis
praeerant, and interuenicbant, they were the peacemakers of the time, and fate
as Arbitrators in matters of contestation between man and man, Plin. vt sup.
as the great Naturalist in the 18. book of his History, 2. chapter. And who
fitter for such a moral office than the Priest? an honor which these worst of
times allow him, though with some turbulency, Numb. 16.3.
and indignation: Moses and Aaron, you take too much upon you, was the cry of
a Jew once, so it is now, who would manacle and confine them only to an
Ecclesiasticke power, and deuest them quite of any civil authority, though
Moses here had both. But 'twas not without some show of mystery, that in the
robes of Aaron (I instance now in him, lest perchance they should cavil with
his brother Moses) there was a crown set upon the Myter, Exodus 29.6.
moralizing a possible conjunction at least of Minister and Magistrate in one
person. 2 Timothy 2. Chyt. de ordin. minist. page 506.
And Chytraeus has a patheticall observation from the Apostles (...) -- divide
aright, that the Metaphor was first taken from the manner of cutting or
dividing the members of the host, Leuit. 7. where the fat and kidneies were
burnt as a sacrifice to God, but the breast and the shoulder were given to the
Priests: the Allegory carries with it both weight and majesty, here is a breast
for counsel, and a shoulder for supportation in matters of government. And no
doubt in times of old (even these of the Fathers) the Sacerdot all power, was
at a great height, in equal scale with that of their honor, Si Regum fulgori
and principum Diademati inferius est quam si plumbi metallum ad auri fulgorem
compares, Ambr. ibid.
which was so eminent, that Saint Ambrose ranks not the Myter with the Diadem,
but in a zealous Hyperbole (pardon the Epithet) preferres it, and makes this
comparatively to the other as a sparkle to a flame, or dull Lead to burnisht
Gold, in his de dignitate Sacerdotali cap. 2.

I may not follow the Father in his priestly Panegiricke, it is too high, and
borders too much on the discipline of the triple crown, such a crown as never
yet girt the temples of King or Priest, but of him that tramples on the neck
of both; let such insolence invade the right of Potentates, and spurn their
Crowns and Scepters in the dust, whilst we seat our Aaron at the beck of
Moses, but the people too at that of Aaron: Let the Priesthood do obeisance,
and kiss the feet of Sovereignty; but let not the Laity turn the heel, and
kick against the sacredness of Priesthood. S. Augustine upon these words of
God to Moses, -- Tu eris illi in ijs quae ad Deum. -- Hec shall be to thee in
stead of a mouth, Exodus 4.16.
and thou shall be to him in stead of God, seems entranced awhile, and
bringing them to the balance, Aug. lib. 2. Exodus 10. quaest.
and weighing precisely every scruple, cries out, Magnum Sacramentum cuius
figuram gerat, as if Moses were a medium between God and Aaron, and Aaron
between Moses and the people. The moral is plain, Sovereignty stands
between God and the Priesthood, and the Priesthood between Sovereignty and
the people. Howeuer the Ceremonies due to either heretofore, in matters of
Instaulement, stood not at such enmity as we can say they differed, they were
both anointed, and both crowned; and though the authority were unequal in
respect of place, yet not of employment, Ye are full of power by the spirit of
the Lord, Micah. 3.8. And Elisha could once tell the King, He should know there
was a Prophet in Israel, 2 King. 5.8. And in matters of preservation God was as
zealous for the safety of these as them, -- Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.

But let not my zeal to the Priest dispriuiledge my alleagiance to my King. I
speak not this to set up Moses in competition with Pharaoh, or rival the
dignity of the Priesthood with that of Sovereignty; but to mind you in what
luster it sometimes shined, and how the times now conspire to cloud that glory.

The days have been, when the Laicke was ambitious, not only of the title of
a Priest, but the office: for Eusebius examples in many of them, who thrusting
upon Bishops of primitive times, Statim concionandi munus obierunt, in his lib.
6. cap. 15. And Tertullian (speaking of the insolences and taunts which the
Laity then put upon the Priesthood) tells us that they justified their malice
and injuries to the Priest, by usurping the name, or profaning rather, Tort.
lib. de Monog. cap. 12.
-- Quum extollimur and inflamur aduersus clerum, tunc omnes Sacerdotes, quia
Sacerdotes nos Deo, and Patri fecit, quum ad peraequationem disciplinae
Sacerdotalis prouocamur, deponimus infulas, and pares sumus; in his book de
Monogamia, cap. 12.

It should seem then the office and name past honorably through all ages,
even those of Infidels, though the person were sometimes exposed to the
persecutions of the time, and suffered under the blasphemies of unchristian
tongues; but now the very title grows barbarous, and he thinks he has
wittily discountenanced the greatness of the calling, that can baffle the
professor with the name of Priest. But these, whilst they intend to wound,
they honor us, and we account them no scarres, but glories. Let such children
mock on the Prophet, the event (I believe) will prove as horrid as that of
old, will you tremble to hear it spoken? you may read it then, and look pale
too, in 2 King. 2.24.

Office 2.
May it please you now, turn your eyes from the dignity, and reflect upon the
office. The office, a task indeed, such a one as should rather provoke our
endeauours, than appetites. If any man desire the office of a Bishop (let us
awhile leave the word Priest, and fasten upon this, the authority may bear it
out the better) desires a good work, 1 Timothy 3.1. 1 Timothy 3.1. Lib. 19. Ciuit.
Dei cap. 19.
Quia nomen operis est, non honoris (as Augustine glosses it) it is a name of
work, not honor; a work no less fearful, than laborious, no where better
figured than by Moses, here, to Pharaoh, repriuing Israel from Egypt, from
which it is scarce any way differenced, but in the difficulty, and therein it
exceeds the type; difficulty worthy the trauells of the best, were not those
labors shouldered and thrust on by vainglory. Greg. de Val. in 2a. 2ae.
disp. 10. 43. part. 2.
Istaec cathedra cupientem se, and audacter expetente^, non requirit, sed
ornatum, sed cruditum --. So Valentia upon Aquine. -- This chair of Moses is
no seat of ambition, but desert, it hates either an intruder, or pursuer; He
that gains it by covetousness, or bold desire, does not possess, but invade
it, and it is not so much his by right of inheritance, as usurpation.

These honors fawn only upon humble worths, men clad and harnessed with
double eminency, of life, of learning, those whose virtues have advanced them
above the ordinary level and pitch of popularity. Yet to these neither without
this proficiscere -- to Moses, Go. Clemens in his first Epistle, will persuade
you: it is the conclusion of Saint Peter. Augustine goes farther, Lib. 19. de
Ciuit. Dei, cap. 19.
-- Locus superior sine quo populus regi non potest, et si administretur vt
decet, tamen indecenter appetitur --. Suppose the man worthy of this place of
Eminency, and comes home in matters of administration, yet he is to blame in
those of appetite, Greg. de Val. vt supra.
for the desire lays open his unworthiness, and the Schoolman will not
flatter him, but concludes it plainly for a mortal sin. And if we may
guess at the child by the parent, it best countenanceth leuity, or arogance,
never read to be the proper seeds of any virtue. Notwithstanding this desire
(sometimes) comes not within the compass of presumption, Part. 1. Pastor. cap.
8.
if the work be the object of our appetite, and not the honor, or, if the
honor, not the reuenew, -- Appetere colsitudinem Episcopalem, non est semper
praesumptio, sed appetere Episcopatum, ratione celsitudinis, appetit enim
celsitudinem, supra dignitatem -- Gregory will have it so. Howeuer, 1 Timothy 3.1.
if it please you to glance on my former quotation from the Apostle, 'twill not
so much whet your appetite, as gravel it; Beza in locum.
for first Beza limits the desire, If any man desire? and it is not meant -- de
ambitu -- of the appetite, or ambition to get the Sea, but de animo, of the
earnest desire to benefit the Church, or admit the words will carry that
interpretation, yet the commendation which is annexed truces with the work,
not the desire, -- Bonum opus de siderat --, not -- been desiderat --, though
it be good what he desires, yet he does not well to desire it. Men unworthy of
what they sue for, only because they sue for it. And this in Primitive times
has occasioned in many no less a modesty than unwillingness in those sacred
undertakings, when the Fathers, with a kind of reluctancie and fear, were
towed on to these high employments. Nay some, whether through majesty of the
place, or roughness of the times, or guilt of their own weakness, have
panted and breathed short in their desires to this great enterprise, and at
length exchanged the honor for an exile. Greg Naz in praefat. Apol. Athan. in
epist. ad Draconi. Episc. fug: vt Gl^ss. in prim. Euan. Marc.
Nizianzen flies into Pontus; Dracontius, into the skirts of Alexandria: and it
is tradition'd me by Aquinas, (and he quotes Saint Jerome for it) that Saint
Mark cut off his thumb, Vt Sacerdotio reprobus haberetur -- They are the
Schoolemans own words in his 2a. 2ae. quaest. 185. Artic. 1. But 'twill not be
amiss here to take Saint Ambrose -- quamuis notandum -- with us; that these
things were done in the Churches great extremities, when he that was -- primus
in presbyterio, Part. 2. past. c. 3.
was -- primus in Martyrio. 'Twould require the temper of a brave resolution,
and a better zeal, to desire this Bonum opus, when 'twas made the touchstone
and furnace of men's faith and constancy, not only in leading others to the
stake, but their own suffering where they were to be a voluntary Holocaust, and
sacrifice to the Church, there to remain a monument of their Religion, and
others tyranny. It Is true, Histories have furnished us with examples of some
which have renounced an Empire, and (which is strange) a Popedom; Dioclesian
did one, and Celestinus, the other. The times (we may suppose) were blustering,
and the revenues thin at Rome, when the honor of the chair, was at once not
desired and scorned. No project now vnsifted, no stratagem vndig'd for; no
reach of policy vnfathom'd for the compassing of that great See, though by
synister, though by devilish attempt, nay, that is the chief engine by which
it works. Tiberius could once tell a Prince of the Celts, that Rome had a sword
for her conquest, not an Apothecaries shop; now they are both too little;
Sword, and poison, and massacre, and Pistol, and knife, and powder, for the
purchase (or at least the strengthening) of the triple crown.

And I would Mach^auell had rendeuouz'd only in Iesuited Territories, and not
knocked at the gates of Protestant Dominions; it is to be feared he has Factors
nearer home, those which not only know the backdoores to the Staff, and
Myter, but are acquainted with the lock, which if they cannot force or pick
by the finger of policy or greatness, they turn with that golden key which
at once opens a way to a purchased honor, and a ruin.

Ambition whither will thou? nay, where will thou not? to the pinnacle of the
Temple for the glory of the world, though thou tumble for it to thy eternal
ruin.

The Greek Philosopher will beg of the gods, that he may behold the Sun so
near, as to comprehend the form, Eudoxus.
beauty, greatness of it, and afterward he cares not if he burn, as if
there were no such Martyrdom, as what Ambition fires. Occidar modo imperet --,
Tacit. Annals.
was the resolution of Agrippina for her Nero; but lo, how the event crowns
the vnsatiatenesse of her desires? He gains the kingdom, and first dig'd out
those bowels which had fostered him, and then that heart which was the throne
of such an aspiring thought; cruelty shall I call it, or justice, when the
vain glory of the mother was penanc'd with the unnaturalness of the son. Thus
lofty minds (furnished with a strong hope of the success of their designs)
have embark't themselves into great actions, and proposing humane ends, as
scales to their high thoughts, have bin wasted into strange promotions, but
after they have (a while) spangl'd in that their firmament of honor, they
become falling stars, and so the success proves as inglorious as the
enterprise was bold, and desperate. We have seldom met with any eminency that
was sudden and permanent: Those which in their dawne of Fortune break so
gloriously, meet with a storm at noone, or else a cloud at night. The Sun
that rises in a gray and sullen morn, sets clearest; and indeed ambition is
too hasty, and is hur^ ^d violently to the end it aims at without
cautelousnesse and circumspection to the mean; but humility has a calm and
temperate pace, and stoopes it along in a gentle posture, yet at length
attaines her mark, but slowly, as if it went unwilling to honor, and slighted
those proffers which others sue for. I envy Scipio Africanus, and Marcus
Portius (you know whose it is, Traianus to Plutarch) more for contempt of
offices, than the victories they have won, because a conqueror for the most
part is in Fortunes power, but the contempt of offices lived in prudence. Will
you hear the paraphrase? Tacitus giue's it, Sapientibus cupido gloriae
nouissima, exuitur --. Wisemen are so little in the drift of honor that they
loath the sent, it is the vanity, they last put off, and there was a time when
a modest refusal of them, was no by-way to them; for this shadow once
followed, flies, but fled, Chrysostom. Hom. 35. in Matthew.
follows -- primatus fugientem desiderat, desideratum horret, says the
Father. It Is a trick of primacie to fawn where it is not croocht too, but
look coy where it is over courted, like some weather-cocks which in a constant
and churlish wind beak fairly toward us, but in a wanton blast, turn tail.

Hence it is that in matters of authority, and pre-eminence, pride has for
the most part the foil, humility the conquest, that stoopes basely to the
title, or the profit, and looses either, This in a modest distance keeps a
loose, till worth inuit it, and at length gains both; so that it is in ways
of promotion, as in some waterworks, where one Engine raises it to make it
fall more violently, another beats it down that it might mount higher. The advice then of S. Peter comes seasonably here, 1 Pet. 5.6.
-- Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time. The words are not without their strength of emphasis, here is an --
humiliamini -- crowned with an -- vt exaltet, humble your selves, that he may
exalt, as if humility were so necessary a disposition to preferment, that
without it God might not exalt. But soft, Impostor; Thou which iuglest both
with God and with the times, I call not that humility which is typ'd in the
downfall of the look, or the affected crindge and posture of the body, but
the knee of the inward man, which the Wiseman of old called the character of an
holy soul, leading noble hearts slowly to the feasts of friends, but speedily
to their succor in calamities; So that true meekness is retinu'd with a
double worth, charity, resolution; And the Philosopher will tell you, Plato in
Timaeo.
it is A virtue belongs to the courageous part of the soul, seated between two
base extremes, Pusillanimity, Arrogance, No Buffone, and yet no Bafler,
supporting sometimes injuries, not out of cowardice, but Patience, allaying all
tumults and instigations of the soul to revenge or choler, not exposed to any
violence of passion, but as temperate in disposition, as settled; no wave in her
design, nor tempest in her thought; she is all calm, not a wind so rough as
to move a storm either in her mind or action. But there is a squint-eiea
humility, which casts one way, and points another; the look is dejected,
still groueling toward the earth, and with such a dress of mortification, as
if it desired no more of it, than would serve it for a grave; when the thought
measures out a Diocese, or labors on some greater project, which gained the
countenance is cheered, the body droopes not, and he can now safely i^st it
with that old Abbot, Quaerebam prius claues monasterij,
Quibus inuentis, nunc rectus incedo.


And this subtle Nauigator never steeres as he sets his compass; the look
(happily) points you to a formal meekness, but the thought still coasts upon
Ambition; yet this gluttonous desire seldom anchors any where, but goes on
still with a full sail, till 't'ath compassed the cape it is bound for, Seneca.
-- Habet hoc vitiumomnis ambitio, non respicit, The thirst of Eminency is
headstrong, and runs with a loose bridle. It Is to see much below satietie, that
it still desires, nay it is hungry even in surfeit, and is sharpened with the
fruition of that it coueted; so that the birth of this title is but the
conception of another, one honor rooms not the greatness of his thought, our
Aaron is not contented with an Ephod, the rod of Moses, would do well too;
Authority is slighted, discipline fallen, and corruption crept strangely into
the times, but

Iumen. Sat. 1.
-- O fortunatam me consule, Romam. What should a merciful worth do with a
Consulship? it is a place for thunder, not clemency, one that can strike dead
exorbitancie with the furrows of the brow, and quell all vice with the tempest
of a look, one that can both vnsheath the sword of authority, and brandish
it, if not to reformation, yet to ruin; Thus he would make government the
stale both of his pride and Tyranny, his proiects are loftily cruel, so are
his actions too, yet still in a hot sent of promotion, which (if they want a
trumpet for others commendation) shall borrow one from his own, and so at once
applaud his designs, and justify them. And indeed this titillation and itch
of honor, if it once find in the bosom of the receiver a fair admittance,
does smoothly insinuate and cheat upon the powers of Reason, But when it is
thoroughly seated and enthroned there, it is no more a guest but a Tyrant, and
leaves the possessor, not a master, but a captive, and in this case, I know not
whether Saint Augustine will pity his Aurelius, or excuse him, Aug. Epist.
64. ad Aurel.
-- Et si cuiquam facile sit gloriam non cupere dum negatur, difficile est ea
non delectari cum offertur -- in his 64 Epistle. Howeuer the Father seems
there to plead only for the delight in glories offered, not in the unjust
prosecution of those denied. But our humble-arrogant walks not to his temple
of honor by that of virtue, but invasion; and of some of his colleagues, the
Fathers complained of old, Qui nequaquam diuinitus vocati, Greg. part. 1. past.
cap. 2.
sed sua cupiditate accensi, culmen regimini. rapiunt potius, quam assequuntur
It Is Saint Gregory's line, and a strong one too, such a one as the Prophet once
lash't Judah with, Hos. 8.4.
Ho. 8.4. They have set up a King but not by me, they would make a Ruler, I
knew it not. Mat. 23.
Would you have a more punctual character, that of the Pharisees is most
apposite: They love greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi,
Rabbi, Matthew. 23.7. Devout cruelty, Religious arrogance (the Father will make
it out) Ob pietatem miseri, ob splendorem infaelices, Greg. Naz. in praefat.
Apol. edict. lat.
in his Apology first Oration 44. page

But I have followed Moses too long as a Magistrate, I must now a while as a
Priest, and (what I exchanged him for) a Bishop. I shall not travel far,
e're I descry them both in a full careere, not far from the road I left the
Magistrate, Ambition, but in a more covert, and untrodden way; a way, howeuer
doubly obnoxious to the passenger, because unwarrantable, because forbidden; no
authority for his progress, no Letters patents from heaven, no proficiscere
from his God, Go, yet he runs, runs without command, nay against it,
trebly against it, against that, non dominantes in clerum --, feed, 1. Pet.
5.3. Iam. 3.1.
But not as Lords over Gods heritage, but ensamples, and against that nolite
magistri, be not masters, knowing you shall receive the greater condemnation;
nay against the direct prohibition of Christ to his Disciples, Matthew 20.27.
-- Will there be any great among you --, (...), let him be your servant. It Is
high time then this bladder were a little pricked, and this impostume launc'd.
The body of the Church desire's it, cries for it, she is sick, sick even unto
death, yet no Physician in Israel will administer, will? durst not; We are
grown so emasculate, and palsie-strooken, in ways of reprehension, the times
so censorious, and in a lust of novelty, that this mount of God which was wont
to send out lightnings and thunder to the Israelites below, is now grown a
terror to the Moses that shall climb it. And whereas the Pulpit has been
formerly our Tribunal to judge and sentence the lapses and deprauations of the
people, they have made at length a bar for our own arraignement, and their
doom or mercy passes on us, as we shall please or not please, but the verdict
runs much to the fancy of the censurer, which is commonly as barbarous and
wild, as he that gives it. Discourses (and I am sorry I cannot call them
Sermons) are so sleeke, and wooing for applause, the ears of the times so coy,
and picked for accuratenesse, that to be plain or home, entitles the speaker to
rudeness or stoicisme, each offered annotation is a barbarism, and every
reproof a libell. The hewing down of a glorious vice, or the whipping of a
sin in scarlet, Praemunires him that does it, and he grows a tributary and
slave to the frowns and dishonours of the time, Iuuen. Sat. 1.
-- Vnde illa priorum -- scribendi quodcunque animo flagrante liberet --
Simplicitas? 'Tshould seem Antiquity had a privilege of venting any thing
that proceeded from the simplicity and truth of an honest breast; But the
thoughts of aftertimes were choked with a -- non audeo dicere --, sincerity
was turned bankrupt, and truth an exile, plaine-dealing, pertinacie, and zeal,
madness. But what, shall Moses here be tongue-tyed, shall he stutter in the
Messages of his God? -- Quid refert dictis ignoscat Mutius annon? Iu. ibid.
Pusillanimity and deiectednesse of spirit in the employment of thy Maker, is
the basest degree of cowardice; for my part, I have set up my resolution with
that of S. Bernard: Ad Fulc. Epist. 2.
Quid me loqui pudeat, quod illis non puduit facere? si pudeat audire quod
impudenter egerunt, non pudeat emendare quod libenter non audiant. Let me tell
howeuer this child of vainglory, that no touch of malecontentednesse, or
spirit of inuection puts me on the justice of these complaints; But that which
the devout Abbot calls, patient anger, humble indignation -- even that charity
wherewith he catechized his ambitious pupil, -- Quae tibi condolet, quaemuis
non dolenti, B^rn. ad Fulc. epist. 2.
quae tibi miseretur, licet non miserabili, and inde magis dolet, quod cum sis
dolendus, non doles, and inde magis miseretur, quod cum miser sit, miserabilis
non es, vult te tuum scire dolorem, vt iam non habeas vnde dolere, vult te tuam
scire miseriam, vt incipias miser non esse, in his 2 Epistle, Ad Fulconem --.

I never yet envied the prosperity of any, I have sometimes wond'red at their
ways of advancement, and now have trac't them, and find a double staire by
which they ascend, zeal, policy, -- (please you to translate the terms, you
may, they will bear the christning) Faction, Simony --, one of the chief
means to gain preferment, is, to cry down the way to it. And he that will
have three livings, must first preach violently against two. Non-residency must
be a capital and indispensable crimes. Pluralities, damned, till they be
either offered, or possessed, when the fish is caught, what makes the net here
then? away with it; the question is stated on to'ther side. A double Benefice
is but one living, and that swallowed with as little reluctation, as 'twas but
now thundered against, with all the bitterness that the power of virulence
could suggest; all is well now, the conscience is at peace, and (what is
strange) the tongue too. Ere long, Non-residency hangs not in the teeth, but
that is easily put off, for the honor of Nicodemus, -- To be a great Master in
Israel, Sueton.
-- Si violandum sit ius, regnandi cause a violandum, -- what matter's it for
justice so we gain an Empire? or for equity so we may insult? The application
needs no skrew, 'twill come home of it is own accord to the murmurings of the
guilty bosom; In the mean time it much staggers me, to see the reconcilement
of two virtuous friends with a base adversary? a Saint in the countenance, an
Angel in the tongue, with an Hypocrite at the heart.

Thus (beloved) upon easy enquiry we may as well descrie an equivocation in
the look, as in the word, and he that can art it handsomely in ways of
dissimulation, has not so much two tongues, as two faces; one looks toward
the world, where demureness lays on her paint and color, and this oftentimes
deludes, shamefully deludes; the other toward heaven, and that is but coursely
daubed in respect of it, for the eye of the Almighty cannot be dazell'd, that
will descrie her furrows and deformities, and at length give her a reward
answerable to the defert, her portion with the Hypocrite, and there I leave it.

This fruitless and pernicious branch pruned, and lopt off, the other buds, no
less dangerous than that, and yet more flourishing, it sprouts now to such a
breadth and height, that it has almost ouershadowed the body of the Church,
insomuch, that the Fowls of the air lodge in the branches thereof. No Vulture
or Raven (emblemes of rapine and greediness) though they devour and hauock it
(so they have a trick of merchandising) but nests and perches there; nay
scarce an Owl or Buzzard (now the metaphors of dullness and simplicity) but
hoots and revels there. Times more than calamitous, when the inheritance and
patrimony of the Church, shall be thus leas'd out to avarice and folly, when
those her honors which she entailes upon desert, shall be heaped upon a golden
ignorant, who rudely treades on those sacred prerogatives, without any
warranted proficiscere from God or man. We find Moses trembling here, though
encouraged both by the persuasion and command of the Almighty, -- Et
infirmquisque vt honoris onus suscip at, anhelat, Greg. par. 1. past. cap. 7.
and qui ad casum valde vrgetur ex proprijs, humeru^ libenter opprimen^u^
ponderibus submittit alienis --. It Is Gregory's complaint in the 1. part of his
Pastoral, chapter 7.

Strange monument of weakness! he that reeles under his own burden, stoopes
to be oppressed with the weight of others, and lo how he tumbles to a mortal
sin (The Schoolmen does style it so) directly opposite to a pair of
virtues, justice, charity; unjust, that the revenues due to worth should be
pack't upon bulcklesse and unable persons, Greg. de Val. in 2a. 2ae. Aqui.
did. 10. q. 3 punc. 2.
and uncharitable for him to undertake the guidance and pasturing of a flock
who was never trained up in the conditions of a shepherd. Neither is he an
enemy only of a double virtue, but a companion of two such sins which seem
to brave, and dare the Almighty to revenge on the prophaner, Intrusion,
perjury; first, in rushing on the profession not legitimately called, then in
purchasing her honors. Yet there are which can say with the Disciple --
Master, we have left all and followed thee -- our birthright for the Church;
left did I say? sold it, exchanged the possessions of our Fathers (their
vineyard) to purchase thine; and in stead of that penny which thou give in
liew of a Crown and recompense to thy labourer, we have given thousands to be
possessed one, and so, thou not hiring us, we have, it. But hear S. Bernard
schooling his Eugenius, and do not so much blush as tremble, -- Quis mihi det,
Bern. epist. 238. ad Euge.
ante quam moriar videre ecclesiam Dei sicut in diebu^ antiquis quando Apostoli
laxabant retia in capturam, non aurd, sed animaerum! quam cupio te illius
hareditare vocem cuius ad^ptus es sedem? Pecunia tua tecum in perditionem --. O
vex tonitrui! The Abbot goes on devoutly in the 238. Epistle ad Eugenium.

If that Father be too calm and modest in his reproof, and cannot rouse blood
in the cheeks of the delinquent: S. Ambrose shall startle it, or else scare
you with the vision of Simon Magus, Amb. de dign. sacerd. cap. 5.
or Gehazi, -- Qui non timentes illud Petri, aut Elizei, Sacerdotalem defamant
honorem, sanctique Episcopatus gratiam pecunijs coemerunt; in his de dignitate
Sacerdotali cap. 5.

And indeed, in ways of sufficiency and worth, it is the -- si nil attuleris --
damp's the preferment; The age can instance, in some languishing and weak in
their intellectuals, men without sap or kernel, who (having their storehouse
well fraught with that white and red earth) have stumbled on the glories of the
time, as if fortune would make them happy in despite of virtue; when others of
Christ's followers (were truly his Disciples) are sent abroad with their -- ite
and praedicate -- barefooted, without bag or scrip, but their Commission large
-- Omni creaturae -- the wide world is their place of residence, no particular
roof to shelter them, or place of retiredness to lay their head in. Nay some
that have served a triple Apprentiship to Arts and Sciences, and spent in these
our Athens the strength of their time and patrimony, men thoroughly ballac'd
for those high designs, well kern'd both in years and judgment, lie
mouldring for non-employment, and dashed for slownesse of promotion; when others
of cheap and thin abilities, men without growth or bud of knowledge, have met
with the honors of advancement, and trample on those dejected bookewormes
which dissolve themselves into industry for the service of their Church, yet
meet neither with her pomp, nor her revenue; nay, some that have wasted their
Lamp, are burnt their Taper to an inch of years, have spent those fortunes in
the travails of Divinity, which would largely have accommodated them for more
secular courses, and enforced to retire themselves to the solitariness of some
ten-pound Cure, and so spin out (...) he has suffered strangely in the
censures of the world) somewhat windy, and tempestuous, but such as had
authority only from the tongue, not the heart, and as soon ore-blowne, as
occasioned, naught else but a green leaf in a flame, cracked, sparkled, and
so out. His rule of friendship the best, not popular, but choice, and there
too, where it found truth, no gloss; there vnshooke, nobly-constant, his, both
in his heart, and in his purse; not in his purse, (as Seneca writes of
Sicilius, where naught could be extracted but an hundred upon a hundred) or as
your Hackney Mynt-men for the most part do, ten upon the same number, but that
trebled, many times, for nothing, as the clemency of some vnpersecuting scroles
can testify. His contribution, and benevolence in way of alms, rather powered
out, than given, as if poverty had been the object of his profuseness, not of
his relief; yet that without froth of ostentation, without reference to merit,
on the grounds of a true charity. His Religion (wherein the world thought he
had wau'd and tottered) upon his accounts to God, and his inlargements and
declarations to his friends, on his deathbed, fast to the Church of England;
which, (though in the last act) was beleager'd by some emasculate suggestions,
yet, blessed be the circumspection of a careful Son, it stood vnbatter'd,
and in that loialty, and strength, he penitently gave up his soul into the
hands of his Redeemer.

And now he is gone, let his imperfections follow, and the memory of them rot,
and moulder with his body; he had many, some preualent; and (good Lord) which
of us have nor in a large proportion! But they are our earthy and dusty, and
ashy part, so they were his; let them then be buried with him; shouell them
into his grave; earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust; let them spring
no more, to the soyling and dishonor of his name, or our own
uncharitableness, but let his ashes rest in peace; for he is now -- Gone to
his long home, and the mourners have walked for him about the streets.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. Amen.
FINIS.

