portrait

THE PARLIAMENT Of Virtues Royal: ( Summoned in France; but assembled in
England) for Nomination, Creation, and Confirmation of The most Excellent
Prince PANARETVS

A Praesage of Pr. DOLPHIN: A Pourtrait of Pr. -- HENRY: A Promise of Pr.
CHARLES.
Translated and Dedicated To His Highness, by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

To the Honorable, Sir Robert Carry: Sir James Fullarton: Sir Robert Carr: Sir
David Foulis: Mr. Thomas Murray.
Grave Guides and Guards of Hopeful CHARLES his Wayn,
Least I incurr the least of Your Disdaigne;
^f, without Leave, I (ouer-rashly rude)
^surp Your Rooms, or on Your Rights intrude;
(...) humbly crave Your License; and Your Loves,
^or My Address, When My Access behooves.
I know, the Field of His Young HIG Hnes heart
So duly tilled by Your deep Care and Art
Adding His Fathers Royal golden Writ;
And goodly Practice, to demonstrate it:
His (late) rare Brother's Pattern, of Renown:
With Honest Quin's new-cast Prince-Worthy Crown:
And holy Promptings of that reverend Pair,
^ilborn and Hakwill, from the saecred Chair)
That little needs He the Stagyrian's store,
The Corduban's, or the Attik-Muse his Lore:
Much less (alas!) My silly Muses Myte,
With borrowed Feathers to advance his Flight.
Yet, since, too-often, to a tender Ear,
^oo-serious Lectures sound buttoo-severe;
Especially, to Princes dainty Taste,
They seem but harsh, and will not down in haste
(As holesom'st Dishes, if but homely dressed,
Some queasie Stomachs hardly can digest):
Let me presume (with your good leaves) a while
To imitate Physicians honest Guile;
Who, often, in Sugar sheathe their bitter Pills,
The better so to C^re unwilling Ills,
When way ward Patients, for the Sugars sake,
Take-in their Health, which else they would not ta^
Sad Rules of Patience, Abstinence, Austeritie,
Humility, Frugality, Sincerity,
Religion, Labor, Care of Commonwealth,
And Many, meet for Prince and Peoples Health;
Which hardly can, in their Own Likeness, sink
In Youth-ful Minds (scarce in their Ears, I think)
How grau^ly often, with greatest Diligence
Pressed; and impressed with Tullian Eloquence:
Sweetly disguised, in artificial Sut^s,
Dancing the Measures after Delphian Lutes,
Washed in Nectar, wrapped in sugared Verse,
Enter more easily, and more deeply perce.
This I endeavor: and to This Intent
I summon CHARLES to Virtues PARLIAMENT
TO The High-Hopeful CHARLES, Prince of Great-Britanne.
WHere witty Bertault (in his Fancy) meant
But a faint Praesage of His Pr. of France;
Our Hopes of Ours the better to advance,
We have presumed to call a PARLIAMENT
Where Royal Virtues, from Olympus sent,
By several ACTS of sacred Ordinance,
Conform, confirm Your future Governance;
So please it Heaven Yor heart and hand consent.
O! please it Heaven, You may be pleased Thus,
These Works to imitate, These Acts to act;
^o prove yor self, This same PANARETVS,
^hen future Age shall see our Hopes in Fact,
(...), while I pray; sweet Prince, in humblest sort
^cite Yor Highness to This Soverain Court.
To Yor Highness Service humbly-devoted, Iosuah Syluester.

TO The right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal: The Knights and
Burgesses of the Lower House: and To all generous and ingenuous Readers.
PResuming all Your Lordships will appear,
Not by your Proxies, but in Person, Here;
And in your Turns, say (Every-one) Content,
To Every Act, in Virtues PARLIAMENT:
I humbly bring You Every-one A Brief
Of every Bill; or, at the least, the Chief.
An Act against Duels, desperate Combats, and R^sing Boys. Pag^ An Act for
better Execution of the former Act. An Act against Hypocrisy. An Act against
Superstition. An Act against Abuses in the Courts of Justice. An Act for some
Mitigation of the former Act. An Act for due Execution of Justice in general.
An Act against Persian State, in proud Retirednes. An Act against prosuse
Prodigality. An Act of exceeding Love and excellent Resolution. An Act of
rarest Piety in a Prince. An Act for Imitation and continuance of the former
Act. 61 An Act for right Employment of Public and Private Treasure. 61 An Act
against Ingratitude. 63 An Act against King-Killers, Powder-Traitors, and their
Abettors. 64 An Act for Clemency, and against Impunity. 65 An Act for
Propagation of Princely Piety. 66 An Act against the Mitred-Monarchy. 66 An Act
of Admiration. 67 An Act for Reading of Histories. 68 An Act against ignorant
and ignominious Chroniclers. 68
THese All are Public Acts: Private, This Session
Has Passed None: but in the next Impression,
Your Acts of Bounty, and the rest of Mark,
Shall be recorded, By Your Vnder-Clark,
Iosuah Syluester.

Names of the Nobles in This Parliament, Interpreted.
PANARETVS: AL-VERTVOVS Andria: Prowess. Phronesia: Prudence. Pistia:
Fidelity. Eumenia: Clemency. Euergesia: Liberality. Hypomone: Patience.
Cateria: Constancy. Aletheia: Truth. Dicea: Justice. Eusebia: Piety.

Interpretation of other terms used in This Parliament.
Dysidaimone: Superstition. Fridea: Contention. Merimne: Careful-vexation
Dapania: Charge or Cost. Adicia: Injustice. Oval: Crowns for unbloody Victors

PANARETVS.
Y^ERES timely Turns, unto a Luster run,
Brought forth at last the long-long wished Sun,
^here on our Hopes our just Desires pursewd,
^o see our PRINCELING with a Name indewd
Which, Since WE saw, or heard that Happy sound,
^turn's slow Teem had trotted twice the Round)
^hen, lo, The Etern All-Maker's Majesty,
Quick-darting down his All-discerning Eye,
^hereby his Goodness all his Works does guide;
^^d seeing pressed the sacred Pomp and Pride
As in so solemn Mysteries is wont)
^ado^^ the Altars and the hallowed Font;
^ the instant summons with a gracious beck
(...) ^imble Scouts, which scudding light and quick,
^^sp^^ch more speedy then a Thought the things
^o^^ inioind them by the King of Kings,
^ho, with a most-mildly-maiestike gest,
^ heavenly words, his pleasure thus expressed:
The young french DOLPHIN in even ready Now
^o take the Name my fore-Decrees allow:
A frequent Name of Kings, and famous far;
Wonders in Peace, Thunders in dreadful Warre^
And, One of them, more excellent in Grace,
Among my Saints has justly held a place.
But yet, besides that Name, which France affects
For one Man's virtue, and for due Respects;
Besides th^^ Name, which only Men have given,
I Will give him one my Self, as sent from Heaven:
And such a one as one day, by Events
Shall prove it a true Praesage of that Prince;
And, in One Word, mysteriously contracts
The History of His succeeding Acts.
Go therefore, quickly from all Quarters cite
The rarest Virtues, and most requisite
For Royal bosoms, that did ever rest
Within the Closet of a Kingly breast.
Tell them it is Ou^ pleasure and Decree,
That to This Prince they All Godmothers be:
And She among them that is found most fit,
And best behoues in Crowned souls to sit,
Shall at the Font, Her sacred Name impose;
And from thence-forth inspire him, as he grows*
With all her Powers, to correspond the scope
And full Extent of that great Empires Hope,
Whose Limits yet unlimited appear,
Where Sire and Son to me are equal dear.
I see the Aegean streams, and Thracian strand,
Already trembling under his Command:
And the horned Crescent (which has scornd to vale)
Before the Beams of This new Sun grows pale.
To greatest Ships (as Guides of all the Fleet)
The cunning'st Pilots evermore are meet:
Mine, most Immediate, seems the souuerain care
Of Soueraign Kings (who but My Subjects are);
And therefore, I, that have behight This Lad
An ampler Rule then ever Monarch had,
As, of the WORLD to make him Emperor,
^'ll have his Virtues equal to his Power:
^'ll make them so: and to approve it, all
The Earths four Corners I to witness call.
This published thus: eft-soones the winged Posta
^ddresse them quick to these inferior Coasts,
and (swift as Arrow) he that took to find,
^aire Andria, of great and goodly mind,
among the many Idols of our Days
that counterfeit her fashion and her phraze,
^py'd her at last, for her here slight account,
^eady to leave us, and about to mount
A winged horse in hope els-where to get
A new Renown, 'mid stranger Nations yet.
Her Helmet (ever as her head she stirrs)
Seemed to twinkle with a thousand Stars;
A stately grove of azure Plumes did wave,
And proudly shadowed her gilt Armor brave:
The bright keen Blade that by her side she wore,
Inured to blood in Battaills long before,
As it were, weary of that rusting rest,
And greedy longing for his wonted feast,
Seemed malcontent and his proud Sheath disdain^
(The golden Prison that him still detaind)
Whereon were graven (with Arts Art-passing (...)
By such a hand as could give Metal life,
The noblest feats of Valor (most extolld)
In later Times, and in the Days of old,
Of greatest Monarchs that yet ever were,
Whose marks the World (unto this day) does b^
There, by the Banks of Granic died in grain,
(As then: no Banks, but rather Hills of Slain)
Philips Great Son (inspite of Multitude)
To his sole Scepter the whole World subdewd.
There, valiant CAESAR ( Rome's first Empero^
Qu^shing the Senats and the Peoples power,
and stooping all their Laws to his Sword's law,
^ramples the Tropheis of his Son in Law;
^ho pale without, and all appalld within,
^lyes from Pharsalia, and his Host, unseen.
Why flies Great Pompey? so (at once) to lose
The Honors so often wonn from so many foes?
^^cause Thine fainted, must Thou faulter too?
(...) yes! with Caesar thou had here to do.
^h^^r's thy Excuse: and though Thou lost the Game,
^hy Victor yet somewhat abates Thy Shame.
Thear (on the Chape of massy gold, unmixed
(...) other Metal plain or wrought, betwixt)
(...) own, great HENRY, smeared with blood and dust,
^urs^^es the Iberians with keen fauchin just;
and justly keening his courageous sp^rite
against those daring Demi Mo^res despite,
(...) out of breath the brauest of their Troop,
^h^ bleak for fear, begin to faint and droupe:
^he gold there loose, seems even to fly and (more)
^ooks pale in faces full of pride before.
^ut He (well marked by his milk-white Plume)
^ith Kingly scorn, disdaining th'odious fume
^f vulgar blood, in valiant fury runns
upon the proud Commanders Dukes and Donns.
Who (either proud of Port, or rich Attire)
Had by his hand a sudden death for hire.
Their royal Pattern all his Troops take-after,
And of the rest they make a glorious Slaughter:
Whence streams of gore that to their Center scud,
Met in a Rubie, make a Lake of Blood.
Such costly Sheath sheathed in such workmanship
The sheen keen Blade on Valor's brawnie hip,
( Hung in an azure Scarf, all over sow'n
With Crowned-Swords, and Septres ouer-throw'n.)
A thousand other famous Battles, fought
At sundry times, with Cunning-cost were wroug^
Within her Crimsin Bases, waving low
About her Calves, in Buskins white as snow.
She seemed like Palias, against the Giants pressed;
Or (on Mount Ida) against Mars addressed.
At sudden sight of Heavens bright Messenger,
In mylder port she straight composed her;
And when He briefly to her heedfull thought
Had done the sacred Arrand that he brought,
And (by the way) had questioned her (beside)
Whether her Haste was bent, she thus replyde:
Celestial Herald, While th'heroick Prince,
Whose gentle Yoke his Celticks so contents,
^aru'd with his Sword a Statue to my Name,
^o stand triumphant in the House of Fame,
nothing could hold me from his steps, apart;
^y hand did guide his hand, my heart his heart:
^ea, I was with him, nay, within him, pressed,
^is spirit's familiar, and perpetual guest.
^ut fithens Peace Him now has quight disarmed,
and keeps Mars within her Temple charmed;
^ did give way to my keen Swords Request,
Which can no longer lie and rust in Rest)
and, while his heart, now all in love with Peace,
^ath left His hand, for me, no business,
meant to seek some other Strand for Stage
^o act my Wonders, in Wars dreadful rage;
that in brave Battaills I again might reap
^he Palms He wonted on my head to heap.
For, with the sparkles of my glorious fire,
^h'incensed breasts of Younglings to inspire,
^ can no more find in my heart; fith they
^o rashly rush to cast themselves away,
^o often, for Trifles (bred of idle breath)
^o madly run to an untimely death;
^o daily sacrifice their Life and Soul,
^n some so foolish Quarrels, some so soul,
That, in the issue (fatal for the most)
The Victors self may rather blush then boast;
And such, as for such to vsurp the Sword
(Besides the Conquest's even to be deplored)
Is nothing else but to profane the same,
And to blaspheme mine honor and my Name.
Not that I blame (where Blood and Nature bind^
In point of Honor (Idol of brave minds)
A Caualier, so sensible of wrongs,
To hazard Life and all that him belongs;
Since, void of Honor, he is void of sense,
That houlds not Life a deadly Pestilence.
But I would have them rightly learn before
(Not, of a heart mere valiant and no more;
But, of a heart valiant at-once and wise)
Wherein that Point of precious Honor lies,
For which, he is happy that his Life shall lose;
And cursed he that care-lesse it forgoes.
For such a cup-fume over flows the brain
Of such whose Souls this Error entertain;
That One will ween his Honor interess't
To bear a Word, though spoken but in jest;
Who never thinks it tainted with a Lie,
Nor touched with base and will-full Perjury:
Nor with his Treason, when for some pretense,
He has betrayed his Country or his Prince,
Or yielded up some vn-distressed Place,
Or ^^ed the first to save a Cowards case.
So the Hypocrite, through Superstitious Error,
Thinks he has don some Sin of heinous horror,
When, by mis-heed, or by mis-hap, he comes
V^hallow-washt, into the Sacred Rooms;
Yet, makes no Conscience, yet has no Remorse
To have undone, or done to death, by force
Of unjust Doom, or fraud of Evidence,
A many poor and harme-les Innocents:
Nay, laughes at Widows and at Orphans tears,
By his deceit, dispoild of all was Theirs.
Those valiant Romans, Victors of all Lands,
They placed not Honor there where now it stands;
Nor thought it lay, in making of the Sword
Interpreter of every Private word;
Nor stood upon Puntillios, for Repute,
A^ now-adayes your Duellers pursew't.
But from their Cradle, traind in Rules more fit,
They nether knew the abuse nor use (as yet)
Of Challenges, Appells, and Seconds-ayde.
But, when the Laws their Bridle loose had laid,
For Public Glory, ^g^inst a Public Foe,
There Hono^^ point there Valo^s proof to show.
But, wh^^ behoou'd bravely and first to front
An Armies force, or bear their sudden Brunt;
Or, (...) thick with darts, victorious, die
Upon a Breach, or on a Rampire high;
Or, leap alive into a yawning Hell,
To save then City, from Infection fell;
Lived never Men that lesser feared death,
More-daring Valor never yet had breath.
Witness (unto this day) the undaunted hearts
In ^urtius, Decius, and Horatius Parts:
With many Wo^thies more, Immortalized,
Which for their Countries have Selves sacrifiz'd;
And who^e brave deeds, whose honors, whose deserts
Move more Despa^re then Envy in Men's hearts:
For, dying so* Garlands and glorious Verse,
No^ C^^es and Tears, honored their happy Hearse;
Their Flower of ^ame shall never, never shed,
^^cause their Death, their ^ountry profited:
(...) the death which brings now brainsick Youth
unto then Grave, d^se^ues but Tears and Ruth;
Their Courage casts them even away, for naught;
Without Memorial, save a Mou^nfull Thought,
Which, banning but the fury that inflam'd-them,
Honors enough, if that it have not blam'd-them.
O what a number of Courageous Knights,
Abortiuely, have in These Single Fights,
Lost the fair Hope the World conceived of them,
Have idly frustred, of their Valors gem,
Their gracious Prince, who justly might expect,
Against his Foes, their forward Worths effect;
And, sacrilegious, to their Wrath have given
And headdy Rage (whereby they have been driven)
The Sacrifice which (with more sacred zeal)
They ought to God, their King, their Co^monweale!
Ynow to make (could they return from death,
Such as they were, when here they lost their breath)
Not a sole Squadron, but an Host of Men
Whose Acts alone would furnish every Pen;
An Host of Hectors, and Achilleses,
Caesar's and Scipios, who, by Land and Seas,
Following Great HENRY for their General,
Might (if he would) have made him Lord of ALL.
Where, now, they lie in an inglorious Toombe,
Longing for Light until the Day of Doom:
Or lower, in eternal Dungeons dwell,
With Ghosts and Shadows skirmishing in Hell.
This mischief therefore, springing day by day,
And spreading so, as naught his course can stay;
And seeing (too) mine Honor blurred with Blame,
When these rash Mad-caps do usurp my Name;
To be, from heoceforth, from the Rage exempt
Of such as turn my glory to contempt,
And thus desace my Virtues grace with Vice,
I hoped els-whear some holier Exercise:
And rather would, hearts so intemperous
Should not enjoy me, then employ me thus.
Here Andriae ceast: The Angel, gracefully,
Humors her Anger with this mild Reply;
Ceites, fair Namph, your Plaint has Right and Truth,
But yet, excuse the boiling heat of Youth;
Perhaps it is harder then you ween (precise)
To beat-once a Frenchman, Young, and Wise.
This Evil from This inborn Error springs,
That a Brave Mind, when wronged in any things
He weens himself (if so he Arms profess)
Must no-whear seek but in his Sword redress:
And that an Eye, a No, a Nod, a Nick,
^ Enough to oftend a Noble sense and quick-
Petnitious Error, which does undermine
Both Martial Thrones and Civil, and Divine!
^or, to no end the Public Sword shall serve
If every man may with his Private carue.
And then, in vain are Souueraine Princes Laws,
When Subjects dare Themselves decide their Cause.
But I believe This Madness will no more
Praecipitate their courage, as before.
The curb of Law which by their prudent Prince,
Is now new made against This Insolence
Will bar their Boldness, and (directing mean
How (This deer Honor saved whole and clean)
A gallant Spirit, wronged in any kind,
May lawfully his Satisfaction find)
Will bind their hands, and even glew-in their blades,
Till, when some Foe the Common Right invades,
In forward Zeal of their dear Countries good,
It shall be honor (even) to dyue in blood.
Disposed therefore to expect Amends,
Dispatch the Order which Heavens Monarch sends;
And go not hence whear thou art so renowned,
Till all the world be but This Empires bound:
Were it for nothing but That Rising Sun
Where on all Eyes already have begun
(Both Friends and Foes) to fix their Hopes and Fears,
That brave Young Prince, who from his cradle bears
Thine Image in his eyes, and in his arms,
Thine Exercise in every kind of Arms.
Surely, said Andria, 't had been hard to find
A stronger Charm here to arrest my mind,
(Chiefly, here living my Souls Sympathy,
His Father; rather, that same other I)
For, as in the one I am a Miracle,
So will I be a match-lesse Spectacle
In the other too, when to his Ancient Right
His daring Sword shall make his Claim by Fight:
Whether his Armies royal Front aspire.
Those craggy Hills whose Name is taen from Fire;
O^ tend unto those fruitful Plains which spread
Toward Boots, and Hyperions Bed,
Whose Princes in then Fables Antique -- Framed,
Counts among Kings, Kings among Counts are named.
After these words, pronounced with voice and gest,
As Oracles are wont to be expressed,
Both took the^^ flight through the thin crystal Air,
Toward the Place appointed for Repair
Of all therest of Royal Virtues Band,
Which were converted by Heavens high Command.
Royal Eumenia was already come,
And simple-mannerd ( Pistia, thought by some
Long-since exided from the World); and She
Who from afar does all Events foresee.
There was (apparent by illustrious things)
Fair Euergesia, Ornament of Kings,
And sirme Hypomone, with her Twin-sister
Carteria, and She whose Patron and Assister
Are often shent, Alethia, little known
To mortal men (no scarce among her own)
With vailes and cloaks they do be-clowd her so,
Whose spotesse Self should rather naked go.
In brief, of all the Virtues summoned here,
There wanted none but Dicea to appear,
And St. Eusebia, in her Shadows hid,
That long it was yer Her the Angel spid.
For here among us a queint Idol haunts,
Whose simple habit, whose sad countenance,
Whose lowely look, whose language mildly meek,
Whose zeale-like gestures, and whose postures like,
So counterfeit Her, with the Mask it makes,
That many times the wisest it mis-takes.
You Would think, her heart had only God for Joy,
Her Exercise only to fist and pray;
That she bhoris the World, and lodged therein,
Lines as the Fish that out of water bin;
That burning Zeal of Heaven consumes her so,
That all seems bitter that she tastes below.
Yet all the while, This hollow Holy-Tricks
D^ats but of Honors, dreams of Bishopriks,
Thirsts for Promotion, thrusts for Primacie,
Hunts glory still, yet seems it to defy,
Never does good, but for some great applause,
Nor ever did good, for mere Goodness cause.
This Been of Souls, and that same Fopperie
(Of old) surnamed Dysidaimonie,
Whose heart, deiect with Terrors ouer-strong,
To fear God's Justice, does his Mercy wrong
(Right Servile Fear, with Errors foolify'd)
Have driven Eusebia hence, else wheare to bide.
Because the one loves not, the other miss-beloues
What best to fear and least presume behoues.
The Angel therefore ferrets every nook,
And narrowly her wonted haunts does look,
In every Cloister and in every Cell,
Where Folk belieu'd that She did ever dwell:
Yet nothing finds he of her, anie-wheare,
Save same old track or footing here and there;
No, though he visit the austerities
O^ famous* Abb^yes and fair Nunneries:
(...), in Her stead, he meets evermore,
One of These Haggs in every Covent Door,
^^esst in a habit of so humble show,
That hard it was the difference to know.
Yet, at the last, prying on every side,
Her (as conceald) in a by-place he spied,
Where, with incessant tears she stayed to rue
And to bewail our Errors old and new;
Amid an humble Troop, whom like Desire
To loath the World, and from it to retire,
Had made prefer a poor and mean estate,
Yea Want it self, in place so separate,
Before the Wealth, the Honors and Delights,
Wherewith the World inueigles, as inuites:
As choosing rather here to lose all These,
Then lose thereby, their Souls eternal Ease.
In this sequestered place, prostrate in Prayer
(Best Antidote against Hopes-pride and Despair;
The Two grand Poisons of Souls Faculties)
The Angel found Eusebia on her knees.
Their Talk was short, the Time inportun'd so:
I^ brief therefore he does his Message show,
Acquaints her quickly Whence, and Why he came*
Then She eftsoons consenting to the same,
Away they post in a swift Aierie Coach
Toward the place where all the rest approach,
The general Rendez-vous for all This Act:
Where yet (alas!) the Lady Dice a lackt.
For, the Angel tasked to go seek her forth,
Sees her no more conuersing on the Earth,
Nor finds her sitting (as she wont of-old)
On Princes Thrones, and Prelates, uncontrolled;
Nor among Magistrates, which are the Tongue
And ^^fe of Law, ^'interpret Right and Wrong.
Where at amazed, and desiring more
To sound what reason Men could yield therefore,
Assumes a Body, bearing in his hands
A b^gg of VVritings and seem-Deeds for Lands:
Comes to a Hall, all full of Murmuring
Of people pricked with the angry sting
Of ^ed (...), who her Venom sheds
Even into Boores and Paisants hearts and heads,
By Her kee^ surie (as wiith Brizes) stung;
And by Merimne and Dapania wrong:
In This great Hall, vnknow'n unto Repose,
Stalk that stern Fury, either among those
O^ her own Frye, or among the wretched Crew
Whom Her hard Gripes had made (in vain) to re^
A Rank of Seats, each unto other fixed,
And euery-one a sundry Name affixt,
Bordred the Walls, smoakie with age' and foul;
Perches of many plumie-pownced Foul,
Whose nimble Quills have learnd to fly for that
Ri^h Mineral, which makes men peace and prate.
There was no Order: a lowd-buzzing Press
With whirling Eddies hurried without cease,
Full of all Sorts; of Priests, of Gentlemen,
^^^chants, Mechaniks, Grooms and Husbandmen:
Each iustled other, crowding to and fro,
A^ here and there the stream did ebb and flow.
This yauld, that brauld, another beat the Bar;
O^e wooed the Judge, another urged him far;
This proves Default, That pleads a Warrantie;
This auoides Witness; That, appeals more high;
^^other, fleering does his Adverse flowte.
With Rod in hand the Vshers trudge about:
A world of Lawyers swarmed; yet some had leisure
(^s least employed) the Places length to measure.
(...) boyld with Discords; one no sooner don,
(...) instantly another New begun;
With such a Noise as sounds near the Shore
When, toward a Storm, the Sea beginns to roar.
Hard-by this Ocean, which Night only stilld,
Appeerd an Old Man (as one deeply illd,
And inly galled for some grievous Loss)
With eyes lift-vp, pale cheeks, and arms acrosse;
Whom the Angel spying, toward him he speeds*
And (seeming Mortal by his Shape and weeds)
Good Father, said he (so to sound his mind)
Where might I (think you) Lady Dicea find,
Whom I have sought already far and near,
And surely thought now to have found her here*
Dicea, my son, said the Old Man (well-nigh
Gushing out Tears which stood in either eye;
And sending forth a deep-^et Sigh, before)
Dicea, alas! is in the World no more.
That Fire which only Death has power to quench
That fell Desire no Deluge else can stanch;
The burning Thirst of Worldly Goods and Gol^
And all Sins, taught to war against her, bold;
Have forced her to forsake this wretched Frame,
And fly again to Heaven whence first she came.
Or, if in Earth she yet have any Stance,
It Is with the Chinois, Turks, or Scythians:
But in This Climat hardly does appeer
Any small sign, to show she has bin here.
Cruel Adicea in her Room is set:
^^^e Favor, Fraud, and Madame Countersait,
(Out of all Courts hunting all Conscience quight)
Make of Right crooked, and of Crooked Right.
Art and Deceit keep thear their open Schools:
^^son and Law are but the phraze of Fools,
(...) Law and Reason are now waigh'd (by Sleight)
I^ golden Scales; where, only GOLD is weight.
Thus, the Old Man proceeding still complaind;
T^^l the Angel, thus his Blasphemies restraind:
Alas! good Father, your fresh Grief (I see)
For some great Suite, late lost unhappily,
^^om your sad lips this bitter language draws;
^^^usable (perhaps) for your Grief's Cause:
(...) the eye of Passion ill discernes the truth.
This having spoken; the Celestial youth
^^rns to another, less disturbed in mind;
^^d likewise asks, Where he might Dicea find.
^ee, more discreet, and milder-spoken, far,
Replies: My Son, sure very few there are
(Yea of the wisest, who best understand)
That easily can answer thy demand.
For One perhaps will think her to be there,
Whereas, another (seeming wronged) will swear
By Heaven, and all that in it Heaven contains,
That not a spark nor mark of her remains:
Each holding her, present, or absent, still
As his own Cause has thryued well or ill.
But I Will assure thee (and past all Appeal)
That in this Place she does not always dwell.
Sometimes she comes, and brings for Company,
Honor, and Faith, and old Integrity:
But the strange Tricks of a bold babbling Dame
Called Quiddi-quirk, as barbarous as her Name,
Molest her so, that soon they drive her hence;
For, Both at-once have nowhere Residence:
And Plutus too, her many-times dismaies.
With that sweet Power whereby the world he (...)
Causing her often return with heavy cheer:
And that is the Cause she stays so seldom here.
Often have I seen her on the souverain Seat
In that high Senate, whose Edicts complete
Sway all the Kingdom; and (if anie-where)
I sure believe, you yet shall find her There,
If those Abuses whose bold Tyranny
From other Thrones has driven her openly,
Have not crept-in by some close Golden Port:
But, far be That from such a reverend Court.
^eer ceased He: and instantly, with all
^ng his sight, the Angel leaves the Hall;
^aierie Body to the Aier repayes.
(...) while he takes to other Courts his ways,
(...) happily the wished Lady meets:
^o, inly ioyd (which outward gesture sweets)
^ause in Judgment she had ouerthrow'n
^o^gs proud Support, and given poor Right his own,
^me from deciding of a Cause of weight,
^ore the Peers and Council of Estate.
^ut, her Content was doubled when she heard
^av'ns sacred will (as the Angel had auerrd)
^d His high pleasure (whose Omnipotence
^e Heavens adore) for Surname of the Prince:
^th him therefore Her speedy she directs
^wards the Troop which only her expects.
Now all these Nymphs assembled, seemed pressed
All diversely with Joy and Hope possessed)
^ll take their Flight to that King-fauourd Place
^here (pre-ordained for this Work of grace)
^hey should impose the Royal Infants Name,
^he Worlds main Hope (as most conceive the same)
^hen soudainly there did among them breed
^noble strife, which stayed their forward speed:
Though great desire to see the radiance
Of that young Sun which should enlighten Fra^^
Hasted their haste: and though on every side
As well the sacred Pomp as civil Pride,
The King himself, Princes and Princely Dames
Glittring in gold, sparkling in precious Flames,
And all the Court adornd in rich Array,
Seem as offended at the least Delay.
But yet, because Heavens Monarch had decreed,
That of the Virtues She which should exceed,
As most conducing to Kings happy state,
Should with her Name this Princeling nominate;
When one of those high Hearlds urged them on,
Among them selves This to consult upon:
Consult? said Andria: Why consult about
A Point, whereof (I think) was never doubt?
Mine, Mine Is this Honor: for among us all
Who more adorns a Kings Memorial,
Or better keeps a Sceptres Majesty
At his full Height in Royal hands, then I?
I fill his Name with glory and Renown;
I make him feared abroad of every Crown.
I with the terror of his Arms deterr
Ambitious Tyrants that they dare not stir
^siue War against Himself or His,
(...) ever spurrd by Spite or Avarice;
^amous Valor gaining This, for Meed,
^t at the last he seems it not to need:
^esse he list his Conquests to extend
^ough-out the World; then is it I that bend
(...) prowdest Mountains under his Command,
(...) strongest Holds, I render to his hand;
(...) with fear, I chill with trembling Ice
(...) boldest hearts of oldest Companies
^t dare resist his quick and thick Alarmes,
^th the only luster of his glittering Arms.
^^n only with his Trumpets sound
without a stroke) his Enemies confound;
(...) dreadful, make the most redoubted here
^nk it no shame to fly his fierce Career,
(...) if (no Steel, of proof to ward his blows)
(...) were Rashness more then Valor to oppose.
^uch were of-old those hardy Heroes found,
(...) Prowess, Then for Demigods renownd:
^h, He whose showlders shor'd Olympus walls:
^h, He who conquered the Empire of the Gauls:
^h, that Great Macedon, and such (again)
^ose famous Paladines, whose Fables vain,
(Yet useful Tales) tho'ld Romants fain so fit,
That even they seem by Morpheus fingers writ.
But what they had Ideally from Art,
That Really I to a Prince impart.
Who knows not, that I, only used in Field,
Serve all the Virtues both for Sword and Shield?
Your Selves, indeed, seem to agnize no less;
Although, in words, you shame it to confess.
For, when the fury of Wars dreadful Stowres
Beginns to thunder near Your dainty Bowers,
All pale for Fear, all trembling, all dismayed,
To Me ye fly, to Me ye cry for Aid;
Under my wings ye creep, to keep you sure:
Where (and but there) you think your selves sec^
And, rather I, then Any (who expose
My Self alone against the Hail of Blows)
Begin Estates, begett, and bring them forth,
And plant (in blood) the Empires of the Earth.
The admired height of Romes great Scepter yerst
(As that of Greece) was but My work, at first;
And that same Other, famous, glorious Throne,
Whose Greatness, Yet, does in it is Cinders groan.
For, though by War, with Fire and Sword, I waste
What Heavens Decree has doomed to be defaced;
(...) while I raze, I raise; and of the Rubble
^ettie States, I build One hundred double;
^orrid Dragons grow so hugely great
^manie Serpents that alive they eat.
^ou are indeed extold (and worthylie)
(...) knowing well, to use a Victory:
(...) without Me, You can have none to use;
^^out Me then, your Knowledge naught accrues.
^refore, your Honor's less; at least it is such,
(...) (at the best) on Mine depends much.
^n brief, in all the sacred Works we do,
(...) Merit's diverse, and our Honor too:
(...) rule the humble, I the proudest tame:
(...) adorn Kingdoms, and I conquer them:
(...) can direct, and I protect a Crown:
(...) do besiege, I dare assault a Town:
(...) show the utmost of Man's Wit and Art;
^t your aims with valiant hand and heart:
(...) (lastly) plott, in shadie Chambers sield,
^at I perform, abroad, in bloody Field.
^ut, in all These, I pass you All, as far,
^o subdue the stoutest Foes in War;
(...) see about one (Lightning-like) to flash
^lions of Shot, Millions of Swords to clash;
To hear no noise but Canons roaring Thunder,
Diuorcing Souls from Bodies pasht in sunder;
To march in blood even to the Knees; and yet
In all undaunted, not dismayed a whitt,
Is both more painful and more Princely too,
Then, clearing of a clowdie Fraud, or two;
To shield by counsel Equity oppresst;
To gain the Fame of Wisdom with the best;
To fast and pray, or give abundantly;
Or get the name of gracious Clemency.
Then well fare Valor: and long live the Story
Of valiant Princes in the Phane of Glory:
No humane Virtue hides so well as I,
Obnoxious stains when Princes step awry;
An ALEXANDER ARISTIDES seems,
Because the splendour of my spreading beams
With radiant luster dazles so the sight,
That naught is seen but Great and glorious Light
Whear, if he lack my Rays, or my Renown;
Boast he of double or of trebble Crown,
Be he benign, be he munificent,
Just, wise, religous, learned, eloquent,
Precise of Promise (both to Friend and Foe)
Princes abroad little regard him though;
(...), might heeiustlie all (else) Virtues vaunt;
^t wanting me he seems all to want.
His Hare-like heart, at Wars least noise does quake,
^d to his Beads he does him all betake;
(...) Fear strikes Fear in his best Refuges,
^d his no-courage does discourage His.
(...) brief, as bless with Peaceful Virtues rare,
^e seems far fitter (in a time of War)
^th Keys and Crosiers a POPE'S Part to play,
^en Sword and Scepter, as a KING, to sway.
As Andria had ended here her Part;
^ee, in whose School we learn the heedfull Art
(...) never fondly Undertaking ought;
^ft, soft, said she: To boast our Selves, we ought
^ot blame our Equals; nor (with proud Exchange)
^o our own Praises their Dispraises change:
^dria, I grant, Thy merit's great; but Mine
(...) if not greater, full as great as Thine:
^hens, to reign in Soul of Majesty,
^ere is no Virtue to be matched with Me.
For, let a King be full of High-deseigns,
^t him be Valiant, as your Paladines;
^t him be gracious, just and liberal,
^ue of his word, and so devout withal,
That at his Feet all Vices prostrate ly;
If Me he lack that am all Virtues Eye,
Blindfold he uses (nay, wel-neer abuses)
These divine Gifts, which bountious Heaven inf^
And right resembles a fair Ship, for Sea
All ready rigd, and furnished every way
With every Needful; Men, Munition, Beef,
Beer, Biscuit, all: only she wants (the Chief,
The Life and Soul; the Sense, the Law, the Lig^^
Whereby she lives, moves, stirrs, and steers aright
A skillfull Pilot, with Discretions hand
Her winged Manedge rightly to command
With hempen Raines, and wooden Bridle, so
That never wry she sail, nor wrong she row:
Without whose guidance, if the puffing gales
Into the Deep transport her huffing sails,
She runns at randon, and with ruefull Knock,
Soon splitts her self upon some Shelf or Rock.
Even so it fares with Princes, when they make
Or Peace, or War, and not My Counsel take;
Or, without Me, as it were blindefold, use
Their other Gifts the gracious Heavens infuse.
They thryue so little, that (as in a Wrack)
Their own rich Burden often breaks their back
^ir forward Valor but sad Fruit does yield
^y Winn the Victory, yet lose the Field;
^y bravely fight, and yet are bravely soild:
^e Error still has all-their Actions spoild.
^ir Bounty binds not, but vnbindeth hearts:
^ir Clemency much more then Rigor smarts:
^ir Zeal it self, proves to them selves pernicious;
(...) unto others blind and superstitious:
^ir Vice and Virtues them so inter-nex,
^t scarce can one distinguish their Effects.
Not that Ill still is not Good's Opposite;
(...) that, They wanting Me, their only Light,
(...) (even) Good cuill; or do, out of season,
^ood, which is not good, done without Reason;
(...), of fair Virtues, fruitful Seeds of Glory,
^p blasted Buds, which stain their goodly Story,
that famous Conquest ever yet was got
^ich to the Victor I prepared not?
^u fightest bravely, and in Victories
^loodie blades, gettst the first Crown, for prize;
I, by thou art of Providence, dispose
(...) glorious issue thy courageous blows.
^ely take the fit advantages
Time and Place, to second Courages:
I, skillfully the Squadrons range and rank;
I marshall them to show their Front or Flank
As best befitts (by warrlike Stratagem)
T'inclose their Foes, to clip, or curtall them;
Or, breast to breast (as angtie Lions wont)
With brave encounter, charge them full afront:
I by an Ambush, laid with luckie speed,
Oppressed with number, help thee at thy need.
I manie-times prevent thy like miss-hap,
When seem-fly Foes would train thee to the t^
I, to be brief, with ever watchful brain
Assist, to make thy Valor never vain.
But, if a Prince must needs want one of us,
And might not be both Wise and Valourous;
Sure Reason would our glorious Parts assign,
Thine to brave Soldiers, to great Captains Min^
Because, my Powers are proper to Command,
As Thine to Execute with hardy hand.
But though our humors so fair diverse be,
Yet may we Both, in one brave Spirit, agree;
And, for This Age, we need no Witness else
But famous HENRY, who in both excells;
With so great Wisdom ruling on the Throne
Which with such Valor he has made his Own^
^ictories, yet, making Men dispute,
which of Us, they should them best impute.
^t hundred Laurells never widow-curst,
(...) hundred Ovals, which no skin have burst,
^e I have often Conquered without Thee:
^euer were Thou Victor without Me.
(...) I have often seen Armies dissiped,
(...) proud, strong Cities often rendered,
^ll mur'd, well manned, and well stord with food)
^out the spilling of a drop of blood;
^g no other then the ancient Wile
^asting fields, where Public loss (the while)
^urnd This Gain, to stoop by Famine Those
^ch could not else have been subdued by Blows.
^des, th'off-cutting of all Passages,
^ell of Succors, as of Forrages;
^en to conquer by vncasuall course,
^t-lesse to fight, and without force to force.
^reat Captains therefore did Us never part:
(...) either, sole, is as a head less Dart;
(if not head-lesse) heed less thrown (as ill)
^m feeble caster, without aim, or skill.
^T is said of Pallas, in the Troiane Broyle,
^t She in fight stern Mars himself did foil;
To show how fair Wise-Valour does excel
A rash Excess of Courage boiling sell;
Whose fume-blind force, wanting Discretions b^
Resembles right a sight-less Polyphem.
But. whether joint or seuerd be our Powers,
My Cunning still yields fairer fruits and flowers,
Then does Thy Violence (though often it spread
Bright virtuous rays about Thy glorious head).
For, only then are Thy stiff arms imploid,
When stubborn War dares to have all destroid.
But, when sweet Peace fills Crowns with Coron^
Thou art locked up in Princes Cabinets;
Among the Corselets, which, now wariefied
Through love of Peace, they have new laid aside;
Or those, which idly (through Times alteration
Hang by the Walls, both out of Use and Fashion
But I, indifferent, serve in War and Peace;
I breed her, feed her, and her years increase,
By prudent Counsels, provident Decrees,
Kind turns, calm Treaties (sitting all degrees);
In brief, by all means meet to render Kings
Mutually friends; and rule their Underlings:
Whence to their States if happy fruits accrue,
The Honor of all to Me alone is due.
^t, in the World, what State has ever thriuen;
^ther, which has not to Wrack been driven,
^re lackt My Conduct, and where only Chance
(...) steerd the course of Public Governance?
^t humane Action, what Design, what Thought,
^out Mine aid has ever com'n to ought?
^t Private stock, what Public stem of Blood,
^out my Rules has sprung, or long has stood?
^oblest Arts, all nimblest Works of worth,
^ch humane brains conceive, and hands bring forth,
^d they not Me for rich and fruitful Womb,
(...) whence their births (both first and second) come?
(...) kindest Counsels, without Mine among,
(...) we not call them Treasons of the Tongue,
^n blind and bad Adnise (though malice-less)
^s the Friend to whom it meant Redress?
^ay nothing, nothing under Heaven, may miss
(...) Minds guide rays of my Resplendencies:
(...) the true Sun of all humane acts;
^out Me, Fortune all their praise exacts.
^ght ^ leave to Fortunes doubtful deed,
(...) all appear well set, though ill succeed:
(...) where My Scepter has a soucraine sway,
^nes false Die has little power to play.
Then, be it on Cedar, with a Pen of Gold,
For Memory and Glory too, inrold,
That Of all Soule-adorning Gifts divine,
The Majesty, the Monarchy is Mine:
That I, Their Queen, life of Their laws and spring,
Am, of all VERTVES worthiest of a KING.
To whom, I seem so much more requisite
(Being both his Guide and Eye to give him Light)
As has a Guide (so judge the most discreet)
More need of Eyes, then either hands or feet.
Here ceast Phronesia: Andria instantly,
Weening her wronged, seems willing to reply,
And to her Self already soft she says,
She has less skill in Phrases then in Frayes;
But, to maintain the honor of her Cause,
Where need requires, not words but swords she d^
Then St. Eusebia, jointly raising fair
Her Souls pure Zeal, and hersweet Voices air,
See, see (said She) how proudly insolent,
Vain Men, admiring and too confident
Of Their fond Wisdom, and frail Fortitude,
(Forgetting Heavens quick Eye and Arm) conclu^
That their own strength, or their own Prouidenc^
Has foyld their foes, or given their own defense:
^lly children (set on fourm or stool)
^se hands are (first) held at the Writing-Schoole,
^ing some Letter, vaunt it for their Own,
(...) think their Art-less fingers skillful grown.
^t, o fond Mortals! Neither is it your Art
^ystique State, nor your high hand and heart,
^ch in your Borders Peace and Plenty brings,
^nds your Battles in your Tryumphings:
Heavens Right Hand invisibly addressed,
^eskue You, has death it self represt;
^ell'd all Perils, put-by all Miss-haps
^dy to quell you with tempestuous claps):
(...) then retorting all upon your Foes,
^u of Laurels (which They did propose)
^s Terrors, Errors, or Disorders rife,
^utinies, or other Civil strife,
^ther Mischief, which confounds their powrs
(...) their own Swords, or makes the^ fall on yours:
^at your hands, victorious Thus, do bear
^t glorious Palms, and Olyues euery-where
^rne your Coasts with their rich oily tresse:
(...) all with you is Victory, or Peace.
^t you, ingrate the-while, through blind Self-loue,
(...) seeing that these Gifts come from above,
Sacrifice to your Selves, confer the honor
Of all, to all, save to their own right Owner.
O cursed Soil! o barren Sand and dry!
Not betterd ought by any husbandry;
Hardened with heavenly deawes, the more the worse
More worthy nothing then a heavy Curse.
O wretch! refer, refer aright, and bring
These sacred Streams birth to their sacred Spring,
That perfect Good, which can no more desist
To do thee good, then Thou Him to resist.
Through all thy Province let his Name be pr^^
If to a Crown his favor have thee raisd,
Rear Him an Altar in thy Soul anon,
And for Burnt-Offring lay thy heart thereon:
His power (alone) adore, implore and trust;
And in thy Self kill every kind of lust:
So shall thou not, what ever Hap succeed,
Neither so much Courage, nor Counsel need.
For, covering thee with his protecting hand,
Did all the World in Arms against thee band,
Besiege thee round, assault thee in such sort,
That naught could save thee; neither force, nor For
Amid all dangers which might fright thee there,
He, he would free thee from all cause of fear;
^hine, preserved from death and deadly Foes,
^d be amazed to conquer without blows.
^rayers would put a hundred Hosts to flight:
^ach a Casar to command them right,
^ghting on thy knees, with arms acrosse,
(...), thou (alone) should conquer, without loss.
^e, His Angel would assume the sword
^e-with som-times the Assyrian swarms he gored;
(...), Senacherib's brauing Blasphemies,
^d find a King, with waterin his eyes,
^nquish him with vows: and as with charms,
(...) shold'st do more with tears, the^ he with Arms.
^y then, thus vainly dare We here consult
^hers Right? or of our Own insult?
(...) she that gives to God (nay, gives God)
^er of right this Crown should be bestowed;
^er possessing, they All Good possess:
^anting her, All else is emptiness.
(...) neither Prowess then, nor Prudence, ween
self Kings glory, neither Virtues Queen:
^e seen Valiant Kings, and Prudent too;
^uch as knew in all turns what to do,
^uch whose Constance was incomparable,
^retchedly, and die as miserable:
But, never saw I but a happy End
Of Pious Princes, which on God depend;
And in all doubts, all dangers (from their Birth)
Have (sacring unto Heaven the thoughts of Earth)
With eyes ay-fixt on That Sunn's sunnie side,
Belieu'd his Love their Guard, his Law their Gui^
Not that I would a Prince secure and idle,
Should so let-go his Empires Rains and Bridle;
To cast on God the Cares, the Managings,
And glorious labors that belong to Kings:
Nay, rather would I, that with Vigilance,
Constancy, Justice, Wisdom, Valiance,
And all else Virtues which his God has given,
He second full the assisting hand of Heaven;
Aye well assurd that God will not neglect
Iust-armed Prayers of his own Elect.
But, to His only Bounty must they give
The honor of all the fruits they shall archieue
By their most noble C^res, most Royal Pains:
Not to the depth of Machiauilian Brains,
Not to the vain Effort of humane force,
Nor Martial Courage, mowing Men and Horse,
Which in effect (how glorious Name it bear)
Is but a Public, (lawful) Massacre.
(...) brief, what Worth, or Wit in King may be,
^ns King commands he make Them wait on Me:
(...) That, the Spur; Me, Rain of each Intent;
(...), of his Counsel; Me, the President:
^it Them often, Me continually:
(...) They inspire his Heart, his Judgment, I.
(...) that in nothing They with Me compare;
(...) any else (how Royal) Virtues rare:
(...) make Me sit in Honors fourm the first;
(...) without Me, esteem his State accursed:
^d Them for helpful, Me for necessary:
(...) ^^rme believe, when Times are adversary,
^er to fail, with Prowes and Policy,
(...) fall, with All; then flourish without Me.
^hrogh such a Faith, that great King-Prophet yerst,
^h little force, so many Foes reverst:
^ft escaped so many Snares of Death,
^ch Envies hand had set to stop his breath:
^ortunate, in every ieopardie,
(...) almost seemd to have wedded Victory.
that Monarch would not gladly be the Heir
^hese high fortunes of His Virtues fair?
^o would not purchase at the dearest rate
^ll his Pains, the glorious Praise He gate?
And yet, the Virtue which aduaunc't Him so,
And on his Acts such honors did bestow;
Was not his Prowess (though he durst enough)
Neither his Prudence (though of famous proof)*
But his religious Piety and Zeal
To serve the Lord, the God of Israel:
Zeal, which consuming Him with heavenly flame,
Made him to consecrate his Facts, his Fame,
Himself, his Sword, his Scepter, and his Song,
At the Authors feet, to whom they All belong:
As still esteeming that he held his Crown,
By his support who had it first bestow'n;
Not by the Prowess, or the Policy,
Of his own darefull hand, or careful Eye.
Let noblest Princes imitate this Part,
This pious zeal of his religious heart:
And let them know, that nor their Heed in sway,
Nor their Good-hap (which seems to attend them (...)
Their Knowledge, Courage, nor Victorious fame,
About their heads so glorious Garlands frame,
Neither from heaven so many blessings bring,
Neither so much do magnify a King,
Nor dignifie the Scepter in his hand
So many millions justly to command;
^ho, after this worlds Diadem,
^em anew, in New Jerusalem:
God himself-vouchsafes to watch Their state,
^s Their Counsel, Their Consederate,
Rock, their Refuge from their Enemies,
^ets them daily glorious victories:
(...) without Me, no Virtue is complete;
^at, in That which makes truly Great,
^e the rest, and all the best They can,
^re as God in Greatness passes Man.
^ebia here concluding her discourse,
(...) began her Title to enforce:
(...) (said she) long lent you ear a-like,
^om your Reasons, and your Rhetorike
^er nothing, from the most of you,
(...) surpations of Mine honors due;
(...) mine own Noursling from my side you steal,
^in, with Justice, you scarce justly deal.
(...), if of Virtues any worthy be
^ign, as Kings eternal Company;
^ith more luster their great Names do grace,
^n She may justly claim that Place;
^ee alone, who, by One duty, do
(...) happy Kings, and happy Subjects too:
She, that of all the Graces from above,
Acquire them most their Peoples hate or love:
She that the Stock of Traitors does extinguish,
She that good Kings from Tyrants does disting^
She that to Each due Recompense imparts
According to their good, or bad Deserts:
She, without whom, the rife-full strife-full sou^
Of Mine and Thine, would all the World confo^
Not that I am so inly blunt, or blind,
As not to value Valors valiant mind;
Or not to see, What Benefits to Kings
Sacred Eusebia, and Phrone^sia brings:
But save Easebia (whom I honor more
Then all the Greatness Worldlings most adore)
Not one of you produces her effects
So fortunate and free from all defects,
But oftentimes some evil them succeeds
Which equals often their Good, sometimes exceed^
Much like some Herbs, of doubtful fame and for
Which cure one Grief, and cause perhaps a wors^
'T's a glorious Work tryumphing worthily,
To win by force a famous Victory,
To (...) a field with dead, to swim in blood,
To glass ones Valorin a Crimsin flood:
^hat's all This, but a mere Massacre
^ous Lions (not a humane War)
(...) the Right of the bright Sword victorious
(...) the Cause just, and the Effect as glorious?
^re not those so bloody Palms, (the while)
^red in Countries, ruined with the spoil
^arrs dire fire, flaming on every side
^se sad fields, for saken far and wide?
^udy Virtue, for War only fit,
^or the Mischiefs that do wait on it!
(...) least (alas!) her thirsty Steel should rust
^n her Sheath, too-long restrained; must,
^men with Tears see their deer Countries spoild,
(...) fields with heaps of slaughtred bodies pyl'd,
(...) Cities sacked, their Houses all inflamed,
(...) treasurs shared, their wines and daughters shamed
(...) tenderbabes (which have no help, but cries)
^d, broached, broyl'd, in horrid Sacrifice?
^e, Noble surie of heroic hearts,
^id^ous Stage whereon thou act'st thy Parts,
(...)-too-costly to a State; too-deer
^ll thy Palms, thy Glory walks too-neer
(...) Miseries, Pains, Perils, Dolors, Deaths,
^dire Events; which not alone the breaths
Of Foes hereaue, and Foraine States undo;
But wrack withal thine own Domestics too.
For, what Effects, but such nefarious things,
Have been the fruits of thousand valiant Kings;
Whose memories so ring of Battles yet,
That even with blood their Stories may be writ:
Leaving their Names, just Arguments of terror,
Loading the Earth with Monuments of horror,
Filling both Land and Sea, with Gore, with Gall,
And, to no purpose, topsie-turning All:
Since all the gain of all their Victories,
Is but a fame of Valiant Robberies;
Reproachfall praise to Souerain Potentates,
To Supreme Pastors, to high Magistrates:
Yet, most of These have reapt no other fruit,
From bloody labors, but This odious Bruit:
Whereas They should (only) their Powers implo^
To salve, to save; and never to destroy.
One only King (no further Name is need)
Justly constrained to arm, and mount his steed,
By force to enter to his Own by Right;
Has sacred all his Art, his Heart, his Might,
To's Empires good: and chasing War away,
Makes Peace approved his Valors daughter ay.
^est, still greedy of new Isles, new Indes,
(...) raisd such storms with their Ambitious winds,
their own Seas have nigh sunk Themselves,
^ast their Subjects upon Rocks and Shelues,
^e (through more woes) they, even with tears, behold
^ll it is to have a King too Bold.
^w, for your Prudent (but, mere Prudent) Kings,
(...) much Discourse, which from their judgment springs,
^akes them timorous, loath to take-in-hand;
^se their time, while waiting Time they stand;
^aring nothing, but Discoursing still,
^r as much as Those that dared ill:
^akes them, more (in Worldly matters, here)
^e and sharp, then loyal and sincere.
^t as They, of dangers heedfull are;
^em, no less behoues it to beware.
(...) not say, that many times the grounds
^on the worlds, blind, foolish wisdom founds,
^ontrarie unto the solid Base
(...) heavens true wisdom every where does place.
^t, one Thought never it self extends
(...) can) at once, to two so diverse Ends:
^ore then can the sight of mortal eyes
(...) same instant, Heaven and Earth comprise.
What shall I say of Thee (and do thee right)
Sweet St. Eusebia, Gods own dear Delight?
Thou fillest Kings, indu'd with Thy desires,
With sacred fervor of Celestial fires;
Thou make their Lives a lively speaking Law,
To rule their Subjects more by Love then Awe*
But yet, thou make (if Thou alone be Theirs)
Them too-too-slack in other Kingly Cares;
Too-mew'd in Peace, in War too-scrupulous;
And think so much of Heaven, that Earth they lo^^
And* Euergesia, praising Thine Effects,
Amid the best well may we doubt defects:
For, what in Kings more Heavn-like seems to (...)
Or God-like more, then to be liberal?
Yea, liberal Princes seem even Gods on Earth,
Com'n-down from Heaven to hunt Despair and D^^^
Care, Indigence, Incomber, and the rest,
Wherewith poor Virtue often is oppressed.
Yea, even as Gods, Their Names are honord^
And, for their Service, nothing is too-deer.
(The ground of which so great benevolence,
In some, is Hope; in some, Experience):
So that all Vows, all Voices end in Them,
And, as the Sun, Their Sceptres brightly beam.
(...), oftentimes, those Bounties of thy hand
(...) public Burdens, bitter to a Land;
(...) fluent Princes (least their Favors source
^d be exhausted) have too-oft recourse
^ributes, Imposts; and some worse withal:
^ce Flowers to few, to many Thorns befall:
(...) Ararice her self unjustly fills
(...) what Profusion ouer-fondly spills.
^r Thou, Eumenia, though extold so high
^chest Type of Heavenly Clemency;
^nely Shield of such ^ dare infrenge
^cred Rules, to save them from Revenge:
(...) can not clear thee from the confluence
^ills used to Follow Indulgence.
^y too-sparing, Thou do Vices spread;
(...) losest sound, to save corrupt and dead:
^illing Ciries with home-Enemies,
^ardons turn to public Injuries.
(...) I, by practice of impartial Rigor,
^ain good Orders, keep the Laws in vigot:
(...) Kings at-once beloved and feared too
^ed, alone of those that evil do).
(...) Subjects (set on happy Plenties knee,
^ir possessions from Oppressions free)
Bless them, adore them, hold them (ever deer)
Their Countries Fathers, nay their Gods wel-^^
In brief, no Blessing can befall a Realm,
But Theirs enjoy, from, by, or under Them.
For, as it is, of the Wilde-Ash-tree, said,
That the only savor, nay the only shade,
Instantly kills (by strong Antipathie)
What ever Serpents underneath it lie:
Such, to the Snakes of Vice, those Princes are
Which against Injustice have proclaimed War,
With no less Care to make My Rules to reign,
Then their own Sceptres in their hands sustain^
Can no Rebellion spring (at least) none speed
In their Dominions, neither Factions breed:
Since gracious Heavens vouchsafe them this A^
For having used so equally My Sword
(To all Degrees, in City, Field, and Town)
In Civil War they shall not wear their Own^
Their People, feeling in Their happy Sway,
What Hap, what Rest, what Freedom they enjoy,
Deeming them as their Gods, and meting (rife)
Their length of Bliss by Their deer length of (...)
Watch for Their Safetics; and can suffer naught
Against them to be mis-done, mis-said, mis-tho^
^ore then' against their Publique's Prospering,
^eof they hold Their Justice only Spring.
^r, of all rarest Virtues that may meet
^ust Prince, They only taste the sweet
^ine Effects; and of that Equal Care
^ot surcharging more then they may bear.
(...) boots it that their Majesty's be meek,
^animous, frank, pious, politic.
(...) of a spirit surpassing each Extrem;
(...) they but Me, They little reck of them:
(...) love them not, they listen far and near,
^e welcome news of their wished death to hear.
^n, if they use My sacred Exercises,
^ugh they be staind (perhaps) with other Vices,
(...) hold them perfect; and, in spite of Fate,
(...) after death, their Names they celebrate;
^ing Relics, still preserved above
^mes fair bosom, and their Peoples love.
^es, unto this day, that Norman Prince,
(...) Rollo, still beloved (though dead long since)
^alld upon (as for His just Revenge)
^n some new Wrong does their old Right infrenge.
^nceforth therefore, o Princes, that desire
^aue your Names to highest Fames aspire,
To leave behind you Monuments of Worth,
To give your Glories, after death, new Birth;
Endeavor not to dazzle proudest eyes
With Towers of Marble mounted to the skies;
Neither by War (whose Train is Plague and Dea^
With fire and blood to mingle Heaven and Earth;
To thousand Perils to expose your lives,
Whereby your Greatness, not your Goodness, thrive
Only, love Me; let Me be reuerenc't
Through all your lands, by all your hands defen^
Let Me sit by you on an Awefull Throne,
To daunt the Lewdest with my looks alone;
And with my Sword still drawn to prune-away
Luxuriant Twigs that break my just Array:
Let My Tribunals be the Poores Refuges;
Let here-on sit no Mercenary Judges:
Let Innocence find there her surest Fort;
And who wants Right, there let him want Suppo^
There let My Balance be impawn'd to none;
^ut, as his Right is, let Each have his Own:
In brief, with You let Me be set so high,
That absolute as you do Reign, may I:
And I shall more enrich your lasting Stories,
Then all your golden Towers, your Co^quering^
^precious Gifts that with full hand you give,
^ght besides, whereby your Names can live.
^a as yet did her Discourse pursue,
^ugh mild Eumenia, loath to lose her due,
^onger to endure her Vaunts so high,
(...) open mouth was ready to reply;
(...) her Sister Euergesia eek,
(...) little choler coloring her cheek)
(...) from the Empyreall (right Imperial) Court,
(...) a new Nuntio with a new Report,
^ie Truch-man of supernall Pleas,
^gentle Iarres thus gently to appease.
^ortall Beauties of past-humane Souls,
^t both Globes in his one hand-gripe holds,
(...) you to weet, that His high pleasure is
^uench for ever all your Differences)
^ll have the honor to impose the Name,
whom he means such favor and such Fame,
^ARETVS (for an auspicious Sign.
^e marked him All with all your Tipes divine)
(...) All transformd into that reverend Clark,
^s hallowed Organ, for this sacred wark;
^s, Thou (whom He resembles best)
(...) Name the Child, in name of all the rest;
After that He has six times sounded tho
That other Name his Nation fancies so.
Hy, by ye then, Time calls you; for the thro^
These Rites expecting, thinks each minute long.
And I, the while, with no less speed must spy
Th'vnholsome Den where Pestilence does ly,
And in Heavens name, her straightly countermand,
That She presume not once to lift her hand,
Nor from her Quiver shoot one Arrow out
At any of the Royal Courtly Rout
Assembled for the sacred Mystery,
During the Pomp of That Solemnity.
Heer-with the Angel hence't, and bent his flight
Toward Our sad City, which then deeply sigh't
Under the fury of that Monster fell.
He found her out in a hot-humid Cell,
About to Arm her, and to scout abroad,
Even toward the Place which now the Heavens forbod^
Foul seam^rent rags (whch some old Robe had^
Cas't here and there her yellow-sallow skin,
Where-in hot fiery Carbuncles were fixed,
With poisonie R^bies, here and there betwixt:
A quench-lesse Thirst, with a continual Fever,
Broild in her breast, boild in her body ever;
^rie Breath was as a deadly stroke:
^rsed Stance ready with stink to choke:
^se it was, that never Wind could fan,
(...) 'vnrefin'd autumnall Affrican,
(...) noisome air a stuffing fogge did pen
^mustie Vapors of a moistie Fen.
^round about her, by her side did ly
^ts of Fruits that soonest putrify,
^ns of Milions; Pears, Plums (passing numbers)
(...) humor-poysoning, crudie-cold Cucumbers;
(...) Grapes; and that soft Persian fruit (so deer)
^ll at home, and little better here.
^e Angel, wonted to Heavens Bliss-full Hall,
^ little stay in this unwholesome Stall;
^athing soon that thick contagious air,
^edily dispatched his Message there:
^eav'n-ward quickly from the Fury flew,
^e horror yet so seemd him to pursue,
^he had fainted to have bin so nigh-her,
^e not felt him of the immortal Quier,
^immortall Sisters, in one troop, the while
^ch from their Owners every Vice exile)
^ported swift upon a winged Cloud,
^ir Arrival made the Palace proud.
The pompous Scaffold, for this purpose re^^
Seemd at their sight to tremble (as afeard):
The stately Towers of the antique Edisice,
The massy Porch, and Arch, and Frontispice,
Seemed round about to lighten smiling flames,
As at ^^eir Entrance to adore these Dames.
They, s^^^^ing them (unseen) amid the thro^
Of those Good-Great, whom (as they past along)
A soft sweet Murmur, for their Virtues, blessed;
Served with Them (each in her office pressed)
That goodly Rising Sun, whose Rays, new sp^
So rathe a Spring of flowring Hopes have bred^
And, after both his favored Names were given,
The humane first, then that they brought from He^
All, in a ring, about him did appeer
(Under the form of some fair Princess near,
Or some great Prince then present there in view)
To do his Name the Honors iusily due;
Each cheering Him to follow for direction
The Property She brings to Kings perfection.
May Thou (said one, as his sweet Eyes she ki^
Great little Prince, be of the Heavens so blist,
That, though Augustus fortunes Thine surpass,
Thy Fortunes yet may give thy Prudence place:
(...) Thou abound in royal Bounty so
^her said) that Traiane thou out-go:
(...) said another: how my Hopes aspire!)
^alour, one-day even excel thy Sire:
^here (said one) one-day appear in Thee,
^artiall Fathers match-lesse Clemency:
^aist Thou, from thy Childhood (said another)
^d in Zeal thy Mother and God-mother.
^efe ( Pandora-like) Each offered there
(...) precious Gifts, in Praesage (as it were)
^ith advantage gracious Heavens produce
(...) wished-Counsails into Act and Use.
^nt, God Almighty, King of Kings, that He
(...) on These Thrones hisroyall Turn shall be,
^ay have care to accomplish euery-where
(...) all our Hopes have for him dared to swear,
that his Looks, Words, Manners, Motions, seem
^ery part, to promise still for Him.
^y He, his People tender, love, protect;
^ght in Justice, yield them her Effect:
^ee forbear to over-charge their backs
(...) novel Tributs, or with need-less Tax:
^et them see that of all Titles given
^l the Kings that have been under Heaven,
He holds Good the best; better then glorious,
Warrs-thunderbolt, Earths-Terror, Great, Victori^^
Whose lofty sound makes Princes often become
Abroad more feared then beloved at home.
High swells the Ocean, when the Moon's at (...)
And with proud Billows threats both Hill and H^
But sinks again, and shrinks into his Bed,
When Cynthia mues her neuer-constant Head:
So (swelling proud; so, surly browd the while;
So, temper-lesse; tempted with Fortunes smile)
Ignoble Natures are too-lightly pufft;
And with her Frown as basely counterbufft.
Far other be His firm and generous Mind,
Whether his Fate be cursed, or be she kind;
Yea, fawn-shee, frown-shee, (firm indeed to non^
Be He still like him Self, The same, still one;
Still bountiful, still milde-maiesticall,
And still vouchsafing free Access to all:
So that no Bar (a Barbarous device)
But due Respect do sever Him from His.
For, be a Prince never so mighty Great,
If betwixt Him and His a Bar He set;
At length he sets one (which scarce ought repair^
Twixt their Affections and his own Affairs.
He, to the idle Pomp of Prester-Ians,
(...)-proud Sophyes, and soft Asians,
^are, to keep their tawny Majesty's,
^ubiects sight (save once a year, or twice)
(...) Him daily (like the Sun) go out
^er and cheer the clowdie World about;
^o the poor oppressed Widow right,
^p the Orphan, ouer-born by might;
^e the just sighs of sad Laborers:
^waies (like that best of Emperors)
(...) That no Day, or think it lost (for naught)
^in he has not some such Action wrought;
^t he lives not then, or lives in vain;
(...) a Subject, not a Sovereign.
^sume not He in frivolous Expense,
(...) gold a just Love's gentle violence
^or his Succor (in extreme Affair)
^his poor People from their hands to spare,
^fro^ their mouths, nay rather from their bellies)
^s, drawn-dry with Pump of former Tallies.
^her, counting it (with some Remorse)
^old, but Blood; may He with greater force
(...) to lavish upon idle Veins,
^biects soul, and the humor of their Veins.
That great King-Prophet (so renownd for Song)
Once for the water of a Well did long,
Which at the Postern of a City rose,
Amid an Host of his most deadly Foes:
Three of his Worthies (in despite of death)
Brake through their Army, even to underneath
The very wall whereas the Well did spring;
Whereof they drew a portion for the King.
Then, off again they bravely come their ways
(Covered with wounds, but more with worthy Praise)
And re-arriu'd in their own Camp, their Prize
Unto their Prince present in humble wise.
But He, bethinking through how many deaths
Those dreadless Champions had then fetched their breaths,
In fetching of that wished Water so;
For all his thirst, he would not drink it tho:
For, what is This (said he) but the hart-bloud
Of These that Thus have ventured for my good.
So, to Gods will, His, willing to accord,
He offers it on The Altar of the Lord.
So, may Our Prince another-day employ
The public Treasure, which with careful Joy,
His loving Subjects shall (as ought the loyal)
Yield to support his Port and Charges royal.
He present to th'in-sight of his Thought,
(...) how much Sweat and Sorrow it is bought:
^t Rigor (used in his Name perhaps)
^rts it from oppressed Widows laps,
(...) wretched Crafts-men, from hard-racked Swains,
^om Poverty at her own Mess maintains:
(...), in Compassion say (with tender grief)
(...) is my Subjects blood, my Peoples Life:
(...) must not then in idle Pomp and Play
(...) water spil^) be spent and cast away.
^n doubting less the damage then the abuse)
(...) it to God, as to the rightful Use.
and, it is to consecrate, and vow it right,
^d in a fashion pleasing in Gods sight)
(...) pour it out in Royal (right) Expense;
^er in War-works for his Realms defense,
^or his Honor; to all Times to seal
(...) King-like Bounty, Providence, and Zeal.
^lose-fisted therefore may He never be
(...) the true Seed of sacred Memory;
(...) Those whose luster does adorn Renown,
^d honors Kings more then their orient Crown:
(...) stately Structures, speaking Eminence,
^as their Use match their Magnificence:
To wall Highways; to heaw-down harmfull R^
To parallel Eld's Aquaeducts and Bridges:
Found Hospitals, or to endow them founded:
To stop Sea-Breaches where they have surrounded
To fence with Peers and Piles of sundry sorts
From Neptunes fury his importing Ports:
To build fair Shops for the Helyconian Loomes,
To Advance Their Arts, and give chief Parts chief Room^
And (as with living Nets) by Benefits,
To catch both Valiant Spirits and Learned Wits.
Millions of Verse have sounded loftily
The Prudence, Prowess, Pity, Piety,
And sacred Justice of our Souerain Sir,
As diverse gales their diverse Sails did stir:
But not a Voice, in low or lofty vain,
Has of his Bounty ever sung a strain:
Yet yearly from his liberal hand has come
A million (a more then Royal Sum)
Among those (happy) whom his Goodness graces,
Or whom their own in his opinion places.
Which of his Predecessors (first or last)
In Gifts or Guerdons these fair limits past?
Not one of them did ever reach so high:
Yet Vulgar bruit (half false, half flattery)
^es some of them the great and glorious Name
(...) Liberal Princes, of illustrious fame.
(...) shall not we then, bear through th'Vniuerse
(...) worthy Praise upon the wings of Verse?
^l not we say that his renowned hand,
^orthily (in Peace) with Bounties band
(...) bind unto him whom he worthy knows,
^rauely conquer (in the Field) his Foes.
^e mute that list, and muzzle they their style,
(...) whom his Bounty never daign'd to smile
^ere't through their own mis-fate, in having none,
^auing Virtues, not to have them known.)
(...) I, whose hap has been to march with those
^wards whose laps This golden River flows,
(...) Voice and Verse shall tromp^it far and nigh
(...) modern ears, and to Posterity.
^d (without Flattery) say, that all the scope
Wishes waiting on our future Hope,
(...) all our Prayers for a Complete Prince
(...) in the rest of Royal Ornaments)
^ed of the Heavens no greater Hap require,
(...) that in This, the Son be like the Sire;
^d that he may (observing Golden mean)
^e like a King that means to give again;
Yet, with such fervor to This glorious Part,
That still he give less with his hand, then heart.
Vouchsafe The Eternal Destinies-disposer,
Kings sole Advancer, and Kings sole Deposer,
That m^ugre Tyrants wrath, and Traitors wile
(Whose Maister-peece we Here have seen yer-while)
He may wax old (after his aged Sire)
In Peaceful Reign, until his Reign expire:
And never, but at Tilt, or Tourney, feel
The combrous burden of a Case of steel;
Or, when just (...) shall inflame his sp'rite
Against Usurpers of His ancient Right.
But, whether law-lesse Need, or Glories love,
Him drive, or draw, his Force in Field to prove,
May He in Counsel, Courage, and Success,
Match his great Parents constant Happiness,
So as there be no need to spur Him forth,
With brave Remembrance of His match-less wo^^
But, Laurel burnt crackles in vain; and of^-it
Champing the Leaf alone, makes not a Prophet,
If that his Tutors have not more to do,
To hold him from, then to incite him to;
To cool, then kindle, that courageous heat,
Which makes men fear no death, no dangers the
(...) as once Theseus, ready to be killed,
^s known to be the Kings son, that so wild;
^is gilt Sword and sign engrav'n thereon:
(...) shall be known to be His Fathers Son,
(...) the Exploits of His, in such a Rank,
(...) would have made the two first Caesar's blank.
^e He Benign, so as his Indulgences
^d not Bad-Boldnes, Feed not Insolences:
(...) to some Winters, ouer-milde and warm,
^ich neither kill the Weed, nor chill the Worm;
(...) breed the Plague, Pox, Murrain and the rest,
^t ^otten Humors may, in Man and Beast.
^ot, but I know it far more honorable
^saue then spill (in Cases tolerable)
(...) here a World of Dust-bred Creatures live,
(...) reaue-Mans life, which only God can give:
(...) too-oft Pardoning often too-many draws
^au^ need of Pardon, through contempt of Laws
(...) Magistrates; whom the Audacious reak
(...) Bugs, and Bridles to base minds and weak.
(...) Mildnes then, be He so moderate
(...) His own safety and the public State)
^t neither Horror taint his Executions;
^ther his Favors harbor Dissolutions,
And, too-remisse, by His too-oft Repriues,
Turn Pitties Temple to a Den of Thieues.
May He fear God, love, worship, seek, and serve hi^
Know, it is He sole does stablish and preserve him:
That Kings, as his Anointed, have Regard:
That but He guard them, little boots their Guard.
May he believe His Word, honor, obey;
Take it, for Compass in this Worldly Sea,
Make it the Measure of Kings Power, in all,
And counting That of Laws the principal,
Have it ay written in his hearts deep rooms,
But, as a Prince, not as a Priest becoms.
Under the old Law (now abrogat long since)
One might be both a Pontife and a Prince,
For nothing seemed then to hinder them
From matching so Mitre and Diadem:
But now their Functions are divided far,
And Monkish Kings, now but contemned are:
There Man and Master but Hail-fellow is;
And subjects play the kings, where Kings play Pri^^
May He be loyal, constant in sincerity;
In soul, abhorring lies, and loving verity:
That as his Deeds shall (for the most) be Miracles,
So may his Words be altogether Oracles.
^h'Almighty grant, that during all His days,
^ sparks be quenched which Factions wont to raise;
(...), for the most (to double Misery)
^ere be Two Kings where two great Factions be.
(...), if there should (which God forbid) succeed
^h Mischiefs here (as heer-to-fore there did)
^y He not want sound Counsels happy Light,
(...) guide him in his Fathers steps aright:
^o, reauing th'eldest Emperors their Palms,
^dainly turned such Tempests into Calmes,
Means so mild, that it was rather thought
(...) heavenly Hap, then humane Wisdom wrought.
(...), were it Wisdom, were it Happiness,
^tch He our Wishes, and His Wise success:
^one of Himself, the other from Heavenly hand,
^at Peace may prosper over all his Land.
I know that Princes being born for th'Arts
^ich Cou^sails, Camps, and Dangers school imparts,
^e Books most needful and peculiar Theirs,
(...) Politiques, of State, and State-affaires.
^t, since so few years do our Age comprise,
^at even the greatest of the greedy-Wise,
^ould know but little, if no more they knew
^en from Experience of one Age they drew:
That He, at once, may see all Accidents
Of all past Ages, with his own's Events;
May He propose and set before his eyes
The goodly Tables of all Histories;
And there contempling all the true Records
Of other Monarchs, mighty States, and Lords,
Observe their Acts, their Counsails, their Discourse,
All (notable, or rare) in all their Course;
Both what to follow there, and what to shun,
And whether Fame or Shame their lives have wo^^
May He there glass himself, and mark it brim,
Whether the same shall not be said of Him.
For here, Our Verses smoothly sing and smile,
But History will hiss, in other style:
And Kings that here have been compared to Gods,
Entombed once, though under golden Clods,
If in then Lives they have deserved it, first;
Shall hear their Names torn, and their Fames acc^^
What may I add unto These Wishes more?
N^ more but This; that All here wished before,
And All presaged of the DOLPHIN here,
Con^ur in CHARLES: that all His Parts appeer
A living Picture of all Parts of Worth
Of all those Worthies whence He takes his Birth:
^at gracious Heavens (which promise even as much)
^all These Virtues daign to make Him such,
^t really he give royal Assent
^all the Acts of Virtues PARLIAMENT:
^t in his Turn, the Ages after Us,
^y find, and know him for PANARETVS:
^d, since That Name must needs Immortal be,
^t no profane hand blurr His History:
(...) some sweet Daniell, or some sacred Hall,
^iuill Hayward, (milde-maiestike, all)
(...) purest faith, in a peculiar style,
^lorious Work of His great Works compile:
(...) if that Any of more worthy Skill-is,
(...) He the HOMER to This new ACHILLES,
^EAT BRITANS great Hope of Great Hap tocome;
^nix arising from a Phoenix Dust:
whom the Heavens (as merciful, as just)
^ore our great loss, in Great HENRIE'S Toomb.
^ong, long and Happy (in thy Brother's room)
^ceed Thou CHARLES, ever as Good as Great:
^iving, old, to Thy old Fathers Seat,
^e, Great, Good STVARTS, till the Day of Doom.
^ch while I pray, sweet Prince, vouchsafe a space
^ead and rue Your humble Bead-mans Case.
Here (like LEANDER in the Hellespont)
Tossed in a Tempest, in the darkest Night,
Distract with Fears, divorced from the fight
Of My High Pharus which to guide me wont:
Spying Boots in your HIGHNESS Front,
For life I labor toward your hopeful Light
(May never Care be^lowd that Beam so bright,
Come never Point of least Eclipse upon it)
Yet, though (alas) your gracious Rays have sho^^
My wracked limbs a likely way to land:
Unless (by Others Help, or by your Own)
The tender Pity of your Princely hand
Quick hale me out, I perish instantly,
Hal'd-in again by Six that hang on Me.
^xe-times already, ready even to faint,
^ith grievous Weight of guiltless Want oppressed,
^RTAS and I have bowed, and vowed our best
^re the Altar of our Souerain Saint:
(...) yet, the Ear that hears every Plaint;
(...) Heart that pitties every poor Distressed;
^e (alas!) seems Deaf to My Request;
(...) only, is not moved with My Complaint.
(...) must I needs (NEED still importunes so)
^ortune still, till some mild Soul relent:
(...) (under Heaven) no Help, no Hope, I know,
^e YOU alone, my Ruin to prevent:
^OV only may, Now only, if at all:
^ast Help, past Hope, If Now YOU fail, I fall.
Your Highnes's most humbly devoted, and obseruant Servant, Iosuah Syluester.

To The Sovereign of Women, ANNE Queen of Great-Britan.

By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

1614.

TO The right right Honorable LADIES, Lucie, Marchioness of Winchester.
(...) Countess of Bedford. (...) Countess of Dorset. (...) Countess of Exeter.
Frances, Countess of Hartford. ^atherin Countess of Salisbury. Susan, Countess
of Montgo^.
Barbara* Vi-Countess Lisle. Elizabeth, Vi-Countess Haddington. Elizabeth,
Vi-Countess Fenton.
(...), Baroness Zon^h. ^argaret, Baroness Wotton. ^^noria, Baroness Hay.
Eliza. Baroness Knowlis. Eliza. Baroness Cavendish. Jane, Baroness Roxborough.
^Irrors of HONOR, Models of Perfection,
(...) Low, to You all, bows the BETHVLIAN
^eeching All, but chiefly, You, by Name, ( Dame;
^^aign her grace and place in your Affection*
^oblest Lights, whose Virtues bright reflection,
^e-richly sparkles euery-way some flame
^iuerse in Form; in Virtue still the Same)
(...) Objects worthy of your Worth's Election:
(...) kind Address She craves, your sweet Direction
^wards the Presence of Your Souerain DAME,
^ose High Endowments, by the Trump of Fame,
^e All Virtuous under Her Protection;
^^ch, IVDITH humbly prays You, pray, for Her:
^d, mild interpret Her Interpreter.
^ETHVLIANS Rescue. THE FIRST BOOK.
^ing the Virtues and the valiant Deed
Of the Hebrew Widow, that so bravely freed
^lian Doors from Babylonians Dread;
(...) with just Fauchin did behead their Head.
^hou, that to save from Pagans servile Rigor,
^e Isaac's Heirs, did steel with manly vigor
^ke IVDITH'S heart, my feeble heart advance;
^e, raise my Thoughts in high and holy Trance:
(...) my Spirit, o! let thy Spirit reflect:
^nt I may handle in a style select
^acred Stuff; that whosoever reads This Story,
(...) Profit reap, I Comfort, and Thou Glory.
And Yo^, great Comfort of Great-Britan's (...)
Who^e Virtues here I under IVDITH sing;
Thrice-r^yall ANNE, vouchsafe auspicious Rays
Of Princely Favor on These Pious Lays
( Compo^ed first upon a Queen's Command,
( Disposed next into a Queen's own hand,
Transposed now to a more Queen's Protection:
As most peculiar to all Queen's Perfection.)
Great-gracious Lady, let it not distaste,
That! VDITH made not (as she ought) more haste
T^ kiss Your Hands; nor deem, nor doubt, the wor^^
Though She have seen Your Royal Spouse the first
It was her Truth-man, much against Her mind,
Betrayed her so, to go against Her Kind.
For which Offense, with other mo, to Her,
Sh' has got her now a new Interpreter;
She hopes, more faithful (wishes, more discreet)
To say and lay Her Service at Your Feet:
To give Du BARTAS ( at the last) His Due,
In Her behalf; and in Her, honor You.
While Israel a happy Peace inioyd,
And, da^gerlesse, with diligence imployd
(...) Soil, which 70. years vnsow'n
(...) before, with Thistles over-grow'n;
(...) Lord, Who often, by some Stroke severe
^st Correction, vvakes his Own (for fear
^t too-long Resting make them like the Horse,
^th standing still too-long, does lose his Force,
^ets to manege; and too-pampred, grows
^ly, restiue; and his Rider throws)
^rs their Country with so huge an Host,
(...) clouds of Arrows darkened all the Coast,
(...), Bills, and Darts, seemed, as they stirred, or stood,
^ouing Forest, or a mighty Wood:
(...) of all sorts of Soldiers, rankly-rude,
^r their Ensigns marched such multitude,
^en drew dry the Rivers where they past
^ugh rich Judea; so that, at the last,
(...) Iordan's Self, in his dry oazie Bed,
^ing for shame, was fain to hide his head;
^se (flat Bankrupt) he no more could pay
(...) Tribute-stream, of all he ought the Sea.
^he sunburned Reaper had yet scarcely rid
^ridged Acres of their richest Weed:
^needie ^leaner had scarce gatherd clean
(...) scatterd Ears the Binder lest, to glean:
(...) scarce, as yet, the Flayls upon the Floors
^n to groan: When Jacob at his Doors,
Sees HOLOFERNES his weak Frontires spoil^
In bloody Rivers drown his fertile Soil;
Not sparing fell the tender Female-kind,
Nor hoarie hairs (already short confined)
Nor Sucklings, swaddled in their Mothers arms,
From insolence of his insulting Arms.
Then, as a Flock of Sheep, which sees their Foe
Come forth a Wood (who often has scared them (...)
Minds no Defense; but scudding to be gone,
Makes, in an instant, hundred Flocks of one:
The Isaaciant seized with a sudden Fear,
Thinking his Host behind them every where,
Dispersed and scatterd (like those silly Sheep)
Fly into Woods, in Rocks and Caves they creep.
The affrighted Swains, neglecting Fields and Flo^^*
To save their lives, clime steepest Hills and Rocks:
Artificers, leaving their Tools to play,
Gain-greedy Chap-men, laying Trades away,
Hie them to hide them, in securer sort
In mossie Caves, then in a martial Fort.
And greatest Lords hold Denns of Wolves and Bean
A safe^ Hold, then Gold-lyn'd Walls of theirs.
Fear, lending wings to the Aged, makes them (...)
With lusty speed up to the Mountains nigh:
^are makes the Mothers, all forlorn and lost,
^g their deer Cradles to the Clouds almost:
^ar makes the Children (like so many Lambs)
^aule on all four after their dabbled Dams:
^her's nothing heard but hideous Cries and Plaints,
^d Lamentations, pitiful Complaints.
O Lord! (say they) will thou, for ever, Thus
^hrill down the Darts of thy fierce Wrath on us?
^^all the Chalde^an Idolists again
^y Chosen Flock in servile Yoke enchain?
^all our sad Houses, turned to Heaps of stone.
^ith Weeds and Thorns again be ouer-grow'n?
^all sacrilegious Fire again presume
^hy sacred House, thine Altar, to consume?
But Ioachim, High Priest of God, that tide,
and of the Hebrews then the chiefest Guide,
^ollowes the stout and expert Pilots guise,
^ho, when he sees a sudden Storm arise,
^dds not more Fear, with His Fear, to his fellows,
^or leaves his Ship to mercy of the Billows;
^ut, hiding his distrust, opposes brave
^is Arm and Art against the Wind and Wave:
^or, quick dispatching (hourly) Post on Post,
^o all the Coverts of the Able-most
For Pate, Prowes, Purse; commands, prays, presse^ the^
To come with speed unto JERUSALEM.
Since first the Eternal gave his sacred Law,
Upon Mount Sinai (in so dreadful Awe)
The Ark, which contained, in Two leaves of stone,
Much more sound Wisdom, in it self alone;
Then subtle Greece, or Rome (renownd for Wise)
In Worlds of Volumes ever could comprise;
Wandered from Tribe to Tribe, from Race to Race,
Throughout all Jury, without Resting Place,
Yea, sometimes too (o too audacious Theft!)
The sacrilegious Philistines it reft:
Till the happy day when Iesse's holy Stem
Lodged it for ever, in JERUSALEM.
But, since as yet, great David's hands were red
With blood of Thousands he had slaughtered;
The King of Peace would have a peaceful Prince
In Peaceful days, with all Magnificence
To build his TEMPLE; whose high Battlement
Seemd Earth to scorn, and threat the Firmament,
Till the hapless Day wherein a hateful King,
(In name and nature, just resembeling
This Tyrant's Lord) with execrable Blaze,
Did burn it down, and the Foundation raze.
A long-while after, Abr'ham's sacred Stems,
^urnd from Shores of Tyrant Tygris streams;
(...) set with Fears, with Peril, and with Pain,
(...)-builded Here God's glorious House again.
which, though (alas!) That first no more it matched,
^hen a Kings Palace a poor Cottage thatcht;
(...) Bigness yet, Beauty, and Height, obscured
(...) Pagan Wonders which most Fame procured:
(...)' Assyrian Queen-king's (sometime) sumptuous Bowers,
(...)' Ephesian Temple, the Egyptian Towers,
^e Pharians Pharus, Carians costly Toomb,
^odes high Colossus, the huge Heaps of Rome.
^r, for admired Art, This glorious TEMPLE
^ru'd Ctesyphon for Model and Example;
^nt rare Apelles curious Pensill Light,
^d led Lycippus cunning Chizel right.
Thither, by Troops, the Isaacian Tribes devout,
^turnd to Salem, flock from all about:
(...), when the Heavens, opening their Sluices wide,
^ure sudden Showers, surrounding every side;
^e gurgling Rills with rapid Course descend
^om sundry Hills, and to some River tend.
But, sad-sweet IVDITH in the midst (almost)
^ined as Cynthia 'mid the Nightly Host:
For, God (it seemed) her Beauties Form had cast
In rarest Mould of Nature (first or last).
The High Primate then, assisted with the Lig^^
Of Eleazar (Priests, whose sacred Crine
Felt never Razor) on his oyled head
A pearly Mitre sadly settelled;
His sacred Body also soon he heals
With sacred Vesture, fringed with golden Bells:
Then burns for Offering* slayes for Sacrifice,
Kidds, Lambs, Calves, Heifers, in abundant wise:
The horns of the Altar with their blood bedying,
And lowely-lowd, thus to the Almighty crying:
We come not here, o dreadful Lord of Hoasts,
To plead a Roll of Meritorious Boasts;
Nor to protest, that, in these Punishments,
Thou wrongst thy Justice, and our Innocence:
No; we confess, our foul and frequent Crimes
Worthy worse Plagues then These, a thousand tim^
Could thou forget Thy deer authentik Pact
With Abraham, or would thou (so exact)
Forcing thy Mercy in thy Justice Scale,
Our Weight of Sins with Judgments countervaile
Remove our Cause, we therefore (Lord) intre^^
From Justice Bar, unto thy Mercy-Seat:
(...) holy Father, pardon us (we pray)
(...) turn from us this fearful Storm away.
Alas! what boots us, that thy mighty hand
^^th brought us home from Tigris hateful strand,
(...) from the Yoke, which we so long (before)
^der the Assyrian cruel Tyrants bore;
^ese fat Fields, we have but new re-tild,
^ese fair Frames, we do but now re-build,
^ese (o Dolor!) our deer loving Wives,
^r Babes, Sons, Daughters (deerer then our lives)
^st serve the Chaldes, Ammonites for Pay,
^d be the Persians, and fell Parthians Prey;
This thine Altar, if these hallowed rooms,
^re-profan'd with Heathen Hecatombs?
O! if thou will not pity Us, abhord;
(...) least, be Jealous of Thy Glory, Lord:
(...) least, have pity on This Holy Place,
^here, to no God, but to IEHOVA's Grace,
(...) Incense burnt, nor any Sacrifice,
^^t to thy Self, of all the Deities.
^^rd! therefore turn, o turn the Chaldean Torches
^^om these rich Cedar Roofs, these stately Porches:
^eserue these Plates, this precious Furniture,
^^om sacrilegious Pilferers impure.
And let our Sorrow, and our Sacrifice,
Unto thy Justice, for our Sins suffice.
The Service done, Each does his way depart,
And Ioachim instantly calls apart
The States of Judah, and thus, sadly-sweet,
Consults with Them, how with this Storm to mee^
Grave Peers (said he) if your brave Zeal, of old,
Be not quight quenched, be not yet key-cold:
I^ Care of Wives, if tender Childrens love,
Had ever Power Your Souls deer Souls to move:
If in your Breasts rests any noble Worth,
Now, now or never, bring it bravely forth:
For, but God aid, and your auspicious Speed,
We are undone, We and our wretched Seed:
And never more shall the Immortal see
This Altar Smoking to His Majesty.
While the Air is mute, so that it scarce can make,
In Summer days, an Aspen leaf to shake:
While Seas be calm, so that, with Streamers brave,
A thousand Sail slide on the sleeping Wave:
While all the Winds be mewed up in their Cell;
It Is hard to say, which Pilot does excel.
But, when a Tempest, one-while sinks a Ship
Down to the Bottom of the infernal Deep;
^ther-while, with swelling Fury driven,
(...) with her Tops against the Stars of Heaven;
^ng a Shelfe now, and a Rock anon;
(...), and but then, is a Good Master known.
therefore (alas!) let now no carnal Care,
^oods, lives, honors (for your private Share)
^e you forget your Common-Country's Love,
(...) Sacred Place, the Honor of GOD above:
^umbly all into His hands resigning
(...) Souls whole Sway^ and all your Spirits refining
(...) Flame from Dross and Mists impure,
^h too-^o-oft the cleerest Eyes obscure;
^e (I pray) the best, in likelihood,
(...) pleasing God, most for the Public Good.
(...) aged Traitor then, whose breath distilled
(...) Honey Words, whose breast with Gall was filld,
^ging false Tears from his dissembling Eyes,
^u^sed Drift did in These Terms disguise:
(...) Spirits faint, my Speech does fail me quight,
^rost^e hairs for horror stand upright,
(...) I consider how This Tyrant fell,
(...) B^oud-floods drowning where he coms to quel,
^es n^er Us; threatening to our Houses Flames,
(...) to our Selves, dishonor to our Dames:
Bur, when (on the other side) to mind I call
This might^ Princes mild Receipt of All
(Not only t^^h, as, rude and Reason less,
Serve (like him Self) dumb Idols, Blocks and Be^^
But such, as, matching our Zeal's holy Height^,
Are Abrah^ms Seed, both in their Flesh and Faith*
Which wisely have (and timely) turned (submi^^)
The deadly E^ge of his drad Vengeances:
I (...) the Lord for such a Foe; so meek
(...) Lambs, to Lions Lyon-like;
As flexible to humble Tears, as fell
To ^esolutions that (in vain) rebel.
Since therefore, yet we may have Choice (for (...)
Of War, or Peace; his Favor, or his Fury;
Winking in Dangers, let us not Wilfully
Follow our Fathers stubborn Sur-cuidry:
But, striking Sail in such Storms violence,
Let Us live secure under so good a Prince.
Yet, None mi^s-take, that I this Counsel (...)
To save My Stake, as one too-fain to live:
Alas! my Years are of them Selves of age
To dye alone, without Assyrians Rage;
Without the help of their keen Dart or Pole,
To lance my Heart, or to let out my Soul:
^e, were my Youth's Spring now re-flowr'd again
^eateful blood boiling in every vein.
^eale to GOD, and to my Country's Good
^d show me well no Niggard of my Blood;
^t ( Samson-like) My Death bring Death to all
^agan Host and their proud General.
^ore I fear, least, with a Zeal too-Yong,
^ighting for the Law, the Law impugn;
^ng so the Soldiers Insolence,
^sing so the Fury of the Prince,
(...) they by Conquest of one Day undo
(...) Izrael, and drown GOD's Glory too.
^ee bereft, What People, in This Place,
^ly-religious, shall implore His grace;
(...), of all Nations that dispersed Wun
(...) Shores of Indus, to the S^tting Sun;
from the farthest Hyperbarean Coasts,
^ose whose Clime continual Summer roasts,
(...) chosen only Jacob for his Own,
^on This Mount His drad-deer Glory shown?
^t, good old Cambris (else the mildest Prince)
^nes, grieved and pale with Passions vehemence;
(...) interrupting That, with This Discourse
^ens the heartless Peers and Counselors:
Rather, o Earth (for which our Earthlings stri^^)
Gape under me, and swallow Me alive:
Rather, just Heavens, with sulphury Fire and Fum^
(As Sodom yerst) Mesodainly consume,
Then I should (Saint without, within Malicious)
Give Izrael a Counsel so pernicious.
Were it, the Head of this inhumane Band
Meant but our Bodies only to command,
Though with our Birth, to this fa^re Light we bro^^
Sweet Liberty (so sweet and deer, that naught,
No Hopes, no Heaps may be compared to it:)
The TEMPLE saved, I might perhaps submit.
But, since this Tyrant, puffed with foolish Pride,
With heavier Gyves to load our Souls (beside)
Which (only Vassals of the Thunder-Thrower)
Nor know, nor owe, to Any Sceptres lower;
Would that (forgetting Him who made us All,
And of all People chose us principal*
And fatherly provides us every thing*
And shields us ay with Shadow of his wing)
We take for GOD, His proud ambitious Prince,
Who Nimrod-like, with hellish Insolence,
Would climb to Heaven, although his life be s^^
As merits not the Name of Man, by much.
^eard him boldly, bravely stand we to it,
(...) against Arms, Man to Man, Foot to Foot.
^y lies not in vainglorious hearts,
^er of Horses, not of Pikes, and Darts:
(...) be but Instruments the Eternal moves,
^own with Conquest whom his Goodness loves.
(...), should the Lord now suffer Heathen's rage
^er-^un his sacred Heritage,
^se in life his Name we so dishonor;
^ath, at least, in Death, let us do him Honor:
^f we cannot* Assure overcome,
^in, by Patience, Crowns of Martyrdom.
^d, could our Foes (as fell as Lestrygons)
(...) off the Earth extirp our Tribes at-once;
(...) could not though GOD's glorious Name interr
^ese Apostates falsely would infer).
^e that with so sundry Nations stored
(...) peopled World, from one Man; and restored
^g after that) by one small Bark, the waste
Flood had made, when it had All defaced;
(...) He able even of stones to raise
^ople Zealous of his glorious Praise?
(...) He able once again to open
^ara's Womb, and give her Spouse (past hope)
More Sons, then Sands on Lybian shores be (...)
By ruffling Boreas, loud, Cloud-chasing Blast;
Or twinkling Spangles nightly brightly roll
On sabled Circles of the whirling Pole:
Which, with more sacred Voice, more humble (...)
Shall sound his Praises, and observe his Law?
Then rather, Fathers (foul befall You else)
Let us die Hebrews, then live Infidels.
Let Us not prefer, too-base, and too-too-blame,
Profit to Duty, idle Fear to Shame.
Cambris Oration was no sooner done,
But all the Assembly (as all joined in one)
Confirmed His Counsel both with voice and gest:
And Ioachim, (Ioy-rapt, above the rest)
Lifting to Heav'n-ward reverent hands and face,
Said, Lord we thank thee, that thy special grace
Has steeld our hearts, and linkt our Wills no les^:
A hopeful Sign of happy good Success.
Then, to the Princes he the Charge commits
Of Towns and Provinces, as Each befits:
Least any, spurt'd by Envy or Ambition,
In Zrael should kindle new Sedition.
So, Each with-drawes, and bravely-bold prepare^
To front the worst that martial Fury dares.
^ho the Aristaean busy Swarms has seen
Hybla's Top; Whether, with Launcets keen,
^rging the Drones which over-neer their homes
^e humming out to rob their fragrant Combs:
^ther, collectiwg their delicious Deaw
(...) various Thyme, and other Flowers not few:
^ther, extending, in rare Symmetrie,
(...) wondrous Art, their Waxen Canapey;
(...) arching even, so many Thousand Cells,
^uick, so thick; so like, as Nothing else:
^ther, conducting their too-ful Supplies
(...) where, to plant their goodly Colonies;
^ch keep, still constant, in their new Plantation,
^ir Mother Citie's Manners, Laws, and Fashion:
(...) seen the Jews as busy Diligence,
(...) quick Desire to put them in Defense.
^ome stop the Breaches made by Art or Age;
^he Heavens anger, or the Heathens rage:
^he, least the Ram, butting with boisterous Falls.
^uld pash to powder their too-feeble Walls,
(...) Bastions, Bulwarks, Rampires, Ravelins, Forts,
^k on all sides their Cities where imports:
^e to and fro trudging with Baskets filled,
^laces needful sudden Sconces build:
Some wanting time, or means their Town to (...)
With broad deep Trenches soon begirt it all:
And from a River near they cut a Rill
The hollow bosom of their Dike to fill.
While Armorers, in order, beating quick
Hot sparkling Steel on Anvils hard and thick,
Transform it soon to Corslets, Curtellaxes,
Helms, Gorgets, Gantlets, Bills and Battail-axes;
And some, for need (to furnish and set-out
The untrained Shepherd, Neatheard, and the Lo^
Ground the ground-slycing Coultar to a Blade,
And of the Sickle a straight Weapon made:
None Young and healthy took Repast or Rest:
One on his back, another on his Beast,
Others in Wagons carryed-in apace
Corn, Wine, and Food to some importing Place:
Even so, in Summer (as the Wiseman tells)
The Emmets by Troops haste from their hollow (...)
To get-in Harvest, graving where they gone
Their Diligence even in a path of Stone:
The lastiest Swarms for their Provision range,
The sick and old wait at their thrifty Grange
T'vnloade the Burdens, and lay-vp their Store
In their great Garnier, biting yet before
(...) every Grain, least kept so warm below
^id the Molde, it after sprout and grow.
The end of the first Book.
BETHVLIAN^ Rescue. THE SECOND BOOK.
NOw Holefernes, in the Scythik Fort
Had pight his Standards; and in various Sp^
His Youthful Pagans did them still delight;
Naught less expecting then Affront, or Fight:
When he had news, The Jews stood bravely out,
Defied his Pride, and fortified about.
Shall then (said He) shall then a sort of Slaves,
A sort of Clownes and Shepherds, armed with St^^
With Slings and Stones, presume to stop the Co^^
Of Mine exploits: Which, nor the roaring source
Of rapid Tigris and swift Euphrates,
Nor snowie Tops of Taure and Niphates,
Conspired, could stay? You Chiefs of Moabites,
Of valiant Ephraim and fierce Ammonites;
You that as Neighbors (having long converst)
Know all the Nations on these Hills dispersed,
Say, from what People had they their Descent?
What lies their Strength in? What Is their Gouer^^^
For, He that wisely knows his Foe (they say)
Has, in a manner gotten half the Day.
^hen Ammon's Prince, bending his humble knee,
^s to the Duke replied right prudently
^r though in heart a Pagan, born and bred;
^inst his Mind, his Tongue divinely led
that same Spirit which did the Seer compel,
^ch came to curse, to bless his Izrael;
(...) the Hebrews State did such Relation make,
^f in Him Moses and Esdras spoke;)
^y Lord, I shall, since You so please, recite
(...) Isacians Story; and will follow right
(...) ingenious Bees, which wont not to devour
Sweet they meet, nor suck of every Flower;
(...) even of those they choose, take but the Crops.
^s People (Sir) upon the Mountain Tops
^amped here, originally came
(...) forth the Loins of famous ABRAHAM,
^o, to obey the GOD of Gods, most High
^er of All; of All Support, Supply;
^e to This Country (then, in Occupation
(...) Cananites, the rich and native Nation)
^ere that same GOD not only heaps with Gold
^d Goods, his House; but also (though He old
(...) hundred years; a third part less, his Wife;
^d, till that season, barren all her life)
Sent him a Son: swearing, His seed should sway
Trivmphant Sceptres many, many-a-day:
But, when good Abraham's old-old Age expects
This happy Promise in the sweet effects,
The Immortal Voice (o pitious Mysteries!)
Commands that He his ISAAC sacrifice.
Even as a Ship upon the raging Sea
Between Two Winds Cross-tossed every-way,
Uncertain, knows not in what Course to set-her,
Till one of them, striving to get the better,
Doubles his bellows, and with boisterous blast
Drives her (at random) where he list, at last:
So, the Hebrew, feeling in-ward War (that season)
T'wixt Love and Duty, betwixt Faith and Reason*
Doubts what to do; and his Perplexities
Lean now to that hand, and anon to this:
Til^ th'heav'nly love he ought his GOD had won
The earthly love he bore his only Son.
Then, having ready Fire and Faggot laid,
And on the Altar his deer Son displayed;
The knife he draws with trembling hand, and ha^
Even heaved his arm about to strike the Lad,
When GOD, in the instant stays the Instrument
Ready to fall on the humble Innocent:
(...) satisfied with so sufficient Trial
(...) Abraham's Faith; to Him his GOD so loyal.
(...) from ISAAC, JACOB; and from JACOB sprung
^^elue sturdy Sons; who, with sore Famine wrung,
^^rsaking Canaan, for a great-good-while
^d happy Biding by the Banks of Nile:
^ere their blessed Issue multiplied so fast,
^at they became the Egyptian's Fear, at last:
(...), though (alas!) their bodies had no rest,
^l though their backs with burdens were oppressed;
^e noble Palm Trees, mounting stiflly -- strait,
^e more, the more they be surcharged with weight.
Therefore the Tyrant which then held the Raines
(...) that rich Soil where sad Heaven never raines,
^mmands that all male Hebrew Infants found
^ore Innocents!) be quickly killed, or drowned,
^oon as Wombes had them delivered;
^^^tone same day might see them born and dead.
O Tigre! think thou? thinks that Rage of thine
(...) cut off quite Isaac's Immortal Ligne?
(...) may it reave the scarce-born Life of those
(...)-hatched Babes, and them of Light fore-close:
(...) notwith-standing, Jacob's swarming Race
^hin few Years shall cover Canaan's Face;
And, thine own Issue even the first shall be
To break (and justly) thine unjust Decree.
Pharaeo's fair Daughter, with a noble Train,
For Blood and Beauty rarely matched again,
One Evening, bathing in the Crystal Brook
Which thorough Gossen crawls with many a Cro^^
Hears in the reeds a ruefull Infants voice;
But thinking it some of the Hebrews Boys
(As'twas indeed) her Fathers bloody Law
Stopped for a while her tender ears with Awe.
But, at the last, marking the Infants face
(I woat not what unusual Tracts of Grace
And Types of Greatness sweetly shining there)
Love vanquished Duty, Pity conquered Fear:
For, She not only takes him up from thence,
But brings him up, and breeds him as a Prince,
Yea, as Her own. O Babe beloved of God!
O Babe ordained to lighten the Hebrew's Load!
To lead then Bodies, to direct their Minds,
First, best, most, Wrighter, in all sacred Kinds ^^
Thou had but now no Mother (to be seen)
And now for Mother, Thou have found a Queen
Lo, thus (my Lord) could their wise God extra^^
Good out of Evil, and convert the act
^ersecution (bent against the blood
(...) Life of His) unto their greater good.
^seph's Brethren, by their Envious Drift
^ver-throwe him, to a Throne him lift:
^id proud Haman's deadly Hatred lend
Mordechay a Ladder to ascend
Honors Top, and trimd his neck (past Hope)
^ graceful Chain, in steed of shameful Rope.
^ne day, this Hebrew, driving Iethro's Sheep
^n Mount Hereb (where he used to keep)
^e on the sudden a bright blazing Flame
^e in a Bush, and yet not burn the same;
^n whence, anon he heard (with Fear and Wonder)
^oice, might shake both Heaven and Earth in sunder.
(...) I that (only) AM-WAS-SHAL-BE, Who
^e All of Nothing; and can All vn-doo,
^n pleases Me: I-A* M, The Holy-One,
Great, The Good, The Just; Whose hand alone
^aines, maintains, and rules the World: I-AM,
^mni-potent, The GOD of Abraham;
^e to my Foes with my Revenging Rod,
unto Those that worship Me for GOD,
^ole, and whole in Thought, in Word, and Deed,
^t Mercisull; to Them and all their Seed.
Then do my Will: dispatch thee speedy hence;
Go, say from Me, to that unhallowed Prince
Which rules Memphis, and the fertile Plain
Where swelling Nilus serves in steed of Rain,
That he dismiss my People: and least He,
Incredulous, distrust thine Embassy;
Cast-down thy Rod, thy Message to confirm,
It to a Scrpent shall eft-soons transform.
He throws it down, and instantly withal
Sees it begin to live, to move, to craule,
With hideous head before, and tail behind,
And body wriggling (after Creepers kind).
Re-take it up, his GOD commands him then;
Which, taken, takes the former Form again:
And, past Man's Reason (by the power of GOD)
Of Rod turns Serpent, and of Serpent Rod.
Armed with this Wand, wherewith he was to quel
The sceptred Pride of many an Infidel,
He many a time importunes Pharao,
In GOD's great Name, to let the Hebrews go
Into the Desert, at their liberties
To serve the Lord, and offer Sacrifice.
But Pharao, deaf unto his sacred Word,
S^ifly withstands the Message of the Lord:
^hen, by Moses working many Miracles,
^rized His Orator and Oracles.
^t, He not only turned into Blood
(...) seav'n-fold Waves, and every other Flood
^attens Egypt; but even every Spring,
^c captive Crystal, golden Pipes do bring
^ve the Court: so that the King is forced
that red liquor to allay his Thirst.
^n, from the Fens, from puddly Ponds and Lakes,
^ns of Millions of foul Frogs he makes,
^ver Memphis with their ougly Fry,
^ot forbear the Kings own Canapy.
^en, of all Ages, of all sorts, and sexes,
(...) burning Ulcers, and hot Biles he vexes,
^t the Egyptians, in incessant anguish,
(...) known Poison, on their Couches languish:
^an their Leaches their own Leaches be,
^ir unheard of, hidden Malady.
^en on their Cattle; Flocks, and Herds, and Droves
^wnes and Dales, Fens, Forests, Fields and Groves,
^g Contagion suddenly he spread;
(...) took so quickly both their heart and head,
^lly Shepherds near the Rivers side,
(...) Cattle dead, sooner then sick, espied.
Then turns the Earths Dust into Swarms of (...)
Then dims the Aier with dusky Clouds of Flies,
Of Drones, Wasps, Hornets, humming day and (...)
In every place, with every face to fight,
And fixing deep in every Pagans skin
Th'vnvsual anger of their steeled Pi^^.
Then (when appeer'd no Threat of troubled (...)
No sign of Tempest) at his Servants Prayer
The Eternal thundered down such Storms of Hail,
As with the noise and stroke did stoutest quail:
Here falls a Bull, brained with a Hailstones rap;
There sprawles a Child, split with a Thunder-(...)
Here a huge Forest, lately all a Clowd
Of tufted Arms, has neither Shade nor Shrow^
And, if the native Sap again re-suit
The naked Trees with comely Leaves and Fr^^*
Again (alas!) the Caterpiller crops,
Within few hours, the Husbands yearly hope^
Then, with gross Darkness vailing close the (...)
He so sield-vp stubborn Egyptians eyes,
That for three days with fearful foot and ha^^
They gro^pt their way (except in Gossen-Land)
And Titan, tired in his long Course, for ease,
Seemed then to rest him with the Antipodes.
(...), as the same Sun, the same instant, makes
Mud to harden; and to melt, the Wax:
^d These Works, so full of admiration,
^uerse Subjects, diverse Operation.
(...) humble Hebrews, GOD's great hand adore;
^ilfull Pharao spurns it more and more:
(...) as a Co^selet, when it is cold enough,
^ore it is beaten grows the harder Proof.
^t, at the sad News of the Prince, His Son,
^ll their Heirs, all in one Night vndon^;
^as so daunted, that he early bod
Hebrews go to serve the Lord their GOD:
(...), in a Pillar of a Clowd, by Day,
^re, by Night; directed right their Way.
(...), soon retracting his extorted Grant,
^stubborn Tyrant strangely arrogant,
(...) all his Egypt, and in post pursews
Arm-lesse Legions of the harm-lesse Jews,
(...) lodged secure along the sandy shore,
^e the Erythraean ruddy Billows rore.
^as not such Noise, when, tearing Gibalt^^,
Herculean Sea came first to spread so far
^t Calpe and Abyle; nor when O^notri^
(...) sighing lost her deer near Trinacri^;
As in both Armies: The One insulting proud;
The Other in skriches, and sad cries, as loud, ((...)
Deafned the Shores: while Fifes, Horns, furio^
With Noise and Neighes, did even the Welkin for^
Cursed Seducer (cried the Jews) what Spite
Moved thee to alter our Lives happy plight?
What! are we Fishes, that we here should swi^
Through these deep Seas? Or, are we Fowls to (...)
Over the steepest of these Mountains tall?
Were there not Graves in Egypt for us all?
In our dear Gossen? but we needs must come
In this Red Sea to seek our rewfuil Tomb*
Yet, mildest Moses, with his dead-liue Wand
Strikes th'awfull Streams: which, yielding to his (...)
Discover Sands the Sun had never spied;
And Walld the same with Waves on either side:
Between the which (dread-less and danger-less)
The Hebrews dry-shod past the Crimsin Seas.
But, when the Tyrant rashly them pursues,
Marching the Way was made but for the Jews;
The Sea returns, and over-t^rns his Force,
Him Self, his Men, his Chariots, and his Horse.
O happy People, for whom GOD (so kind)
Arms Fire, and Air, and Clouds, and Waves, and Wind^
(...) All things serve: which have All things in Pay.
^euer let Time's File to fret away
^re a Favor? rather let the Tongue
^ll thine Aged tell it to Their Young;
(...) to their Seed, and They to theirs again;
^ally These Wonders to retain.
^em, forty years, GOD in the Desert fed
Angels Food, with a celestial Bread;
(...) from a Rock (as dry as Pumice first)
(...) Rivers gush, to satisfy their Thirst:
(...) (even) their Shoes, and all their Garments there,
^od, the last, as the first day they were:
(...) since our Souls will faint for want of Food,
liberal in All, for all their Good,
(...) (on Mount Sinai) in his Sacred Law,
(...) to their Souls, through sharp-sweet filial Awe:
thing them all (as duty All does bind)
^ue Him first, and next to Him, Mankind;
(...) We might never break That sacred Twine
^h Man to Man, and Man to GOD does join.
^aue Moses dead, brave Iosuah's rule began;
^e happy Sword soon conquered Can^an;
^n few years unto subjection brings
Lives and States of one and thirty Kings.
At His command, more powerful then the Thund^^
The firmest Rocks and Rampires fall in-sunder;
Without the Shock of Tortoise or of Ram,
To batter Breaches where his Army came:
For, but with bellowing of hoarse Trumps of (...)
As with an Engine, prowdest Towers are torn:
As at his Beck, the Heavens obey his will;
The Fire-foot Coursers of the Sun stand still,
To lengthen Day, least under wings of Night,
His Heathen Foes should save themselves by Fli^
This scourge of Pagans, in a good old age*
(To live in Heaven) leaving this Earthly Stage,
Israel had many Magistrates of Name,
Whose Memories live ever fresh in Fame.
Who knows not A^^d, Sangar, Samuel,
D^bor^, Bara^, and Othoniel?
Who has not heard of mighty Samsons Coile,
Who, sole, and Arm-less, did an Army foil?
What Praise with Iephthe's might have well com^
Had but his Rashness his deer Daughter spared*
What Clime, what Time, what River, Dale, or (...)
But rings of Gedeon, and his high Renown?
After the Judges; Kings (some good, some b^^)
The sacred Helm of the Hebrew Vessel had:
(...) their Dauid's holy Harp and Skill,
^ng but David would I wa^ble still:
(...) (my Lord) great Dauid's Deeds, could none
(...) while) atchieue, but Dauid's Self alone;
^one but Dauid's Harp, and Dauid's Hymn
and aright the Honors due to Him:
(...) not therefore, with unworthy Lays,
^ing to praise him, derogate his Praise.
(...), shall I balk his Son, whom Heaven adorn
(...) Health, Wealth, Wisdom, and All-Plenties horn:
^e prudent* Problems, touching every Theme,
(...) thousand Sophysts to JERUSALEM,
^ians, Indians, Africans, among;
^'d by the Charms of his All-Skilfull Tongue?
^m, whose Zeal the Idols so defaced;
^urg'd GOD's TEMPLE, and his Rites re-plac't?
^im, that saw a heavenly Host descend
^ccour Sion, and his Foes offend?
^im, whose Army, near to Gerar, yerst,
^d Ethyopians swarming Troops dispersed?
^im, who praying for Heavens aid, to fight
^st Ammon, Moab, and Mount-Se^^rit^;
(...) by Themselves, his sad Request ful-filld,
^n, Self-incenst, Themselves they enter-killd?
But Chaldei's King, by Their's Captivity,
Put (late) an End unto That Monarchy.
Ye^ did Great Cyrus Them again restore
To Liberty; and gave them furthermore
Leave to elect Two Rulers of their Race:
Whereof the One (who yet supplies the place)
Was Ioachim; who, for his holy Life,
Prowess, and Prudence, is respected life,
Not sole in Sion; but with Ammonites,
Syrians, Sydonians, Madians, Moabites,
Thus was (my Lord) the Prime, this the (...)
Of ISRAEL, through every Times success^^^
And Thus the Lord has lift them (nigh) to He^
Som-times; som-times, them (eue^) to Hell has (...)
But, whether Princely-Priest, or Judge, or Ki^^*
Of the Hebrew Tribes have had the Governing;
So long as They observed the sacred Pact
GOD with their Fathers did by Oath contract*
Ay prosperous, tryumphantly they troad
On proudest Foes: and all the World abroad,
Conspired in Spite, could nothing Them (...)
Much less distract them; least of all, destroy:
On the other side, soon as they have infreng'd
His Ordinance, their GOD (to be avenged)
^hrall'd them, now, to cruel Moabites*
(...) to Edom, then to Ammonites,
(...) Philistines: and ay his Wrath has bin
^y upon them, when they hapt to sin.
^o be therefore, any their Offense*
^ealous Justice of their GOD incense;
(...) not their Mounts, nor undermine their Bowers,
^ring thy Rams against their rampir'd Towers,
^^ale their Walls, nor lead thy Legions,
^h Resolution) to assault them once:
^et them heap, on Carmel Libanus;
^iban* Niphate; there-on Emmaus:
^in one Chanel let them muster hither
(...) and Rhone, Nilus and Rhine together,
(...) and Iber too, to fence their Coast:
(...) cannot escape from thy victorious Host.
^t, if they have not broke the Cov^nant
^h GOD to Abraham and his Seed did grant:
^re (my Lord) beware how you come near
(...) holy Nation, to their GOD so deer.
should swart Auster him dispeople quight
^u^nish Thee with all His fit to fight:
^ld swarming Borea^ from His utmost end
^is tall Soldiers to Thy service send:
Should Zephyrus add to Thy dreadful Power
His martial Legions, all Hesperians Flower:
Should (lastly) Euru^ send Thee for Supplies
His Troops which first see Phoeb^^ Rays a^i^^
All These, all-daring, all-devouring Swarms,
This armed World, or all This World of Arms,
Could never conquer (in a thousand year)
The least* worst, weakest, of these Cities here;
Because Their GOD will be Their sure Defe^^^*
That GOD almigh^y, whose Omnipotence
Can with a breath confound all Kings that dare
(As Thou do now) against Him make op^^ (...)
As the Oceans Billows swell not by and by,
When (first) the Winds begin to bellow high;
But, first begin to foam, and then to fume,
Higher, and higher, till their Ragepresume
To chide the Earth, and check the Welkins Front,
And ^andy Hills against the Heavenly Mount:
Even so, the Princes of this Pagan Rout,
Hearing GOD's praises, forthwith break not o^^
In ragefull Fury; but as the Ammonite
Grows in Discourse, so grow they in Despite;
Till at the last, with loud, proud murmu^ing^*
They even blaspheme the glorious King of King^
Kill (cry they) kill; let us heaw and hale in pieces
^e subtle Traitor, that with wily Speeches,
(...) save his Hebrews from Khamnusias Rod,
^uld fright us with a false and idle God.
Renowned General, send but out a score
(...) All thy Troops, and they shall soon run-o're
^ose rascal Rebels, and reduce them all
^strate and humble at Thy feet to fall:
(...) Coward, Villain. But, the Viceroy then,
^pping their loud outrageous Storms again,
^an him Self Th^^ to the Ammonite;
(...), impudent Impostor! Tell Me (right)
^at Fiend, what Fury has inspired these Spells:
^at Trevet told thee, or what Sybel else
^de thee believe the Syrians shall not quell
(...) Isaacian Troop, but stoop^ to Israel,
^ose GOD is but their Dream, or Fancy vain*
^meer Devise of MOSES subtle brain;
^ther, of power to give them Victory,
(...), from Our hands to rescue Them nor Thee.
^at GOD have we, but the great King of Kings,
^^BVCHADNEZZAR? whose drad puissance rings
^e all the Earth: who covering far and nigh*
(...) Plains with Horse, Hills with Infanterie,
Shall raze these Runnagates; which, fled from (...)
Have heervsurped Others Right, yer-while.
Die therefore, Vilain, die; take the desert
Of thy false Tongue, and of thy treacherous heart.
What said I, fond? No, Dastard, I disdain
My valiant Blade in Thy base blood to stain:
Thou shall so quickly not receive the meed
Of thy disloyal and detested Deed
(For, a quick Death is Wretches bliss, we know*
Them quickly ridding both of Life and Woe)
But, with thy Days thy Dolors to protrack,
Thou shall from hence unto Bethulia pack,
Where still thou shall, through infinite dismay,
Vndying, die a thousand times a day;
Until, with Those invincible (thou say)
With thousand wounds a wretched End thou ha^^.
Why tremblest Thou? why does thy color fail*
Why seems ^hy heart for horror so to qua^le?
If so Their GOD be GOD (as thou have v^nted)
Now, by thy Face witness thy faith, undaunted.
Then, the Lord Marshall, in Authority
Under the Viceroy, not in cruelty,
Transporteth speedy, near Bethulians side
The un- pagan Pagan, hand and foot fast tied;
^uing His Troops wounded with wondrous grief
(...) be deprived of so brave a Chief:
^n so the Puttock in his crooked Serrs
^e peeping Chicken through the Welkin bears;
^ile the poor Dam, below cluk-clucking thick,
^es, but in vain, and calls her rapted Chick.
The Citizens, seeing the approach of Foes,
^n in alarm, them all to Arm dispose;
^d, with meet Number of their Men of worth,
^d choice Commanders, bravely s^lly forth;
^er then Torrents, gus^ing from the Hills,
^n hopping down into the lower Fields.
^e Foe, retiring to their mightier Bands,
^ues captive Ammon in the Hebrews hands;
^om with a forced foot, though free in thought,
^d Will right willing, to their Town they brought.
^ere, round-environd with a curious Crowde,
^ing to Heaven his hands and eyes, aloude
^s he began: O Thou great GOD, the Guide
Heaven and Earth, and All that is beside;
^ose living Spirit (spread in, and over All)
^es All things Life, Breath, Growth, Original,
^ue Thee, Lord, a thousand Thanks devout,
^at thou have daign'd, yer death, to take me out
Of my wild Stock, to graft me in the Stem
Of th'happy Tree, deaw'd with thy Gracious stre^
Which (maugre Blasts, and Blastings, rough and (...))
Of All the Trees, bears only Fruit of Life.
And, good Isacians, for GOD's sake, I pray
Miss-doubt me not, as coming to betray,
Or vnder-mine by wily Stratagem,
Your Strength or State; or wrong IERVSALI^
No: GOD does know, I suffer This, for You,
For witnessing before yon wicked Crew,
GOD's mighty Arm for Your Forefathers (...)
As ready still, to save and shield his Own:
Fear not therefore Their mighty multitude,
Whose sight (almost) so many has subdewd.
Nor let their Boasts, nor brauing Menaces,
Kill, quail, or cool, your holy Courages:
For, should the whole Earth send her Sons, in swar^
Against you only, all to carry Arms;
So that your Trust be fixed in GOD alone,
Not in an Arm of Flesh, not in your Own:
You shall, no doubt, make ruddy, M^cmur's Flo^
With Idolist Assyrian Armies blood:
You shall, no doubt, of Fearful, Fierce become,
Your strong Ass^lants stoutly overcome.
Almighties hand, so ready bent to smight,
^ut to humble, not destroy you quight;
(...) but to show you, that in all Distress,
(...) only He, can give you quick Redress.
^s from a Bramble springs the sweetest Rose;
^om a Weed the whitest Lilly grows:
(...) so, diuinest Sighs, deuoutest Tears,
^urest Life, are Fruits Affliction bears.
(...) here the Faithful are much like the Earth,
^ch, of it Self (alas!) brings nothing forth
Thorns and Thistles, if the Plough she lack,
(...) daily wounds to lance her bunchie back.
(...) yet the Lord (who always does relent,
^oon as Sinners earnestly repent,
(...), in his time, his sharp hand does retire,
(...) cast, at last, his Rods into the Fire)
(...) rid your dangers, and restore you rest,
(...) in an hour, when you can hope it least.
^hen, courage, Friends: let us vanquish GOD with Tears*
^d then Our Arms shall quickly conquer Theirs,
^eir World of Men. And, if as yet in Me
(...) any Strength; if any Courage be;
^ine Experience may in ought avail:
^ith mine Age, all be not old and frail:
I vow it all, and All that else is Mine,
To your Defense, and for the Law divine.
The end of the second Book.
^ETHVLIANS Rescue. THE THIRD BOOK.
Lame-snorting Phlegon's ruddy breath began,
Reducing Day, to gild the Indian;
^n early wakened with their rattling Drums,
(...) Heathen Soldier from his Caban comes,
^s-vp his Arms, and marching in Array,
^ards Bethulia tends the ready way.
(...) May, the Meads are not so py'd with Flowers,
^ndry Figures, Colors, Sauors, Powers;
^s this Host, with Squadrons, different
^nguage, Manners, Arms, and Ornament:
^at the old Cha^os (Womb of th'VNIVERSE)
^neuer made of Members more diverse.
^heer-in All agreed, for all their Ods,
^arre against the Eternal GOD of Gods,
^se breath, whose beck, makes both the Poles to shake,
Caucasus and Libanus to quake.
^er, cold Hyrcania's bold and brauing Seed,
(...) with (Their neighbors) both Armenias Breed,
^e wanton Crests. There Parthian Archers try
^ward to shoot, the while they forward fly.
The Persian, there, proud of the Imperial state,
With golden scales scalops his Armed plate.
Here would the Mede show, that for want of (...)
Not Heart, He lost His (late) Imperial Cap.
And that, nor Pomp of his too sumptuous Suits;
His painted Che^ks, his Phrygik Lays and Lute^^
His crisped Bush, nor his long, borrowed Lock,
Had ever power his Manly mind to smock:
Happy-Arabians, who their Fern-thatcht Town^^
Tumble in Tumbrels up and down the Downs:
The subtle Tyvians, who did first invent,
Our winged words, in Barks of Trees to pri^^:
The men of Moab, and the Ammonites,
The Idumeans, and the Elamites,
Learned Egyptians: Those that near confine
The swelting Coasts of swartest Abyssine:
In brief; All ASIA was immured almost
Within the Trenches of This migh^y Host;
Wherein, almost as many Nations clustred,
As the Hebrews Army single Soldiers mustred.
But, of all These, none plagued the Israelite^
More, then their own Apostate Ephraimites;
Who, not to seem of kin to Israel,
Raged with more fury, fought more deadly fell.
(...) the Spring time, while a Poole is still,
^mooth alost, the Froggs lie croaking shrill;
^the least Stone that a Child can fling
^ir the water, straight they cease to sing:
^hile a happy Peace IVDEA blessed,
Constancy of These stood with the best
^ng the Saints; and the Lord's sacred Praise
^n their mouths daily and many ways;
(...) at they seemed like burning Lamps to shine
^d the Flock, devoutly-most-divine:
^t the Noise of Holofernes Name,
^r famous Faith nothing but air became;
^r Mouth is stopped, the Zeal they did presume
^^ghly hot, is vanished into Fume.
(...) turned Pagans (for some Profits sake)
(...), worse then Pagans, their poor Brethren rake.
(...)! what a Number of such Ephraincites
^ow-adayes (Deceitful Hypocrites!)
(...)-in the Church, the while a prosperous wind,
(...) gentle Gales, blows fair and full behind;
^ch seem with Zeal the Gospel to embrace,
^le that it yields them either Gain, or Grace:
(...) if the Chance change; if it hap to puff
(...) half afront; if She be feign to luffe;
Faint-hearted, then forthwith they cast about:
And, with the Almighty playing banque-rout,
With greater Rage his Law they persecute,
Then yerst with Zeal they did it prosecute;
And in their Malice grow more fierce and furious,
Then Julian yerst, or Celsus, or Porphyrius.
Soon as the Hebrews from their Turrets spy
So many Ensigns waving in the Sky;
And such an Host, marching in such Array,
Begirt afar their City every way:
They faint for dread; not having where to run,
Save to the GOD their Grandsires trusted on.
O Father (cry they) Father of Compassion,
Whose wing is wont to be our strong Salvation;
Since now against us all the World does swarm,
O! Cover us with thine Almighty arm.
Thus having prayed, the Careful Governor
To Charge his Watches does him quick bestirre;
And when the Sun in his moist Cabin dives,
With hundred Fires the Day again revives;
Watches himself amid the Court of Guard;
Walks of the Round: and weens, that over-hard
P^oebe's black Coachman drives his sable Steeds,
Hebrews Ruin hasting more then needs.
^hile, opposite, the Pagans think her fast
^ith her Emdymion, in a slumber cast:
^t, Men's frail wishes have (alas!) no force,
^o hold, or hasten, the Heavens settled Course.
^ Soon as they saw Aurora's saffron ray
^n their Horizon to renew the Day;
^he Vice*Roy makes a thousand Trumpets sound,
^ assemble all his scattered Troops around;
which from all parts with speedy pases went
^nvironing their Chief-Commanders Tent:
^s round about a Huntsman, in a morn,
^he Hounds do throng when once they hear his horn,
^ Having, in vain, summoned the Town; hetries
^ hundred ways, it (wrathful) to surprise:
^eer, the Enginer begins his Ram to rear;
^eer mounts his Trepan, and his Scorpion there;
^ends here his Bricol, there his boisterous Bow;
^rings here his Fly-Bridge, there his batt'ring Crow:
^sides high Timber-Towers, on rolling Feet
^ov'd and removed; controlling every Street.
^ Here, Pioners are put the Ditch to fill;
^o level Mounts, to make a Hole a Hill:
^o play the Moules, to dig a secret way,
^ to the Town their Soldiers to convay.
Here, others must their Ladders raise the while,
And quick surprise the Sentinels, by wile:
Others must vnder-mine: others aspire,
With matter fitting, every Gate to fire.
But the most part stand ready in Array
To give Assault, soon as they see their Way
Made meet and easy by the batterring Thunder
Of all their Engines pashing Walls in sunder.
Tower-tearing Mars, Bellona thirsting-blood*
Fill there the faintest with their Furious-mood:
There fiery Steeds, stamping and neighing loud;
There Pagans fell, braving and raving proud,
With hideous noise make th'Heav'nly Vault resound,
The Earth to echo; and even Hell astound.
But He that keeps eternal Sentinel
On Heavens high Watchtower, for His Israel;
Pitying his People, alters, in a trice,
The Tyrants purpose, by a new Advise;
Causing the Captains of brave Moabites,
Strong Idumeans, and stout Ammonites,
Thus to advise: Most noble General,
Terror of Kings, redoubted Scourge of All;
We would not wish (my Lord) in any sort,
You bring Your brave Bands to assault this Fort:
^or, neither Pike, Dart, Sling, Bow, Sword, nor Shield,
^o back the Foe, or make them slack to yield;
(...) these proud Rocks, which, by wise Natures grace,
^ampire the Rampires of this wretched Place:
Which yer You scale, undoubtedly will cost
^adders of Bodies; and even Tithe your Host.
^he Victor is no Victor, if his Gain
^asse not his Loss; nor th'Honor drown the Stain:
^ise-valiant Prince, that Fisher, Fool we hold,
^ho for a Gull, venters a Line of Gold:
and, ill does th'Honor of a Crown beseem
^h'inhumane, bloody, barbarous, Head of Him
^ho rather would the Death of many Foes.
^hen Life and Safety of one Friend, to chose.
You may (my Lord) you may, without Assault,
Or Loss of Man, reduce them all to naught,
(...) in you Hillocks you but seize the Springs,
^hence hollow Lead the Hebrews Water brings;
^ho, so by Thirst distressed, and so put to 't,
^ill come and cast them haltred at your Foot.
(...) The noble Lion never sets-vpon
^se fearful Beasts, but on the noblest one:
^VE'S sulphury Darts He seld or never thrils
^t on Mount Atlas, or the Ryphean Hills:
And stormfull Auster, ever rather smote
Clowd-cleaving Turrets then a lowly Cote:
No more, no more let your drad Arms assail
So faint a Foe as of himself will quail.
It is not Fear (my Lord) and much less Pity
(Fear of our Selves, or Favor to the City)
Makes us oppose us to Thy Purpose yet:
For, yer that We Thy happy Standards quitt:
For Thee will We defy the immortal Gods:
For Thee We Will break their Altars all to Clods:
For Thee will We march with vnweary soles,
Beyond the Arctik and Antarctik Poles:
For Thee will We with winged Arms go fetch
Jove's Aigle down; and Neptun's Trident snatch:
For Thee, the Son shall not his Sire forbear,
Nor Sier the Son, nor Brother, Brother spare.
The General, who for Avail revolves,
Peizes this Counsel; and re-peiz'd, resolves:
Dispatching speedy a selected Force,
To seize the Waters, and divert their Course.
The Hebrews, Their Drift, and their Own Danger see
In that Attempt: so, sally instantly
To stop the Foe from stopping of the Stream
Which should derive Liquor and Life to Them.
Then Pagans fighting for ambitious Fame;
^ewes, not to die with vn-revenged Shame;
^ravely encounter with so fell Disdain,
That now the Pagan flies, now fights again;
^ollowes his flying Foe: and now the Jew,
Nigh foiled, faints; now does the Fight renew:
So that fair Victory seems long to waver,
As it were, doubtful whether side to favor:
Till (at the last) the Hebrews, all over spread
With Clouds of Shot, back to their Bulwark fled:
Even as a Pilgrim, in the naked Plain
Meeting a Storm of mighty Hail or Rain,
Runs dropping wett some hollow Rock to find,
Or other Covert built by Nature kind.
Pagans pursue them, and pel-mel among
Enter almost the City in the Throng.
Then every where did dreadful Noise arise:
From street to street the amazed Vulgar flies;
Tearing their hair, beating their breast and face:
As if the Foe had even possessed the Place.
Why flieye Cowards? Whether? Do you know?
What Fortress have you, if you This forgo?
Or, in this City seek you for a stronger,
To guard you better, or preserve you longer?
If now (alas!) you dare not bear you stout
Against the Foe, while he is yet without;
How will you dare resist his violence,
Were he once Master of your weak Defense?
The People, chid thus by their prudent Chief,
Somewhat re-heart'ned, rescue with relief
Cambris and Carmis; who, the while, like Towers,
Had in the Gate withstood the Assalting Stowers
Of almost all the furious Infidels.
For Lance, along Mast, either strongly welds,
For Arms an Anvile; each a massy Targe
Of steel about his neck, as long as large:
Adown their shoulders from their Helms did wave
Th^ck Plumy Clouds of Colors brightly-brave:
Both like, in age, in Courage, Name, and Nature;
Both like, in bulk, both like in Strength and Stature.
Both, like Two Popplars which (on either side
Some silver Brook) their tressie Tops do hide
Amid the Clouds; and shaken by the Wind,
Often kiss each other, like Two Brethren kind.
The Heathen, seeing still fresh Troops descend
From every side, the City to defend;
Leave-off their On-sett: and, welnigh disbanded,
Gladly retreat whether their Heads commanded.
When I consider the extreme Distress
Which thirty Days did the Bethulians press;
^ong sad enough I hardly can invent,
^o deadly Plight lively to represent:
My hand for horror shakes, and can no more
^uide on this page my Pen as heertofore:
^et do mine Eyes with Tears bedeaw it so,
(...) well appears a subject full of Woe.
Thou Spirit which do all Spirits vivisie;
Which did unloose the Tongue of Zachary;
and, through the World thy sacred Name to preach,
^hy Messengers so sundry Tongues did teach:
^irect my weary Quil, my Courage raise,
that I, This Work may finish to Thy Praise.
Though the Hebrews saw their Town, on every part,
^ot with an Host, but with a World begirt,
^et had they Hope the long Siege would no less
^onsume the Assyrians, then themselves distiess:
^at when the Foe had all the Pipes deprived,
^hence, Water yerst the sacred Town derived,
^las! their Hope and even their heart did shrink,
^s quite cut off, and dried up with their Drink.
(...) The Rulers though (yer Bondage, Death to take)
^ive to the People what Themselves did lack:
To wit, a hope, Water enough to keep
In private Troughs, and public Cesterns deep;
Both Citizens and Soldiers to suffice,
So that they would be moderate and wise.
So: the Officers divide in silver measures,
To all, of all sorts, of these liquid Treasures,
This welcome Liquor; which might serve (at first)
To keep their life a while, not quench their Thirst.
Their Cesterns dried, they seek in every sink:
Of every Gutter greedily they drink;
To Appease their Thirst a while, not please their taste,
With Drink whose stink was often the Drinkers last.
O wretched Men! O wondrous Misery!
Little, or much; drink, or drink not; they die.
Plenty and Lack of Liquor, in extreme
Though Contraries, concur to murder them:
With-in whose Bodies warreth Thirst, as fell
As outwardly the outrageous Infidel.
Street, Lane, nor Ally had this woeful City,
Where-in the Sisters, Enemies to Pity,
Invented not some new and uncouth guise
To murder Hebrews; and from firmest eyes
(In sign of Sorrow) showers to extract
Of pearly Tears, of bitter brine compact;
Mid all Degrees; if rested any-where
^ut so much moisture as could make a Tear.
There, an Old man complains that a Lad
Has new snatch from him all the Drink he had;
^ut Thirst contracts his Throat, his voice, and vains;
and ends at once his Life, his Plaint, and Pains:
(...) Soldier here re-swils again (and gladder)
^h'vnsavory Water which had swelld his bladder:
^here th'woefull Mother, on her Couching-Settle,
^er half-dead Child reviveth with her Spettle:
^eer the sad Lover sighs her latest breath
^ith the last Sighs of her deer Love, in Death.
^or, cruel Thirst, com'n from Cyrenian Strand
Where ay She lives amid the burning Sand,
^erpetual panting for continual Drouth,
^anging her Tongue a foot without her Mouth,
^er Face all wrinkled, both her Eyes deep sunk,
^er Body lean and light, her Bowels shrunk,
^er Breast transparent, and her Veins repleat
^ith Brimstone, all, in steed of Blood's moist Heat)
^owes from her rotten Lungs a loathsome breath
through all the Town; infusing Fumes of Death
(...) the Hebrews Artires: causing every Porch
^bscurely shine with some Funereall Torch.
So that the Heavens, seeing so many Woes,
Could hold no longer; but would feign with those
Sad-weeping Hebrews Their sad Tears have melld,
Save that their Tears the Lord of Hoasts withheld.
And, I my Self, that drown mine Eyes with Theirs,
Unable though well to express those Tears,
Will with my Silence veil their Countenance;
Following that Painters learned Ignorance,
Who well conceiving that his live-less Colors
Could not to life express the deadly Dolours
Of Agamemnon at his Daughters End,
Covered his sad Face with a sable Bend.
Meanwhile, the few that of this Wrack remain;
Against their sad Chiefs murmur and complain:
The Lord, say they, in Justice recompense
Your wilful Malice, and Our Innocence:
The Lord look down upon the wretched Teen
Your wicked Counsails have here plunged us in:
For, had you yielded to the Foes demand,
Yer he had entered on the Holy Land,
We, happy we, had never seen our Friends
So hap-less brought to so untimely Ends.
Alas! What Comfort rests? O wretched City!
Those that besiege thee round would show thee Pity;
Thine Own are Cruel: Foes would fain preserve-thee:
^hy Friends destroy thee: Those would fain reserv thee,
^ould save thy Children; thine own Children rather
^un headlong all on wilful Death together.
Lord, well we know, our wicked Deeds have made
^hee (just displeased) to draw the keenest Blade
^f thy fierce-kindled ire, which justly sheads
^hy deadliest Darts on our disloyal heads.
^et, Thou, which do not long thy Wrath retain,
Against thine Own) O turn to Us again:
lord, change the purpose of our wilful Lords,
^ho against our Bosoms whet the Pagan Swords:
^r grant (at least) with thousand Arrows thrilled,
^e rather may by Heathen hands be killed;
^hen longer Languor of this banefull Thirst
^o linger us in living Death accursed.
(...) Deer Brethren, it is our only Duty binds,
their Rulers said (not our sinister minds
^f undermining, or of pyning Ours)
^hus to hold out against these Heathen Powers.
(...) You have Pain, We have our Portion too;
^e are imbarkt in the same Ship with You:
^n the same Deep we the same Danger run;
^ur Cross is common, and our Loss is one:
As common shall our comfort be when GOD
Shall please to ease us of the Assyrians Rod:
As sure he will, if Your Impatiency
Stop not the Course of his kind Clemency.
Then, strive not with the All-Perfect; but depend
On God alone: Whose Actions all do tend
To profit His: Who, in his Season, ever
(Almighty) can and will His Church deliver.
Sometimes the Archer lets his Bow, unbent,
Hang idly by; that, when it is re-bent
With boisterous Arms, it may the farther cast
His winged shafts, and fix them far more fast:
So, often the Lord seems, in his Bosom, long
To hold his hand; and after (as more strong)
To hammer Those whose impious Impudence
Miss-spends the Treasure of his Patience,
Which (at first sight) gives all Impunity
(As think the Lewd) to all Iniquity.
But, at the last, his heavy Vengeance pays
Them home, for all his Justice long Delays:
As the Usurer, for bearing of his poor
And needy Debtors, makes his Debt the more.
What though the high Thunderer, in his Fury dread*
Strike not in the instant this proud Viceroy dead?
^n all th'Amasse of Waters which he pent
love and under th'ample Firmament,
^ditious, so shake-off his Sovereign Power,
(...) not to send the thirsty Earth a Shower?
^o, no: though Heavens, on every side so clear,
^^d nothing less then Rain, or moisture ne^r:
^ey with their Tears shall shortly soak the Plain,
(...) on the Day when Saul began to reign:
(...) all the Heavens, the Stars, and Elements,
^st execute his high Commandments.
But still the Plebe, with Thirst and Fury pressed,
^us roaring, raving, against their Chiefs contest:
(...) holy Nation! shall we, shall We die,
^eir Elderships grave Sights to satisfy?
(...)! shall we die to please These foolish-wise,
^o make themselves rich by our Miseries;
^d with our Bloods would purchase them a Name,
(...) live for ever in the Role of Fame?
(...), no: Let Us rather break their servile bands
^ich hold us in: let us take into our hands
^r Cities Helm; that freeing it from Sack,
(...) wisely so may free our Selves from Wrack.
As the Physician, by the Patient Pressed,
(...), on his Bed (unruly) will not rest;
Permits sometimes what Art prohibiteth:
Osias so, importuned, promises
To yield the Town, if in five Days appear
No certain Sign of divine Succor near.
The People then, their woeful past estate,
Their present pain, and future Fears, forgate:
Since though it should not hap as most they thirst*
At least, they should of Evils escape the worst.
But IVDITH (who the while incessant Showers
From her sad eyes, in sign of Sorrow poures)
With mourneful voice now calls upon the Lord;
Anon, her sad Soul comforts in his Word:
Prayers, were her Stairs, the highest Heavens to clime
GOD's Word, a Garden, where (in needful time)
She found her Simples (in Examples pure)
The Careful Passion of her Heart to cure.
There, IVDITH reading (then not casually,
But by GOD's will, which still works certainly)
Light on the place where the left handed Prince,
Who, grieved for Isreal's grievous Languishments
Under the Heathen; to deliver them
Slew Moab's Eglon, by a Stratagem.
The more she reads, she marks it, and admires
That Act of A^ud; and in Zeal desires
(...) imitate his valor. But frail flesh
^th thousand Reasons would her purpose dash;
^oposing, now, the Facts foul odiousnes;
^en, Fear of Death; then, Dangers numberless,
^ere-to she puts her Honor: and that (though,
(...) Isreal's sake, God should the Act allow)
^o^es a Man's hand, not a Woman's (there)
^ich fitter for a Spindle then a Spear.
^hile IVDITH thus with IVDITH ^^^abts does wage,
^iddain Pu^^^urns-ouer that same Page:
^d, that which follows shows, how Iahel yerst
^urageously the sleeping temples per^'t
(...) that fell Pagan, who from the Hebrews flying,
^cursed found in his Defense his dying:
(...) teach all Tyrants in all Times to-come,
^at they may fly, but not out-fly their Doom.
This last Example did so fortify
^e fearful Widow, that even by and by
^e would with Engine of Revenge endeavor
(...) wicked Soul's and Body's knot to sever.
^ut while apart Sh^^ plots and plots anew,
^me wily way her purpose to pursue;
^e hears reported, by a neighbor Dame,
^e Towns Decree, much grieved at the same:
So: to prevent Mischiefs so near at hand,
She sends forthwith for Those of Chief Command,
Whom sharply sweet She thus begins to chide:
Why! How-now, Lordings, shall the Lord be tied
Unto your Terms? Will you the Almighty's Arms
Chain with your Cou^sails? limit with your Charm^
O! vniudicious Judges, will you Thus
Give law to GOD, who gives it Heaven and Us?
Will you ^^biect, to Times confined Stays,
The Author of Times, Months, Moments, Years (...) Dai^
Be not deceived; The sacred Power Divine
No Circumstance can compass or confine:
God can do, what he will; will, what he ought:
Ought love his righteous (who^ his love has bog^
This (Fathers) This my dead Hopes most reviues;
That, in our City not a man surviues
Who lifts his hands (after the Heathen fashions)
Unto the dumb, dead Idols of the Nations.
All Sins are Sins: but that foul Sin, alone
Exceeds all blind or bold transgression
That we have heapt against sacred Heaven: for, that
Seems to degrade GOD of his Souerain State;
To give his Glory to a Wedge of Gold,
Or Block, or Stock, or Stone of curious mold.
^th then That Sin does not our Conscience taint,
GOD's dear Succor let us never faint:
(...) think (alas!) how* now all Iuda's Eyes,
^st, are cast upon Our Constancies:
(...) think, that All will (over all the Land)
^r Example, either stoop or stand:
(...) think, that All these Altars, Houses, Goods,
(...) (after GOD) on our couragious-Moods:
(...) think, We keep the Gate of Israel;
that, so soon opening to the Infidel
(...) hates so deadly all our Abramides)
shall be held Traitors and Paricides.
^e cannot, neither will we now deny
^at our Counsel (Thus the Chief reply)
^oolish, and offensive to the Lord:
^w (alas!) we cannot break our word.
(...) Thou rue our Common miseries;
^nst not see our Tears with tear-lesse Eyes;
^night and day: o! weep and sigh so much,
^hy sad Sighs and Tears with Ruth may touch
^ernall Judge; whose gentle Ear is ay
(...) to All that to Him humbly pray.
^all, said She, and (if GOD say Amen)
^edge this City, yer we meet again.
Sound me no further, but expect The Event
Of Mine (I hope) happy as high Intent:
And, soon as Night has spread her dusky Damp,
Let Me go forth into the Heathen Camp.
Go on, in GOD's Name: and where ere thou art*
GOD guide (say They) thy Foot, thy Hand, thy (...)
The end of the third Book.
^ETHVLIANS Rescue. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
^DITH, the while, trills Rivers from her Eyes,
^tterrs her knees, tends toward th'arched Skies
^harm-less hands: then Thus, with voice devout,
^very Soul to GOD she pours out:
^rd! that did once my Grandsire Simeon arm
(...) Justice Sword, t'avenge his Sisters harm;
^n Me that Sword, that I may punish (just)
(...) Tyrant fell, far passing Sichem's Lust:
(...), not suffis'd with Virgins Ravishment,
Rape of Wines; is execrably bent
^oot Thy Name out from the Earth around;
^r^ze Thy Temple, level with the ground.
^mptuous Prince! whose whole Affiance stands
^ndred-thousand Soldiers He commands,
^ndred-thousand Horse, which (thirsting-fight)
(...) lofty Bounds the lowely Earth do smight:
^out Belief, that Thou alone (o Lord)
^st Heads or Hands; with either Crown or Cord:
^gthnest the Feeble, quickly foylst the Strong;
^ay'st the Power of prowdest Kings along.
Grant therefore, grant, good GOD, his charm^^
The curious tramels of my Tress may chain: ((...)
Let every look of mine be as a Dart
With amorous Breach to wound his willing heart:
O! let the little grace of Face and Form
Thou have vouchsaft me, calm his furious storm:
Let the smooth cunning of my soothing Lips
Surprise the fell Fox in his Suttleships:
But, chiefly, Lord, let my victorious hand
Be Scourge and Hammer of this Heathen Band:
That all this All may know, that Abram's Rac^
Is ever covered with thy Shield of Grace;
And that no Tyrant ever touched thy Jury,
But felt in fine the Rigor of thy Fury.
Let not, good Lord, o let not one of These
Return to taste Hytane or Euphrates.
Thus IVDITH prays: and in the sted of stops,
With thousand Sighs her words She interrupts.
Then, from her sad sole Chamber, late she packs,
Adornd with Ophir, Gold, and Serean knacks.
O! siluer-browd Diana, Queen of Night,
Da^'st thou appear, while here below, so bright
Shines such a sacred Star, whose radiant flame
Would even at Noon thy Brothers splendour shame
^ough, as unknown, to pass vnshown she ween,
(...) Odors made hersmelt, her Jewels seen;
^sk, Ambergris, and Civet, where she went,
(...) all along an odoriferous Sent:
^arbuncle shined on her Brow so bright,
^at with the Rays it clarified the Night:
^^ver Tincel wauing in the wind,
^wn from her head hung light and loose behind:
^d bound her golden Tress; her Ivory Neck
^ies and Saphires, counter-chang'd in check:
^ither Ear, a richer Pearl then yerst
^pts proud Princess in her Cup dispersed:
(...) soft white Bosom (as with Curtains drawn)
^nsparent coverd under Cob-web Lawne:
(...) Robe, Sky-colour'd Silk, with curious Caul
(...) golden Twist, benetted over all.
(...) rest she wore, might have beseem'd for Tires
(...) stately Foundresse of the Euphratean Spires.
^or, though her Self were Modesty it self;
^tice this Pagan to the wrackfull Shelfe,
^es her Own, sh'had borrowed Ornaments
^ther Ladies of most Eminence.
^chior, watching in the Court of Guard,
^g her pass so late, and so prepared;
Enquires of Carmis (who then watched too)
What, Whence, She was, and what she went to do*
So brave a Gallant, tri^kt and trimmed so;
In such a Time, in such a Place of Woe.
Ye^-while, said Carmis, in our City dwell'd
M^rari; a m^n here high in Honor held:
To whom, for Seed GOD but this Daughter sent;
His House's Joy, This Citie's Ornament.
Gain-greedy Fathers, now-adayes turmoyle
Bodies and Souls, Heap upon Heap to pile:
But, have no care with the Mind's Goods to grace
Th'heires of their Goods (which after melt apace):
Much like a Man that keeps in his Chest
His costly Garment, folded fair and pressed,
But lets his Body, it was made to serve,
Naked the while, in Wet and Cold to starne.
But, as the Farmer spares no pains, nor cost,
In husbanding his Land; but careful most,
Now rids the stones, anon ^ips-vp the Ridges*
Here casts a D^tch, there plants, there plashes hedg^^
And never is his hand or tool there-fro:
But chiesely cares there good Seed to sow,
That when the Summer shall have ryp't his Plains,
His Crop may pay him for his Cost and Pains:
^r, as some Damsel, having special Care
^f some fair Flower, which puts-out earely-rare
^h' Incarnat Bud; weeds, waters euery-houre
^he fertile Plot that feeds her Gilli-flower;
that, one-day blown, it may some Sunday-morn
^er lilly Bosom, or her head adorn:
(...) wise Merari did endeavor fair
^o form the Manners of his tender Heir;
that, in his Age, he thence again might gather
^h' Honor and Comfort worthy such a Father.
^r soon as ever, stutting yet and weak,
^er tender Tongue did but begin to speak;
^ee taught her not (as many Fathers do:
^oo-many now) vain words, and wanton too,
^t some good Prayer, or GOD's Ten-fold Law;
that, with her Milk, she might even suck the Awe
(...) the Almighty: which not vain appeers;
^r that the Damsel brought forth in few years,
^its worthy of such Seed: whence did ensew,
^at this her Nurture to a Nature grew.
(...) does a Vessel long retain the Sent
(...) the first Liquor we have settled in it:
(...) does a Bough bend ever (when it is big)
^o the same side that it was bent, a Twig:
So, Bears, Wolves, Lions; and our wildest Game,
Bred tame with us, with us continue tame.
When as 12. times She 12. new Moons had past,
This virtuous Pattern all Perfection graced.
For, the expert Pilot is not more precise
To shun, in Sailing, all the Ieopardies
Of Cyane Straight, of hat^full Syrtes Sand,
Charybdu Gulf, and of Capharean Strand,
Then was wise IVDITH to avoid the Dames
Never so little spotted in their Names:
Knowing that long conversing with the light,
Corrupts the sobrest; or at least, though right,
Right safe the Honor be saved; the Names not so,
From common Bruit (though often false) we know.
For, haunting Good, good are we holden ay:
Bad, with the Bad: Like will to like, we say.
She, ever modest, never used to stay
Abroad till midnight at a Mask or Play:
Nor tript from Feast to Feast, nor Street-webs span*
To see, and to be seen of every man.
But rather, knowing that such fond desire
To gaze and to be gaz'd-on ( Flax and Fire)
Undid light Dina, and such gadding Dames
A thousand more; their Noble Houses Shames;
^h^ wisely kept at home; where, Morn and Even*
^aily she called upon the God of Heaven.
The rest of every day in dutious course
^he served her Nursers for a tender Nurse:
^s wont the Storks kind and officious Brood
^or their old Parents to go gather Food;
and on some high Fur (far-off having flow'n)
^ing life to Those from whom they had their own.
If in the Day, from Houswifes needful care,
^he had perhaps an hour or two to spare,
^he spent them reading of the Sacred Book,
^here faithful Souls for spiritual Manna look.
^ometimes on Cloth sh'embroidered cunningly
^ome Beast, or Bird, or Fish, or Worm, or Fly.
^ometime she wrought with silver needle fine
^n Canvas-web some History divine.
Here Let, escaped from that dread Flame, from High
which burnt his Town, with winged Feet does fly
^o little Zoar: while his Wife (alack!)
^credulous, and curious, looking back;
GOD in the instant smighting for that Fault,
^ransforms her Body to a Bulk of Salt.
Here, chaste Susanna (^^andred of dishonor)
^eems led to Death, People seem pressed to stone her:
But, Truth appearing, soon they seem at-once
To turn on th'Elders all their storm of stones.
Here loyal Joseph rather leaves behind
His cloak then heart with his too- Lady-kinde:
And rather chooses (by her false disgrace)
His Irons, then her Arms, him to embrace.
Here, rash, rough Iephthe in vnsacred slaughter
Imbrews his own Blade in his only Daughter;
By private and improuident Annoy,
Troubling the Public and the general Joy.
Weary of Work, on her sweet Lute she plays,
And sings withal some holy Psalm of Praise;
Not following such as by lascivious Dances,
Lavish Expenses, light and wanton Glances,
Seek to be sought, courted, and loved of most:
But, as the Fisherman that baits the Coast
With poysonie Pastes, may have a greater draught,
And (though less wholesome) has more Fishes caught*
Then those that only use their Hook, or Net:
So may these Gallants them more Lovers get,
Then modest Mayds; But, their immodest flame
Fires none but Fools, Frantikes, or Voids of shame,
Virtue alone begins, begets, conceiues,
A perfect Love; which, though it flow receives
^s Form and Life, nor is so soon afire:
(...), neither does it half so soon expire.
(...) we kindles quickly, and is quickly past:
(...) heats but slowely, and it is heat does last.
Now IVDITH'S fair Renown through Judah rings
(...) every City; and great Suitors brings
from All-form Fashions, from fair painted Faces,
^om Powdered Tresses, from forced Apish Graces,
^om Prince-fit Pomp; from Peacocks strutting by
^ith Bosoms naked to the Navel nigh)
^o woo Her Virtue. But, Loves burning Dart
^ould neither harm, nor warm her Icie heart.
^r, as hard Hammers, harder Diamant;
^e harder did resist Loves grace to grant;
^auing resolved, sole and single, rather
^o spend her days with her deer-loued Father.
^t at the last, importuned long, and pressed
(...) her dear Parents, careful of her Rest;
^e took MANASSES, one of Noble blood;
^ch, in the Mind's, Nature's, and Fortune's Good.
Their Marriage then was neither stolen, nor packt,
^or posted; to prevent some Pre-contract,
^o cheat some Heir, some Avarice to choke,
^o cover Others, or their own Sin cloak:
But duly past, modest, and reverent,
With Either's Parents knowledge and consent.
Dina's Disasters to this day do prove
The sad successes of prepost'rous Love;
Of privy Choice, close Matches, and unkind;
Which seldom bring Lovers to happy end:
And that our Selves ought not our Selves bestow,
But Those from whom our Birth and Breeding grow.
This happy Match begun thus holily,
And holy carried, did so firmly tie
This chaste young Couple, in so mutual love,
That both their bodies seems one soul to move.
The one never wished but what the other would:
Both by one Organ their one-minde unfold:
And, as a Hurt on the Right side (we see)
Reaches the Left; even so, by sympathy,
Her Husbands Sorows did sad IVDITH share,
And IVDITH'S Sorows her sad Husband bare.
The Husband did not his deer Wife control,
As Tyrants rule: but as the tender Soul
Commands the Body; not the same to grieve,
But comfort rather, cherish and relieve.
Him IVDITH loved as Brother (or more, rather)
Feared as her Lord, and honored as her Father.
their House, for Order so religious,
and more a Temple then a private House:
^re, did no Maid, with merry-tricks, entice
(...) bashful Stripling to lascivious vice:
^re did no drunken Groom sick Healths disgorge,
(...) against Heaven blasphemous Oaths re-forge:
^e no broad Iester, no bold common Liar,
Gamester, Thief, Rogue, Ruffin, Apple-squier,
(...) ever harbor: but all Servants there,
their grave Rulers Rules conformed were.
^ANASSES, knowing what a Flood of Crimes
^ounded all, in His enormous Times;
^cially, what Evils Confluence
(...) even corrupted sacred Governments
(...) that, for favor, or for Money (more)
^s, Knaves, Boys, Basest, highest Burdens bore)
^odestly refused all Public Charge:
^ing him happy so, free and at large,
(...) from the Courts of State and Justice too,
^et at Home, his Household dues to do.
^t notwithstanding, knowing too, that none
(...) ever borne so for himself alone,
that the best part of our days (though few)
^r Country, Kindred, and our Friends is due;
No Magistrate, He daily served the State
More then a hundred that in Offcesate.
For, in His House did sacred Justice live,
And from his Lips would She her sentence give,
He ever was the afflicted Poores Protector,
Widows Supporter, Silly-ones Director,
Orphans kind Father: Every age, Sex, Sort,
Had from his hand some kind of kind Support.
Never vain Thirst of the 'curs't Earth of Jude,
Made Him wound Water, neither woo the Wind
Never did Avarice his Life endanger,
With mercenarie Sword to serve the Stranger:
Never did He, to Adverse-Clients, sell
A double Breath, blowing to Heaven and Hell.
But, strife-less, using harm-less Husbandry,
Took of his Land both Stock and Usury
Of his le^t Labors. For, sometimes, by Line,
He plants an Orchard; which he orders fine,
With equi-distant Trees, in Rows direct,
Of Plums, of Pears, and Apples most select:
Heer-there He Crab-stocks sets, then grafts then
Some stranger Slip: inocculates anon:
Anon with keen Share the kind Barth he shreds:
Anon the Vine unto the Elm he weds:
(...) he prunes-off the superfluous shoots:
(...) the Bodies pares, then bares the roots.
(...) either Dog-Dayes, nor December's Ice,
(...) keep Him Prisoner in his Chamber, nice.
(...), is one-^ay, his Reapers he beheld,
(...) swelting, swift the yellow handfulls feld;
^om his head, caused a Catarrh descend,
that shortly after caused MANASSES End.
that can number, in November, all
^ithered Leaves that in the Forest fall:
^at can number all the Drops, in Showers,
(...) Hyades, Pleiades, and most Orion poures
(...) the Plains: may tell the Tears She shed,
^r deer Husband so untimely dead.
^ealth and Treasure he had left her, kind,
^d of easing, more afflicts her Mind:
^e of his Goods still sets before her eics
(...) good old Owners sweet and graceful guise.
^he had all the Gold was gathered ever
(...) the shoal Sands of the Lydian River,
^d not been Rich, being berest of Him,
^ut Who^, Wealth doubled her Woes extreme:
^ith Who^, glad she would have born the crosses
^etched JOB'S, sad, sudden, many Losses.
Phoebus had thrice through all the Zodiakpast,
Since His Decease: Yet Time, which all does waste
And cures all Cares, could not her Griefs recover,
For Loss of Him, her decrest Lord and Lover.
Still therefore, covered with a sable Shrowde,
Has She kept home; as all to Sorrow vowed:
For, for the most part, solitary sad,
Tears in her eyes, sack on her back she had,
Grief in her heart: so, on the withered Spray
The Widow- Turtle sighs her mournful Lay;
Sole, and exiled from all Delights, that move;
Chastely resolved t'accept no Second Love.
If any time IVDITH went out of Door
(As Duty binds) it was to see some Poor:
Some woeful Woman in deep Passions toyld
For sudden Loss of her deer only Child:
Some long-Sick body, or some needy soul,
With needful Comforts of her Bag, or Boule:
Or else to go (as GOD commanded Them)
To pray and Offer at JERUSALEM.
Thus, deer Companion, have I briefly show'n
Fair IVDITH'S Story: on whose Worth alone
All eyes are cast, but cannot tell you out
Whether she goes; less, what she goes about.
^e may, from former things infer
^e of future; We may hope from Her
Happiness: and sure, me thinks, her Cheer,
^int changed, boads some good fortune near.
^is Discourse, the wakefull Hebrew Knight,
^g between, wore-out the weary Night.
^ITH the while, her Handmaid with her, hies
^s the Trenches of the Enemies.
^m the Fort She had a furlong gone,
^athen Scouts desen'd her, and anon
(...) her Thus: O! more then humane Beauty,
(...)? What are You? What Cause has hither brought ye?
(...) Assyrian Camp? Alas! I am
^g, quoth She) a woeful Hebrew Dame,
(...) escape so many Deaths, or Thrall,
^ere to yield me to your General.
(...) to the Duke they lead her. Who-so-e're
^n, in Cities, how they flock, to hear
^ating Montibank; or see some Monster
^ught from Asrick, from Inde; may conster
^esse of Soldiers from all parts did throng,
^is Tent; and even pressed in among
that complete She, so comely deemed;
^e more looked on, the more lovely seemed.
Her waved Locks, some dangling loose, some p^
In thousand rings curld-vp, with art-less art;
With graceful Shadows sweetly did set-out
Her broad high Fore Head, smooth as Ice, about:
Two slender Bows of Ebene, equal bent
Over two Stars (bright as the Firmament)
Two twinkling Sparks, Two sprightfull Ietty Eye^
(Where subtle Cupid in close Ambush lies,
To shoot the choicest of his golden Darts
Into the chariest of the chastest hearts):
'Twixt these Two Suns, down from this liberal From
Descendingly ascends a pretty Mount*
Which, by Degrees, does near those Lips extend,
Where Momus Lips could nothing discommend:
Her ruddy, round Checks seemed to be composed
Of Roses Lillied, or of Lillies-Rosed:
Her musky Mouth (for shape and size so meet,
Excelling Saba's precious Breath, for sweet)
A swelling Welt of Coral round behemms,
Which smiling shows two Rows of orient Ge^
Her Ivory Neck, and Alabaster Breast
Ravish the Pagans more then all the rest:
Her soft, sleek, slender hands, in Snow bedipt,
With purest Pearl-shell had each Finger tipped.
^rief, so passing Her Perfections were,
^t, if rare Zeuxu had but found Her there,
(...) such another; when from curious Cull
(...) Croton Dames so choisely Beautiful,
^any Beawties (severally met)
(...) cunning Pencil drew the Counterfeit
^er for Whom Europe and Asia fought;
(...) only Piece had he sufficient thought.
^DITH no sooner came within the Tent,
^oth her Cheeks a bashful Blush besprent;
^mbling for Fear: until, inviting nearer,
(...) courteous General's gentle words re-cheer-her.
^eet-hart, I am not, I am not so fell
^lse Report has told fond Israel:
(...) Me for Father, I for Ch^ldren take;
^e whom love my Lord their God to make:
(...) who do both, may be assured to have
^t ever Good, Man's heart can hope, or crave:
^h Israel well should find, would they give ear
that Kings Favor, whose drad Power they fear:
^n fear not Thou, my Love; but tell me free
(...) happy Cause that hither brings thee.
(...) Prince! said She (with, then, firm Countenance)
^eme, for Fortune, Wisdom, Valiance,
Of all that ever had Command in Field,
Or ever managed martial Sword and Shield:
Although my frail Sex, and weak body's state,
No longer could endure the wretched fate;
Wants, Labors, Dangers, and the deep Affrig^^
My fellow Towns-folk suffer day and night:
Yet is not That the Cause that drives me thence,
Nor That which draws me to Your Excellence:
But, it is a never-never-dying Worm
Which g^awes my Conscience; a continual Sto^
A holy Fear, least I be forced to eat
(Among my People) some unlawful meat.
For, I foresee (Sir) that our Folk, yer long,
With cruel Famine so extremely wrung,
Will be constrained to fill, and file them too
With unclean Flesh, which GOD forbids us do^
And that the Lord (who strikes, with just Reveng^
Whom-ever dare his dread just Laws infrenge)
Will then, without Fight, give Thee up their Plac^
And one of Thine Thousands of Them shall ch^
Therefore (my Lord) GOD's Wrath and yours to
O^t of BETHVLIA, to your Camp come I:
Beseeching humbly, for your Honors sake,
That here no Rigor, neither Wrong I take.
^s more then Wit-less that him wilful throws
^king) in Dangers that he well fore-knowes;
(...) when he may live, pain-less, and secure;
^oil-full Fears will his own Death procure.
^ow: please thee grant me, in this Vale (away
^n noise* and number) nightly to go pray;
^ews no sooner shall GOD's Wrath incense,
(...), inspired, shall show thine Excellence:
(...) then shall I thy valiant Legions lead
(...) all Judah; and thy Standards spread
(...) swell in SION; where not one shall dare
^aunce against thee, nor Defense prepare:
(...) not a Dog so much as bark at Thine
^s-clashing Army, nor their Armors Shine.
(...) Name alone shall tame the stoutest Troup:
Thee the Hills their proudest Tops shall stoup:
^rs, for Thee, their rapid Course shall stay,
(...) Thine Host a new vn-wonted way.
^e Prince replies: O, Worlds sole Ornament!
(...), as fair as wise and eloquent;
^t-Welcome are You: and we wish you ever
^l Contentment with us to persever.
(...) if you prove in Truth and Loyalty,
^ou are pleasing to mine Ear and Eye;
I shall from henceforth worship evermore
The mighty GOD you Hebrews do adore:
You shall from henceforth only Lady be
Both of my Scepter, of my Soul, and Me:
Henceforth your Name with high Renown she
Where Heber, Ister, Nile, and Ganges spring.
With License then, soon as the Moon with light
Of silver Rays began to clear the night,
The Widow hies to a dark Vale apart;
Where first she bathes her hands, and then her hea^
Then, from her Eyes a lukewarm Rill she shown
Then, from her Soul this fervent Prayer powers:
Lord GOD, no longer now Thine Aid deny
To those that only on Thine Aid rely.
Lord rescue Those that ready are to spend
Their bloods and goods, Thine Honor to Defe^^
Lord, let our Infants sad and cease-less Mones,
Our woeful Elders deep and dismal Groans,
Our Matron's Scrieches, Cries of Virgins fair,
Our sacred Levit's Day-and-nightly Prayer,
Perce to Thy Throne, to wake thy slumbring Ey^
Drad GOD of Justice, glorious Father; Why
Do sulphury Bolts of thy best Thunder light
On Carmel's Top, and little Hermon smight:
^d let the Heav'n-threatning Sons of Ecarth alone;
(...) proudest Ossa prouder Pelion?
Alas! What said I? Ah! forgive me, Lord,
^is idle, rash, and unadvised Word;
which, in frail Passion, my fond Lips did borrow
^om fervent Zeal of mine unfeigned Sorrow.
^o: o, Our Lignes sole Pillar deerly dread,
^nowe, Thou shortly wilt their Head behead:
^nowe, This hand, by Thy right hand led out,
^all at one Blow, This Heathen Army rout.
The end of the fourth Book.
BETHVLIANS Rescue. THE FIFTH BOOK.
FOr blood and marrow, in his veins and bones,
The Viceroy feeds new Pains, new Passions;
Which, while he shuns, he seeks; feels, yet not know^
A dead-live Fire, which of Self's Cinders grows.
For, the Hebrew Lady's rapting Rarities
Being now sole Object of his Soul's dim Eyes;
Sad, peevish, pale, soft, drowsy, dream-awake,
Care of his Host he does no longer take:
Goes no more out, a-nights, to set his Watches,
And Courts of Guard about, on all Approches:
Comes not to Counsel, neither gives The Word:
Nor viewes the Quarters of his Camp: nor stirred.
As Sheep, that miss their wonted Guard and Guide*
Disp^^sed stray* now, by some Rivers side,
Or gu^gling Brook; now, up and down the Downs;
Now, in the Groves; now, on the Fallow grounds*
So the ^thni^ Army, without Rule or Reine,
T^^sue their I l^asures, violent, or vain:
^one will obey; None but will now Command;
^ch, as him lists, dares him now dis-band.
(...) Hebrews, Why stay you now mewed in your City?
^ow, now or never, does the Time befit-ye
^o ^ally on the Foe; whose rank Disorder
among themselves, themselves (in Fight) will murder*
^^y; bouge not though: of ^uch a Victory
^OD will the Honor have, and Author be.
Yer that blind Cupid did this Tyrant blind,
(...) take the Town was Day and Night his mind;
^ow, day and night he minds but how to gain
Lady's grace; Who, taken, is not taen
^er Soul being tempered more then Fancy-proof):
^r-while, the undaunted mighty Theban rough
^uld not have feared Him* with his massy Mace;
^w, but a Glance of a weak Woman's Grace
^maies him, daunts him, nay eve^ wounds him deep*
^t care of Cure; and does him Captive keep:
(...) while Ambition, with Drums rattling Din,
^akt him ear^ly, yer the Day pe^pt-in;
^w Love awakes him; and with His Alarms
^kes him neglect the Hebrews and their Arms:
(...)-while, he h^d Princes and Kings at bay;
^w, of Him Self has neither Power no^ Sway.
Alas! alas! Unhappy Change, said He:
Must I live Captive to my Captive-Shee?
Is This (alas!) to live: the Body base't;
The mind as brute; and both their Power defaced!
This's not a Life: or is worse Life to feel,
Then sad Ixion's, on the brazen Wheel
Eternal turning: or a life (in brief)
Most like the Life of that celestial Thief,
Whose ever-never-dying heart and liver
On Schythian Rocks feed a fell Vulture ever.
What boots me, to have subdew'd so many Land^
What, to have tamed with my victorious hands
All Nations lodged betwixt Hydas^es large,
And the Haven where Cydnus does in Sea discharge*
Since I am vanquished, by the feeble Might
Of Captive IVDITH's Glance. What boots my bri^
Strong steeled Targe? my brazen Burguinet?
My martial Guard about my Body set?
Since the keen Shot which her quick Eye does dart,
Through S^^el, and B^ass, and Guard, does wound my (...)
What boots my Courser swifter then the Wind,
Leaving the Swallows in his speed b^hinde?
Since* on his back flying, I cannon fly
The willing Chains of my Captivity.
^ange, change then, Hebrews, into Smiles yor tears;
^umph of Me, mine Host, Arms, Swords and Spears:
(...) no more the Duke, whose Name alone
(...) while with Terror shook you every-one:
(...): I am He whose Courage, late so brave,
^ow become but Slave unto my Slave:
^n not come, to War with Israel,
(...) burn your Cities, or your Selves to quell:
(...) to entreat You, to entreat (for Me)
^r match-less IVDITH, that She milder be.
^ut, whither, Wit-less, whither am I borne
Loves fond Fury; wilfully forlorn?
^e I not Her here in my Patronage,
^at can the Anguish of my Soul assuage?
^d yet with idle Plaints I pearce the Skies;
^d thus vn-Manly melt me at mine Eyes.
^nhappy Me! my wretched Case is such
His, who wants most, what he has too-much;
^rystall River flowing to his Lip;
^dies for Thirst, and cannot drink a sip:
(...), so do I respect her Excellence,
^r Heav'n-given Graces; that, for Reverence,
^ne eyes dare scarce behold her, and my Tongue,
^steed of suing, to my roof is clung.
O that my Breast transparent Crystal were,
That She might see my hearts dire Torment there;
And there read plainly, what my Loves excess
(Alas!) permits not my sad voice to express.
Since IVDITH first came to the Assyrian Camp,
Thrice had the Heavens light and put-out their Lamp;
And now Aurora, with a saffron Ray,
Began, in Inde, to kindle the fourth Day:
When as the Duke, who Food and Rest forsakes,
This heavy Mo^n, to 's Eunuke BAGOS, makes:
BAGOS, my Son, adopted, not by Chance;
BAGOS, whom I, still studying to advance,
Have made, of Meanest and neglected most,
First in my heart, and Second in mine Host:
BAGOS, I bu^^, I^ave, I rage, I die
Of wounds received from that fair Strangers Eye.
^o, seek her out: go quickly: tell her Thou
My loving Languor: tell her, that I vow
To make her equal, nay above the best
Of greatest Dames whom royal Crowns invest:
Especially, insinuate so, that She
Be pleased this night to come and sup with Me.
We ar't not a Folly, nay a Madness mere,
In Me, to have the rarest Beauty here
(...) Age has bred; and yet, too-faint a Fool,
^uld not dare my hearts hot Thirst to cool?
^ld not my Soldiers laugh at it apace?
(...): would not IVDITH blush at My Disgrace?
^GOS, too-apt, too-vs'd to such a Turn;
(...) oils the Fire, which but too-fast did burn:
lord, if Private men (whose otious Care
^e pass the Threshold of their own Door dare;
^se Minds, content with their unhappy Hap,
^ther Grace or Greatness never gape)
(...) not content (alas!) unless some-while
(...) warm Comforts their chill Cares beguile:
(...) more unhappy then, are Those that bear
^tlas Burden: Those that Rest forbear,
others Rest: Those that (like Argus) wake
^e Others, fear-less, their full Naps do take:
^ong all their Gall, their Toil, their Teen,
(...) ( Cupids) Honey be not mixed between?
^en, Sir, pursue your Love: lose not the Game,
(...) of it self comes to your Net, so tame.
^if in like Employments, heertofore
^e found Me fit and faithful evermore;
^is new Trust, you shall by speedy Trial,
^me more secret, diligent, and loyal.
Alas! How-many BAGOS's, in our Time
In Princes Courts, to highest Honors climb,
More, for their Cunning in such Embassies,
Then for Repute of learned, flout, or wise:
Whilome, grea Courts were Virtue's Accadems;
Now, Schools of Vice: now (rather) Sinks of Re^
You, who, Great minded* cannot be content
To be close-Brokers forth' Incontinent:
Who cannot brew (with too-too-dangerous Skill)
Both a Love-Potion, and a Cup to kill:
Who cannot, noble, your free Natures strain,
With flattering pencil on your Face to fain
A Face of srownes, or Smiles; of Wrath, or Ruth;
To please the Great (rather with Tales then Truth)*
Come not at Court; if I may counsel you.
For, There, in steed of Grace and Honor, dew
Unto your Virtues; you shall nothing gain,
But that which There still haunts the Good; Disdai^
You, Noble Ladies, in whose heart is graven
A filial Fear of the All-see GOD of Heaven:
You that more prize your Honor's pure Report,
Then Love of Princes: keep you from the Court.
But You, who, having neither Land nor Money*
Out-brave the bravest: Who with words of Hon^
^d Friend-like Face, Dissemblers, humbly greet
^om your false hearts wish in their winding sheet:
^o, lavish, sell your Wives for Offices:
^o, make you Noble, by base Services:
^o, serving Time, can set your Faith to sale;
^t your Religion; sail with every Gale:
^o, Parasites, can put more Faces on
^en ever Proteus in the Seas has show'n:
^o, forcing Nature, can your Manners fit
(...) my Lords Humor; and so humor it;
^e a Chamel^on, which, here blew, there black,
^r gray, there green, does with his Object take:
^o can invent new Toules, new Taxes find,
(...) charge the People, and the Poor to grind:
^o, fayning to possess your Princes Ear,
^e Suitors crouch and court you euery-where;
(...), subtle Shifters, sell them dear your Smoke,
^ding the Wretches with a wily cloak.
^ou, warbling Sirens, whose delicious Charms
(...) wariest youth into your wrackfull Arms:
(...) Circes, you whose powerful Spells transmute
^r Loves to Stones, Hogs, Dogs, and every Brute:
(...) Stymphalides, whose Avarice deuoures
(...) richest Treasure of Youth's freshest Flowers:
You, you, whose Painting, and Pearl-golden-glister,
Of Priam's old Wife, make young Castor's Sister:
You Myrrha's, you Canaces, Semi-ram's:
And, if there be any more odious Dames:
Come You to Court: come quickly: There, on (...)
A hundred Honors shall be heapt, vn-dew:
You, there shall sell Justice, Preferments, Places:
Yea, you shall sell mis-gouernd Princes Graces.
But, Muse, it boots not: Had Thou thousand (...)
The Strength and Stomach of Alcides bold,
Thou could not cleanse These Sin-proud shining Hall^
Fouler by far then foul Augeas Stalls.
Let Us back to IVDITH; who to bring about
Her hard deseign, survayes her, sets her out,
Be-curles her Tresses; makes her Crystal clear
Her Beauties Judge, which had in Earth no peer.
Then comes she to the Tent, rich hanged rou^
With curious Arras, from the top to ground;
Where Artfull fingers, for a Web of glory,
Had woven Medes, Persians, Syrian Princes Story
There Ninus first, pusht by vain Prides amiss,
Vsurps the East: here comes Simiramis,
Who, fayning Her a Man, the Assyrians swayes;
And to the Clouds her BABYLON does raise*
^ee, see a Prince, with soft white singers fine,
^minate, sits spinning Flaxen Twine:
^d, for a Lance, bearing a Distaffe, shows
^t more to Female then to Male he owes:
^how he poats, paints, frizzles, fashions him;
^es, basks, anoints, viewes, and re-views his Trim
^in his Glass, which for a Glaine he wears.
(...) how he shifts to hide his Shame and Fears:
^m Vardingale to Vardingale, he flies
(...) brave Lieutenant, least He him surprise.
(...) see, at last (to act one Manly thing)
(...) burns himself, not to outlive a King.
^e, here an Infant sucking of a Bitch
^er a Hedge, and in a shallow Ditch;
(...), grown a Man, here musters in his Train
(...) bond and free, the Soldier and the Swain;
^ues the East, and into Persia draws
(...) Medes proud Scepter; and he gives them Laws.
(...), who is That marches so dis-figurd there,
^re an Army, without Nose, and Ear?
(...) that good Servant, who reduced, alone,
^er Darins, Rebel Babylon.
^hile, with these Shows sad IVDITH entertaind
Eyes, but not her heart (too-inly-paind)
In comes the Duke: and with right courteous che^^^
Kindly salutes her, hands her hand; and near
Causing her sit in a rich ^asie Chair,
Himself, at ease, viewes and re-viewes her Fair*
Then, seeing him so nigh his wished Pleasure,
His hart's a fire: nor has he longer leisure
To stay for Venus, till, Star-crowned bright,
On their Horizon She bring back the Night.
The Widow, knowing Time and Place, as yet,
For God's Decree, and her Deseign, unfit;
Finds still Delays: and, to delude his Love,
She (wily) still Speech upon Speech does move
My Lord, pray tell me, What so great Offense
So grievously your Fury could incense?
What? When? Where? Why? How? and by Whom
Could so the Wrath of such a Prince provoke, ((...)
So separate, in Language, Land, and Law;
Who never Us, and Whom we never saw?
Uncivil were He ( Sweet) replies the Prince,
Could ^ught deny to such an Excellence.
Then: ^s the Heavens cannot Two Suns sustain*
N^ more can Earth Two Kings at once contain,
O^ equal Power and State: for Soveraintie
Brooks no Co-partner, no Equality.
^es my Soverain: who, offended at
(...) Power and Pomp of mighty Arphaxat,
(...), high aspire, and far to spread began;
^to the Clouds had built his Ecbatane,
^ve's^'s Shame, and dread of Babylon:
^ely endeavors to supplant, His Throne,
^aue his Scepter, sack, raze, ruinate,
(...) ^oodly Cities, and himself dis-State.
^t Arphaxat, as valorous as sage,
(...) both, right worthy of his Crown and Age)
^ld rather venture Media's Royal Rings,
^n veil to Any. So between Two Kings,
(...) stout, and stirring Spirits (whereof, the one
^d brook no Peer, the other, Superior none)
^n a dreadful and right deadly War,
^ng (alas!) too-long, spreading too-far.
^^phaxat arms Those, where the Flower of Greece
^t, not the Locks of an old Golden Fleece,
^assie Ingots, which do richly pave
^appy Plains great Phasis Streams belave:
Harmastans, the Albanians, wont to mow
^e times a year, where only once they sow:
^m Oxus boundeth with his swelling Tide:
^m Anti-Taurus double Horns divide:
Those on the Mountain, whose high-lowely back
Bowed to the Ves^ell which preserved from wrack
The Worlds Abridgement: Those along the (...)
Where proud Iaxartes rapid Current rores:
In short, besides his Medes he had in Pay
All, near the Pontike and the Caspian Sea.
So that, already, This great King-Commander,
Had Hopes as high as ever ALEXANDER.
My Prince, resolved to conquer, or to die,
Omits no point of Opportunity
For his Affairs: He armeth Sittacene,
Levies the Archers of all Osrohene:
Those, whose rich Plains hundred for one repay,
From Euphrates and Tigris march away:
Fish-fed Carmanians (who with Seal-skin Iacks,
In sted of Iron, arm their warlike Backs)
Gold-sanded Hytan's native Shores forgo:
You, Parthians, Cossians, and Arabians too,
By your sage Magi's deep prophetike Charms
Sacredly counsail'd, take you all to Arms:
And Thou, Chaldea, turn'st to Swords and Spears
And Shields, Thy Rules, Squires, Compasses and (...)
For, of his Subjects spares he not a man
That bear a Lance, or Pike, or Crosbow can:
^es, Beldames, Babes, Gray-heads (and Sickly, some)
^ough all his Countries only kept at home.
^e also sends for Persians and Ph^nicians;
^oft Egyptians, Hebrews, and Cilicians,
^ckly to come, and kindly take his Part:
Neuters, They (more Friends in face, then heart)
^ct his earnest Suit, Himself neglect;
^vse his Legates but with small respect.
^y Lord dissembles for a while This wrong,
^auing tryumpht of a Foe more strong,
(...) may with more ease, and with danger less,
^r Sacrilege and surly Pride repress.
(...) Ragau's ample Plain, one Morning, met
^e Royal Armies, of two Kings, as great
^er Mars with steel and Fury armed:
(...) and Pride so Either Soldier warmed,
(...) hardly could they stay till Trumpets shrill
^ounce the Battle, and give leave to kill:
(...) with stern Looks, and brauing Threats, afar;
and, with Blows; they had begun to war;
^anging wounds. Two thousand Perduz first
^e bravely the Onset: and not much dispersed,
(...) sudden whirlwind of their nimble Slings,
^ick a storm of humming Pebbles sings
So sad a Dirge of Deaths, that they suppose,
That not one Troop, but All, had bin at Blows.
To second Those, then, in good ordinance,
With waving Ensigns, thousand Troops advance*
Both Armies join. Now fiercely fall they to 't,
Mede upon Chalde, pressing foot to foot;
Incount'ring felly with a furious noise
Of clashing Arms, and Angry-braving Voice:
Louder then Nile, rushing from Rocky-Coomb;
Or then Encelade, when he shakes his Toomb.
Here lies one head^lesse: foot-lesse there (alas!)
Another craules among the gorie Grass:
One's shoulder hangs: another hangs his Bowels
About his neck (but new bound up in towells):
This, in the Face, That in the Flank is hurt:
This, as he dies, a Flood of Blood does spurt:
That, neither lives nor dies; but sees at once
Both upper Jove's and neather's diverse Thrones;
Because, some little spirit (too-stubborn-stout)
Still, in the Body, will not yet come out.
Yer-while the ground was yellow, green, and bl^
Now only coverd with a Crimsin hew:
While one does (hee^) another deadly thrill,
Another Him, Another Him does kill:
(...) Rage increases: still does Fury spread,
(...) all the Field be but a Heap of Dead.
One-while the Syrians by the Medes are chased;
^n the Medes by Syrians are re-chas'd:
^ne-while, from the Sea unto the Shore,
^ge after Surge, Wave after Wave does rore;
^ther-while, from Shore to Sea they ply
^e after Wave, Surge after Surge to fly:
^s (we see) the Flowery Ears, in May,
^hen Zephyrus with gentle Puffs does play)
^y to and fro; forward and backward bend;
^w stoop a little; and now, stand an end.
^oth Kings the-while, whose Force and Fortitude
(...) past their Subjects, so their Blades imbrewd
^loud and Slaughter, that an open Glade
^ere-e're they came, in either Camp they made;
that, nor Casks, Cuirets, nor Shields could save
^n mighty Strokes their massy Weapons gave:
^h like two Torrents, which with headlong fall
^n two opposed Hills, downe-bearing all,
^s* Bridges, Trees, Corn, Cattle; seem to vy
^ether of either shall most damnifie.
^cially, the Medes King thundered so
^n our Battles, that our Bravest tho,
Began to shrink, and with that shameful sight,
Our Host dis-ord'red, fell to shameful flight:
The Foe pursues, slayes, slashes (swift as wind)
Millions of wounds, and every one behind.
In brief, that Day had Niniue bin down,
Her King undone (dead, and deprived of Crown)
Had not I (full of Force and Fury) quick,
Like Lightning, rusht where deadly Blows were the
Mails, Murrions, Corselets, Iron, Steel and Brass,
Before My Sword were brittle all, as Glass.
And only I, My hand alone, which lent
More deaths then blows, brought more astonish^
Unto Their Camp, then all Our Camp beside.
Their Foot no longer could my Brunt abide:
Their Horsemen, fainting, in their Saddles shake;
Arms on their Backs, hearts in their Bellies quake.
Here, with a downright Blow, from top to twist,
I cleave in sunder one that dared resist:
There, I so deep dive in Another's mind,
That near two handfulls peers my Sword, behind
So, that the Medes, now more then wavering,
In the heat of Fight, abandon All their King.
Who, seeing him so betrayed, his Tresses tore,
Re^^'d to Ragau, all besmeard with gore:
^re, over-taen by Ours, He bravely fought;
(...) thickest Darts a glorious Death he sought;
^wes, thunders, thrills, and of his Manly blows
(...) one in vain, not one amiss bestows:
(...) yer He die, with quick, keen, Fauchin fell,
^ends before, thousand stout Souls to Hell:
^e fierce Tigre, compast everywhere
(...) Men and Dogs, to Fury turns his Fear;
^ts where he finds the greatest danger ly;
^s, tosses, kills; not, vnreveng'd to die.
^at, at the last, the vainly Valiant King,
^rie of killing, and of conquering,
^illd with a thousand Darts, and wounded rife,
^ed at once his lofty Rage and Life:
(...), falling, fares as does a mighty Oak,
^ch, planted high upon a massy Rock,
^ousand times has felt the Winds to beat,
(...) thousand Axes, it a Fall to threat;
^at the Root groaned, and the Valley nigh
^o'd the noise unto the steepest Sky,
^le that the Top still reeling to and fro,
(...), These; now, Those, threatens with overthrow:
(...) still it stands, in spite of all their spite,
(...) at the last, all vnder-mined quight
With million strokes, it falls, and with the Fall,
Bears to the ground, Trees, Rocks, Corn, Cattle*
For, Arphaxat extinct, extinct with-all
Was Median's glory: and, My Lord of All
Razed Ecbatane; and now grow Weeds and Grass
Where, late, His lofty, rare-rich Palace was:
Where, late, the Lute, and the loud Cornets noise
In curious Consort warbled sweet their voice:
The voice of Scriech-Owles, and Night-Ravens is (...)
And every fatal and affrighting Bird.
My King-God, weary of Wars tedious toil,
In NINIVE the great, for four months-while
Made Public Feasts: and, when the Feast was (...)
Commands Me leavie a huge Host, anon,
Of chiefest Men; to go and chastise Those
That had disdaignd him Aid against his Foes:
And that, on All that dared His Hests infrenge,
With Fire and Sword his Honor I avenge;
And that with speed. But, Madam, see (alas!)
How far I am from bringing This too-passe:
For, coming here, your Nation to subdue,
My Self am conquered and subdued by You:
So that (alas!) Death's draddest Tyrannies
In end-lesse Night will soon siel-vp mine eyes,
^t the powerful sole Preservatiue
^y sweet Kisses keep me yet alive.
(...) good My Lord, said She, Tell-on (I pray)
(...) good Success and Service, by the Way.
^en HOLOFERNES, where he left, began
^g Na^ration how He played the Man;
(...) Truth, half Tales: For, it is great Soldiers guise
^ibast often their Own Exploits with Lies.
^e Host all mustered and together brought,
^lame their hearts with martial Heat I sought:
^es (said I) if ever Your Desires
(...) thirsted Fame, to live when Life expires;
(...)' now, to punish that presumptuous Crew
^h rudely (late) our sacred Legates slew:
(...)', to avenge our drad-deer Soverain Liege
^at fell Outrage, nay, foul Sacrilege
^nst the Greatest GOD came eues down
(...) Heavenly Spheres to sway an Earthly Crown:
(...), arm you, brave Bloods, arm your either hand;
(...), with a Blade; That, with a Fier-brand,
(...) Fire and Sword to overrun the West,
^ay it waste, to bear away the best:
^nk it all under a Crimsin Flood;
^ake (at least) your Horses swim in blood:
Gow', take possession of Your Valors due,
The whole Worlds Crown, which yields it all to you*
Take you This Honor; which, in Time-to-come,
Shall keep your brave Names from the obliuious Tomb:
Take, take your pleasures of the richest spoils
Of richest Cities in a hundred Soiles
Which you shall sack. So, may you once in Health
Come laden home with Honor and with Wealth.
I ceast: and soon they second, All, my voice
With Caps cast-vp, with clapped hands; and noise
Of general Joy, to have Me GENERAL.
Some six-score Thousand was Mine Host in all,
Or som-what-more: with which from NINIVE,
But three-dayes march I made to Bectileh;
Thence past I forward by Hierapolis,
Then by Amida, then by Nisibis.
And thence to Charan (at the length) I came,
Once happy seat of your great Abraham.
Then wan^ the Hill, whose oblique Horns divide
All Asia near, and limite far and wide
Many large Empires: Where, I sack, I slay,
I burn, I raze, what-euer in my way:
My Soldiers seem so many Mowers, right,
Which in a Mead leave not a blade upright;
^t, by long Swathes of their degraded Grass,
^ell show the way their sweeping Sythes did pass:
^his, Phul, and Tharsis, and all Lydia knows,
(...) whose waste Fields now only Bramble grows.
(...) Com'n near the Straight which serves for Wall and Fort
^o soft Phoenicians, and Thief Issians Port:
^he Rosians, Soleans, Mopsians, Tharsians, Issia,
^nchials, Aegoeans; briefly, all Cilicia;
^ake-vp this Gate, with all their Power; in hope
^o stay my Passage, and my Course to stop.
(...) Should I here tell the dangerous Enterprises
^raue Charges, Rescues, Sallyes, Shocks, Surprises,
which there befell, the day would fail (I fear)
before my Speech: for, the Cilicians were
^o fortified by favor of the Place,
That little could we there prouaile, a space:
Nay, all mine Host, which had so often chas't
So many greater Hoasts; now stood aghast;
Till in despite, and full of desperate rage,
In thickest dangers, I my Self engage;
Where, round assaild, and wounded in all parts,
My Shield thick bristled with a Grove of Darts,
I never shrunk: but so be-stirr'd me round,
That I alone made All their Host give ground.
Mine Army then, follows the way amain
Mine Arm had made, and paved thick with Slain:
Now our most Cowards (late) for Fear, adying;
Wound most, kill most, and most pursue them flyin^
Cydnus* yer while, for his pure silver Flood,
Called King of Waters, wallowes now in blood:
And rapid Pyr^m (past his wonted Toule)
To Neptune, Shields, Helms, Horse and Men does ro^
In brief, as here your Mo^mur, stopped a while
By some new Bridge, or some unusual Pile;
Roars, rises, foams, fumes, threats, beats, rages, (...)
Against his new Bank; and with weighty Waves,
Weighty and strong, bears down at last the B^y,
And, for a time, out-lashing every-way*
Tears, over-turns, and undermines, much worse
Then when he freely has his native Course:
Even so, my Force, having the Force repeld,
Which in these Straights the struggling Passage held
Burns, kills, confounds, what meets it most and least.
ASIA* laid was^e: returning to the East,
I conqu^^'d Coele, spoiling, pityless,
The fruitful Verge of famous Euphrates:
Rapsis ^^az'd; and Agraea* overthrow'n,
The Virtue of my mighty Arm has known.
Thence, keeping still by the Sea coast, I spoil,
^e Madianites: then, marching North awhile;
^wards double Liban, I Damascus race,
^h her near Towns, G^ane, Abyl^, Hypaepas:
^ence came I (curious) to that Hill, from whence
^e Sun, by Night, is seen; and seen from thence
^o to R^se: Thence, toward the Western Realms
^ontinual beaten with Phoenician Streams.
Then, Those of Gaze, Tire, Sydon, Ascalon,
^otus, Byblus, Ioppa, every-one,
^r'd with my Fame; in greatest humblenes,
^spatch their Legates to My Mightines.
^e come not here with Force and Arms (say They)
^o bid thee Battle, or to bar thy Way:
^t rather, Mightiest Price, in humblest awe,
^o yield us Thine, to accept Thy Will for Law;
^f Life, or Death. Thine are our Fields and Forts;
^hine are our Cities; Thine our Ships, our Ports,
Our Lands, our Goods* our Cattail, Corn, and Wine;
Thine are our Children, and our Selves are Thine:
Only be pleased (Sir) to accept us so*
And so esteem us: and right happy the
shall we esteem our Selves, to have a Lord
Can wield so well the Scepter and the Sword,
The Lance and Balance; and, besides, excels
Men, equals Gods in every Virtue else.
Nor did their People, nor their States disprove
Their Embassies; but by all signs of Love
Both Young and Old, crowned all with Flora's Fauo^*
Of hundred Colors and of hundred Sauors;
Came Dancing out with Musiks cheerful Moods,
To offer Me their Bodies and their Goods.
Nor did I then a Victor's Right abuse;
But with all Kindness them as Friends I use:
Leave them their Land: but first, their Forts I mao^
With some of Mine; with some of Theirs, my Band.
For ( Madame) still the farther that I go,
My Camp, in Bands; my Bands in Soldiers grow:
Even as Danubius, first, beginning small
Through Raurak Plains with shallow course to craule,
Still swelling more and more, with threescore Rivers,
To the E^xi^e Sea his Sea-like Self delivers.
I hoped, as These, so also Israel
Would yield themselves; and not at all compel
My just Revenge to threat Extreamities:
But, when I came here to S^ythopolis
(The Toomb of Her whose happy Milk had y^rst
The twice-born Dennis in his Cradle nourc't)
^as aduertis'd of this stubborn Folly;
which will, no doubt, undo the Hebrews wholly.
The end of the fifth Book.
BETHVLIANS Rescue. THE SIXTH BOOK.
YEr that the Pagan could his Story end,
From highest Hills did dusky Night descend:
And now the Steward full the Table f^aights
With all, most precious, most delicious Meats;
As if the Viceroy, to This Iouial Feast,
Had bid the Kings both of the West and East.
O greedy-guts! O Gulphes insatiate!
A thousand Worlds, with all their delicate
And various Cates devised by the Abderite,
Cannot su^^ize your bound-less Appetite.
O Belly-gods! for You (at any price)
To the Moluques, must we trudge for Spice;
To the Canaries, for your Sugars fine;
To (Io^es-Crete) Candy for your choysest Wine.
To please your Tastes, your Palats to content,
Seas sacred Bosom is profanely rent;
Aieris dispeopled; yea, right hardly can
The only Phoenix escape the Jaws of Man.
O Poison! worse then Plague to Martial states,
Which brauest minds basely effeminates.
While Rome, for Heads, had Curios and Fabricios,
Whom Roots suffiz'd for dainties most delicious:
While Persia was with Sallets sole content;
They flourisht Both, admired and Eminent;
And Eithers Arms triumphing euery-where,
Filled all the Earth with Tropheis and with Fear:
But, since that This, from soft Assyrians took
His vast Excess of Kitchen and of Cook;
And, since that That fell under the Dispose
Of Galba's, Neros, and Vitellios
(More glorying to exceed Others Excess,
Then conquer Pyrrhus or Mithridates)
Both have bin often and justly sacked and spoiled
By petty Nations, whom they often had foiled.
Nature 's suffiz'd with Little: Ouer-ful
Deadeth the Courage, and the Wits does dull.
Each being set; anon, full filled-out
In massy Boules the Malmsey walks about:
One drinks devoutly in an Estridge Egg;
One in a Lute, another in a Leg;
One in a Ship, another in a Shell;
Another takes a broad deep silver Bell,
To ring his Pea^ but so his hand does sway
And shake, that half he sheds it, by the way.
But, above all, the Prince him so behau'd,
That, now, the more he drank the more he craved:
Much like the Sea; which, though it take this-while
Twin-named Ister, and Seauen-mouthed Nile;
Never increases, nor is full therefore;
But ever ready for as many more.
Cup calls for Cup; and when the Skinker ween^
TO have done his Service, he afresh begins
To fill them Liquor: for, till Midnight past,
Among the Guests this Tippling game did last.
And then away, with much adoo, they went
(Feeling, and reeling) Each unto his Tent;
By th* amorous Tyrant often urged before,
Who thought each minute now a year and more.
When they were gone, He 'gan embrace and busse
The trembling Lady; who besoothes him Thus:
Nay: leave (my Lord): such have what need you make
To reap the Fruit which from you none can take?
Get you to bed: and, if you leave me room,
I will not fail you by and by to come,
So soon as I have but disburthened
My Load of Clothes, and made me fit for Bed.
If suttlest Wits, and if the sobrest Brains,
^ue hardly escaped Women's wily Trains,
^aruaile not, Reader, if One, fooled at-once
(...) Semele's and Cytherea's Sons,
(...) thus beguiled: since Either of the Two
^reaues the Body's and the Minds Force, too.
(...) Then, letting her slide from his arms away,
^e goes about himself to dis-aray:
^ow he vnbuttons, now pulls-off his hose;
^ut, his heat hinders, and his have foreslowes;
^or (sleep-awake, blinde-seeing) while he plyes
(...)' untruss his Points, them (fumbling) faster ties:
^ill, overcome with Rage, and Longing, more,
He cuts his knots, and off his Clothes he tore;
And then to Bed. Where (as the Crosse-bow-man,
Who, for his pleasure, watches now and than
By some Cross-path, some Coney, or some Hare;
At every Noise, on every side does stare
Where stirs a Leaf; and leuels thither-ward,
At the least Wren, or the least Worm that stird
Near where he stands, still in a Hopefull-Doubt
Turning his Body and his Bow about)
The lustful Tyrant, if he hear a Mouse
Never so little stir about the house;
Shivering for Joy, he thinks his Mistress there:
Nay, though he nothing hear, his flattring Ear
Thinks it hears something, which can nothing be
But his admired most desired She:
Lifts-vp, layes-down, and up again re-lifts
His heavy Noule: from side to side he shifts;
Casting the Distance, counting, in his head,
How-many steps will bring her to his Bed,
The which the-while he full of Thorns does think.
But, now the Fume of his abundant Drink,
Drouzing his Brain, begins to deface
The sweet Remembrance of her lovely Face:
Already wheels his Bed, already shine
A thousand Rays before his slumbring Eyne:
Already in his Ears (now waxen numme)
A thousand Drones with buzzing Noise do humme:
He sees Chimeras, Gorgons, Mino-Taures.
Medusas, Haggs, Alectos, Semi-Taures.
But IVDITH's heart still beating thick with-in,
Felt a fell Combat in it self begin:
Now, causing Fear her sacred Fervor quash;
Anon, her Fervor her faint Fear to dash.
IVDITH, said She, Thy Jacob to deliver,
Now, is the Time; Now to-it. Do-it never.
O! Yes. O! No. I will. I will not, I:
Shall I profane kind Hospitality?
^ay, rather shall I sanctifie't the more,
^hen by the same I shall the Saints restore.
But, Traitors ever bear Dishonors brand.
^raitors be Those betray; not save, their Land.
But, Murderers Heaun's righteous Judge abhors.
Why? all Man-killers are not Murderers.
But, He Is a Murderer who his Prince has slain.
^his is a Tyrant; not My Soverain.
But, GOD has now bequeathed Him us for Lord.
^ee's not of GOD that wars against his Word.
Why, then, may All, their Tyrants kill and rid?
^o Ahod, Iahel, and so Iehu did.
Yea, but from Heaven had They autentik Warrant.
^o has my Soul (approved and apparent.)
But, ah! how weak art Thou, this Work to act!
Whom GOD assisted, never strength has lackt.
But, had thou done; the Sequel's more to doubt.
GOD brought me in: and GOD will bring me out.
What, if He please leave thee in Heathens hands?
Their Chieftain dead, I fear nor Death, nor Bands.
But, to their Lust thou shall be left a Prey.
Never my Mind; my Body force they may.
Then, in this point thus sacredly confirmed;
With hands heaved up, her eyes on Heaven she firm'd*
And softly, Thus poures to the Lord her Prayer:
O gracious GOD, who with paternal Care
Have ever kept thine Israel, strengthen Thou
Mine Arm with Thine, that it may nimbly now
Cut Off this Tyrant, who thus dares presume,
To scale the Heavens; Thy Scepter to assume.
And, since thy grace, through thousand storms and more*
Has brought my Bark in sight of wished shore,
O, let it land: with Poppie's sleepiest sap
This Tyrant's sense benum in end-less Nap;
That I may raise this Siege, Thy Thralls release;
Return Thee Praise; and, to thy SION, Peace.
Her Prayer done, the Drunken Prince she hears
Sno^ting aloud. Then fair and soft She neeres
His Pallets side, and quickly takes the Sword
Which had so often the groaning Earth begor'd.
But, even about the fatal Blow to give;
Fear, from her hand did the fell Weapon reaue:
Her ha^t did faint, her strength did fail her quite.
O GOD (then said She) strengthen by Thy Might
My timorous heart's, and trembling hand's Consent*
Then on the Duke so stiff a stroke she lent,
(...) happily, tri-parted (at the poule)
(...)' Head from the Body, Body from the Soul.
(...) Soul to Hell: his Body on the Bed:
IVDITH's hand his grim and ghastly Head;
^ich soon her Handmaid in her Night-bag hid.
Then speeding thence, suspect-less, or vnspi'd;
^thout Impeach the Pagan Host they past.
^r, if that any saw them trip so fast,
^av'n-blinde, they thought She went but (as before)
^o the Vale, bright Diane to adore.
Now, when chaste IVDITH came to the Hebrews Tower,
^e, open (said She): for the GOD of Power,
(...)' Assyrian Forces has this Night forlorn,
^d lifted up his chosen Jacob's Horn.
The Town, amazed at her Return vn-hop't,
^esse to the Port; which instantly they op't,
^ronging about her: who a Tarras mounts,
^d her Exploit from point to point recounts.
^en, from her Bag, for Proof of what she said,
^e pulls the-while the dreadful Pagans Head.
The Citizens, when in her hand they saw
^h' Assyrian's Head's Head; full of humble Awe,
^toll the Almighty, who so mighty Foe
(...) a weak Woman had subdewed so.
But, most of all did Ammons Prince admire
GOD's dreadful Judgment: and to escape His ire,
Who Israel thus, of vanquished, victoriz'd;
His Flesh and Heart he sudden circumciz'd.
How sweetly, Lord, Thy sacred Providence,
Men's suttlest Wisdom, in their Plots, preuents!
For, thine Elected unto Life, to guide
Into thy Fold (when most they seem beside)
Good out of Ill thou draw'st: making their Sin,
Means ('against their minds) their Goodness to b^gi^
Lord! foul Desire of Murder and of Spoil
Brought this (late) Pagan to the Isacian Soil;
Where, meaning (first) Thy Peoples blood to spi^^
Now, spend his Own for their deer sakes he will:
Thy mercy so from his malign Affect,
Maugre his mind, brought forth a good Effect.
So, near Damascus, made thou, by thy Call,
Of Wolf a Shepherd, of a Saul a Paul;
Of Persecutor, an Apostle; (brief)
Of Chief of Sinners, among Saints the Chief:
So suddenly, that all the Saints about
Admired his Doctrine; Yet, his Deeds did doubt.
So, the Saint-Thief, which suffered with our Sa^^
Was led to Life by his Death-dew Behauior:
(...), when no longer Earth could bear his Sin,
(...), in a Moment, made Heavens Citizen.
^eareful-hopeful Precedent of Grace!
(...) as, but One, GOD's holy Books embrace:
(...) that None (humbled) should despair of Pardon:
One, that None presume in Sin to harden.)
^o, turn, good Lord, O turn the hearts of Princes,
^ose Rage their realms with S^^. deer blood berinses:
(...) let the Sword, Thou in their hand have put,
^ne but Thy Foes, none but Those Tyrants cut,
^o cursedly Thee, or Thy CHRIST blaspheme
(...) surping IVDA and JERUSALEM,
^d all Thy Golden Candlesticks beside;
^reating the West, too, with their Power and Pride):
^t Those, who humbly, only, evermore,
^e, TRINITY in UNITY, adore.
Then, as the brave Virago ordered,
Soldier takes the Assyrian Tyrants Head;
^d, for the Hebrews more Encouragement,
^ad sets it up upon the Battlement.
There, Parents, Children, Maids, and Widows sad,
whom Pagan Swords but new bereaved had
^f Children, Parents, Lovers, Husbands deer,
^ixt Grief and Anger, as distracted near,
Pull-off his Beard, pull out his hateful Tongue,
(Which had blasphemed Heaven and Earth so long)
Spit in his Face, scratch and poach-out his Eyes;
And all, that Hate and Fury can devise.
For, live Remembrings of their wrongs, them (...)
On his dead Head, this dead Revenge to take.
Aurora, weary of the cold Embrace
Of her old Spouse, began in Inde apace
To paint her Portal of an Opal hew;
When, of Bethulians all the brauest Crew
Issue in Arms: and such a Noise withal,
(Such Shouts and Cries) as if, in the antike Braule,
All the Elements, breaking the bands of Order,
Were by the Ears; and in their old Disorder.
The Court of Guard (that night unusual strong,
Toward the Town) hearing such Noise, so long,
Start from their Sleep*and crying Arm, arm, arm,
Give suddenly to all their Host Alarm.
One, for his own, his Fellows Helm puts-on:
One, his right Vantbras on left arm does don:
One, on his neck, for Lance, a Libbet takes:
One speeds him quick: another scarce awakes:
One mounts his Horse, yer he be curbed, or girt;
And, without Spurs: Others, to show more heart,
^ld make a Stand: some neither wake nor sleep:
^e, brave in Word; in Deed, as faint as Sheep.
^ow, by degrees, this Noise comes to the Ears
Holosernez Household Officers:
that sad Bagos hies him in all have
^o the Tent where the Ethnic slept his last.
^h trembling hand, once, twice, or thrice he knocked:
^an eternal Sleep the Doors had locked
^his Lord's ears; who had already crossed
^e Stygian Ferry, not to be re-crost.
^hen, hearing still the Isacians louder shout,
(...) makes the Door fly-open with his Foot;
^d, entering, finds, in gorie Bed, low shrunk,
^t Holofernez, but his Head-less Trunk.
^en did he tear his hair, and rent his Clothes*
^d to the Clouds roars out in yelling Oaths:
^ecially, when IVDITH there he mist,
^om now the Murdress of his Lord he wist.
^en, ragefull rushing from the bloody Tent,
^is hideous Cry through all the Camp he sent:
Woe, woe to us! Alas! this cursed Night
^ursed Captive has confounded quight
^r awefull Army, and undone us All,
(...) treacherous slaughter of our GENERAL.
This new Affright redoubled on the first,
The stoutest hearts does so dis-hart and burst;
That All (at-once abandoning their Arms,
Pikes, Swords, and Shields, Darts, Arrows, all) by swa^
Be take them to their heels; o'r Hill and Dale,
Flying from one death, on a worse to fall.
Then the Besieged, in great Troops descend,
And on their backs revenging Bows they bend.
Both run apace: Those fly; These follow fast:
But those that fly, make less good speed then haste.
For, without loss of Man, the Hebrews, at will,
The flying Pagans slaughter, thrash, and thrill:
Even as a Lion, in Getulian Lawnes,
Bestreawes the soil with fearful Kids and Fawnes*
Where, not a Beast his Fury dares abide,
Nor lift a horn against his awefull pride.
One, from a Rock himself does headlong dash,
And all to pieces all his parts does pash:
Other, forgetting that in deepest depth
Fate finds us out, into a River leap'th.
But, if by speed, or some good hap, perhaps
This Mornings first fell Fury any scapes,
He scapes not though those Hebrews outrages,
Who kept (about) the Straits and Passages:
that at scarce one of such a Rout could bring,
(...) Niniue, the News unto the King.
The Battle (rather, the Execution) don,
^t of the City flocked euery-one
^om Sex or Age had hitherto restrained;
(...) see the drad Revenge the Lord had rained
(...) suddenly, and past all Expectation,
(...) those fell Foes of His deer Holy Nation.
One, full of Wounds, yet gasping, calls in vain
(...) lazy Death, to end his lingering pain:
^e, grinning ghastly, in his visage grim,
^owes, dead, the Rage that living sweld in him:
^me mangled here, some there, some round about:
^d every Soul a sundry way went out:
^cordingly as Valor, Slight, or Chance,
^d the dead-doing Sword, or Dart, or Lance.
(...) short, This sight so truly tragic was,
^at even the Victors would have sigh't, alas,
^d they so vanquished any Foe but This.
But rifling long, among the Carcases,
(...) last the Body of the Duke they found
^hogh head-less, known best, by that only wound).
^hither they throng; That, every blade must thrill,
and every one that Corpse again would kill:
A hundred Swords, a hundred Pikes, and Darts,
Are every moment goring all his parts;
And every Nerve, Vein, Muscle, Joint they hack;
Till room (at last) their Vulgar Rage does lack.
For, were his Bulk as big as Atlasses,
His Limbs as many as Encelades,
And strong Briar^us; yet, yet think I, all,
Their dire Revenge would still, still think too small
For, of the Jews, none so base Clown there is
But would a Gobbet of that Flesh of His.
Give, Tyrant, give thy Right hand to Cilicians,
Thy Left to Medes: give one Arm to P^^^nicians,
The other to Ismael: and divide thy Feet
Between the Egyptian and the Coelianit^:
That every Nation, whom Thine Arms offenc't,
May, by some Part, be partly recompenc't.
Alas! I err: for, all in Atomies
Were Thou divided, all would not suffice.
But IVDITH, nor forgetful, nor ingrate,
Would neither bury, nor Selfe-arrogate
The sacred honor for Assistance given
In This great Work, by the All-work hand of Heav'^
But, tyming meet her Feet to Timbrells noise,
This Hymn^ she sings with glad-sad warbling voice;
^low'd by all the Flower of Hebrew Dames
^aids, Widows, Wives) of faultless Forms and Fames.
^ude, laud we, loud, with verse, with voice and strings,
(...) GOD of GODs, the glorious King of Kings:
^ese Power alone, pulls Tyrants down, and reareth
^ek in their Room, who HIM ay-faithfull fears.
^or, who would think, one City, in one Day,
suddenly could such an Host dismay,
^ose high Exploits had all the World astounded,
^d, from the Indes, to Iapheths Inns resounded?
Lord! who would think, that HOLOFERNES, late
^ud Conqueror of many a Potentate,
^uld lose his Life (for all his Selfe-affiance)
(...) one weak Woman, not a Troop of Giants?
Who, who would think, that HE, who late possessed
^t least, had power) from farthest East to West;
^om Pole to Pole stretching his arms all-over,
^uld not have, left, one Inch of Turfe, for Cover?
That stately Prince, so thick attended-on,
^w dead, (alas!) lies, above ground, alone.
^t, not alone: for, Those that served him, living;
^nsort him, dead; Proose of their Duties giving:
Nor yet, above ground; for, the Ravens become
His mangled Body's better-worthy Toomb,
Then precious Marble, let, and Iacynth gilded;
Which, for his Bones Himself had proudly builded.
So, so (good Lord) from Henceforth, let us find
Thee, not our Judge, but as our Father kind;
And so, Henceforth, the Foes of SION rather
Feel Thee their Judge, then their propitious Father.
Here IVDITH ends: Here also end will I,
With thanks to GOD; and to Your Majesty.
To GOD, for bringing This my Work about:
To You, for daigning to have read it out.
FINIS.
LITTLE BARTAS: OR Brief Meditations, ON The Power, Providence, Greatness, and
Goodness of GOD, In the CREATION; of the World, for Man: Of Man, For HIMSELF.

Translated; and Dedicated To the most Royal Lady ELIZABETH.

by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

TO The most Royal Lady ELIZABETH, Infanta of England; Princess PALATINE of
Rhine.
Sweet Grace of GRACES, Glory of Your Age,
Luster of VERTVES (Moral and Divine)
Whose Sacred Rays (already) far outshine
Your Princely State, Your Royal Parentage;
^eer, to your HIGHNESS (with all Good-Presage,
Congratuling Your little PALATINE)
I consecrate This LITTLE-One of Mine
To serve Your Self, first; then, Your Son, for Page.
^^ur gracious Favors to my former Brood,
So bind my Thoughts, so bolden my Desires,
To show Me grateful, as I know You good;
that Thus to YOU, This LITTLE Mine aspires:
Little in Growth; yet of so great a Spirit,
As (happily) Your Graces grace may merit.
To Your Highness Service, Duly and Truly devoted, Iosuah Sylvester.

Souhaits Royaux and Loyaux.
Au Roy.
^Insi, l' Ancien des Temps, d' Ans, d'Honneurs, and Bonhe^
Comblant ce Chef Royal; couronne voz Labeurs:
Qui. pour le Droict des Roys, d'vn Glaiue tout divin,
Combattez l' Antichrist, and son grand BELLARMIN.
Au Prince Charles.
^sile Tout-puissant, de sa main de PANDORE,
Face d'vn Charle-moindre, un Charle-magne encore;
Qui, suivant Voz Vertuz, derive, perennel,
Saincts-Sages-Preux STVARTS au Scepter paternel.
Aux Princes Palatins.
^nsi, le Ciel benin de ses Tresors benisse,
L'Hymen heureux and saint de FREDRIC and d'ELIZE*
De sort, que d'Iceux, leurs Filz, and leurs Neveuz,
Nous naissent desormais des EMPEREVRS heureux.
Aux Anglois and Allemans.
^insi, Lions ANGLOIS and Aigles d'ALLEMAGNE
(Triumphants, pour la Foy, de ROME and de l'ESPAGN
Terrassent coup a coup les Lunes du TVRQVOIS,
Pour planter tour par tout les Lauriers de la CROIX.
LITTLE BARTAS.
(...) wanton Lovers so delight to gaze
^n mortal Beauties brittle little Blaze;
^t not content, with (almost) daily sight
Those dear Idols of their Appetite;
^r, with the Ideas which the Idalian Dart
^h deep imprinted in their yielding heart;
(...), with Their Pictures (with precisest charge)
^e by De-Creets, Marcus, or Peake, at large
and hanged of purpose, where they most frequent,
(...) some fair Chamber's choicest Ornament)
^ey must have Heliard, Isaac, or His Son,
(...) do in Little, what in Large was done;
^at they may ever, ever bear about
(...) Pictures Picture (for the most, I doubt).
(...) Much more should Those, whose Souls, in Sacred Love,
^re rapt with Beautie's- Proto-Type above
(Since, here, they cannot see the ORIGINAL;
Nor, in themselves, now, find His Principal)
Thirst for Their Object; and [much less content
With the ample Table of the Firmament,
And various Visage of this goodly Globe,
Wherein, they see but (as it were) His Robe,
Embrodered rich, and with Great Works embost,
Of Power, of Prudence, and of Goodness, most;
Yet, so farre-off, so massy, so immense,
As over-swaies Their weak Intelligence:
Or with that lesser Tablet of their Own
(The Little-World, wherein the Great is show'n)
Which, near and deer, though still about they bear,
Such Clouds of Passion are still crowding there,
That seld or never can they ought perceive
Of those pure Rays it did at first receiue]
Long for Their Long-Home, past the Gates of Grace,
To see Their Love, in Glory, face to face.
Till when; awhile to entertain them here
With Prospects fittest Their faint Thoughts to cheer
(Insted of That Great Universal Table,
Made in Six Days, with Art so admirable;
And, by My BARTAS, in His Weeks divine,
So large and lively draw'n in every line)
^VAL, and I (too short of Isaac's Art)
^e Thus Essaid to play the Limners part,
^d draw in little (like a Quintessence)
^t goodly Labors glorious Excellence;
^ease of Such, whom Public Charge denies
^sure to view so large Varieties:
^d Such, whose Means may not afford their Minds
^o^tly Pleasures, of so Gain-less kinds:
^d (lastly) Such, as, loving BARTAS best,
^uld glad and feign still bear Him in their breast,
(...) in their Bosom, were He Pocket-fit,
(...) well He might; would Printers Gain permit:
Now therefore, Thou, All-forming ONLY-TRINE,
(...), in the Large, Thou ledst His hand and Mine;
and likewise here Thy gracious Help again,
(...) guide aright my Pencil and my Pen;
(...) suit my Colors, sweet my Shadows, so,
^at This my Little, Thy Great Works may show.
And, grant, the-while, I be not like the Hand
which at S. Albons, in the Street does stand
^irecting Others in the ready Way;
^ut, void of mind, it Self behind does stay:
^or, like a Buoy, which warns from a Shelfe;
^ut lies still wallowing in the Sea, it Self.
SVpernall Lord, eternal King of Kings;
Maker, Maintainer, Mover of all things:
How infinite! how excellently-rare!
How absolute Thy wondrous Works they are!
How much their Knowledge is to be desired!
And Thou, in All, to be of All admired!
Thy glorious Power so suites thy gracious Will:
Thy sovereign Wisdom meets thy Goodness still:
Thy Word effects thy Work; and, void of Pain,
Turns round the Heavens, and does the Earth sustain
Thy Spirit, infallible and infinite,
Filling the World (yet not containd in it)
By Power and Presence, all, in All things dwells;
In Essence though, the Heaven of Heavens excells.
Eternally, before All Form began,
Thou, only GOD, were in Thy-selfe, even than,
As absolute, as after all the Term
Of All thy Works: They, Changefull All; Tho^ firm.
The Revolution of This ample All,
Heavens height, Starr's light, the Ocean's flood and f^
To all Mankind, in some kind, make Thee kno^
But add not Thee more Glory to Thine Own.
^o make a World, or mar it, Thou art free.
^omes and goes, by Thy divine Decree.
^u, at Thy pleasure, have made All of Naught:
^at Thy pleasure, shall to Naught be brought.
^hy Name is (right) I AM: for, without Thee,
^one: all Beeings of Thy BEING be.
^erfect Unity, proper Existence,
^nely found in Thine own sacred Essence.
^lthough the World a goodly Piece appear,
(...) has, to Thy Greatness, no Proportion near:
(...) but a Point, to Thine immense Infinity.
^en, what (alas!) is Man, to Thy DIVINITY?
Yet, have thou Him a Tongue and Reason given;
^d Eyes erected toward Thy glittering Heaven,
(...) read and ruminate Thy Wonders there;
^d afterward proclaim them everywhere.
The Heavens declare thy Glory, and they preach
^o Man, Thy Works, Thine Excellence in Each:
^he Elements accorded Discords sound
^ow good for us thy goodly Works are found.
The radiant Stars, in their eternal Sway,
^h' alternate Changes of the Night and Day,
^he birth of Beasts, the growth of Plants, each hour,
^each everywhere Thy Providence and Power.
From THEE, the Sun receives his Beauty brig^^
And Soverain Rule of Each celestial Light;
Whose Yearly Course, in certain Circuiting,
Makes Winter, Summer, Autumn, and the Spring.
Be It clowdy, clear, Eclipse, or Night, or Day;
Hi^ lovely brows are equi-lucent ay:
And, whether swift or soft He seem to wend,
His Speed is such, We cannot comprehend.
Though us He Warm, yet is Himself not hot:
Though red, or pale, He seem, yet is He not:
Though small to us; His Orb is eight-score times
And six, as big as All our Earthly Clymes.
Did not He draw moist Vapors from below
To drench our Fields; here, nothing green would grow^
Did not He dry excessive Showers again,
We could not sow, nor mow; our grass, nor Grai^
Thou Lord, by Him, work'st all this Alteration;
And causest so All Creatures generation:
Prankest the Earth in diverse-Flowred hew;
And Yearly, almost, make the World anew.
Thou have disposed His oblique Body so,
That Rise he, Set he; be he High, or Low;
His Noon's perpetual: and he makes at-once
Day, Night; Su^mer; Winter; frying, freezing Zones.
^hen low to Us, he is to Others high;
^n Others see not, We behold his Eye;
^n here he Sets, he Rises other-where;
^n here direct, he looks glancing there.
^hen some, in Summer, hear sweet Nightingales,
^n some, in Winter, hear but blustering Gales:
^e, see but Buds, when some supply their Granges,
^h-where, the Sun thus Seasons conter-changes.
^hen here, there springs both leaf and grass together,
(...) where the Meads do hang their heads and wither:
(...) in their turns, so in their times, he measures
(...) Gifts to all; and all partake his Treasures.
^n brief: each change of short, long; Day and Night;
(...) Seasons, Times, Turns, and returns of Light;
which, in a whole Year, everie-where he forms;
that, in the whole World, daily He performs.
(...) So that, drad Lord, were not Thy sacred Lore,
^an, above All, would likely Him adore
As some have don); but Supreme Reason shows
that all His Glory unto Thine he owes.
Things finite have Beginning, and Beginner:
things moved, a Mover (as the wheel, the Spinner)
^ffects, their Cause final; and (formallie)
^lder then Time, Nature, or Faculty.
Even THEE, the Cause of Causes: Sourse of (...)
First, and Last, Moover; Prime, and Principal.
Infallible, involuble, insensible;
All Selfe-comprising, else incomprehensible:
Immense, Immortal, absolute Infinity,
Omnipotent, Omniscient DIVINITY.
Even THEE, in Whom only begins all Good,
And all returns into Thy bound-lesse Flood.
By Order then of thy Decrees divine,
The have set the Sun over All the World to shine;
And (as the Subjects lightly suit their King)
With His fair Light, to enlighten every thing.
His goodly Face, the ungodly ever fly,
Seeking for Night's black horrid Canapie,
To cover Theft, Rape, Incest, Murder too,
And all foul Sins; which in the Dark, they do^
By Him, We see Thy Works, in their Propriety;
Discern their Beauties, learn their vast variety:
Where, without Him, the World would all return
To the old first CHAOS, or in Blindness mourn.
By Him, We calculate our Grandsires Dates,
The Increase of Kingdoms, and Decay of States:
By Him, Thou measur'st, Lord, to Us and Ours,
Years, Ages, Seasons, Months, Days, Minutes, Ho^
^l Wits admire the immense and wondrous way
(...) great bright Body circuits every Day:
(...) more his Orb is from the Center far,
(...) longer Daily his great Iournies are.
^esides his Daily Course, his Coursers drive
^e of three hundred threescore Days and sieve,
^e Hours, three-quarters: of which Ouer-plus,
^uery fourth Year, grows a Day with us.
Yet, whosoever would the Year exactly rate,
^iue-score-fiue Years, must one Leap abate;
^d, in threescore, for the Error ready past,
^ould no Bissextile in our Books be placed.
But, though We err, He never errs at all:
^or, since Thou did Him in his State install,
^th He misst Moment of the Task he ought;
though he have seen Men fail and fall so often.
Above all Creatures, He retains, of Thee,
^me-thing conform to Thine Eternity:
^r, though He see our hourly Changes here,
^is Light and Beauty still the same appear.
How many Changes has He seen on Earth!
^ings, Kingdoms, States; their Burial and their Birth;
^ising and Falling of triumphant Races;
^aising and razing of renowned Places.
How often has Heseen Empres reverst?
Rich Cities sacked? Rare Common-weals dispersed
Fields turned to Floods, and Seas returned to Sands?
While steadfast He between his Tropiks stands?
Him, just betwixt Six Wanderers have thou pla^
Which prance about Him with unequal have:
All which, without Him, could no Light reflect,
As is apparent by the Moons Defect.
By His Aspect, her Own she daily makes;
She, Wax-less, Waen-less, does both waen and wa^^
And though to Us, She seem a Semi-Ray,
Her Full round Face does never fall away.
By His fair Beams, as well by Day as Night,
The full whole Half of Her thick Orb is bright:
And, as She draws near, or far off from Him;
So, more, or less Our Half is clear or dim.
Her upper Half is full, in her Coition,
Her lower Half is in her Opposition:
Her other Quarters, other Forms express;
And up, or down-ward, show Her, more or less.
When We see little, then the Heavens have store
When Heavens see little, then have We thee more
Nearer the Sun, the less She seems in sight;
Turning her Horn still to her Opposite.
At Even Increasing, She the Sun succeeds;
Morn, Decreasing, She his Car preceeds:
(...) that, each Month, the Sun environs Her,
(...) every side His Splendour to confer.
Her silver Light then only fails her
^hen the Earth's between Them (in Diameter)
which Masks her Beauty with a sable Clowd,
^om Sight of Him, her Brother Golden-browd.
Good Lord, what changes do Thou work by These
^ieties; in Air, in Earth, and Seas!
^re, or foul Weather; Wind, or Wet, or Thunder;
(...) dry, or drip; or cool, or warm Heer-vnder.
^f She but smile the fourth day, 't will be fair:
^hen She blush, we shall have blustering air:
^hen her brows be muffled with a Frown,
^ost of that Month shall sad Tears trickle down.
Thus does the Vigor of the Signs superior
^le in the Virtues of these things inferior:
^t All are governd by Thy souerain Might:
(...)! happy He who understands it right.
Thrice happy He, who sees Thee everywhere,
(...) Heaven and Earth, in Water, Fire, and Air:
^ho, due admiring Thy wise Works (of Yore)
^hee above All, Thee only, does adore.
Who knows Thee so, so needs must love Thee
And, with his Will, Thy sacred Will would do*
Still lifts his Eyes to Heav'n-ward, to contemp^^
The stately Wonders of Thy starry Temple.
Admires the set and measured Dance of Thin^
All-clasping Palace, azure-crystalline,
Rare-rich-imbost with glittering studs of Gold;
And, more admires, the more he does behold.
'T's a wondrous thing to see That mighty M^
Hindge-less and Ax-less, turn so swiftly round; ((...)
And th'heauie Earth, propless (though downward^
Selfe-counter-poiz'd, mid the soft Air suspending
On th'ample Surface of whose massy Ball,
Men (round about) do trample over-all,
Foot against Foot, though still (o strange Effect)
Their Faces all be toward Heaven erect.
Those dwelling under the Equinoctial, they
Have, all the Year long, equal Night and Day:
Those near the Tropiks, have them more vn-eue^
The more, the more that they are Nor-ward dri^
But Those, whose Tents to either Pole are ne^
Have but One Night, and One Day in a year.
Yet All well compast by due ruled Rite,
Neither then other, has more Dark, or Light.
Thus have thy Works, o All-Disposing Deity,
^me-what conform, for all their great variety:
^ich Harmony, amid so diverse things,
All, aloud Thy wondrous Wisdom rings.
But, specially, we wonder at the Place
which here thou have bestowed on Adams race:
(...) see our selves set on so Round a Ball,
(...) firmly hanged just in the midst of All.
^or, This our Globe hangs Prop-less in the Air;
(...), but thy Self, can nothing shake or sway-her:
(...) roaring Storm, nor rumbling violence,
(...) move the Centre's sad Circumference.
Which, who-so should oppose in Disputation,
^ght be convinced by easy Demonstration;
(...) evident, from Sense and Reason err,
^o think the Heavens stand, and the Earth does stir.
The Parts and Whole, of same-kind bodies, have
^me or like Motions; be they light, or grave;
(...)-ward or down-ward; round, or overthwart:
^eds must the Total move as does his Part.
So, if we see the Sun and Moon to veere;
^eir ample Heavens have even the like Cariere:
^t, who has seen a Selflie-turning Stone?
^w then should Earth turn her whole lump alone?
Let Us therefore, boldly, with old Truth, affirm,
That the Earth remains immovable and firm:
And (if we credit the Geometer)
Three thousand leagues is her Diameter:
This Measure of her vast thick Depth, is found
By the admirable Compass of her Round;
Which has, by test of Arts Experiments,
More then nine thousand leagues Circumference.
Yet, learned Mappists, on a Paper small,
Draw (in Abridgement) the whole Type of All;
And in their Chamber (paineless, peril-less)
See, in an hour, and circuit, Land and Seas.
This mighty Globe is but a Point, compared
With the upper Globe: yet on This Point are she
Millions of millions of Mankind, which plow
With Keel and Coultar its Twin Back and Brow.
Man, placed thus, in This Mid-Point, so even,
Sees always Half of God's great Hall of Heaven:
The other's beneath him; yet abides not there,
But in a Day does to him all appear.
Ah, Soverain Artist! o how few of us
Know right the Place where Thou have placed us the
Alas! how-many know not, to What end
Thy gracious Wisdom did them hither send!
^t, giving Man a quick Intelligence,
^u sett'st him just in the World's Midst; that thence
^g thy Wonders round about him so,
^wing himself, he might Thee better know.
(...) the usual Circuit of the Heavenly Ball,
(...) Stars appear unto us (almost) all:
(...) We, in time, observing all their Figures,
^ht contemplate their Courses, Natures, Vigors.
^o view the Stars, is honest Recreation:
^earch their Course, deserves Commendation;
^ee beware, with some presuming Sects
^ick things future out of their Aspects.
^e must renounce That Errors patronage,
^t what some Dreamers, by our Births, presage,
^t needs betide us: tying to their Laws
(...) nature; governd by a Higher Cause.
^erhaps the Signs some inclination bring,
^cing hearts to some Affectioning:
(...) by Gods grace, well may we vary that;
(...) never forced by necessary Fate.
^or, sure if Man, by strong Necessity,
^o any Ill, ill meriteth not He:
(...) Stars constrain us; neither Virtue, then,
(...) Vice, were worth Praise, or Reproof, in Men.
If any way the Will of Man be free,
On These Effects what Judgments ground can b^
What Certainty can from the Stars be known,
Of Weal or Woe; Life, Death; or Thrall, or Thre^
When Kings are born, be many born beside:
Must all be Destined to be Kings, that tide?
Often, many at-once are hanged, or drowned, or slain:
Did all, at-once, their groaning Mothers pain?
Who can conceive, that such or such Aspect,
Is good, or bad; boads Life, or Deaths Effect?
Who can produce so sure Prognostications
Of our frail Life, so full of Alterations?
Certain 's that Art, which shows the daily Cours^
Of restless Stars, their influence and force:
But, Divination 's an uncertain Skill,
Full of fond Error, false, and failing still.
What booted, Lord, our hu^blest Vows to Thee,
Were their Conclusions certain Verity?
Disastrous Fate would mate us with Despair,
And frustrate all religious Faith and Prayer.
Were it their Sayings were right certain true,
Then, of necessity must all ensue:
But, if Events their Verdicts often thwart,
False is their Aim, and fallible their Art.
Observe the Works those subtle Authors write,
^re so ambiguous, or so false outright;
(...) if, sometimes, some Truth they chance to hit,
^y'll counterpoize a hundred lies for it.
^o-busie-bold, with Thee, they, Lord, presume;
(...) to themselves Thine Office they assume,
(...), by Star-gazing, or ought else below,
(...) arrogate the Future to fore-knowe.
^ee hardly see what hangs at our Eyes:
(...) should we read the Secrets of the Skies?
^e knows, Tomorrow what betide him shall:
(...) then foretell Years Fortunes yer they fall?
^hen leave we All to GOD's high Providence;
(...) listening for To-morrow-Dayes Events:
^er then We, He knows what is meet to send.
^en, fear we nothing, but Him to offend.
O! Thou All-knower! Nothing more has thrust
^ud Man from Thee, then This Ambitious-lust
(...) knowing All: for, by that Arrogance,
^tead of Knowledge, got He Ignorance:
Man nothing knows, nor nothing comprehends,
(...) by the Power which Thy pure Spirit him lends:
(...) then, Thy Wisdom have so bounded His;
^hy would He hold more then His Measure is?
Let Us humbly stoop our Wits, with all Sincerity,
Unto Thy Word: there let us seek the Verity.
And all Predictions that arise not Thence,
Let us reject for impious Insolence.
Let us repute all Divination vain
Which is derived from man's fuming brain,
By Lots, by Characters, or Chyromancie;
By Birds, or Beasts; or damned Necromancie.
Let Us also fly the furious-curious Spel
Of those Black-Artists that consult with Hell
To find things lost; and Pluto's help invoke
For hoorded Gold, where often they find but smoke.
He Is fond that thinks Fiends in his Ring to coop,
Or in a knife them by a Charm to hoop.
Such as have tried those Courses, for the most,
Have felt in fine Their malice, to their cost.
Woe, woe to Them that leave the living GOD,
To follow Fiends, and Montibanks abroad;
Seeking, for Light, dark, dreaming Sorceries;
And, for the Truth, the erroneous Prince of Lies.
Condemning therefore all pernicious Arts,
Let Us be contented with our proper Parts:
Let Us meekly seek what may be safely known;
Without usurping GOD's peculiar own.
(...)' have Stuffynough (besides) our time to spend;
Our short life can hardly comprehend
(...) half of half the Wonders, licenst us
(...) search, and know, and soberly discuss.
^he smallest Garden usually contains
^ts, Fruits, and Flowers, sufficient for the pains
^one man's life, their natures to descry:
^en will he know all Creatures property?
^arth's but a Point, compard to the upper Globe:
(...) who has seen, but half her utter Robe,
^itting All her Inwards, All her Water?
^en shall we then see All this vast Theater?
What here we see, weesee is Exquisite:
^at's This, to That so far above our Sight?
^elling fair, what to our Eye is sensible:
^n to our Soul, the rest's incomprehensible.
^ho then can vaunt himself Omni-scient,
^re, then All-sin-less, pure, and Innocent?
^one's all-guiltlesse, in thy glorious Eyes,
^ere's none all-knowing thy high Mysteries.
Yet must we praise and glorify thee fit,
(...) that we know; and for our good by it:
^ere is no Pleasure can be comparable
(...) Contemplation of Thy Wondrous Table.
There-on the more we muse, the more we (...)
So our Delight Desire increases ay
Of finding Thee: and that divine Desire,
Calming our Cares, quenches our fleshly Fire.
All other Pleasures have displeasures mixed:
Joys meet Annoyes, and Smiles have Tears betwi^^
Yea, all Delights of Earth have ever been
Fellow'd, or followed, with some tragike Teen.
But, Who of Thee, and Thine, contemplates ever
Scapes all the Fits of the hot-cold, cruel Fever
Of Fear, of Love, of Avarice, Ambition,
Which haunts all others, with small Intermission.
Man, laborlesse, receives a rare Delight,
When he observes the settled Order right,
Whereby all Creatures (with, or wanting, Sense)
Subsist, through thine Unchanging Providence.
What more Content can We have here below,
More high, more happy; then, but This to know
(This certain Sum) That when This World beg^^
Thou made Man for Thy-selfe; and All for Man.
The Horse was not made to glorify thy Name,
Nor the Elephant to magnify the same:
Man only has voice, memory, and wit
To sing thy Praise, and sound thy Glory, fit.
and, to serve Thee, as He is sole ordained;
^o serve Him, thou have the rest darraind:
things that fly, that walk, that craule, or swim,
(...) Heaven and Earth, and All are vowed to Him.
^r Him, the Earth yields Herbs, Trees, Fruits, and Flowers,
(...) sundry purpose, and of sundry powers)
^e of all kinds, in Valleys far and wide
(...) Bread and Drink) and dainty Vines beside.
^or Him the Rocks a thousand Rivers gush:
^r rolling Brooks, There silver Torrents rush;
^nting Meads and Pastures, a^ they pass,
^ose smyling Pride peeps in their liquid Glass.
^or Him, the Mountains, Downs and Forests breed
^s, Biefes, Sheep, Venzon; and the lusty Steed
(...) bear him bravely thorough thick and thin;
^d silly Worms, his Silken Robes to spin.
^or Him, the Bullock bears his painful Yoke:
(...) Him, the Weather wears his cursed Cloak:
(...) Him, the Birds their brooding chambers build:
^or Him, the Bees their Wax and Honey yield.
For Him, the Sea does many millions nurse;
^th whom, the Air helps both his panel^ and purse:
^e Fire's his Cook, to dress the abundant Cheer
which Air, and Sea, and Earth, do furnish here.
Yea, Dragons, Serpents, Vipers venomous,
Have Fell, Fat, Blood; or som-what good for us;
In Leprosy, or Lunacie, applied:
And Triacle is also hence supplied.
He (briefly) He has use of all that is;
Winnes the most savage of the Savages:
None so fierce Lion, but to tame he wonts,
Nor Elephant so high but that he mounts;
And makes, besides, of his huge Bones, and Teeth
Hafts, Boxes, Combs; and more then many see 'th
Nay, more: for Him, the fell Monocerote,
Bears on his Brow a sovereign Antidote.
Yea, many sovereign Remedies He finds,
For sundry Griefs, in Creatures of All kinds.
All (in a word) Wild and Domestic too,
Some way or other, Him some service do.
For Food, He has the Flesh of Beasts and Birds:
For Clothes, the Fleece, the Hair and Hyde of Hea^
For House, each Quarr, and every Forest, offers:
For Metal, Mines furnish his Camp and Coffers.
For Him, the jarring Elements agree:
Fire cleers the Air; Air sweeps the Earth, we see;
Earth bears the Water; Water (moistly mild)
Cooles Fire, calms Air, and gets the Earth with-child
(...), All is made for Man; and Man, for Thee:
^oue, and serve, and laud Thy Majesty;
^e above All: Thee only to obey;
(...) Thankful Soul walking Thy sacred Way.
^his does He well, that yields his Will to Thine;
(...) of Desires, if not of Deeds, divine:
^ing to stoop under the Spirits Awe,
(...) members stubborn and rebellious Law.
^or, Man consists of discordant accords
^at the great World, the little-World affords.
^ere Heaven and Earth; Here Heaven and Earth there (are;
^ere War and Peace; Here also Peace and War).
He has a Heavenly Soul, an Earthly Sheath:
^at soars above: This ever pores beneath:
^at, lightly-wingd, All Creatures comprehends;
^is, leaden heel'd, but to Corruption tends.
The Spirit, often against the Flesh does fight;
^d sometimes, vanquished by his Opposite,
^arried Captive with the most Dishonor,
^rer his Foe; and forced to wait vpon-her;
Till roused again, and raised by Thy Grace,
^s striving Will recovers wonted place:
^ith better Watch, and brauer Resolution,
^o stand it out, until His Dissolution.
Surveying then both Heaven and Earth about,
He brings in, what he has seen without;
And, marking well the Effects of natures visible,
Ascends by those unto their Cause invisible.
For, but two Organs has our Soul, whereby
To find and know the eternal Majesty:
Faith, which belieues the sacred Word of GOD;
And Reason, reading all His Works abroad.
Those Wonders send us, to their Author, over*
Those certain Motions, to their certain Mover:
Then Faith conducts us, where our Reason leaves
And what the Eye sees not, That our Faith conce^
Faith, firm and lively, does our Souls perswad^
That, Thy high Power, of Nothing, All has man
Thine ESSENCE is Eternally-Divine:
The World Beginning had, and shall have Fine.
We must not say, Of Naught, is formed Naught
(Although to Man it may be justly brought).
The eternal Spirit can All of Naught produce;
And instantly, to Nothing All reduce.
Nor may we ask, What the E^iternall-One,
That space-lesse Space, could find to do alone.
His THREE-ONE-Selfe to know and to partake,
Is (Countless) more then Thousand Worlds to man
(...) passing Artist is no less Complete,
^n in Composure, in his rare Conceat:
(...) in the Knowledge Art's perfection lies;
(...), Works deferrd, veil not the Work-man's Prize.
^he Mind's not idle, though the hand awhile
(...) neither Pen, Pencil, nor Gouge, nor File.
^e Mind's before the Work; and works with-in,
^n the Idaea, yer the Deed begin.
^ould we not say, the World were God indeed,
^om no other it did first proceed?
^nal, only is GOD's proper term;
^ne preceding Time, exceeding Term.
^he World supports not Thee, nor Thee supplies:
^ou do Thy-Selfe sustain, Thy-Selfe suffice:
^d grossly erres who-euer shall suppose,
^ee, Infinite, within a World to close.
And, as we may not match the Heavens Extense
^to Thy Circle, infinite, immense:
^o more may We, to Thine Eternal-Age,
^ompare the Worlds short, brittle Little-Age.
Before All Time, Thou, Everlasting-One,
^ecreedst in time, to make the Sun and Moon.
^he Worlds few Days and ill (with little comber)
^hy sacred Book will teach us soon to number.
What Book, what Brass, what Marble, ought (...)
But of an hundred-thousand years ago?
Had Man been Here, from an eternal Ligne,
Here must have been (sure) some perpetual (...)
Millions of Millions of Years must have p^
From th'endlesse Clue of th'eviternal-Vast:
In all these Years, of all that did surviue,
Of all their Acts, could None to Us arrive?
We hear (and often) of the Babylonians,
Medes, Persians, Grecians, Romans, Macedonians:
But, Where Is the Nation, Whose Renowned G^
Has lived a hundred-thousand years in Story?
Seek All ( Greek, Latin, Hebrew) Authors, (...)
Of All, will MOSES be the Senior found.
Who (to His Times) in express terms has ca^^
The Age of the World, with the Descents that past,
Now, from His Days to Ours, what years amo^
We may with ease with-in few Hours account;
And adding Both, soon by the Total, find
The Age of the WORLD, and of Our crooked (...)
Five thousand years, five hundred, forty One,
This year are past; since This vast World began. 1613.

Since all the Heavens; Fire, Water, Air, and Earth,
Had, by thy WORD, their being, and their Birth.
^n was the Heavens azure Panilion spread,
^ith Spur-Royalls spangled over head:
(...) those Twin- Princes with their Train of Light,
(...) their Kingdoms, over Day, and Night.
^n was the Air, the Earth, and Sea, repleat
Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes; small and great:
(...) Plants, and Trees, and Fruits; each yielding seed,
^opagate their Kinds that should succeed.
^en (lastly) Man, thy Masterpiece of Art,
(...) did appoint to His Imperial Part:
^ling Him with Sense and Reason's Light,
^n his Soul, grauing Thine Image right:
^'st Him Possession of this Earthly Throne,
(...) gracious Promise of the Heavenly one:
^ortall Soul, thou daign'dst him to inspire,
^l (almost) to thine Own Heau'oly-Quire.
^d, as Thy Spirit, all other Spirits excels
^gel, or other that in Body dwells):
^oth His Body all else Bodies pass,
^comely Form, and for maiestik Face.
^l Creatures else, low on the ground do pore,
(...) groueling feed: but (as was touched before)
(...) has an Upright and a stately Stature,
^h head aloft, agreeing to his nature;
Which, properly, is to behold the Skies,
To lift to Thee, his heart, his hand, and Eyes:
And by his Soul's discursiue power to peize
Things past, and present, and of future days.
For, only Man can measure, number, weigh;
True, False, Good, Evil; know, cast, sound, (...)
Man only, has an in-reflecting Knowledge
Of his own Self (from Natures only College)
Knows his own fact, his form, his load, his streng^^
Knows that he lives, knows he must die at leng^^
And, that a ruled sober life, and sage,
Preserues his Health, and may prolong his Age*
Knows how to find ^ase in his own Disease*
And, if need be, his Neighbor to appease:
And for him-self and others, make, of Flowers
Fruits, Herbs, and Roots, Unguents of passing (...)
But, none so powerful (when their Term is sp^
As can his Own or others Death prevent:
For, Our short Date; Childe-age, or Wilde-age, (...)
And now but seldom to Old Age extends.
Yet, What is Old Age to ETERNITY?
To Man, expecting IMMORTALITY,
What is it to live some Three, or Four score Year^
Or, Yet Ten more (in Languor) linger here?
^all our Time-Past, underneath the Sun,
^ng remains, save Good or Evil done:
^reds of Years, once past, are less (in Sum)
(...) a few Days, or a few Hours to-come.
(...), to say Truth, of Times three-pointed Powers,
(...) the Present (instant) Point is ours.
^ue, of the Past, but vain Imagination;
^at To-come, but doubtful Expectation.
^t, to The Eternal, are All Times, alike
^ot; and present, Dead as well as Quick:
^s Today with Thee: Lord, in Thy Sight,
(...) Past and Future are even equal bright.
^hogh, in Times Terms the Heavens reuolued be;
^housand Years are but One Day with Thee:
(...) shortest Moment of one only Day
(...) Thee is as a Thousand Years (for ay).
^ut, Our set Days, to us, are long, or short;
them, good Accidents, or bad, consort:
^rietie and Peace prolong our Life:
^ich is abridg'd by Surfait and by Strife.
^xcess, or Cares, now, so cut off our lives,
^at of a thousand not a man arriues
^er to the Tithe of the admired Age
(...) those that lived in Nature's Pupillage;
Eight hundred Years, 9. hundred some, some more;
In Mind and Body, full of Natures store;
To stock the Earth with Issue rational,
And learn the Course of Heavens Star-spangled Ball:
Which, first of all, Their long observance found,
Then, by degrees, they taught their Heirs the ground;
And We, from Them (so eased of endless pain)
Derive that Art, We could not else attain.
In Their long Age they learned Heavens full Careers
(Not to be compast, in our Span of Years)
Whence, One of them might in his life know more,
Then, in our Days, successively, a Score.
Of Their so long age, who-so doubtful is,
Let him but look in sacred Genesis;
Where Moses mentions diverse famous men
So old; and shows their Years as ours were then.
The All-drowning Flood-year did 12. Months contain,
And every Month did his due Days retain:
Which made up one Year of that Patriarch,
Who lived seav'n fifties, having left the Arc;
And was Six hundred when he came aboard:
Teaching his Sons his wondrous Skill, by word.
See, see, alas! how our unhappy Life
Is now abridg'd, and charged with Mis-chiefs rife.
Had we not pleasure in thy Works, o GOD,
Soon must we sink under the heavy Load
Of Cares and Crosses (in a thousand things)
Which this, our wretched, sad, short, Way-fare brings.
O! let us therefore bend our best and most
To magnify Thee, Lord, in All thine Host:
And so, contempling all thy Goodness given,
With true Content, begin (in Earth) our Heaven.
Man, knowing Thee, knows all that can be known:
And having Thee, has all that is, his Own:
To long for Thee, is endless Joy, internal;
Disposed to Thee, to Die, is Life Eternal.
Not knowing Thee; to live, is daily Dying:
To rest, without Thee, is continual Flying:
But all extremes of Torments passing measure,
In Thee, and for Thee, are exceeding Pleasure.
Yet, no man ought to off^r w^lfull Force
To his own Self; nor his own Soul divorce:
But patiently attend Thy cheerful Call;
Then, to Thy hands gladly surrender all.
Nor may We ween our Souls (as Beasts) to Die;
And with our Bodies Vanish utterly:
Death's but a Passage from a Life of Pains,
Unto a Life where death-loss Joy remains.
W' have, after Death, another Life to see:
As, after Storms, a calm and quiet Lee:
As, after Sickness, Health: as after Durance,
Sweet Liberty; with Safety and Assurance.
Two Contraries, opposed, in their Extreme,
Have This vnfailing Property in them;
That the One's Privation is the others Ens:
So, Death, concluding, does our Life commence.
For, on each-other Contraries depend,
Chained (as it were) unto each others End:
Day after Night: Atonement after S^rife:
And after mortal Death, immortal Life,
Our Soul's immortal then (we must infer it)
Having beginning of the Immortal Spirit:
And they are brute (as Beasts) that do contend,
That with our Bodies, Souls for ever end.
If there be GOD immortal, All-scient,
All-mighty, just, benign, benevolent;
Where were his Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Power,
If Vice He damn not, nor give Virtue Dower?
Here, for the most, the Godly suffer still:
The Ungodly, here have most the Wind at Will:
Shall they not, one-day, change their Difference;
And one* day look for Diverse Recompense?
Here, Proud, Rich, Mighty; Meek, Poor, Weak, oppress
^ons kill Lambs; Fox strips the Fatherless:
(...)! is there not another Life imperible,
^eet, to the Guiltless; to the Guilty, Terrible?
Who, for Thy sake, their Lives have sacrifix'd,
(...) all the Torments Tyrants have deuiz'd;
(...)! how unhappy were They, were there not
^rownes kept with Thee, for their Eternal Lot!
Then were We Beasts, or worse then Beasts, indeed:
^or He were best that could the worst exceed.
^hen, Let us eat, drink, dally, might We say:
^f, after This, there were no Shot to pay.
But leaving now that Song of Sensuality,
^elieue we firm our blessed Immortality;
^lessed for Those, that, in Perseverance,
^o Thee alone (Lord) their whole Hopes advance.
Blessed for Those, who, in sincere Humility,
Acknowledging, as knowing their Debilitie;
Through the old Corruption of all Adams race:
Themselves distrusting, only trust Thy Grace.
Thou, Lord (alas!) know all our Imperfections,
Our vain Desires, our mutable Affections,
How prone we are to fall; how Wild, how Wood,
Pursuing Evil, and eschewing Good.
The incessant Sway of our continual Ill,
Requires the Grace of thy prevention still;
And the odious Fruits our Nature wonts to breed,
Lord, of Thy Mercies have continual need.
Of frailty therefore, when our foot shall slip,
Or sway, or stray, or turne-awry, or trip;
Yer flat We fall, vouchsafe thy helping hand,
To raise us then; and make us, after, stand.
For, without Thee, our Force is Feebleness;
Our Wisdom Folly; Will is Waywardness:
Our Knowledge, Ignorance; our Hope Despair?
Our Faith but Fancy, and our All but Air.
Without Thee, Lord, mere Idols are we all:
W' have Eyes, but see not: feet, but cannot craule:
Ears, but we hear not: Senses without Sense:
Souls without Soul, without Intelligence.
Without Thee, all our Counsails and Deseigns
Are but as Chafe before the boisterous Winds;
Our Preparations quickly come to naught;
Our Enterprises vanish with a Thought.
Without Thee, boot neither our Foot, nor Horse;
From Thee alone all things derive their Force;
Thou only give Virtue, Wisdom, Wealth,
Peace, Honor, Courage, Victory, and Health.
Thou holdst the hearts of Princes in thy hand:
Their Strength and State is all at thy Command:
No Chance of War, no Power, no Policy;
But, Changeless, Thou giv'st Loss, or Victory.
By Thee Kings reign; bound, equally to all
To weigh just Justice, both to Great and Small;
To reach the good their Sceptre's helpful Vigor;
And teach the Lewd their Swords seuerest Rigor.
Who Them reject, or Their just Laws repugne;
Thine Honor, and Thine Ordinance impugn.
They owe their Subjects, Justice and Defense;
Their Subjects Them, Honor, Obedience.
Each ought to pay Them (in degree, and manner)
Tribute, where Tribute; Honor, to whom Honor;
And, to their People, They their best Protection,
And Each his Own; without mis-fond Affection:
And think themselves (the while) Thy subjects too,
And bound the more thy sacred Lore to do:
To show the more Their Virtues Excellence,
The more their Charge is, and their Eminence.
Justice due Dooms slackly to execute,
Makes some Disloyal, others Dissolute:
Some too-outrageous, in Wrongs greediness,
Others (on the other side) in all Excess
TO has often bin seen ( and in Our Times and Climes)
Good Princes smart for wicked Peoples Crimes:
And sometimes also for their Princes Sin,
Subjects are plagued outward and within.
But, O! how highly happy is the Land
Where a just Prince does prudently command!
And where the People in a Loue-bred Awe,
Pay willing Service, and Obey the Law.
O happy! both, People and Prince (in fine)
Where both obey Thy sacred Laws divine:
Who grately using Blessings great and small;
Acknowledge Thee Owner and Lord of All.
Of Thee, in Fee, all Princes of the Earth
Hold their Estates, Goods, Honors, Being, Birth:
And, without Thee, can neither keep, nor get,
Least point of Honor, nor of Earth least bit.
Their Arcenals, without Thee are but vai^,
Their Hoords of Treasure, and their Heaps of Grain:
It Is vainr, without Thee, to a^^e in Force
Of Men, Munition, Champions, Charrets, Horse.
Without Thee Order is dis-orderd soon,
Valor soon va^quisht, Policy undone:
Num^^^ ^^ Cumber: and a Multitude
Of beaten Soldiers, be^^^n by few rude.
Thou, at thy pleasure, make the deepest Sea
Divide it Self, to give Thy Servants Way:
And suddenly, again itself to close,
To ouer-whelm Thine and Their stubborn Foes.
Thou, from the Rock make plentious Rivers spout.
For Thine to drink, in sandy Deserts drought.
And, there, from Heaven send'st them exceeding store
Of Quails, for meat, till they can eat no more.
Thou fedst them there, with Angels bread (a while)
And gav'st them then a Milk-and-Hony Soil.
There, without stroke to conquer in the Field;
And, Mine-less make their tumbling Walls to yield.
To show the use and power of humble Prayer;
And How to Thee behooues us still repair:
While heart and hands Moses to Heaven does strain,
Renowned IOSVAH Conquers in the Plain.
Thou, at thy pleasure, make the Sun to stay;
And, without Night, to make one Double Day:
To give thy Servants complete Victory;
And euer-raze their Foes foul memory.
Thou, to express thy Power (in Gedeons Reign)
Have by Three hundred, Six-S^ore Thousand slain:
And, by One man, one Goad-groom (Silly Sangar)
Destroyed Six hundred, in religious anger.
Thou can in One a Thousands strength compress
And place it strangely in his slender Tress:
Which, cut, he lost; and then re-grown, regained;
And dying, more then living, Foes he brained.
Thou turn'dst to grass, a King of Babylon:
And setst a Shepherd on a Regal Throne.
Thou slew'st a Giant, by a gentle Lad,
Who, for a Pistol, but a Pebble had.
How-many Troubles had that Prophet-Prince!
For happy Service, hateful Recompense;
Through Hill and Dale, hunted from place to place:
Yet, still preserved by Thine assisting grace;
And set, at last, upon his Masters Throne,
Subduing all civil and foreign Foen:
Then, in Thine Honor warbles many a Psalm;
And, hoary, leaves his Son, his Kingdom calm.
By Thee, His Son, renowned Solomon,
Obtained the Name of Wisedoms Paragon:
For, asking only That; Thou gave Him Wealth,
Honor and Peace withal, and Power and Health.
And, as good Princes thus Thou do advance;
So bringst thou down fell Tyrants Arrogance;
Such as, transported in their Pride extreme,
Dare wrong Thy Saints, or Thy drad Self blaspheme.
Sen^cherib must This confess, and new,
^ith nine-score-Thousand which Thine Angel slew,
^f His proud Host; besides th'vnkindly Slaughter
^f his own Self, by his own Sons, soon after,
So, That Baal-blinded, blood-soild, Sin-sold Paier,
^n whose sad Days the Zealful Thesbits Prayer,
^or Seav'n Six-Months, seald-vp thy heavenly deaws)
^hy Power, Truth, Justice, in Their Judgment shows.
^ft-times thy Hook hales moody Tyrants back;
^ft-times themselves by their own Swords to wrack:
^ometimes, by Women's weak unwarlike hands,
^hou conquer'st Captains, and confoundst their Bands.
Yea, Lord, at all times, in extremest Straights,
^hy sacred Arm, or Secret Army, waits,
^o succor Thine (from Famine, Sword, and Fire;
and all the Plots that Foes, or Fiends, conspire)
And them, so daily, to supply, support
(...) Their Wants, their Weakness) in so various sort,
that, all thy Wonders of this kind, to count,
^uen past Examples, past all Numbers mount.
But, All thy Mercies, unto All, and Each
Of thine Elect; What Words, what Thoughts can reach!
that Thou have said, and don't unto Thy Vine,
^hy Love, Thy Dove, that little Flock of Thine!
To whom Thou spakest diverse ways of old
In Visions, Dreams, Types, Figures manifold;
By Priests and Prophets; sealing often thine Oracles
Of Wrath, or Mercy; with respective Miracles.
And last of all, when Times full Term was ^un,
Sent'st us from Heaven Thine Own and only SON;
Whom co^teroal GOD Thou did ingendor,
Thine own graue^ Image, Thine own Glories sple^der.
The Eternal Word, by Whom, when All began,
Thou made All; and since, re-madest Man:
The Mediator, and the Vmpire, given.
To reconcile revolted Earth to Heaven.
Who, to impart to us His Immortality,
Took part with Us in this our frail Mortality;
And, in all things (except all Sin alone)
A perfect Man, put all our Nature on.
Born in the World, to make Us Born-anew:
In poverty, Us richly to endew:
Humbling himself, that we might raised be:
In Seruant's Form, to make us ever Free.
Came down to Earth, Us up to Heaven to mount:
Was tempted here; our Tempter to surmount:
Died to destroy the Strenght of Death and Sin:
And Rose again, our Righteousness to win.
How often did He visit the Poor and Sick?
Cure the Distracted, and Paralitique;
Restore the Blind, Deaf, Dumb; and Dead revive;
And Satan's Captives from his rage repriue!
How many Idiots did He make excel
The Wisest Masters in all Israel!
How many rude, plain, silly Fishermen,
Rare power-full Preachers; Fishers (then) of Men.
How-many Sin-sick did he inly cure;
And deep Soule-wounded binde-vp, and assure!
How-many Proud, Loose, Cruel, Covetous,
Made He Meek, Modest, Gentle, Bountious.
By Him, deer Father, come we Thee to know,
Thy Word, thy Will; to frame our own Wills so:
By Him alone Wisdom we seek and find;
In Cares and Crosses, to confirm our mind.
By Him alone Thy sacred Truth we learn
From suttlest Errors clearly to discern:
By Him all Clouds of Darkness are dispelled;
Idolatry and Heresy refell'd.
By Him, We pray to Thee; and what we crave
In lively Faith, we are assured to have:
Heavens Kingdom first, Souls Feast, and Bodies Food,
Grace, Comfort, Peace, and every needful Good.
By Him, be We Thy Children of Adoption,
Coheires of Heaven, and Vessels of Election:
Becoming Man, He is become our Brother;
So, happy We have also Thee our Father.
By Him, of Thee, Thine Holy Spirit we have;
Which in our hearts thy Law does lyuelie grave;
The Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, of Love,
Of Power, of Peace, of Wisdom from above:
The Spirit, which stays us, when in Storms we ride;
And steers us steddie, in our Calmer Tide:
Which kills the Flesh, and chills infatuate Fires;
To quicken Souls, and kindle Heav'ns-Desires:
Which brings the Strays home to Thy holy Fold,
Gives Stutters Tongues, and makes the bashful bold;
Opens the Sense of Sacred Mysteries;
Gives Form, or Life to every thing that is.
In Him, Thou built'st Thy Heaven of Heavens excelling
Thy Court prepared for Saints eternal Dwelling:
In Him, Thou made the World and All to move
In every Part as does it best behoue.
He, to the fainting heart new heart procures,
Confirms the feeble, fearful Souls assures:
Gives Faith, and Hope, Love, Grace and godly zeal.
Happy the Souls where He delights to dwell.
For, Those He fills with his abundant Treasures,
^n diverse manners, and in diverse measures;
^s diversely befits Thy Churches state,
To Plant, or Pr^ne, or Prop, or Propagate.
To some he gi^es a clear, quick Apprehension;
To some, deep Judgment; some, Divine Invention:
To some, the door of graceful Eloquence;
To some, the store of Wisedoms Excellence:
Some, to interpret with Divine Dexterity
The sacred Secrets of the eternal Verity:
^ome (School-less Scholars; Learned, study-less)
^o understand and speak all Languages.
Some (to confirm their Office, and Thine Oracles)
To work strange Wonders, great and many Miracles;
Revive the dead, recover native Evils,
Cure all Diseases; and even cast out Devils.
Such are The Effects, Works, Virtues, gifts and graces,
Which, by degrees, in diverse times and places,
Thy Holy Spirit to silly Men has given;
From Them, to Thee, to raise our hearts to Heaven.
And, as in our frail Bodies (through variety
Of Members, fitted into One Society)
One very Soul does actions different,
^ome more, Some less, Noble, or Excellent:
So, in the mystic Body of Thy Son
(Where many Members Love unites in One)
Thine Own, One Spirit, works actions admirable
Among themselves more or less honorable.
Yet, orderly, Each his own Rank observes;
And properly, Each his own Office serves:
Nor boasts any, other not to need:
For often the least, the most of all does steed.
Therefore the stronger must the weak support:
The safe and sound, cheer the afflicted sort:
The Rich and mighty, not despise Inferiors;
Neither the mean envy or hate Superiors.
Were All a Head, in This fair Frame of Man;
Where were the Foot, the Hand, the Stomach than*
Were All a Tongue, where should the Eye become*
Were All an Eye, where should the Ear have room,
O Spirit Eternal! which have All composed;
In number, measure, Order, All disposed;
Make Charity Us (mutual Members) move;
Unite our Spirits in thy perpetual Love.
Quench all Contentions, Errors, Heresies,
Which, both our Minds and Bodies tyranize:
Quench all Concupiscence, and foul Desire,
Which, both our Bodies and Souls Death conspire.
Vouchsafe our Souls, Rest; wthout Schismik strife;
Our Bodies Health, through chaste and sober Life.
What could we ask? what should we rather crave,
Then in sound Bodies as sound Souls to have?
Sound is the Body kept, by keeping Chaste,
With moderate Exercise, and mean repast:
Sound is the Soul, which rests (sober-wise)
Content in Thee; vn-vext in Vanities.
Sound is the Soul, free from all Self-Sedition
Of Pride, Hate, Envy, Avarice, Ambition,
And all the Crowd of Man's Concupiscence;
Binding His Will, to Thy Obedience.
Who is so bound (Thy Servant) is most Free:
Most Rich, who leaves all Riches else, for Thee:
Most easy rests, who most for Thee endures:
Most Self-distrusting, most Thy Strength assures.
So Thee to Serve, is even to Reign: in brief,
So to Obey, is to Command in Chief.
To walk Thy Ways, in only Liberty.
To learn Thy Learning, ENCYCLOPAEDIE:
O! happy Those that stand in such a state;
And in Thy Statutes always meditate:
Or, if they slip, or trip, or fail, or fall,
Return betimes, and for Thy Mercy call.
For, though thy Law, in Fiery Thunder-giv'n,
Threat still the Stubborn, with Revenge from Heaven,
Thy gracious Gospel offers Pardon free,
To humbled Souls that Sigh, in Faith, to Thee.
And Thou, who wilt not, Sinners die, but live;
Have promised, All, so suing, to forgive.
Thy Word is Truth: Thy Promise to fulfill,
Thou (God of Truth) have ever Power and Will.
O! bountious Thou, which do so often repair
Our broken Souls, and keep'st them from Despair*
And, blessed We, whose Faith in Love's Physicion,
Assures our Hope, of all our Sins Remission.
Who-so has Sorrow for his Sinfulnes,
Purpose to mend, Desire of Holiness,
Trust in Thy Mercy; has no need to doubt
But, by Thy Grace, his Sins are wyped out.
O Cordial Word! O Comfortable breath!
Reviving Souls, even in the Gates of Death!
From Jaws of Hell, raising our Hopes to Heaven!
Therefore, deer Lord, To Thee all Praise be given.
Who shall accuse us now, if Thou acquight?
God being with us, what can us affright?
Our Faith in Thee (o!) What can shake, or shock;
So surely fixed upon so firm a Rock?
What shall divide us, Lord, from Love of Thee?
Shall Shame? shall Sorrow? shall Adversity?
^hal Famine? Plague? War? Wealth, or Want? (In sum)
shall Life? shall Death? things Present, or to-Come?
Stay, stay, us Lord, and steel our feeble hearts,
Against the sting of temporary Smarts:
Draw, draw our Souls near to thy Self, o Lord,
With powerful Touches of Thy Spirit and Word.
Guide, guide our Steps still in thy Gracious Way,
During our Durance in This house of Clay:
That, when This Prison shall be broken down,
We may with Thee receive a Glorious Crown.
So shall We ever, with a voice Divine,
^ing Haleluiahs to The Eternal TRINE;
Record thy Mercies, which all Thoughts Surmount;
And Thus the Glory of Thy Deeds recount:
SVpernall Lord, Eternal King of Kings,
Maker, Maintainer, Mouer of All things,
How infinite! How excellently-rare!
How absolute! Thy Works, Thy Wonder are!
How-much Their Knowledge is to be desired!
How, THOU, in All, to be of All admired!
FINIS.
MICRO-COSMO-GRAPHIA; The Little-Worlds Description: OR, THE MAP OF MAN (From
Latin Saphiks of that Famous, late, Preacher in London, Mr. HEN. SMITH)
Translated; and Dedicated To the Right Honorable, HONORIA, Lady HAY.

By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

To the right-Right Honorable, HONORIA, Wife of JAMES, Lord HAY, Sole Daughter
and Heir of EDWARD Lord DENNY.
EQually bound, in humble Gratitude,
To Two deer Equals (to You equal Deer);
Unable (yet) with Both at once to clear,
Unwilling yet, with Either to be rude:
^ine would I crave to have my Bond renewd,
For a more Happy, or more Hopeful Year,
When gracious Heaven shall daign to set me freer
From old cold Cares, which keep my Muse vnmew'd.
^uld You be pleased ( Madame) to interpose
Your gentle breath, I would not doubt to speed:
Such virtue has Your Virtue still with Those.
^erefore in Hope of Your kind Help (at need)
This simple Pledge I Offer at Your Feet;
Altar of Love, Where both Their Vows do meet.
Yo^. Honorable Virtue's humble Votarie, Iosuah Syluester.

THE MAP OF MAN.
^ing not, but (in Sighs abrupt)
^ob the State of MAN, corrupt
^y the old Serpent's banefull Breath;
^se strong Contagion still extends
^uery Creature that descends
from the old Little World of Death.
^d-deer Creator, new-create
(...) Creature: Savior, expiate
Th^^, and all our Own Addition:
^acred Spirit, Our Spirits renew:
^orme, reform, and tune Me true,
^o condole Our sad Condition.
Earth, Man wanders (Pilgrim-wise)
^pes, doubts; desires, faints, freexes, fryes;
Crossed, tossed to and fro:
^turns, he winds; he finds no good:
^ay complains that Euill's Flood
(Far and wide) does ouer-flowe.
(...) Birth (in Sin) begins in Tears:
(...) Life is rife in Pains and Fears;
Will-He, nill-He, spoiling sport:
(...) Death with groans, in doubtful case,
^ds him, God knows, unto what place:
Blessed none rest, but in the Port.
The Flesh against the Spirit rebels:
The Spirit again the Flesh repells;
Ever striving, never still:
And suddenly, while these contend,
Their common Foe, the cursed Fiend,
Finds advantage Both to kill.
Earth (Step-dam-like) sharp Rodds does yield,
To scourge her Sonns: the Sea is filld
(Both above and under too)
With hideous Horrors, past report:
Th'Aier, whirling in Tempestuous sort,
Beats, and threats All to undo.
The Countrey's rude, and foe to Fame;
The Courtmore brave, and more to blame;
Painted Faces, graces feigned:
The City (There, O! bad's the best)
Seat of Deceit, and Misers nest;
Gold their God, ungodly gained.
Iarrat the Bar: Stews at the Stage;
In Way-fare, Thieues: in War-fare, Rage:
Noise abroad: Annoyes at home:
In Churches, Purchase, Profanation,
Fiends seeming Saints; Abomination:
Euery-where, no Fear of Doom.
^e Throne's not given unto the Just:
(...) Faithful is not put in Trust:
^rophets are not held for true:
^r loyal loved, nor learned graced,
^r weary eased, nor Worthy placed:
^or has any here his dew.
(...) impudent, the insolent,
^e Fool, the Friend in complement,
And the sly, we see (by proof)
^d eloquent, magnanimous,
^ht pleasant, kind, ingenious;
And the Wealthy, wise enough.
^ward is heard: words are but wind:
^h Art is long; Life short confined:
Might makes Right in every Cause.
^sicke is vile, and vilely used;
^inity, disdained, abused:
Under foot men tread the Laws.
^e Rich with rage, the Poor with plaints,
^th hate the Wise, with scorn the Saints,
(...) Evermore are curstly crossed:
^th painful toil the Priuate-man,
^e Nobler states with F^^y wan,
(...) Without end are torn and tossed.
If good, he fares no better for 't;
If bad, no worse they him support;
Fortune serves all alike:
Though she simper, though she smile,
Though she laugh outright awhile,
She is always slippery-sleeke.
Who lately served, Lords-it now:
Who lately becked, now does bow:
Valleys swell, and Mountains sink:
Who lately flourisht, now does fade:
Who late was strong, now feeble made,
Feeding Worms, in Dust does stink.
So, Lowly rests: so, Lofty rues.
Say that one might his fortune choose,
Under Heaven to have his will;
'Twould be a Doubt, among the Wise,
Whether it better were to Rise
To High state, or to Sit still.
Phant'sie conceiues, Reason receives,
Passion repugns (and Patience reaues).
What I wish, What I desire,
I see: and Sense importunes so,
I cover, I commend it too:
Then again it does retire.
^se, whither now? It Is grief to see
^at flits so fast, so suddenly.
Reason, whither roams thy reach?
^at hurts, were better still be hid,
^d still unknown: O! ill-bestid!
Poor in store, in Wealth a wretch.
^en Fortune comes, she means our Wrack;
^d when she goes, she breaks our back:
Coming, going, all is one.
(...), What she gives she takes away,
^kinde, and blind, inconstant ay;
Frank to few, and firm to none.
^t have I canvas'd, whethers Case
Worst; the Fallen, or th'euer-Base:
Yet, scarce can I it decide.
^e Fall proves plainly for the first:
^ant Pleads, that euer-Want is Worst;
(...) Partial to their proper side.
^rks the Fallen to have been High:
^h' ay-Poor could wish he had been By:
(...) Either others state would glad.
^euen in gladness sadness grow,
^ere not I somewhat glad also,
(...) How extreme should I be sad!
If Care We take, i^ Health impaires:
If not, it takes Us vn-awares:
Whether should we seek or shun?
Whether (to pass unto the next)
The good or bad be most perplexed,
Is another Question.
The Guilty suffers for his Fault:
The Guilt-less doubts no less assault
By Miss-Fortune: both desire
To live on Earth, to draw this breath:
Both fear to Die; and, after Death,
Torment of eternal Fire.
Hence, slow Days labor wears us thin:
Hence, lightly, Nightly fears begin:
Hence, rathe Rising and late Rest:
Hence, toughest storms, and roughest streams:
Hence, griping Cares, and ghastly Dreams,
Waking, sleeping, do molest.
Winter's too-colde: Summer's too-hot;
Autumn too-moist (which breeds the Rot)
All the hope is in the Spring.
The lively Spring is lovely fair:
B^t, if keen Ice then chill the Aier,
Little pleasure does it bring.
^as drown the Vales: the Winds do heave
^he Hills to Heaven; the Rocks they cleave.
(...) Bold Ambition stands amazed,
^pecting where to build a Fort
(...) strong, and rampyr'd in such sort,
That it never may be razed.
^ace is too-drown'd in Lust and Sloth:
^arre is too-drunk with Blood and Wrath:
That, too-gawdie; this, too-grim.
^ens minds are all so delicate,
(...) soft, and so effeminate,
Small things, all things, grievous seem.
^her the Head does always ache,
(...) Palate sleep, or Palsy shake,
Or our Belly roars within:
(...) else with Choler we abound,
(...) else with Phlegm, or else (unsound)
Tumour's humors scald our skin.
that dread of Death, What greedy Lust,
^at Surfait, Sloth, and Deeds unjust,
Daily plunge in Perils rife;
that Sword consumes every hour,
^d what the Plague does quick devour,
Lengthens Physic, shortens Life.
Where Is now AEneas? where is his Son?
Where Is Hercules? Where Is Solomon?
Where is David? Where is Saul?
Where Is Cyrus, Caesar, and the rest?
Ah! He and They are all deceast:
I must follow: so must all.
Hark: Thou, whom most the People hailes;
The wisest errs: the iustest fails:
Strongest limpeth now and than:
The humblest swells: the sobrest sips:
The holiest sins: the wariest slips:
God is fault-lesse: never, Man.
Too-curious or too-carelesly,
Too-lauish or too-slauishly,
By the Fool or by the Knave;
Too-craking, or too-crauenly,
Too-hatefull, or too-gratefully,
Haste or waste marrs all we have.
Ambition's end is Rule and Reign:
Crueltie's, Conquest: Guile's, is Gain,
To grow Rich by hook or crook:
Iuggling, and struggling, strife in all:
No Triumph without Fight will fall;
Warr-less, none for Peace may look.
^e think, but never can intend,
^od thoughts well to begin; or end
(...) perhaps they be begun:
(...) if we end them, never find
^w-euer rare, in any kind)
^ecompence when we have done.
(...) heart it has an in-borne Guest,
(...) Ill (it bight): it posteth pressed
^o the Tongue, ill Words to vent:
^re, then, rushes to ill Deeds:
^geance anon the Fact succeeds.
^hus comes Ill to Punishment.
^e, this Snake we choke or charm;
^hin, again We hug it Warm:
^aring, doubting, up and down;
Lust, as lighter, up does surge;
(...) the horror of the fearful Scourge,
^ll, as heavier, to the ground.
^e Flesh, be frolike, take delight,
(...) revell now: 't will once be night:
^all a little Gout, or Cholick,
^odaine Qualm, or sullen Care,
^ddle Fit of idle Fear
^ar thy Mirth? Come Flesh, be frolik.
What seeks, we shun; What shuns, we seek:
What helps, we loath; What hurts, we like:
Bird in-hand we leave, for bush.
For, What we Want we panting crave;
And loosely lavish what We have:
Brag, of that should make us blush.
With-childe with mirth, we bring-forth Scorn,
We bring-vp Fury; overborn
(Moov'd and mooving) either way;
Too-sorrie, or too-merry-mad:
The happy Mean is never had,
While we Wretches here do stay.
We reign and serve: we want and flow:
We joy and mourn: we freez and glowe:
Vows we make and break (together):
We build and batter; join and iarr:
We heap and scatter; make and mar:
And we flourish, and we wither.
We look to Heaven, and leap to Hell:
Our Hope and Fear (by turns) rebel;
Plunging down, or puffing-vp:
Please would we feign, but find demurr;
Please might we well, did Will concur:
Sloth does stay, and Lust does stop.
(...) still we stand, and whine the while;
^ught Labor boots, nor love, nor wile:
^ll is lost, when it is too-late.
^lls to th*euill and the good
(...) daily sent: and if with-stood,
We but faster foster Fate.
^ll at once giue-over quight
^h to be Wicked and Upright;
^o do either Right, or Wrong:
(...), Goods well-gotten, grow but thin,
(...) hardly up, come slowely in:
And th'ill-gotten last last not long.
^at shall I do? If I forbear
(...) Cause-less Foe, I blush, I fear
^is Despite, and my Disparage.
^o revenge me, I resolve;
^tisfies, when I revolue
^one's all-Fault-less, in all Carriage.
^en I have spared, I wish to have spoke:
^d when I speak, I would revoke;
^etter pleased to have held my peace:
^uld God I could (as Wiser-ones)
^h speak and hold my peace at once;
^o to live at Quietness.
Dear Mind, how do Thou? Frail and sick,
My Flesh implores thy Succor quick:
Can? O! can Thou cure her grief?
O! daign (I pry-thee) then with speed
To help thy Servant now at need;
Send her Reason for relief.
For, Faithful Minde's firm Resolution
Cures oftentimes the will Constitution
Of a Body sick-inclyn'd:
But, then the Body (late deplored
For weak estate) to Health restored,
Grows a Burden to the Mind.
O Sin-bred Hurt! O inbred Hell!
Nor full, nor fasting, never well?
Never sound? What shall I say?
Once all was well, and would be now
Better then ever, if that Thou
Cursed Sin were quight away.
But Now (^las!) all Mischiefe^lies
In Ambush with all Miserics,
Man's Confusion to conspire:
Desire and Fear at-once torment:
Fear is a Tyrant; Mal-Content,
And insati^te is Desire.
^ho fears? who mourns? who wants? who wanders?
(...)! only Men (Wills ill-Commanders).
^ Man alone abounds therein.
^wd Lamentations, lasting Terrors,
^rt-wounding Wants, and wilful Errors,
Had not been, had Man not been.
^eere Pestilence, there Hungers Iawe,
^eer Drink, there Duel, there the Law,
Snatches one or other hence,
^er Cross, there Care: or (better blessed)
^ho hap These Haps to escape the best,
Age deuoures without Dispense.
^rpending This in mind perplexed,
^e Miserable (Envie-vext)
Cries, O Beasts, O Fowls, O Fish!
^u happy, harm-less, storm-less things,
^ecise in Natures Lessonings,
Live You long: You Life may wish.
(...), I think, better not be born;
(...), born, hence quickly to return
To our Mothers dusty Lap;
^en living, daily here to die,
Cates, and Fears, and Misery,
By Miss-heed, or by Miss-hap.
While Hunger gripes me gut and gall,
While burning Thirst for Drink does call,
While for Cold I quake: alas!
In languor long I linger-on.
O! happy Those, whose Woes, whose Moan,
Ridding quick does quickly pass.
The Stout, the Coward, and the Meek,
All skirmish under Fortune like,
Stryking all with Mischiefs aye;
The Stout repugnes, the Patient prays,
The Hare-like Coward runs his ways;
Fortune differs not, but They.
^oo-peeuish This, too-pleasant That,
(Too-sierce, or too-effeminate)
Golden Mean can hardly stand
Betwixt these Two Extremes, upright,
It Is worn so weak, and waigh'd so light:
Error plays on either hand.
Wedlock, with Wife and Children cloggs:
The Single-Life, Lusts heavier Loggs,
(Rare's the Gift of Continence).
The Young Man stalks, the Old Man stoops,
That over-dares, This ever droops:
The Infant craules through Impotence.
^isters tax Servants, proud, slutt, slow;
^uants, Churl Master, Mistress Shrowe:
Either Others Fault can find.
^e Daughter thinks her Mother froward;
^other her Daughter deems vn-toward:
Kit (they say) will after Kind.
^nces do envy Subjects Wealth:
^biects do envy Princes Health:
Each does envy Others Good:
(...) all do envy Learnings Honor
(...) any be conferrd upon her)
O! o wicked, wretched Mood!
^e Soldier likes the Rusticks Calm;
^e Clown affects the Soldiers Palm;
Thus does Envy inly fret-her:
^r Pastures parch, our Herds be poor*
^r Neighbor thriues in every store:
Others Crop is ever better.
^d Lovers languish at their Eyes:
^e Wrathful fosters and defies
^renzies, Furies, (wayward Elues):
^at need we call for Whip or Scourge?
^eir punishment what need we urge?
their Selfs Errors scourge themselves.
Fear hunts the Coward at the heel;
The Cruel, still Revenging steel;
Ruin Him that Ruin seeks;
Heavy Revenge on heinous Crimes:
Yea, in the Sin, the Plague sometimes;
Heavens just hand so justly strikes.
Sorrow and Shame, for what is past;
Care, of the present; Fear (forecast)
Of the danger yet to-come;
Make all false Pleasures shorter seem,
And sharper too in pain extreme,
Then even Pain it self to some.
If I be merry, I am mad
(Say the Severe): if Sober-sad,
Merry Greeks me Meacock call.
Is It possible for any-Man,
At-once to please (do what he can)
God, Himself, the World, and all?
Who Greatness haultily affects,
Who Great Things happily effects;
That is hated, This envied:
But, hoping Greatness, who so haps
To fail (or fall in After-Claps)
Him the Vulgar dare deride.
^RTVE is vanquished by her Foes,
those Triumph even their Forehead shows,
(...) It Is a shame to be ashamed.
^t shall I tell (and tell thee true)
^y Fate (the Fruit that shall ensew
Shame-less shame-full life untamed)?
^is Fate then falls to be Thine own,
^th shall thou reap as thou have sown:
Wages like thy Work expect.
^ho here their Days in Evil spend,
^ll suffer Evils, without End;
Such is Mines Doom direct.
^en, swagger, stagger, spend and spoil;
^ale and conceal, and keep a coil;
Quickly shall thou all forgo:
^l, conquer, triumph; down again
^lt thou be cast: bouz, beat, disdaign;
The End's at hand, and comes not slow.
^e Wise bewail Men's Follies rife,
^d feign would cure their Vicious life
^ith Receipts of heavenly Skill:
(...) Sin-sick Fools (whatever prick,
^umbd by Custom) lethargike,
Care not, fear not, feel no ill.
Who knows much, much ill he knows:
Who little reaks, much good forgoes.
Hence, perplexed Doubts he casts;
What is great Knowledge? What so much
Of Learning? or of Book-Skill such?
But great Blazes, and light Blasts?
While Plato, sportiue, does despise,
The sullen Cyniks Slouen-guise;
He, as fast (on the other side)
Does Plato's Pomp as much condemn
And trample-on: Were both of them
(Who can tell me?) Wise, or Wide?
Democritus here laughes a-good:
Heraclitus there weeps a Flood.
Glad and sad would mend us feign:
But now, so stubborn-stiffe is Man,
That Tears, nor Tunes, nor Ought else can
Faults restore, nor Fates restrain.
Sloth never wants Want, for Mate;
Thrift, Sweat and Labor macerate;
Either in their issue languish:
So, Health is never without Sin,
Nor Sickness without Pain with-in:
Outward Ache, or inward Anguish.
Service is to the Lofty mind
(...) Curb, a Spur to the abject Hind;
(...) Seld or never stoopes the Will:
^he Vulgar voice, the Common Cry
(...), Welcome, Welcome LIBERTY:
(...) Good for good, but ill for ill.
(...) Grief it is alone to be;
^ut more, to have ill company:
(...) More or less (alas!) by This,
^ppeareth plain, when all is done,
As Proof has found) that under Sun,
(...) Here Is no full, no perfect Bliss.
^ho never yet himself could please,
that can content? Whatvse? What Ease?
(...) What avails Wealth at will?
^eedy and naked here I live:
^o die, it does me nothing gricue;
(...) But to perish, and live still.
(...) look to Heaven, and there (alas!)
^ith Fear I see my Judges Face,
(...) Auditing my Sums of Sin:
(...) think of Hell, and then I burn
^ike AEtna: then to Earth return.
(...) Cares and Fears there never lin.
This ^eele I, thus I justly fare:
O Man! learn quickly, and have care
Sacred Duties to observe.
This Life is rife in Troubles sore:
But yet (alas!) a Million more
Our Rebellion does deserve.
Much like, or worse then former Age,
The sutures Face we may presage:
Better seldom comes, they say.
Now Right, now Wrong; now Good, now Ill;
Now Fiend, now Friend; now God, now Will,
Seem to have alternate Sway.
Nothing is gratis given nor got:
Each labors more or less (God wot)
With the hand or with the head:
None without Art or Virtue thrive;
Nor Art, nor Virtue all atchiue:
Only, These, not always sped.
What should I seek or sue for much,
To live at Rest? Content is Rich.
Fortune often is too-free,
And often kills where she is too-kinde:
But, had we once an equal Mind,
We should all Contented be.
^r, every one is too-secure
^ sunny Days; and in obscure,
Too-deiected in Desire:
^nce, ouer-faint, or ouer-full;
^o-pyned, or too-plentifull,
^ry we all with inward Fire.
^w, Dust her dustie Brood expects:
^e, Earth to Earth (of either Sex).
^leasure trembles at her Call;
^es-out of Haste, complains of Heaven:
(...) Pain and Sorrow (narrow-driven)
^re well pleased, and easd with-all.
^o gives me grace to gush-out Tears,
(...) lends me space to pour forth Prayers;
^et, both seeming to neglect?
(...) God the dreadful, Sinners Scourge;
(...) gracious God, which often does purge
^s with Pills, in his Elect.
^old me, Thou that did bestow
(...) Son on Me: Forgive me, Thou
that did suffer for my Sin:
^t and stay me evermore
^u, Thou that here so often before,
(...) my breast a Guest have bin.
Regard us, Lord, unworthy though;
Thy Glory seek, thy Mercy show;
Enemies approach apace:
We fail, we fall, we cannot stand,
Our Foes will have the upper hand,
But Thou help us with thy Grace.
Witness my Self that here lie slain,
But, by Thy Touch revived again;
Glad to hue, to live to Thee:
And yet desire to be dissolved
(When my due Date shall be revolved)
As more happy far for Me.
Show me the Holy Land, which flows
With Milk and Honey ( Saints Repose).
Train me in the new Commerce,
In the New Art of Better Life:
Then farewell Muses, farewell Strife:
In Thy Courts I will converse.
I cannot strike Apollo's string,
Study for Heaven and timely ring
Sacred Aaron's golden Bell;
Nor sing at-once the Thespian Songs,
And s^rue my Country, as belongs:
Theresore, MUSES, beer Farewell.
FINIS.
CERTAIN EPIGRAMMS of the same Mr. H. S. Translated; and Dedicated To my
deer-affected, due-respected, Dr. HALL, and Dr. HILL.
Owe You Each a larger Sum:
Why bring I then to Both a Crumm?
^shew you Both, My Shifts, to live;
^en feign to Borrow what I give:
^t better so, then (blushless) steal
^hers Conceits; or Debts conceal.
Til more my Might, divide this Myte.
Lark (they say) is worth a Kite:
^me Greater, greater things present,
^lesser Worth, or worser meant.
^OD measures not our Work, but Will:
^o You the like: and love me still.
I. S.

EPIGRAMMS.
1. Of a King.
EXtirp 1, extol 2; know 3, keep 4; love 5, learn 6 (from (...))
Bad 1, Good 2; Thy Self 3, The Laws 4-path; Peace 5, to Dy^ ^
Live just (Justinian) still: shield 1, shun 2, suppress 3;
Good-mens Good 1 Cause, Bribes 2, Brawling 3-Pee^ (...)
3. Of a Physician.
He that can Cure the Sick, and Keep the Sound,
Shall be My Leach (Whether He Kill, or Wound).
4. Of a Divine.
Know GOD; known, teach Him; as thou teach (...)
So shall thy Flock be as well taught, as fed.
5. Of a Judge.
Both blind and lame Liudge Thee best to make;
Least that thine Eyes miss-giue, thy Hands miss-(...)
6. Of a Husbandman.
Good Morrow bids the Cock, th'Owle bids Goodnight
To Countrie-Cares: I bid, GOD speed them right.
7. Of a Captain.
In War and Peace, CHRIST is the sole Command
To lead to Godward: follow still His Standard.
Of all the Seven.
So Rule 1, Plead 2, Practice 3, Preach 4, Doom 5, Delue 6, (...) ^
Climes 1, Causes 2, Cures 3, CHRIST 4, Crimes 5, Turns 6, (...) ^
FINIS.
^ACHRYMAE LACHRYMARVM: or The Spirit of Tears, Distilled For the vn-timely
Death of The incomparable PRINCE, HENRY (Late) PRINCE of WALES.

By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

A CHRYMAE LACHRYMARVM.
A Funeral Elegy.
The Argument, in an EPITAPH.
(...) Erelyes ( Dry Eyes, read not This EPITAPH.)
(...) Here lies Great-Britans Stay, Great Jacob's Staff:
(...) stately Top-bough of Imperial Stem,
^d's richest Jewel, Nature's rarest Gemme,
^ror of Princes, Miracle of Youth,
Virtues Pattern, Patron of all Truth;
^ge of Arms, ample Reward of Arts,
^rth's Comforter, mild Conqueror of Hearts:
Church's Tower, the Terror of the Pope,
^ik HENRY, Atlas of our Hope.
HOw-euer, short of Others Art and Wit,
I know my powers for such a Part unfit;
^d shall but light my Candle in the Sun,
(...) do a work shall be so better Down:
^ld Tears and Fears give my Distractions leave,
(...) sobbing words a sable Web to weaue;
^uld Sorrow's Fulness give my voice a vent;
^w would, how should, my saddest Verse lament,
(...) deepest Sighs (in stead of sweetest Songs)
(...) Loss (alas!) which unto All belongs!
To All, alas! though chiefly to the Chief;
His royal Parents, Principalls in grief:
To All the Peers, to all Confederate,
To All the CHVRCH, to all the CHRISTIAN State:
To all the Godly now, and future, far:
To all the WORLD; except S. P. Q. R.
To All together, and to Each apart,
That lives, and loves Religion, Arms, or Art:
To all abroad; but, to Us most of all
That nearest stood to my High Cedars fall:
But, more then most, to Me, that had no Prop
But HENRY'S Hand; and, but in Him, no Hope:
In Whom, with Nature, Grace and Fortune met,
To consummate a PRINCE, as Good as Great:
In Who^, the Heaven's were pleased to show the Earth,
A richer Jewel then the World was worth,
Or worthy of: therefore, no more to make
So rare a Piece, His precious Moulde they brake.
O soudain Change! O sad Vicissitude!
O! how the Heavens our Earthly Hopes delude!
O! what is firm beneath the Firmament!
O! what is constant here that gives Content!
What Trust in Princes! O! what Help in Man,
Whose dying Life is but in length a spann!
Melting, as Snow before the Midday Sunn;
Past, as a Post, that speedy by does runn;
Swift, as the Current of the quickest Stream;
Vain, as a Thought; forgotten, as a Dream.
O Dearest HENRY, Heaven and Earth's Delight!
O cleerest Beam of Virtues, Rising bright!
O purest Spark of Pious Princely Zeal!
O surest Ark of Justice sacred weal!
O grauest Presage of a Prudent Kind!
O brauest Message of a Valiant Mind!
O All-admired, Benign and Hountious!
O All-desir'd (right) PANARETVS!
PANARETVS ( All-vertuous) was thy Name;
Thy Nature such: such ever be thy Fame.
O dearest! cleerest! purest! surest Prop!
O grauest! bravest! highest! nighest Hope!
O! how untimely is this Sun gonn down!
This Spark put-out! This Ark (as) ouerthrown!
This Presage crossed! This Message lost and left!
This Prop displac't! This Hope of All, bereft!
O! How, unkind! How, graceless! How, ingrate!
Have We cut off Thy likely longer Date!
For, were This Stroke from Heavens immediate hand;
Or (by Heavens leave) from Hell's suborned Band
Of ROMVLIDES (What dare not They presume?
If this, That Sea a Sulphury Sea consume.)
How-e'r it were, We were the Moving Cause
That sweet Prince HENRY breath no longer draws.
We all (alas!) have had our hands herein:
And Each of us has, by some cord of Sin,
Haled down from Heaven, from Justice awful Seat,
This Heavy Judgment (which yet more does threat)
We Clergy first, who too-too-oft have stood
More for the Church-goods, the^ the Churches good*
We Nobles next, whose Title, ever strong,
Can hardly offer Right, or suffer Wrong:
We Magistrates, who, mostly, weak of sight,
Are rather feign to feel then see the Right:
We Officers, whose Price of every Place
Keeps Virtue out, and brings Vice in grace:
We Gentry then, who rack, and sack, and sell,
To swim like Sea-Crabs, in a foure-wheeld Shell:
We Courtiers, next, who French-Italianate,
Change (with the Moon) our Fashion, Faith, and Fate.
We Lawyers then, who Dedalizing LAW,
And deadding Conscience, like the Horse-leach draw:
We Citizens, who seeming Pure and Plain,
Beguile our Brother, make our God our GAIN:
We Countrymen, who slander Heaven and Earth
As Authors of Our Artificial Dearth:
We Pourueyors, last, who taking tenn for two,
Rob both at once, our Prince and People too:
All, briefly all; all Ages, Sexes, Sorts,
In Countries, Cities, Benches, Churches, Courts,
(All Epicures, Witt-Wantons, At^^ists,
Mach'-Aretines, Momes, Tap-To-Bacchonists,
Batts, Harp^^s, Sirens, Centaures, Bib-all-nights,
Sice-sink-ap-Asses, Hags, Hermaphrodites)
And We poor Nothings (fixed in no Sphere,
Right Wandering Tapers, Erring euery-where)
Scorn of the Vulgar, Scandal of the Gown,
Have pulled this weight of Wrath, This Vengeance down.
All, All are guilty, in a high Degree,
Of This High Treason and Conspiracy;
More brute then Brutus* stabbing more then CAESAR,
With Two-hand-SINNES, of Profit and of Pleasure:
And (the odious Engine, which does all include)
Our Many-pointed proud INGRATITVDE.
For, for the Peoples Sins, for Subjects crimes,
God takes-away good Princes oftentimes.
So, good JOSIAH (HENRY'S parallel)
Was soon bereft from Sinful Israel:
So, our good EDWARD (HENRY'S Pre-cedent)
For ENGLAND'S Sins was hence untimely hent.
So, here, good HENRY is new taken hence,
For now Great BRITAN'S, great Sins Confluence.
We see the Effect: we have the Cause confessed:
O! Turn we then, with speed, to Save the rest:
O! Turn us, Lord; turn to us, turn away
Thy Frowns, our Fears, with humblest Tears we pray.
O save our SOVERAIN; save his Royal seed;
That still his Own may on his Throne succeed.
Let Each of us make privy Search within;
And having found, bring forth the Traitor SIN:
To Execution, with all Execration
Henceforth renouncing such In-Sin-newation.
Let Each of us (as Each has throw'n a Dart,
A Dart of Sin, at HENRY'S princely heart)
Send-vp in Sighs our Souls deuoutest breath,
To Shield our JAMES, ANNE, CHARLES, ELIZABETH,
And HIM whose Love shall render HER her Brother,
And make Her soon a happy Princes Mother.
Let Each of us cease to lament (in vain)
Prince HENRY'S Loss: Death is to HIM a Gain.
For Sauoy'^ Dukelings, or the Florentine,
He Wedds his Savior, of a Regal Ligne;
Glory, for Gold; for Hope, Possession (there)
Of Crowns so Rich as never entered Ear,
Eye never saw, nor ever Heart conceav'd;
So strong Assured, as cannot be be^eav'd.
Wail not his death: His Virtues cannot Dye;
Immortal Issue of ETERNITY.
His Soul in Bliss beholds her Makers Eyes:
His goodly Body shall more glorious Rise.
Weep not for HIM: weep for our selves, alas!
(Not for our Private, or Peculiar case:
As, for our Sonn's, Brother's, or Master's lack,
Or Prince's loss (our Expectations wrack)
Our Places, Graces, Profits, Pensions lost,
Our present Fortunes cast, our future crossed)
Weep for our Sins, our Wicked-Prouocations,
Our heinous, horrid, high ABOMINATIONS;
Both seen and secret; both in High and Low:
Weep, weep for These; and stripped, from Top to Toe,
Of guiddie-Gaudes, Top-gallant Tires and Towers,
Of Face-pride, Case-pride, Shin-pride, Shoo-pride, ours
( Like NINIVITES so near Their threatened Fall)
In blackest Sack and Cinders shrouded All:
Not like a Bul-rush, for a day or two,
To stoop, and droop, and seem as others do,
(AS ACHAB yerst, and PHARAO, in Distress)
And then return unto our old Excess
(As Dogs unto their Mewte, Hoggs to their Mire)
But, day by day, until our last exspire,
With bended Knees, but more with broken hearts,
And the inward rest of right Repentant Parts,
Prostrate our Souls in Fasting and in Prayer,
Before the Footstool of the Empyreal CHAIER:
That So, What-euer bloody DELVGE float
From the old Red Dragon's wide-wide-yawning Thr^^^,
We, Humbled MOVRNERS may be Heavenly (...),
In MERCIE'S Vessel to be All imb ARKT.
FINIS.
AN EPITAPH.
WHen Great French HENRY Fates bereft,
His Name and Fame to OURS He left;
As ablest ATLAS Then, to proppe
The Weight of WORTH, the World of HOPE:
But, ENGLAND's Sins (a heavier Load)
So over-layd His Shoulders broad,
That, crushed down, Here lies HE dead.
So, HOPE is fallen, and WORTH is fled.
ANOTHER.
WHom All admired, who^ All (almost) adored,
For all the Parts of all PANDORA's Treasure;
The Hope of all, to have all Good restored;
HIM, All our Ills have slain, by Heavens Displeasure.
By HIS (late) HIGHNE'S First Worst and Poet Pension^ Iosuah Syluester.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

AN ELEGIAC-EPISTLE Consolatorie, Against Immoderate Sorrow for the immature
Decease of St. WILLIAM SIDNEY Knight, Son and Heir apparent To The Right
Honorable ROBERT, LORD SIDNEY, L. Vi-Count Lisle; L. Chamberlain to the Queen,
and L. Governor of His Majesty's Cautionarie Town of VLVSHING.

by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.



To the right Honorable, the Lord Vi-count LISLE, and his most virtuous Lady:
To Sir Robert SIDNEY, Knight, their Hopeful Son: To the most Worthy Lady
WROTH, with the rest of their right virtuous Daughters: and To all the Noble
SIDNEYS and SEMI-SIDNEYS.
ALthough I know None, but a Sidney's Muse,
Worthy to sing a Sidney's Worthyness:
None but Your Own LA: WROTH.
AL-WORTH, Sidneides,
In whom, Her Uncle's noble V^^ne renewes:
And though I know (sad Nobles) to infuse
My fore-spent Drops into the bound-lesse Seas
Of Your deep Griefs, for your deer Ioy's Decease; ^^Anagram.

To Your full Ocean naught at-all accrues:
Yet, as (the Floods Queen) Amphitrite daignes
To take the Tribute of small Brooks and Bournes;
Which to Her Bounty (that Their Streams maintains)
The humble Homage of Their Thanks returns;
Accept These Sighs and these few Tears of Ours.
Which have their Course but from the Source of Yours.
Yr Noble Name's and Virtue's most Observant, IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

An ELEGIAC EPISTLE.
WHat Object, less the^ our Great HENRY's Hearse,
Could so have seized the voice of every Verse?
What Subject else could have engrossed so
The public Store and private Stock of Woe?
What Sea, but the Ocean of His Virtues Fame,
Could drink all Tears, or drown a SIDNEY's Na^^
(As buried quick) so quickly (though so young)
So vn-bewayled, so vn-sigh't, vn-sung?
O, glorious HENRY! though alone to Thee,
I owe my all, and more then all of Me;
And though (alas!) the best and most of mine
Reach not the least, the lowest Dues of Thine:
Yet, woldst thou, could Thou hear (as heer-to-fore)
And grant a Boon; I only would implore
Thy leave a little, for a SIDNEY's Death
To sigh a little of my Mournful breath:
The rather, that, as Yerst He served You here,
And, in His End attended Yours so near;
Through-out all A^es subsequent to Ours,
His Name and Fame may ever wait on YOVRS:
Since ^ll the MUSES owe That Name alone,
A Dia pason of each sad-sweet Groan:
But, more peculiar, and precisely, Mine;
Lineally bound unto That Noble Ligne.
ARCADIANS know no Other, for APOLLO,
No other MARS (in Arms or Arts to follow
As DEMIGODS, as well of War as Wit)
Then SIDNEYS yerst, or SEMI-SIDNEYS, yet.
Yet, fit I said: for, of This deer Descent,
Nature (of late) too-lauishly has spent.
(L^ke My Ill-Huswifes which at once do burn
Two or three lights, where One would serve the turn)
Not her Own only, but more orient Gemms,
More rich, more rare; more fitting Diadems.
As, first, the old Father, famous-fortunate,
The prime firm Founder of our IRISH State:
Next, His Son PHILIP (More the^ PHILIP's Son)
Whose World of Worth, a World of Honor won:
Then, His sole Heir (sole VENVS-IVNO-PALLAS)
All Beauties Pattern, and All Virtues Palace;
Whose memory, on MUSES Fairest Hill
^s Canonized, by a Phoenix Quill).
These Three, the which Three Ages might have graced,
^ll These and more in My short Age have past:
^esides This new SWEET-WILLIAM now deceast
The Epitome and Sum of All the rest)
The Flower of Youth, of Honor, Beauty, Blood,
The Apparent Heir of All the SIDNEYS Good;
For Mind, for Mould, for Spirit, Strength, and Stature,
A Miracle, a Masterpiece of Nature.
Alas! How grossly do our Painters err
In drawing Death's grim Visage (euery-where)
With hollow holes, as wholely dark and blind!
Ah! See we not, how still He sees to find
The fairest Mark, the rarest and the best
Of Virtues Budds, and lets alone the rest?
Ravens, Brambles, Bandogs, Sirens, here he leaves;
Swannes, Roses, Lions, Dians, hence he reaves:
Nay; the only PHOENIX has he newly slain
(But, maugre Death, That Bird reuiues again).
No marvel then, if SIDNEYS fall so fast.
So early ripe are seldom apt to last:
So Eminent are imminent to die;
Malicious Death does Such so easily spy.
But, why of Death and Nature, rave I Thus;
Another Style (my LISLE) befitteth us.
Another Hand, another Eye, directs
Both Death and Nature in These high Effects;
The Eye of PROVIDENCE, the Hand of POWER,
Disposing All in Order and in Hour;
So working in, so waking over All,
That but by Those does Nothing here befall.
Then, not (as Currs) the stone or staff to bite,
Vn-heeding why, or who does hurl or smight;
Unto That Eye let us erect our own;
And humble us under That Hand alone,
Which (as the Potter his own Work controules)
Dissolueth Bodies, and absolueth Souls:
Vn-partiall ever, Vn-preposterous;
How-euer Other it may seem to us.
For, ever since first WOMAN teemed Twin,
And at a Birth brought forth both Death and Sin
( Sin, as her Heir; Death, as an Heritage
^ustly derived down from Age to Age)
It is Decreed (by a more Chang-lesse Law
Then ever yet the Medes and Persians saw)
That All men once (as well as Low, the High.
Of Either Sex, of Every Sort) must die.
Yea, the INNOCENT, for Our imputed ill
Who came, not Laws to break, but to ful-fill)
The Son of GOD (The Son of MAN become)
^h' Immortal yielded to This mortal Doom.
^o that ( for Sin) no Son of MAN has breath
^ut once must dye. Wages of SIN is Death.
As for the reason, Why it comes to pass
Sometimes, that Age seems to have turned his Glass*
While oftentimes Youth's, yer it seem begun,
Is cracked, or broken, or already run:
Why Lillies, Roses, Gillie-flowers, be reft;
When Nettles, Thistles, Hemlocks here be left:
Why Cedres, Oaks, Vines, Olives, rather fall,
Then Brush and Briars (good for naught at all)
Let Flesh and Blood, let Dust, be rather mute,
Then with His MAKER sawcily dispute.
Yet here (me thinks) but little Question needs.
Do not We rather gather Herbs then Weeds?
Do not We take the timber for our turn,
And leave the Dottr^lls, in their time to burn?
And, in the Shambles, who is it but would
Be rather sped of young Flesh then of old?
And yet in Season, when we see it good,
We weed our Gardens, fell our Underwood;
And kill old Cattle, least they goar the young,
Or fall away, or mix some Mange among.
Much like the Lord: who knows best all Season,
And best observes. But, will we urge his Reason?
His Reason is His WILL: His Will is just,
Or rather Justice; which His Power must
In Wisdom execute (right understood)
To His Own Glory, and His Childrens Good;
Where in His Goodness through His Mercy shines,
To clear and cheer devout and humble minds.
For, to the Godly (in despite of Hell)
He^v'n makes all things to re-issue well.
Here, here is a Harbor; here is a quiet Shore
From Sorrowe's Surges, and all Storms that rore.
This is Cap Comfort (a high Promontorie,
Of richer Store then here is room to story).
Here let us bide, and ride-out all Events,
With Anchor Hope, and Cable Patience;
Until our Bark some happy Gale shall drive
Home to the Haven where we would All arrive.
Come, Noble Vi-Count, put into This Bay,
Where (with a Light) our A'M'RAL leads the way,
Though deepest laden, and the most distressed,
The greatest Ship of Burden, and the best.
HIM boldly follow: and though here, as CHIEF
In Grief, as Greatness, His must drown your Grief,
Count it an Honor, to be called to try
Your Virtue's Valor, in your Soveraine's eye.
We All partake His Cross; His Loss is Ours:
But His Affections (to the life) are Yours.
The nearer then You match His mournful fate,
His royal Patience nearer imitate.
And you, sad Lady, Mother of annoy
For having lost the prime Son of your Joy;
Ah! see, the Sovereign of your Sex has so.
Some think it ease, to have some peer in Woe:
But, such a PEER, and such a Pattern too,
Should much (me thinks) confirm and comfort You
To beare-vp hard into this happy Road,
And lighten somewhat of Your heavy Load:
The rather, since (besides the Happiness,
Which now, above, your Darling does possess;
The Crown, the Kingdom, and the Company,
Of All the holy, heavenly HIERARCHY:
Besides your Mess of goodly GRACES left
(Whose WORTH, from Al, the Prize of Worth has rest
Four lovely Nymphs, four Rivers, as it were,
Your veins of Virtue through the Land to bear)
You have another Model of The same,
To propagate renowned SIDNEY'S Name;
Another, like in every part to prove
As worthy of our Honor, and your Love;
In whom (if now, You, IOB-like, bear this Cross)
Heaven may restore you manifold, your Loss.
FINIS.
THE SECOND SESSION of the PARLIAMENT of Virtues Real ( Continued by
Prorogation) For better Propagation of all true Piety, and Viter Extirpation of

ATHEISM, and HYPOCRISY; AVARICE, and CRVELTIE; PRIDE, and LVXVRIE.
(From the Original) Transcribed, and Inscribed To the High-Hopefull CHARLES,
Prince of Great Britain, By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

A DIVINE and TRVE TRAGI-COMEDY; JOB TRIVMPHANT in his Trial: OR THE HISTORY
OF His Heroical Patience, In A measured METAPHRASE.

To ARTHVRS CASTLE ( called by ART'S CHASTE LVRE) My Hope Here Hastes, For My
HART'S LAST CVR^.
Sir, YOU have seen In my PANARETVS, A SVVEET IDEA Of -- Our hopes in You: A
REAL ACT of That Ideall VIEVV^, In My St. LEVVI^ Roy-All Vertuou^* Here (more
HEROIK and more HOLY-True) I bring Your Highness Yet A Higher Piece ( Past all
the Patterns of old Rome and Greece) Faith's PATIENT Champion, in His Triumph
due Far be His Crosses From my Prince, I pray: Near be His Courses (As the
most Complete In sacred GRACES that beseem The GREAT) Toward God and Man; in
Clear or Clowdy Day; So much More needful In This Sin-full Age, By How Much
Satan (near his end) does rage: With Whom and His, the better Aye to wrestle,
Great Michael guard and strengthen ARTHVRS CASTLE; prays Prostrate Iosuah
Sylvester.



To the Right Reverend and Honorable FAther, GEORGE ABBOT, Lord Archbishop OF
CANTERBVRY.
IN Grate-full HONOR Of Your MANY Gifts of GRACE and NATVRE ( Apted to Your
Place) This DORIKE Pillar My DEVOTION liftes; To show Here -- After, what We
owe your Grace: Both, for Your Prudence, And Your Pious Zeal; Learning, And
Labor In Your Double Charge; Swaying The CHVRCH, Staying the co^mon-Weal; Most
STVDIOVS Ever EITHER to Enlarge: And Last (not least) of all, For CONSTANT
standing On Right's vveake Side, Against the tide of wrong: When PHILISTINES
And Daliladies banding, With Arms or Charms Would bind or blind the Strong:
In Honor of these Honors, this I bring To Reverend ABBOT, and His Second; KING.
VESTER -- SYL -- VESTER Deditissim^^.



TO The Right Honorable, The Lord ELESMORE, L. High Chancelour of England.
*THOMAS EGERTONVS: ( Anagramma) *NESTOR THEOMAGVS.
Grave, * GOD-WISE NESTOR; Never did a Name
(Save A JUST MASTER) better speak a man
(As Court and Council, with Me, witness can)
Than does Your Own, in This Your Anagram.
Should I A Volume of Your Virtues frame,
Broad as my Breast, and Thicker then my Span;
Could I say More, more True, more Duly, than
The Character concluded in This same?
For, * PIOVS-Prudence cannot but be Just:
And Justice cannot but be Temperate:
And Temperance from Courage issue must.
So that Your Name does Your whole Life relate,
So NESTOR-Like, for grace-full, * Godly-Sage,
That Nothing wants, but (what we wish) His Age.
Ex Animo exoptat Iosuah Sylvester.

To the Right Honorable, Sir EDWARD COKE, Knight; Lord Chief Justice of
England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
* EDVARDVS COCVS: ( Anagramma) * SVCCEDO, ARDVVS.
HArdy and Happy may You long Succeed,
In all the Courses of your Christian Zeal,
To scourge Abuse; and purge the Publike-Weale,
Of vicious Humors, with auspicious Speed.
Hardy and Happy Never more did need,
To meet with Malice, and with Might to deal;
And sift the Drift the Serpent would conceal.
How happy, Heaven You for These times decreed!
Hardy and Happy may you still proceed,
Until You find, confound, and suffocate,
The Viperous Vermin that destroy the State.
Hardy, and Happy, be your Mind, and Meed
With GOD and Men: applauded and approou'd,
Of Prince and People; of All Good, beloved:
Ex Animo Expot^^ Iosuah Sylvester.

To The Right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal; The Knights and
Burgesses of the Lower House; and To all generous and ingenuous Readers.
YOur pressed Assistence and Assistance, past,
Vouchsafed, Here, when you were summond last,
Bind and imbold me once more to present
My humble Briefs, in form of PARLIAMENT;
Hoping no less Consent of Your Good-wills
^n passing These, then of Our former Bills;
^o-much more Need-full in this Weed-full Time,
By How-much Vice does over Virtue clime.
An Act against Atheism and Irreligion. Page. 4. 7 An Act of pious and humble
PATIENCE. 7 An Act conformable to the former. 9 An Act confirming Both. 9. 67
An Act of humane Frailty, to teach the Best, Humility. 10. 18. 29 An Act of the
Weaker Vessel. 9 An Act of Imitation, with better Application. 13 An Act (of
many Branches) concerning the Justice of GOD in his Judgments 14 89 An Act of
Exhortation to Repentance and Humiliation. 16. 23. 31. 60. 90 An Act against
Presumption of ourselves. 30. 40. 91 An Act touching GOD's Om^ipotence,
Omniscience, Al-Regencie, Al-Sufficiencie. 33. 89. 93 An Act against rash and
erroneous Censures. 35 An Act against Partiality in Judgment, false Witness,
Suborned Evidence. ibid. An Act, intimating the Comfort and Confidence of a
good Conscience. 36. 67 An Act, auerring the Shortness of Life, and uncertain
Certainty of Death. 37 An Act against Saduces and Epicures. 3^ An Act against
Puritisme. 41. 65 An Act intimating the effects of an evil Conscience. 41 An
Act against the Security and Insolence of fat and E^s^full Epicures and
Oppressors. 4^ An Act against Hypocrites. 43. 67. 93 An Act against Bribrie,
Brokerie, Usury. 4^ An Act against uncivil Indiscretio^ in visiting of Frind^
Especially against Aggrauation of Griefs. 4^ An Act for our Imitation. 45. 72.
76. 77. 82. 10 An Act against Plattery. 46. ^^ An Act of Terror to the Wicked
in their sudden and ^^^^full Fall. 47. 64. ( Anno. 16 15 An Act against
Ambition conformable to the former. ^^ An Act against Unkindness of Kinsmen,
Neighbo^^ Friends, Servants, Wives, etc. ^^ An Act of lively FAITH, against all
Saduce^, Epicures, Atheists. 51. An Act of Animaduersion, that we stumble not
at the Prosperity of the Wicked. 55 An Act, for the Last Assise, and final
Sentence and Execution of the Ungodly. 57 An Act against Merit of Works. 58.
91. 98 An Act against Works of Supererogation. 58. 91 An Act against the
Children of Darkness; Murderers, Adulterers, Burglers, etc. 64 An Act against
all greedy Wringers, Wrongers, Usurers, and Oppressors. 62. 68 An Act of
Meditation on the manifold Manifest Works of GOD, mighty and marvelous 66. 96.
98 An Act of Invincible Faith and PATIENCE. 67 An Act against Tyrants,
Extortioners, Rackers, and all Unrighteous and unrelenting Rich. 62. 68 An Act,
limitting Man's Wit and Industry from the illimitable Wisdom and inimitable
Works of GOD. 70. 83 An Act against loose and idle Education of Youth. 74 An
Act against Wandering and Wanton Eyes. 77 An Act against Pride and Vanity of all
kinds. 77 An Act against Cousenage, Concupiscence, Cruelty, Briberie. 77 An
Act against Adultery. 77 An Act against impious and imperious Masters and
Mistresses. 78 An Act against dilatorie A^^ners and solitary Nabal^. 78 An Act
against the Vncharitie of our Days, suffering so many Poor to die without
Doors. 78 An Act against all Injury, Inhumanity, etc. 79 An Act against
Avarice and Infidelity, Superstition and Idolatry, Sacrilege and Surcuidry. 79
An Act against insulting over Misery. 80 An Act against all manner of Extortion
and Cruelty. 81 An Act touching the right use and happy issue of Afflictions.
86. 92. 93. 109. An Act of the proueness of Mercy toward the Penitent. 87 An
Act against empty and idle FAITH. 88 An Act (by implication) against the Popes
depriving and deprauing of Princes. 89 An Act containing a Divine Lecture of
Natural Phisophy. 98. To the last Chapter: which is the Last Act of This Holy
PARLIAMENT:
WHose several Acts, of sweet and souerain Use
To cherish Virtue, and to check Abuse
(Too rough transcribed, by too rude a hand,
For so high Statutes of the HOLY LAND)
Are here presented, as sit Precedents
Of sacred Rules for your High Parliaments;
By (the once, least Moat in the Vpper-Houses Sun)
Your Vader-Clarke, Unworthily Undone (By ouer-trusting to a starting Bow^^r
while too-strong, to my poor Wrong and Woe) IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

JOB TRIVMPHANT in his Trial.
The Proem.
A Solid Rock, farre-seated in the Sea
(Where many Vessels have been cast away)
Though blackest Storms of blustering Winds do threat,
Though boistrous Rage of roaring Billows beat;
Though it be raakt with Lightning, and with Thunder;
Though all at once assault, and Each asunder;
With massy Bulk of it Selfs Marble Tower,
^till, still repells the inevitable Stower;
And seems still firmer, and more permanent,
^he more the Tempest has been violent:
^ight so the Faithful; in whose humble Breast
^eligious sear of GOD is deep impressed;
^hat-euer Streak of Fortune threat his State,
^hat-euer Danger him discommodate,
^hat-euer Mischief that betide him shall,
^hat-euer Loss, what-euer Cross befall;
^flexible, invincible, pursues
^e sacred Footings he did ever use:
And aye more constant, and confirmed is He,
The more extreme that his Afflictions be.
If any spirit, inspired with Holy-mood,
Carefully-^urious of the Public Good,
Would liu^ly limne the immortal Excellence
Of such a Pattern of such PATIENCE;
As neither Elements di^placed quight,
Nor envious Stars, nor angry Foes despite,
Nor all the Fiends insatiate Fury fell
(By fraud or force) could ever quail or quell:
Twere labor lost, to fable ( Homer-like)
The strange long Voyage of a wily Greek;
The Pains, the Perils, and extreme Disease
That he endured, both by Land and Seas;
Since sacred Truthe's Heaven prompted Books present
In Constant ^OB a worthier Argument.
Thou then, Urania, to whom right belongs
The sacred Consort of Celestial Songs,
Tune Thou my Voice. Thou teach me to record
Wh^ did in^ite, what did inuit the Lord,
With M^ser^es so rewfull and so rife,
So to disturb his quiet happy Life;
What heinous Sin, what ^orrid high Offense.
The Almightie's Vengeance might so deep incense:
^or else what Cause, what Object el^e might stir-it.
Boiles there such Wrath in an impa^siue Spirit?
But, o Presumption! Why have I begun
(Alas! no Prophet, neither Prophet's Son;
No Priest, no Leuite; ndy, no Israelite
(Such as Nathanael) but a Cananite
Full of Corruption, foul of hand and heart)
To touch the ARK^ to undertake This Part?
Ah! pardon Lord; O! purify me^ all
From all Profaneness; from Sinne's bitter Gall:
And as yer-while it pleased thee to infuse
^n mine vnschooled and unskillful Muse
By virtue of Thine All-sufficing Grace)
^mmediat power du-BARTAS Track to trac^;
^o as (how-euer weak and Art-l^ss^, I,)
That Work^ find^s Welco^e with the grais^st Eyes
Now more, good Lord, my Wies and Words refine,
^^ treat divinely Matter ^o Divine:
(...)! sacred S^irit now ^anctifie my Style;
^t not my S^nsuall thy pure Sense defile:
^ut tune me, right, to Echo, as belongs.
^^ HVSSIAN'S S^gh^ and then Thy (...)
and to that end, vouchsafe me at Thy (...)
^esse Need-full Life, in a less^ Care-full leisure
Cap. 1.
Near where Idume's dry and sandy Soil
Spreads Palmful Forests, dwelt a Man yer-while,
Of life vnblotted, and unspotted Fame;
God-fearing, Just, Sin-flying, JOB by Name.
With due respect to Heauen's and Nature's Law,
In Wedlocks sweet Yoke did he seemly draw:
Whence, by that Bounty, whose all Blessings be,
Seavn Sons he had, and lovely Daughters Three.
Great was his Substance: for of fleecie Sheep
Upon the Downs seavn Thousand did he keep;
Five hundred yoke of Oxen did he owe;
Five hundred Ass-shees, Camels six times so:
Great Train within doors, and great Train with-ou^,
Made him esteemed through all the East about.
His Sons, by turns, their Sisters did inuit
And feast each other, in a Daily Rite:
JOB blessed them every Even; and every Morn
When first Aurora's rosy beams return,
The good Old Man, to GOD, in humble-wise,
For each of them did offer Sacrifice:
Lest They might have m^s^don, mis-said, mis-thought,
Or (in their Feasts) offended GOD by ought.
While happy JOB thus brought the year about,
It came to pass one day when all the Rout
Of Light-full Angels did themselves present
Before the Footstool of the Omnipotent,
There also came the Executioner,
The Ambitious Prince, Malicious Lucifer:
With whom the LORD expostulating, Thus
said; Satan, say, Whence come Thou to us?
^come, said He, from walking in and out,
and compassing the Earthly Ball about.
^ast thou not then suruey'd my Servant JOB
Replied the LORD) whose like in all the Globe
^here is not found; so full of louing-feare,
^o faithful, fruitful, rightful, and sincere?
(...) Is it for Nothing, said the subtle Foe,
that JOB adores, and loves, and fears Thee so?
^ast thou not hedged him safe on every side?
^ast thou not heapt him Blessings far and wide?
^t, for a while withold thy Fauour's stream,
^ith-draw thy hand, and hide thy Bounties beam,
^hen shall thou see (or double my Disgrace)
^e will anon blaspheme thee to thy Face.
Lo, said the Eternal, from this instant hour
^l that he has is in thy hand and power;
(...), but Himself, Himself I sole exempt.
^han eftsoons assumes his bold Attempt.
As all his Children were together met,
Th^^^ elder Brothers hearty Cheer to eat,
Came one to ^OB* running, and breathless nigh,
Sca^ce could he speak, yet weakly thus did cry,
Ah! woe ^^ me to be the Messenger
Of so sad News as now I bring you, Sir:
As all your Oxen under painful yoke,
Their pointed Iourneyes in your Fallowes broke;
And ^s your Asses in the Meads did feed,
Sabean hieues came forth with furious speed
And took them all, and all your Servants slew,
I only cap't, to come and tell it you.
While He yet spoke, there came Another in,
Hared and hot, and Thus did He begin:
Sir, from the Heavens a sudden Fire did fall
Among your Sheep, and has consumed them all,
And stain your Servants yer they could eschew;
I only escaped, to come and tell it You.
While He yet spoke, Another came, amazed,
And sadly said; Sir, while your Camels grazed
In your own Pastures up and down the Lands,
The proud Chaldeans, in three armed Bands,
Surpised them all, and all your Servants slew;
I only sc^p't, to come and tell it you.
While He yet spoke, Another came and cryde
In pitious Fright (as if himself beside)
O, Sir! your Sons and Daughters (all the rest)
Were met to day at my young Masters Feast,
Where, from beyond the Wilderness anon
A sudden Whirlwind rose, and rusht upon
The corners of the House, and shook it so
That instantly it f^ll from Top to Toe,
And with the Fall them altogether slew;
I only escaped, to come and tell it you.
Then starting up, JOB began his clothes to rent,
Sh^ues his hoare hair, his head with ashes sprent;
As in a swoune falls to the ground with groans,
And semi sighing Thus himself bemo^es:
Ah! Naked came I from my Mothers womb,
Naked I shall return unto my Tomb:
The LORD has taken what himself has given:
Blessed be GOD, The Almighty LORD of Heaven.
Yet did not JOB, for all that him mis-fell,
Murmur at GOD, nor inly sink or swell;
Nor sin against the eternal Providence,
But suffered all with humble Patience.
Cap. 2.
ANother day, when all the sacred Bands
Came all attending their high Kings commands,
Came also He, whose Envy (since He fell
From Heaven) has striu'n to hale down Man to Hell;
With whom the LORD expostulateth Thus:
Now Satan, say, Whence come Thou to Us?
I come said He, from walking in and out,
And compassing the Earthly Ball about.
Then, Have thou found, replies the Omnipotent,
In all thy Circuit, Man more confident,
Or mind more Constant, or more faithful Soul,
Then JOB my Servant: whom thine Envy foul,
Late, urged my Leave by sharp Assaults to try?
How have thou sped? What have thou got thereby?
Alas, said He, I reft him but the things
That fly from Men with transitory wings;
And therefore he regards his loss the less:
But would thy Power him somewhat nearer press,
Would thou permit me touch him to the quick,
I yield me conquered, if he do not kick;
If more he serve, trust, pray, or praise thy Grace,
If he, in fine, blaspheme not to thy Face.
Pinch but his Body, and then, Skin for Skin,
He Will wince without, and sudden flinch within.
Go Fiend, said GOD; since the art so obstinate,
Fall on my JOB, him felly cruciate:
Touch not his Soul; his Body only touch.
Hence Satan hyes, glad that he might so much.
Without Delay then, with the most Despite,
He sets on JOB; and in most pitious Plight,
With vlcerous Anguish fills his body so,
That crusted all in Scabs from top to toe,
Amid the Ashes, sad and desolate,
Scraping his Sores with shells (or sherds) he sat;
Yet Constant still, still calmely Patient,
Without a word of grudging Discontent.
Then said his Wife, What helps Integrity?
What boots it, Man? alas! curse GOD, and die.
Go, foolish Woman, the good man replied,
Thy rebel heart does thy rash tongue mis-guide:
Shall we, from GOD, of Good receive our Fill;
And, at his pleasure, not partake of Ill?
So JOB as yet, for all that him mis-fell,
Displeased not GOD, but bore it wondrous well.
By This, the light-foot, fether-tongued Dame
Had far and wide spread and dispersed the fame
Of Job's Misfortunes (from the first begun)
That He was half dead, and was whole undone.
His Friends then, Eliphas the Themanite,
^ildad the Shuite, the Naamathite*
Zophar (as others) hearing this report,
As soon as might be toward him resort;
Resolved with Comforts, to relieve in part
Their Friends Affliction, and assuage his Smart.
But, there arrived, at the very sight
Of his so woeful and so wretched Plight.
They all amazed, their Garments sadly tore,
Their heads with Ashes all besprinkled over;
And for seavn days and nights in Sorrow drowned,
Lay grieuing, by him, groueling on the ground,
Without word speaking, lest untimely trouble
Amid his Anguish should his Dolors double.
^ap. 3.
JOB therefore straining his obstructed voice,
Began Thus, sadly with a shiuering noise:
O! VVo be to the Day when I was born:
O! be it ever of the Light forlorn:
O! may it ever under Darkness lie,
And never Sun vouchsafe it cheerful eye;
No^ GOD regard it: let a deadly Shade
O'^^-clowde it aye, as ever Dismal made.
O! woe be also to the Night wherein
My Mother my Conception did begin:
Lightning and Thunder thrill it evermore,
Whirlwind and Tempest may it ever roar:
Of Fogs, of Frosts, of Showers, of Snowes, of Hail,
Of Mists* of Mil-deawes may it never fail:
May it no more in Calendar be placed,
But, from the Role of Months and Years be rac't:
May the Evening Stars be dark: No light returning:
May it no more see the Eyelids of the Morning,
Because it closed not, at my wretched Birth,
The fruitful Door that brought me weeping forth;
But let me pass into this woeful Light,
To undergo so miserable Plight.
O! Why, when shapelesse in my Mothers Womb
I lay as dead, Why did not Death strike home?
Why not (alas!) amid the bearing Throes,
When I began to feel Man's feeble Woes?
Why did the knees support me? Why the Breast
Supply me suck? Why was I swathed and dressed?
Since else (alas!) I had now lien at ease,
Had been at rest, h^d slept in quietness,
Among the high and mighty Potentates,
King^, Counselors, great Lords, and Magistrates,
Who in the World to leave their Names Renown,
Have built the^ Bowers which others shall pul-downe:
And those rich Princes that have heapt of-old
Their houses full of Silver and of Gold.
Or, Why (alas!) as an Abortiue Birth,
Was I not hid and buried in the Earth?
There, Tyrants cease from their imperious Pride:
There, Virtuous Workers at their rest abide:
There, Prisoners rest from their Oppressors Braule:
There, Slaves are free from their fell Masters Thrall:
There, High and Low (without Disdain, or Dread)
Rest all together in one Common bed.
O! wished Death (more to be wished then Life)
Thou breakst the Force of Enuies Engines rife:
Thou cuttest-off our Trauails Tediousness:
Thou kilst our Cares, Thou calm'st our most Distress
O! to the wretched why is Light imparted?
Why Life (alas!) unto the heauie-hearted?
[Who longs for Death: and if it linger long,
Would fainer seek it then even Gold (among)
And gladder find it (as of Ioys the Chief)
Within their Grave to bury all their Griefe]
Especially, to Him whose Way is hid:
Whom GOD has shut-vp, stopped and streightened?
Since, yer I eat, My Sighs ref^ll my Food,
My Roarings gush out like a raging Flood.
For (though my Plenty, never made me proud;
My Power, imperious; nor to pleasure bowed:)
What most I doubted I endure, (alas!)
And what I feared is even comn to pass.
For Care and Fear, I had no rest before;
Yet Trouble's come, and trebbles more and more.
Cap. ^
JOB ceasing so; began the Themanit^,
July perplexed, an Answer thus to dight:
If We presume to comfort thee, deer Friend,
Will our Discourse (I fear it will.) offend?
Will thy Disease our kind Good-wills disdain?
But, in this Case (alas!) Who can refrain?
Who so hard-hearted, or vnciuill-bred,
That can unmoved see thee thus bested?
To see and hear Thee in this deep Distress,
Who can keep silence? Who can hold his peace?
Why! Thou were wont, in thy Prosperities,
To stay weak hands, and strengthen feeble knees;
To counsel those that in their Course had strayed,
To comfort those whom Crosses ouer-lay'd:
Now that Mis-hap on thine own head has hit,
Now that the Storm has thine own vessel smit,
Now that the Case is Thine, How art thou sunk
From thine own Succor! From thy self how shrunk!
Where is, alas! Where is thy Confidence,
Thy Constancy, thy Hope, thy Patience,
Thy Piety, thy Faith, thy Fear of God,
And the upright Path which Thou have ever trod?
O! ponder this: Who ever Innocent
Has perished? Has the Omnipotent
Eternal Justice ever plagued the Just;
Destroyed the Righteous who Him only trust:
As I have seen Those that have plough'd and sow'n
Iniquity, reap suddenly their own;
When with the Blast of GOD they blasted fall,
And with his Breath are quick consumed all?
GOD, in his Fury starueth in distress
The roaring Lion and the Lioness;
Their ravening Whelps are scattered far away,
Their Teeth are broken, and they pine for Prey.
I Will tell! thee more: Once, in a certain Night,
Silent, I heard a Voice, and saw a Sight,
(About the time when Sleep begins to se^ze
Our drouzie Lids, our Daily Loads to ease)
Amazed with Fear my hair began to heave,
My heart to tremble, every part to leave
His proper Part; When to mine eyes a-space
Appeerd the Image of an unknown Face:
One stood before me, Whence (yet more dismayed)
I heard a Voice, and Thus (me thought) it said:
Shall Man be iuster then his GOD (said He)?
The Creature purer then his Maker be?
Behold, he found not in his Angels bright
Firm Fealty, but Folly in his sight:
How much more then, in Those whose habitation
Is but of Clay, but Dust their best Foundation?
Whose brittle Vessels here so little last,
That yer they know them they are often past:
Whose fickle Garment (how-so-euer loath)
shall be destroyed and done, before the Mo^th:
Whose doubtful Days, yer they begin, be gone*:
^ut down by Death, when least they think thereon:
Whose Dignities (how-euer graced, or Great)
shall die with them, and Them the Worms shall eat.
Cap. ^
NOw call thou loud, if any will reply:
Among the Saints where will thou turn thine eye?
^wo sorts of Fool^s (the Idiot and Envious) die;
(...) Anger the one, the other of Jealousy.
(...) beheld the Fool fair rooted yerst:
^^t have I soon his Habitation cursed;
because his Children succour-less shall suffer
(...) Justice Doom, and none shall Pity offer:
^m Self withal confounded* void of Hope,
^o gather-in his long expected Crop,
Which th'hunger-starued from the Thorns shall snatch;
The Thirsty shall his substance all dispatch;
A Misery, which GOD does often permit:
For, The Earth it self is not the Cause of it;
Since, were not Sin, it should not barren be:
But, Man, for Sin, must toil him seruilelie,
In Sweatfull Labor, borne for Labor's end
As properly as Sparkles to ascend.
But were My Case, as Thine; in this Distress,
Rather to GOD would I my self address:
Him would I seek, of Him would I enquire,
Whose Works are great, whose Wonders all admire^
Vnspiable, Unspeakable by Man;
Immutable, Inscrutable to scan:
Who on the Earth the rain at pleasure poures,
And in the Streets distills the liquid Showers:
Who lifts the Lowly up, brings down the Lofty;
And reares sad Mourners unto Health and Safety:
Who dissipates the craftiest Policies;
And dis-appoints the Counsels of the Wise:
Who takes the wariest in their proper Wiles;
And Wicked ones in their own Guile beguiles;
So that they meet with Darkness in the Day,
And, as at Midnight, groap at Noon their way:
But, He preserues the Poor, from sword and tongue,
And cruel hands of Tyrants, prone to wrong:
So that the Poor shall have their blessed Hope:
But Wicked ones their cursed mouths ^ha^ stop.
Lo, then, how happy he who^ GOD corrects!
Repine not therefore that he Thee afflicts.
He wounds, and heales; he strikes, and he restores:
He sends Plagues, and Plasters for the Sores:
He, in six Troubles, shall deliver thee;
and in the seventh, thou shall be danger free.
^e will preserve thee from fell Famines rage;
and from the Sword of War thee dis-ingage:
^hou shall be safe from scourging ^ungs of Momes,
^or shall thou fear Destruction when it comes:
^ay, thou shall laugh at it, and Dearth der^de;
^ot dreading Beasts of fellest Paws and Pride.
^ones, thorns, and thistles shall be friends with thee:
^ith thee the Beasts in constant league shall be.
^od, as without, thou shall have Peace within
^hy house; thou shall be hold it, and not sin.
^hou shall perceive thy Seeds seeds seed to spread
(...) Grass in Fields, and Flowers in every Me^d.
(...) a full Age to thine own Grave shall Thou,
(...) in due time, Corn to the Barn or Mow.
Lo, This is Truth; and Thus we daily try-it:
Consider it, and to thy Self apply-it.
Cap. 6.
JOB then replied: o! were my Sorows waigh'd,
And with my Sufferings in just Balance laid,
They would exceed the Sea^ wet Sands in poize:
Therefore (alas!) they swallow up my voice:
For th'Arrowes of The Almighty, keen and quick,
Have thrilled me, and still within me stick;
Their Anguish makes my spirits faint and quail me.
Alas! the Terrors of the LORD assail me.
Braies the wild Ass if he have grass his fill?
Or lowes the Ox if he have fodder still?
Unsavory things who without Salt can eat?
In whites of Eggs is there a taste of meat?
Yet am I feign, alas! and forced (indeed)
Of what my Soul abhorred most to feed.
O! that the LORD would daign me my desire,
Grant me my Lo^ging, grant what I require:
Which is but This; that He would end my days,
Let go his hand, and let me go my ways.
So should I yet have Comfort (though I burn
In bitter pangs of Death, I will not spurn.
Let him not spare me) for yet do not I
The holy Word of the Holy-One deny.
^ut, o! What Power have I to persist?
that may ensue, if I shall long subsist?
^m I as hard, as tough, as strong (alas!)
(...) strongest Stones? or is my Flesh of Brass?
^y, am I not already Impotent,
^y spirits consumed, and my strength all spent?
^n Crosses, Comforts should Friends most afford:
(...) men (alas!) have left to fear the LORD.
(...) Brethren have deceived me, as a Brook.
^rising Floods, they have me soon forsook;
^ich, foul and deep, in Winter all over flow,
^crusted thick with Ice, no moisture show;
^else, in Summer, by Sol's thirsty Ray
(...) licked-vp, and quickly dried away,
^le Trauailers to Thaema, and Saba thought
^ater there, and for their succor sought;
^failing quite, and frustrate of the same,
^y are confounded, and they blush for shame:
(...) such are you, you see me ill appaid
(...) small Plight, and ^ou are all dismayed:
(...) are ye so? When have I bid you bring,
^ut of yours supply me any thing?
^av'd of you auxiliarie Bands
^skue me from Foes, or Tyrants hands?
Show me mine Error, where I have gone wrong:
Tell me my Fault, and I will hold my tongue.
But, bold and free's the speech of Innocence:
Which of you can reprove; and what Offense?
Think You advantage of my words to have,
As if Affliction made me wildely rave?
Then on the Orphan does your fury fall;
You dig a Pit to catch your Friend withal.
Therefore, vouchsafe me better to revise;
Wrong me no more: My words be neither lies.
Neither my deeds (as you shall find, I trust,
If you return) in that behalf unjust.
Complain I causeless? Do I counterfeit?
Is not my mouth with Anguish all repleat?
Cap. 7.
Has not Man's warfare his set limits here,
As has the Hireling (by the day, or year)*
As toyled Servants for the Night attend;
And weary Taskers for their Labors end;
So have I looked, but (alas!) in vain,
For end of Sorrows, and for ease of Pain.
Perpetually my fruitless Months proceed;
My tedious Nights incessantly succeed:
No sooner laid down but I long to r^se,
Tired with toffing, till the Morning spies.
^y Flesh is clad with Worms; with excrement
^f lothsom dust, my Skin does rot and rent:
^y Days flit faster then the Shuttles slide
^om Weauers hands, whipping from side to side.
Consider, Lord, my Life is but a Blast:
^ne eye no more shall see the Goodness past:
^o now beholds me, shall no more, anon:
Thou look-on Me, I e^t-soones am gone.
Clouds do pass, and quite away do flit,
^oso descends, ascends not from the Pit;
^ither returns unto his wonted own;
^t of his place is any more be-known.
Therefore (alas!) I will not spare to speak;
cannot hold, needs must I silence break,
^id the anguish of my Spirits distress,
^d in the depth of my Souls bitterness.
^m I a Sea? or Whale? that with a Guard
^ou g^rtest me, and keep'st me in so hard?
^ have said; In silence of the Night
^hen drousie Humor siels-vp every Sight;
^en All, above, in, under, Air; Earth, Seas;
^uiet Slumber seem to take their Ease)
^ay be that my painful Pangs shall cease:
^ay be that my Passions shall have peace:
With fearful Visions then thou do affray me,
With Dreams and Fancies dreadfully dismay me:
So that my Soul had rather choose (at once)
To die then live in Durance of my Bones.
Weary of life, live always shall I not;
Then leave me, Lord, alas! my days are naught.
O! What is Man that thou extoll'st him so?
That Thou on Him do even thy heart bestow?
That every Morning Him thou visitest?
And every Moment Him examinest?
How is it that Thou leau'st me not a little?
Alas! nor lett'st me swallow-in my spettle?
O! Thou Preserver of Mankind, I know,
And I acknowledge I have sinned: but, O!
What shall I say? What shall I do to Thee?
Why, in thy Wrath do Thou encounter Me?
Why make Thou Me (alas!) the Mark and White
To thy Displeasure, in my Selfe's despite?
Remit, O Lord, what I have ill omitted:
Remove (alas!) what I have miss-committed.
For, now I go down to the dust, to lie:
And, if Thou seek, to morrow, none am I.
Cap. 8.
But Bildad then (loath longer to refrain)
Said: JOB, How long will thou this Plea mai^
With words, as high, as Tempests vehemence,
Blow'n by the breath of thine Impatience?
Dare Thou, avert, that GOD does Right subvert?
Or that The Almighty, Judgment does pervert?
Though, since thy Sons had sinned, them he sent
To the due Place of their sins punishment;
Yet, if Thou early unto GOD repair,
and to The Almighty make thi^e humble Prayer,
^f Thou be pure, and in his sight sincere;
^e will again awake to Thee: and rear
^hy ruined State; thy righteous House restore
^ith Peace and Plenty, manifoldly more.
(...) Arc of the Ages past: inquire (I pray)
^f The Ancient Fathers (for, of yesterday
^e Nouices know nothing in effect;
^ur days are but a Shadow in respect)
^ill not They teach thee (without wiles of Art)
^d truly speak the language of their heart?
(...) Can Rushes spring? are Sedges seen to grow,
^here is no moisture; where no waters flow?
^y that they should: yet would they sooner wither,
though never cut, then all else grass together.
^ch is the way of all that GOD forget:
(...) fails the Hope of th'Holy-Counterfait:
His Hope shall be cut off: his Confidence
Like busy Spider's brittle Residence:
He shall be leaning on his House, but it
Shall not be able to support him; yet
He shall hold fast, and thereon fix him sure;
But that (alas!) shall never long endure:
As does the Tree, which growing in the Sun,
O're-spreads an Orchard with fresh Boughs, anon,
His happy Roots among the Fountains winding,
And round about the rockie banks them binding:
If from his Place to pluck it any ween,
It will deny; as safe, as if not seen:
Lo, by this means it will rejoice, the while
That it may prosper in another Soil:
So, GOD will never the Sincere reject.
Neither the wicked by the hand erect.
Till he have filld thy mouth with meriment,
Thy hps with triumph (in entire content)
Thy Foes shall all be with confusion clothed,
Wrapped in shame, dispersed, despisd and loathed;
The ungodly shall be razed to the ground,
Their Tabernacle shall no more be found.
Cap. 9
JOB then replied: I know, I grant you This;
In GOD'S respect, that No Man righteous is.
No: if He argue, if He question;
O! Who can answer of a Thousand, one?
What heart so constant! O! what soul so clear,
That dares dares for Just before that Judge appear?
He is All-prudent, and All-powerfull too:
Who thriues, that strives with what he minds to do?
He mounts the Valleys, and he vailes the Mountains:
He shakes the Earth; he opes and stops the Fountains:
He bids the Sun shine, and forbids it soon:
He seals the Stars up; he conceales the Moon:
He spreads alone the Heavens large Canapey:
He treads upon the bound-lesse ground-lesse Sea:
He makes Arcturus Star, the Or^
Stormy youth,
The Pleiades, and Climits of the South:
He works mighty things and manifold,
Miraculous, and more then can be told:
He passes by me, and repasseth so,
^nseen of me, and unperceived tho:
He, when him pleases, if a Prey he take,
Who can compel him to restore it back?
Nay: who so bold into his Acts to pry?
Or, Who dares question What he does, or Why?
His Anger is not stopped, nor stoopt a whit;
But strongest helps are fain to stoop to it.
Then, how-much-less; O! how-much-less am I
Able (alas!) with Him my Case to try?
No: were I just, I were not absolute;
But, to my Indge would I make humble Suit;
And, to my Cry if he reply, yet hard
Can I believe that He my voice has heard.
For, with a Tempest he destroys me stern;
And wounds me Cause less (for ought I discern);
Nor suffers me so much as breathe at all;
But fills me still with Bitterness and Gall.
If Srength we speak of; Who is strong but He?
If Judgment; then, Who shall mine Vmpire be?
If I would justify my Self (with Him)
He by mine own Mouth will me soon condemn;
If I would plead me perfect and upright,
He, He would judge me wicked, in his sight;
Though I were perfect (to my Self) from Sin;
Alas! I know not mine own Soul within.
Therefore (Thus vexed and perplexed rife)
I loath alas! and I abhor my life.
Yet, grant I not; but that the Lord does smight
(Which you deny) both Wicked and Upright.
Else, when He strikes a People (old and young)
Would He seem smile at Good men's Stripes among?
Would He bestow upon the Vogodly-most
Earth's Soueraintie, and let them rule the Roast?
Would He permit profane Bribe-blinded ones
With blunted Sword to fit on Justice Thrones?
While that the Virtuous to the wall are thrust?
While the Innocent are trodden in the Dust?
For, Who, but He, directs, acts, orders All
In all the World, what ever does befall?
My Days far swifter then a Post have past;
Past without sight of any Good (to-last):
As swiftest Ships, so have they flid-away;
Or as the Eagle basting to her Prey.
If that I say, I will forget my Grief,
Forgo my Wrath, and yet re-hope Relief:
Ah! then my Torments all afresh affright,
With Terrors, least Thou will not quit me quight.
For, if I be Ungodly all in vain
I cry to Thee, and to no end I plain:
Or, if Unguilty, Clean, and White as Snow
(In mine own sight) in Thine I am not so;
But in the sight of Thy pure Eyes, as soild,
And with the Garment that I wear defild.
GOD is not Man, as I (in equal Suit)
That I with Him should argue or dispute:
Nor is there (should we meet) a Moderator,
TWIXT Him and Me to arbitrate the Matter.
Let him leaue-off his hold, take-off his Rod,
Lay-ost his Awefull Majesty, as GOD;
Then will I speak, and freely, void of Fear:
But, as it is, I must, I will forbear.
AS dead a^^ue; upon my Self I Will lay
My sad Complaint; and in mine Anguish pray
Thus to the Lord: O Lord, condemn me not;
But show me, why thou huntest me so hot.
Lord! art Thou pleased to oppress me Thus?
O! do Thou judge as doth' V^righteous
(Unheard, vntry'd, and vnsuspect) to trip
And castaway thine own hands Workmanship?
Scest Thou, as Man? or have Thou carnal Eyes?
Years as Man's Years? Days as Man's Days, who dies;
That thus Thou rack'st Me, and protractst Me still,
Searching and sifting to find out mine Ill?
I cannot sin, Thou know, but Thou must see:
For, from Thine hands can None deliver Me.
Thy hands have made Me, all, and every part:
And wilt I hou now thine own hands Work subvert?
Remember, Lord, how frail and brittle stuff
Thou made me of (then use me not so rough)
Even of the Clay, as is the Potters Crust:
And will Thou then re-crush me into Dust?
Thou pourd'st me out as Milk (within the womb)
Thou made me there, as Cheese, a Crud become;
With Skin and Flesh Thou cloth'dst me fair and fit,
With Bones and Sinews fast together knit:
Inspir'dst me Life and Soul, Reason and Sense;
And still preseru'dst me by thy Providence.
These Things as hidden in thy Bosom be:
But well I know, that it is so with Thee.
If I have sinned, Thou will sift me near;
And of my Guilt Thou will not hold me clear.
If Wicked I have been; then Woe to Me:
If Righteous; Yet still will I humble be;
Though deep confounded, and amazed much,
To see, and feel, my sad Affliction Such.
But, be it more: come, Lion-like set on-me*
Return and show Thee maruclous vpon-me:
And so (indeed) Thou do: for, Thou renewest
Thy plagues on me; and me more fierce pursewest:
Changes of Woes, Armies of Pains extreme,
Afresh iuuade me, and me round behem.
Then, Why (alas!) Why did thou bring me forth
From fruitful Womb (being no better worth)?
O! that I there had perished, unseen:
And that I were as if I had not been,
Brought from the Womb (one Tomb, unto Another)
To Earth my Mother from my Earthly Mother.
Is not my Glass near out? My Date near done?
O! let him cease, and leaue-off laying-on;
That I may take a little Comforts breath,
Yer quite I go to the dark Land of Death;
A Land of Darkness, Darkness Self (I say)
And Shade of Death: where is no Light, no Day.
(...) 11
THen answered Zophar, the Naamathite;
Should words preuail? Shall prating pass for right?
Should all be mute? Shall no man dare reply,
To mock thy Mocks, and give thy Lie the Lie?
For, Thou have said (and that, too-vehment)
My Words, and Deeds, and thoughts, are innocent;
Pure in Thine eyes. But O! that GOD would speak;
That He would once His sacred Silence break;
To show thee Wisdome's Secrets: Thou might see,
Thou me^it'st double what he lays on Thee;
And surely know that (in his Justice strict)
After thy Sins, He does not Sores inflict*
But seems to have forgoten, or forgiven
Thy Trespasses against Him Self and heaven.
Can Thou, by searching, GOD's deep Counsel find?
Conceive the Almighty? Comprehend His mind?
Reach His perfection? It does Heaven excel
In Height; in Depth exceeds the lowest Hell:
Longer then Earth: larger then all the Seas.
O! What? When? Where? How will Thou measure These?
If He cut off, shut-vp, collect, reject;
Who can divert Him? Who his Course correct?
He knows vain Men: He sees their hearts that hard the^
In Guiles and Wiles; and will not He regard them?
That foolish man, made wise, may be reclaimed;
Borne bruit and dull, as an Ass Colt, untamed.
If therefore, by Repentance, thou prepare
Thine humbled heart. if that, in hearty Prayer,
Thou stretch thine hands unto his Throne above:
Though thou have sinned; if Thou thy Sin remove:
If Thou remove it, and permit no more
Iniquity to dwell within thy Door:
Then shall Thou, doubtless, free from Fault and Fear,
Settled and safe, thy Face again vprear:
Then shall thon sure forget thy Miscry;
Or, but esteem is as a Stream past by:
Then shall thy Days be, then the Noon more bright;
And Thou shall shine, as Morning after Night:
Then shall thou rest secure and confident,
Hopeful, and Happy, in thy proper Tent,
In thine own Dwelling: where, for Eminence,
Suitors shall flock, with seemly Reverence.
But, as for stubborn, wilful Wicked-ones,
That still run-on in their Rebellions,
Their Helps shall fail, and all their Hap shall fall;
And as a Ghasp, their Hopes shall vanish all.
^^p. 12
THen said the Hussian: You, undoubtedly,
You are the Men: Wisdom with you must die:
Yet (would ye knew it) somewhat know I, too;
I understand perhaps as well as you. 11

Nor will I yield you in this larre a lot:
What you have urged I know: and Who does not?
Ye say, I lie; ye tell me, that I mock:
But I am made my Fellows Laughing Stock:
Who calls on GOD, and whom He hears pressed,
The Upright and Just (indeed) is made a lest:
And He that is going down (in state forlorn)
Like dying Lamp, is to the Rich a Scorn;
While (for the most) Oppressors prosper, sure;
And God-prouokers, safely and secure,
Have in their hand (GOD in their hand has put)
The Horn of Plenty, them at will to glut.
Ask but the Beasts: inqu^re of Earth, or Seas;
Or Fowls, or Fish: for, which is it of These,
But knows, and shows, and plainly tells thee This;
That GOD's their Maker: and of All that is:
That in His hand's the Life of all that lives*
That He alone, to All Men, ^^^athing gives.
Does not the Ear try Speeches (bad o^ good)*
And, for it Self, the Palate taste the food?
So, Wisdom should be to the Many-year'd;
And Understanding to the Hoary-bait'd.
With Him it is (with the Ancient of Days)
With Him is Counsel, Wisdom, Power, and Prai^^*
Lo, He destroys, and no man can restore:
Whom He shuts-vp, can be les our no more:
He stops the Streams; then dry they up and shrink;
He sends them forth; then all the Earth they sink.
With Him is Strength: with Him is All that is:
Who erreth, and Who makes err, are His:
He does distract the Counsailors of State:
He makes the Judges as infatuate:
He breaks the Bonds of Kings Imporiall Awe;
And brings Them bounden under Others Law:
He leads the Princes as a Captive pray:
Dismounts the Mighty; and, with strange dis^^tay,
He dulls the Learned, dumbs the Eloquent,
And reaues the Judgment of the Ancient:
He poures contempt upon the Noble-born:
He strips the Strong: He leaves the Stout forlorn:
He deepest Secrets soon discovers:
He brings to light the darkest shades of Death:
He multiplieth People; and He mowes
Them down again (by Famine, Plague, or Blows):
He sends them forth in Colonies to spread;
And brings them back (by wrack, lack, sack, or dread):
He reaues the hearts of those that rule the Earth,
And makes the^ roam through Desert sands of Dearth, 11

Where None go by; They grope as in the Dark;
They have no Light, no Sight; no certain Mark;
They stray; they stumble; to and fro they wheel:
And He* He makes Them, Drunkard-like, to reel.
^^p. 13.
ALL This mine eyes have s^en, mine ears have heard:
All This my heart has weighed, and well conferd.
So that, in This, what you have known, I knew;
And am not Herein to gi^e place to You.
But, as You wish, I also wish: O! would
The Almighty pleased that I might be so bold
(In his own Presence, at ^^^ Bar to stand)
To plead with Him the Cause I have in hand.
^or, You, indeed, are too Sophistical:
^ly Physicians, for my Sickness, all.
(...)! that you therefore had still held you mute:
^o might you still have held a wise Repute.
^t, list you now unto my Arguing:
^ark well my Reasons, and the Proofs I bring.
(...) Will You speak falsely for the Almighty Lord?
^ill you for Him pronounce a Guileful word?
^Vill you be partial for His persons sake?
^ill you for Him, with Cauils undertake?
^all it avail you? will He con you Thank
^t his great Audit, for this double Prank?
Or, when you, smoothing, these Deceits to smother?
^r, bu^ to mock Him, as one Man another)?
No^ you shall know, He will not brook, nor bear it,
^t chide you sharp; how-euer secret were it.
^all not the brightness of His Face affray you?
^is Majesty with awefull Rays dismay you,
^eer E^rth and Ashes (daring thus to play)
^our Best but Dust: your rest but Dirt and Clay?
^old you your tongues: no more your silence break:
^ut (at my Pe^ill) give Meleaue to speak.
Why should I tear me (as one out of Sense)
^ith mine own Teeth? or do Selfe-Violence?
No: should He slay me, I would hope again
(Though in his sight I still my right maintain)
For, He himself will save and do me right;
And clear me from your doom of Hypocrite:
Since, in His presence Such can have no place,
Nor hope such help of His assisting Grace.
Give therefore ear unto my words; and weigh
With due regard what I shall truly say.
Lo, here I stand, as ready to be tried
(And well I know I shall be iustifi'd)
Come, who will charge me, and oppose my Pleas 11

(Alas! I die, if now I hold my peace)
Only, but spare me in Two things: with-drawe
Thy heavy hand; vvith-hold thy glorious Awe
From frighting me: then, from before thy face
I shall not hide me; nor betray my Case:
Then, at thy choice, be in this Cause dependant
(I am indifferent) Plaintiff, or Defendant.
What? and How-many are my Sins (pretended)?
Show me Wherein, and How, I have offended,
That Thou should shun, and turn thee from me so;
And handle me as thy most hated Foe.
Do Thou vouchsafe a witherd Leaf to crush?
Against dry Stubble do Thou daign to rush?
That in so bitter and severe a style
Thou do indight me: and recite (the while)
My sins of Youth (them re-recording fresh,
With the Heritage inherent unto Flesh):
And putt'st my feet into the Stocks so strait;
VVatchest my Ways, and at my heels do wait,
To find some hole in my fore-acted Life
(Scourging mine Errors with thy Terrors rife)
While, rotten-like, it wastes, as a Cloth
^rown full of holes, and eaten by the Moth.
Cap. 14.
MAn, born of Man's and Woman's loins, alas!
Has but few days, and those full sad, to pass:
Much like a Flower he shoots up; and fades,
Quickly cut down: he vanishes, as Shades;
Of no continuance [here]. Yet, do Thou daign
To frown at Such? and strive with Me, so vain?
Who, from Pollution, can pure thing extract?
^! there is None; none that is so exact.
^ith then his days Thou have determined;
^ith that his Months with thee be numbered;
^ith Thou have set the certain Time he has
To Him uncertain) which He cannot pass:
^orbeare a while, and from him look away,
Till (as the Hireling) he has done his Day.
For, though a Tree be felled; from the Root,
Yet is there hope that Branches will re-shoot;
Though in the Earth the Root be old and dry,
Though on the Earth the Trunk as dead do lie;
Yet by the Sent of the neer-winding Flood,
It will revive, and as a Plant, re-bud:
But Man (man's Body from his Soul bereft)
Man down and dead; O! what of Him is left?
Since, as Sea-waters past, re-passe no more;
As Rivers, dried, return not to their Shore:
Man, Dead-asleep, shall never wake again;
Nor never rise, till Heaven no more remain. 11

O! were thou pleased, me in my Grave to hide,
Until thy Wrath were past and pacified!
Or that there were some Time, or Term assigned (...)
When Thou will cease; and in thy Mercy mind me!
Or, shall a Man near dead, here live again;
Still liuing-dying in continual Pain?
And shall I still, in this distressed state,
Wait, all the Days of mine appointed Date,
Until my Change (my Renouation) come?
When Thou shall call me: nor shall I be dumb,
But answer thee: Then, then Thou will approve
That Thou the Works of thine own hands do lou^
Though now my steps thou numbrest so exact;
Not'st all my Sins, and seem them to have packt
As in a Bag, safe sealed; yea, to add
New Trespasses unto the old, I had.
So that, as Mountains, mouldring, down do sink;
As from their places shiuer'd Rocks do shrink:
As waters break the Stones; as Showers surround
The dusty Earth; Thou do Man's hope confound;
And tryumph'st ever over Him, dejected;
Transformed in Face, as from thy Face rejected.
Nor knows He, whether his deer Posterity
Shall poorly fare, or flourish in Prosperity:
But, while his Soul his Body bears about,
That, shall have Woe within; and This, without.
The second Book.
^^p. 15.
TO This of His (so hot and vehement)
Thus Eliphas (in the same Element):
Should one so wise (as thou do va^nt thee he^re)
Discourse so vainly? bring such idle gear?
Vent from the Center of a swelling breast
As noisome Gales as the unwholesome East?
Trifle the Time [about I vvot not what]
In idle and unprofitable chat?
Nay: nullify Religious Fear and Piety,
Not praying to, but pleading with the Deity? 11

Which thine own mouth has witnest too-too-far,
With subtle Cauils of a Sophister.
Yea, thine own mouth (not mine) shall thee convince:
Against thy Self thy lips give Evidence.
Why Man! were Thou the first man on the earth?
Or, were Thou born before the Hills had birth?
Have Thou alone GOD's Secret understood?
And have Thou only Wisdoms, in thy Hood?
What is it Thou know, that We have not kend?
What vnderstand'st Thou, but We comprehend?
There are of Us as old as Thou; or rather,
Some (I suppose) more ancient then Thy Father:
And do Thou slight our Comforts (godly sent)?
Or have Thou of thine Own more excellent?
Why does thy heart, and whither, thee transport?
Why do thou close thine eyes? that in this sort
Thy Spirit turns (shall I say spurns?) at GOD:
And from thy Lips spets words so bold and broad?
O! What is Man, that He should clean exist?
Or Woman's Son, that He should Just persist?
Behold, He found, his Angels stood not sure:
Neither, the Heavens, in His pure sight, are pure:
Then, How-much-more, before Him, filthy stinks
Stock-stained Man, who Sin, as Water, drinks?
I Will therefore show the (hark, and mark me well)
What I have seen; I will declare and ^ell
What, from their Elders, Sages yerst have known,
And to their Heirs successively have show'n.
Such as, indeed, have had the Helm in hand,
To steer their Own, and Strangers to with-stand.
The Wicked Man's in-labour, all his Life;
In bitter Pains, in Pangs, and Passions rife:
Number of years are seldom His, to sum:
A Sound of Fears still in His ^ares does humme:
Or, if at all He s^^m in ease to swim;
The swift Destroyer shall soon seize on him,
Hap-less, and Hope-less ever to recover:
Seeing the Sword, him ever hanging over.
Needy, indeed; or greedy still of more
(Pining in Plenty, staruing in his Store)
He wanders, seeking of his Bread about;
In dread of Want; of a Black Day, in doubt:
Trouble and Anguish shall him deep affright;
As royal Armies ready for the Fight.
For, He has stretched his proud hand at Heaven;
And stubbornly has with the Almighty striv'n,
Running at Him, ^ushing upon his Neck;
Yea, on the Bosses of his Shield so thick: 11

Because his Fat, his full broad Face does cover;
And lardie Collops on his sides hang over;
And dwells in Houses, rather Towns of late,
(By Him) dis-patron'd and depopulate;
By Him, rebuilt, re-gilt, re-glost, re-glas'd;
By Him, re- Named (ready to be rased).
Yet, shall not He be Rich; nor in Prosperity
Persist; nor leave Possession to Posterity:
Nor, out of Darkness ever get shall He;
Nor ever other then inglorious ^e:
His Branch shall wither, and with Flame be wasted:
Him Self shall, sudden, with GOD's Breath be blasted
Then, let not (hard-beleeuing haut Humanity)
O! let not the Deceived trust in Vanity.
For, Vanity shall be his Recompense:
Before his Time shall he be snatched hence:
His Spring shall never sprout, his Flowers shall fall,
His Fruit, yer ripe, shall be off-shaken all
(As Grapes and Olives, with untimely Frost)
The Lord shall shake them, and they shall be lost.
For, the Hypocrites Dissembling Congregation,
Shall be dispersed, and brought to Desolation:
And suddenly shall Fire consume the Tents
Of Briberie, with all their Instruments.
For, They conceive but Mischief; breed but Guile,
And bring forth vain Iniquity the while.
Cap. ^^
HE pausing here, JOB Thus replies him, sad:
Yet more of This? This have we often had.
You are indeed a sort of Visiters;
A Crew of cold and wretched Comforters.
Shall idle, addle, aerie, Words surcease?
Or what does make thee dare to dwell on these?
Could I, as you, if you were in my Case,
And I in yours; your Soul in my Souls place:
Could I, against you, words have multipl'ed?
Insulted on you? at you, shook my head?
No: I should rather have raught you Relief,
And with my speeches have asswag'd your Grief.
But, though I plain, my Griefe's not mitigated;
Either, forbear I, What is it abated?
For, He has wearied me: Yea, Lord, Thou have
Spoild me of All: and laid me wholly wast:
The wrinkled Furrows, on my Brow and Back
(Bare skin and bone) bear witness of my Wrack.
My Foe's fell wrath has raakt and rent me sore:
He strives against me; and still angry more,
More eager still, gnasheth his Teeth upon me;
And with his eyes keen flashing frowneth on-me. 11

My Friends (alas!) they laugh at me the while,
They buffet me, and bitterly revile;
They gape upon me, and together gather.
Not to relieve me, but to grieve me, rather.
Thus has GOD hemmed me with ungodly Bands,
And turned me over into Wicked hands.
I was at ^ase; When by the Neck he took-me,
Brake me a-sunder, and to shiuers shook me:
And (whether for Disport or for Despite)
Made me his Butte, and set me as his White.
His cunning Archers do beset me round:
He cleaues my Reins; and ruth less, on the ground
Poures-out my Gall: with doubled Blows he crushes,
And Giant-like, upon me fiercely rushes.
I have in Sackcloth sadly sowed my Skin,
^n Dust and Ashes have I humbled bin,
I have (alas!) besmeard my Face with Tears,
On mine Eie-lids Death's Shade has swom, in Fears:
For no foul Sin; neither, for Fashions sake,
To seem a Saint: pure Prayers did I make,
Pure and Sincere: else, never may they come
In Heaven, to have either regard or room.
Neither, O! Earth! if ever Blood I shed,
O! let it not by Thee be covered.
But, lo, my Witness is in Heaven above;
My Record there, my Conscience to approve.
My Friends contemn me, and condemn me too:
But, droun'd in Tears, to GOD appeal I do.
O! that one might (as Man with Man, in Suit)
That Neighbor-like, one might with GOD dispute.
For, the few Days of my set Number gone,
(...) go the Way, from whence Return is none.
Cap. 1^
MY Spirit's spent: my Days are don (and leave me)
The Graue's already ready to receive me.
Yet are there with me none but those that mock me:
Does not mine eye still see them still provoke me*
But, put me in a Surety, give me Pledge,
To answer me what I shall then allege.
Who Will undertake it? Who will give his hand,
That to the Trial Thou will daign to stand?
Since Thou, O Lord, Their hearts have hidden quight,
From Understanding, and from judging right;
And therefore wilt not, for their Arrogance,
Admit of them, nor them so high advance.
Not, that I would, they should have soothed me neither:
For such shall perish, and their Seed together.
But, to the Vulgar I am made a Song, 11

A Tale, a Tabret unto every Tongue
(Through grief whereof, mine Eye decaies and dims;
And as a Shadow are my other Limbs):
The better sort, amazed at my Plight,
The Innocent, judge me an Hypocrite.
Yet, shall the Righteous still hold on his Course;
Therefore, my Friends, return, recant, re-call
Your hard Opinions, and mis-Censures, all:
For, of you all, not one Wise man I find;
Not fit Physician for a troubled mind.
My Days are past; and my Dessignes undone;
Yea, even my Hopes (my hearts Possessions) gone:
^y Noon (alas!) is changed into Night;
^allods there is twixt Darkness and my Light.
that can I look for, but among the Dead
^o make my House? to have my Grave for Bed?
^r, to Corruption, thus aloud I call;
^hou art my Father: to the Worms that crawl,
^u are my Mother, and my Sisters, all.
Where Is then my Hope? How shall that Hap appeer,
which you yer-while did so re-promise, here?
those things, with me, shall down into the Deep;
^d, with my Dust, amid the Dust shall sleep.
Cap. 18
^Hen said the Sh^hite: Will you never cease
Your tedious Talking? Never hold your peace?
^heare a while; give ear a little now:
^bserue our Speech, and we will answer you.
^t, why, as Beasts are we vpbraided thus?
^d why so basely do you count of us?
(...), rather seems to be besides his sense,
^at wounds him Self in his Impatience.
Why? Shall the Earth, for ^hy sake be forsaken?
^e Rocks removed? and solid Hills be shaken?
^o, no: The Light of Wicked-ones shall out:
^s Fi^ry Sparkle shall not shine about:
^th^n his Doors shall Darkness be for Light:
^ith Him, his Candle shall be quenched quight:
His Strength shall fail him (or be fatal to-him)*
His Counsels cast him; His own Wit vndoo-him:
For, his own Feet shall bring him to the Net;
And willingly upon the Gin shall iet:
Him, by the heel the subtle Snare shall catch:
Him, shall the Thieves and Robbers ouer-match;
For him are laid the Meshes of Mis-hap;
Trains on the ground, and in his ways a Trap:
Him, on all sides, sad Terrors shall affright;
And sudden drive him to his Feet, to flight:
His plentious Store shall Famine soon devour: 11

Destruction's Sword shall hunt-him euery-hower,
Consume his Sinews, and vn-bar his Skin:
And Pestilence (Death's Heir) shall rage within.
His Hope shall hop without his expectation:
His Confidence shall from his Habitation
Be rooted out, and razed (as it were)
And bring him down to the drad King of Fear;
Who aye shall dwell within His Tabernacle,
(Because not His, not his own Habitacle):
Some secret Flame, some Flash, some Sulphury showe^,
Shall sudden spread amid his cursed Bower:
His Roots below shall ^ot amid the Clay;
His Boughs above be cut and cast away:
His Memory shall perish from the Earth;
His Name here nameless (as before his Birth)
He shall be driven to Darkness, from the Light:
And forth the World he shall be hunted quight.
Nor Son, nor Nephew shall be leave behind;
Nor in his Houses any of his Kind.
So that, the Ages, present, and to come,
Shall stand amazed at his dismal Doom.
And This is sure the Lot, the heavy Load
Of VVicked-ones, that fear not, know not, GOD.
Cap. 1^
JOB then replied: Alas! how long will Ye
Torment my Soul, with words; and torture Me?
^en times ye have, with too obdurate mind,
^^proacht me This: uncivil and unkind.
But, put the Case, that I have sinned, indeed:
^ust not I bear it? Then (alas!) what need
^ou load me more; and magnify your wit,
^o amplify my Guilt, and Grief of it?
^eeing you see that GOD has cast me down,
and with his Net has compassed me round.
Lo, I cry-out of wrong and violence;
^oud I cry; yet have no Audience,
^or Ease at all: He has so hedged my Way,
cannot pass: My Paths, in stead of Day,
Are Dark beset: He has my glory reft;
And from my head He has the Crown bereft:
He has destroyed me, euery-way undone:
My Hope, removed (as a Tree) is gone:
And more, His Wrath against me fiercely fryes;
He reckons Me among his Enemies:
His Troops assembled, march against Me, egre;
And, ^ound about, my feeble Tent beleguer:
He ha^h dispersed my Brethren from me far;
To Me, my Kindred as mere St^angers are;
My Neighbors fly me; my Familiar Friend
Has now forgot me (as if never kend): 11

Nay: mine own Household; Men, Maid-seruants, all*
Count me a Stranger, care not for my Call,
Nor will come at me; though I speak them fair:
Nay: to mine own Wife (for the noisome air)
My Breath is strange, though I beseech her, sad,
By those deer Pledges we together had.
The Balest sco^^ me; and when up I ^^se,
They ^p^t their Spite in bitter Obloquies.
(...) most, Those that I loved best,
Abhor me All, and me the most molest.
My B^n^s, in sted of Flesh, cleave to my skin;
And that not sound, save what my Teeth grow in.
Then pity me, o pity me, my Friends;
Since GOD on me his heavy hand extends:
Ah! Why do you yet persecute me, rough.
As GOD? Alas! has not my Flesh enough?
O! that my words (the words I now ass^uer)
Were writ, were printed, and (to last for-euer)
Were g^av'n in Marble with an Iron pen
With Lead in-yoated (to fill up again).
I surely know that my Redeemer lives:
And that He shall (This firm my Faith belieueth.)
In the End of Time, return* and rise from Dust
(The First and Last) to judge and save the Just:
And, that I shall when worms have eat This Clod,
I shall awake, and in my flesh see GOD:
Yea: I shall see him with These ^yes of mine.
And with none els^: though Now in Pains I pine.
The rather, therefore should you now (...),
And Thus Your-selues dis^^eetly now correct:
Why persecute We Him? Why hate Him, We?
^ith This Foundation is thus fix^ in Me.
Then, be you warned: beware, and fea^ the Sword:
^or Wickedness and Cruelty [in word]
^ncenseth Wrath: Know, there shall ^udgment come,
To doom them right, who Other* (^ash) misdoom.
20
SCarce had He done, when the Naamathite
Replies him Thus: Therefore my thoughts in-ci^e
My sudden Answer: therefore, am I spurred
(Regarding light thy sharp and shameful Guird)
With speed to speak unto the Point in hand,
What I conceive, and rightly understand.
Know thou not This of old, through every Ag^
Since first on Earth began Man's Pilgrimage;
That the tryumphing of the Wicked Sort,
The Joy of the Hypocrite is ever short.
Although to Heaven he mount his glorious Top 11

Though to the Clouds his head be lifted up;
Yet shall he perish, as his dung, for aye:
And who has seen them, shall ask, Where are they?
As Dreams forgotten, shall be take his flight;
Yea, chased away, as Visions of the Night:
The Eye that has seen him, shall not see him twice,
Nor shall his Places him again reuise.
His Children shall be fawning on the Poor;
And His Extortions shall to them restore:
His Bones are full of his Youth's sins (his Lust)
Which shall not leave him till he lie in dust:
Though to his Taste his Sin be passing sweet,
Though underneath his Tongue he cover it,
Though there he spare it, and not spet it out,
Though on his Palate still it roll about;
Yet is his Meat turned, in his Bowels, all;
And is, within him, as the Aspic's Gall:
H' has swallowed Wealth, but GOD shall make him fain
To spue it out to cast it up again:
He shall the Aspic's direful Poison suck:
With Vipers tongues he shall be deadly stuck:
He shall not see the Oily Rivers Currents,
Nor Brooks of Butter, nor the Honny Torrents:
His Labor never shall regain his Loss:
He shall restore whom he before did cross;
The Restitution shall be all his state;
He never shall digest, nor joy thereat:
Because the Poor he crushed, and forsook;
And Others Houses violently took.
Sure he shall have no quiet Calm within;
Without, no Store of what he ioyeth in.
There shall be no Remainder of his meat;
And his Reuersions none shall wait to eat:
Nay: in his Ruff, and at his Greatest Height,
He shall be stocked in full many a Strait:
Continual Hazards shall him round enring;
Each spightfull hand shall have at him a fling:
When he is r^a^i^ for his rich Repast,
On Him will GOD his fiery Fury cast;
Amid his Feasts his lead. Displeasure thrilling.
In stead of Food, his b^est with ho^ror filling.
If he escape the Sword; from Bows of steel
Steel-headed Arrows shall him thorough thrill:
The naked Sword bright-shining terror shall
Peep through his Bosom ^^eep through guts and gall.
Horrors shall haunt him: and so, hard-bestid,
From ^iding him, all Darkness shall be hid.
A Fire vnblow'n him sudden shall consume: 11

And woe to them that tarry in his Room:
Heaven shall discover his Iniquities,
And Earth for witness shall against him rise;
All his Revenues, all his state, and stay,
Shall flow to Others, in his Wrathful Day.
This i^ the Por^ion of the Wicked: This
His Heritage by GOD appointed is.
^^p. 2^
SO, Zophar ceast. Then JOB replied: I pray
Hear heedfully what Now I have to say:
B^ this the Comfort you vouchsafe, alone;
Let Me but speak; and afterward, mock on.
Do I complain, or make my moan to Man?
Why do you cross, or interrupt me, than?
^f I have cause of Grief, should not my spirit
^e moved withal? Can Flesh and Blood forbear it?
^ehold me well; and be withal dismayed:
and let your hand upon your mouth be laid.
Thought of the like (elsewhere) would me affright,
And daunt my Flesh: How then, my present fight?
How comes it, that the Wicked live, live long;
Grow Rich, grow Great; wex Eminent, and Strong?
They see their Children, and Grandchildren, rife
Settled about them: In their House, no Strife;
No Fear; no Foe: They feel not any Rod,
No stripe no stroke, of the drad hand of GOD.
Their Bullock genders, and proves ever fit:
Their Heifer calves, and never casts it:
Their Little ones, like Lambkins send they out;
Their Stripplings play and skip, and dance about;
They tune their Voice to sweetest Instruments,
Harp, Pipe and Tabre^; to delight their sense:
In Wealth and Health They live; scarce, ever, sick
Of long Disease; but to their Graves go quick.
Yet These are Those, that to The Almighty say;
Depart from us; we will not learn thy W^y:
Who is the Lord? that we should Him obey.
What should we profit, if to Him we pray?
They have not sure the power in their Own hand,
To get and keep their Wealth at their Command.
Be therefore fa^re, be ever far from Me,
Their Works, and Words, and Thought's Impiety*
Fa^re be their Counsels: far be all their Ways:
And far the Peace of their so prosperous Days.
And yet, how often, is their Lamp put-out?
How often, are They compassed about
With swift Destruction? In his Fury strict,
How often, does GOD Their Payment here inflict?
How often, as Straw before the wind, are They,
And as the Chaff with Tempest whift away? 11

How often, does GOD, in the Vngodly's sight,
For Their own Guilt their own dear Issue smite?
Or, let Themselves here see themselves undone;
Drinking the hot Wrath of th'Almighty-one?
For, what is it to Them? or what care They
(Their Months cut off; Their mouths once stopped with (clay)
What hap their house, what hazard follow shall:
What Weal or Woe, unto their Heirs befall?
But herein, who GOD'S Wisdom shall impeach?
Or, who shall, Him, that rules the highest, teach?
One dies at ease* in Strength's perfection growing;
His Breasts with Milk, his Bones with Marrow flowing
Another dies in Anguish of his Spirit;
And never did good Day or Night inherit:
Both, are, alike, laid in the Dust together;
And Worms, alike, do case and cover Either.
Lo, I conceive your mis-conceipts, from hence;
Your mis-collections, and your wrested Sense:
For, Where (say ye) Where Is now the Princes Court?
And Where the Palace of the wicked sort?
Have ye not asked those that travail by?
And do ye yet, can ye, Their Marks deny?
That (for the most) the Wicked most are spared,
Repriued here, till That dread Day prepared
For dire Destruction: and then (for their Errors)
Shall be brought-forth, in That great Day of Terrors.
For, Here so Mighty and so Great they are;
Who, to their face shall their Offense declare?
Who dares disclose it? Who shall prosecute?
And their due Sentence Who shall execute?
Nay (notwithstanding) to their Grave in peace
They pass, with Pomp of solemn Obsequies;
Accompanied, attended (in their kind)
With Mourning Troops, before them and behind:
Entombed among their Ancestors: and rest
In gloomie Vales, as happy as the Best:
How do You, then, Me comfort, or confute;
While vainly thus, and falsely you dispute?
The third Book.
^^p. 22
T^^ old Thaemanite, as moved withal, replies:
Can Man, to GOD (^^ to Himself, the Wise)
Be p^ofita^le? Any ple^^ure ^^'t
Unto the Lord, if Righteous Thou persist?
If Thou be just, if perfect, and upright;
Is GOD the better? Gains th'^lmighty by it? 1^

For fear of Thee, will He reprove thee (strict)
Enter in Judgment, and thee thus afflict?
Is not thy Sin great and thy Wickedness;
And infinite thy foul Unrighteousness?
Yes: ^hou have taken thy Brothers Pledge for nothing,
And stripped even the Naked of their Clothing:
Thou have not given the weary Drink, at need;
Nor to the Hungry, wherewith all to feed:
The Eminent and Mighty had their fill:
They held the Earth, and swayd thee at their will:
But silly Widows have thou empty packt;
And the arms of Orphans have bin crushed and cracked.
Thence is it, now, that Snares beset thee round,
And sudden Fears thee trouble and confound:
Or a black Darkness that thou can not see;
And a huge Deluge that ore-whelmeth thee.
Is not the Lord in The High Empyreal Bliss?
^ehold the Stars, how high their Distance is:
And then (say Thou) What can the Almighty mark?
How judges He? What sees he through the Dark?
Clouds cover Him from spying so far hence:
He walks in the Heavens Circumference.
But, have not Thou observed the ancient Track
The Wicked trod, to their untimely Wrack;
Who, quick cut down, supplanted where they stood,
Had their Foundations swallowed with the Flood?
Who said to GOD, Depart from us; and thought,
What can the Almighty do to us, in ought.
^et, with good things He filled their habitations.
^ut, far from me be their Inmaginations.
This see the Righteous; safe the while, and glad:
and laugh at them, in their Destruction sad.
^or. We shall stand; our Substance not decay:
^ut their Remainder shall the Fire destroy.
Therefore, acquaint thee (and that quickly too)
With GOD; make peace: and Thou right well shall do
Receive (I pray thee) from lais mouth Direction;
And in thy heart, lay-vp his Words instruction.
If, to the Almighty, Thou at-once return;
Thou shall be built-vp: and shall bravely spurns
Iniquity far from thy Self away;
And from thy Dwellings put it far, for aye.
Then, as the Dust thou shall have Gold, at will;
Pure Ophyr Gold, as Pebbles of the Rill:
Yea, the Almighty Thy defense shall be:
And store of Silver shall be still with Thee.
For, in the Lord thy Pleasure shall thou place*
And unto Him shall thou lift up thy Face: 11

Him shall Thou pray-to; He shall hear thy Lays,
And grant thy Suit; and Thou return him Praise:
Thou shall decree, and He shall make it good,
(So thy good Purpose shall not be withstood):
And on Thy Ways, and in all Works of Thine,
His Light of Grace (and glory too) shall shine.
Nay: when as Others (as thy self art now)
Shall be cast down; re-comfort them shall Thou,
And Thus re-cheer them: Yet, yet may you rise;
For, GOD will save such as have humbled eyes.
Yea: on the Noxious will he pity take,
For the Innocent; and spare them for thy sake.
Cap. ^^
THen answered JOB: Tho to this Day my mones
Right bitter be, my Grief exceeds my Groans:
How is it then, that I, as yet, am held,
For having plained, as if I had rebeld?
O! that I knew, that some would show me, Where
(...) might go find my Souerain Arbitrer.
that I might speedy unto him repair;
and even approach to His Tribunal Chair.
(...) would before Him ple^d my just Defense,
and fill my Mouth with pregnant Arguments.
^hen would I know what should His Answer be:
and understand what He would say to me.
^ould He oppose me with His Power divine?
^o: rather would He steel and strengthen mine.
^here might the Just in his just Plea proceed:
and I should ever from my Judge be freed.
But, Whether to the West I take my way;
^r, to the pearely Portall of the Day;
^r, to the Norward, where he works rife;
^r, to the South, the Cell of blustering-strifes
^hether I look before me, or behind;
On This, or That side: Him I cannot find.
Yet, knows He well my Way: and has me try'd^
And I, like Gold, shall come forth purified.
My Foot has walked in His steps: His Way
Have I observed; and not gone astray:
Nor have I started from His Precepts set,
But prized them more then my appointed Meat.
Yet, He persisteth in one purpose still.
Who can divert him? He does what he will;
And will perform what is of me decreed.
And many such things are with Him, indeed.
Therefore, before Him, am I wonder-smit;
Afraid of Him, when I consider it.
For, GOD has suppled and made soft my heart,
And deep perplexed me in my inward part; 11

Because my Languors neither end, nor I:
Nor can I see, not sound the Reason, Why.
^^p. 24
But, can it be (How can it other be?)
But that the Times of the Divine Decree,
(Concerning Judgments more or less severe;
When, Why, and Who, and How, and What, and Where
Hidden with GOD, and hidden from his Own;
Should to the World, and wicked be unknown?
They shift the Landmarks from their ancient seat^
They take by force men's Flocks, to feed, or eat:
They drive away the silly Orphans Ass:
They take for Pledge the Widows Ox (alas!):
^hey turn the Needy from their nearest Way:
^hey make the Poor together hide them aye:
^o, Like wild Asses in the Wilderness,
^hey ramp about their brutish Business:
^ising betimes for Boot (like Free-booters):
^he Desert Field yields Food for them and theirs.
^hey reap them Each a Crop, from Others Crop:
^hey gather Each a wicked Vintage up:
^hey cause the Naked without Clothes to lie,
^uiuering for Cold, no Covering but the Sky;
^asht with the Showers that from the Mountains shed;
^mbracing Clifts, for Shelter; Rocks for Bed:
^hey Pluck the Pupil from the tender Breast:
^hey take from Poor a Pawn of all their best:
^hey leave them Naked; Nay, the Hungry soul
^en of his Sheaf, and gleaned handfuls poule:
^ea; Laborers that in Their service toil;
that tread their Wine Press, and that make their Oil,
that trudge and drudge in their Affairs; in fine
^hey let them starve, and even for thirst to pine.
The City groans under their Wicked Thr^ll:
^h' oppressed, slain, and wounded, cry, and call:
^et, it is apparent (as the Sun is clear)
^OD does not always smite (nor cite) them ^eer.
Yet, These are Those that aye the Light abho^:
Know not her Way, nor keep, nor care it for:
The Murderer risen (early) yet the Light;
To kill the Poor: and robs (late) at Night:
The Adulterer's Eye does for the Twy-light wai^;
And, muffled, thinks, none sees my quaint Deceit:
They (Burglars) dig through houses in the Dar^
Which, in the Day, they for their own did mark:
But, Light they loath: Morning to Them is D^^^^*
Death's Terror, Day; which all discovers:
On Waters swim they light and swift, for Fear:
On Earth, as Vagrants, fly they here and there, 11

(Their cursed portion) euery-where undone:
By-waies they seek, and the Highways they sh^^.
As Heat and Drought, dissolve and drink the Sno^
The wicked-one the Grave shall swallow so.
The Womb that bare him, shall him quite forget;
And, to the Worm he shall be wel-com Meat.
He shall with Men, no more remembered be:
But broken-off, as is a withred Tree.
He weds the Barren that brings never forth;
And, if a Widow, leaves her nothing-worth.
Yet, by his power, He drags the Mighty down;
And none is safe, if He, in Fury frown:
^o; thoug^h, with Presents, they his Patience buy,
and build on it; on Them he casts an eye.
Such, for a little, are aloft: Anon
(...) low as Others; as All others, gone:
^one taken hence, shut-vp, cut off, and shorn
(...) (with the Hail) the tufted ears of Corn.
Thus it be not: Who will (I desire)
^isproue my Speech; and prove me now a Liar.
Cap. 2^
TO This, the Shuhit^ answered shortly Thus:
He is Almighty, Dradly-Glorious;
those Power imperial, and All-humbling Awe,
^ules his High Places in most peaceful Law.
(...) any number of His Armies known?
that Light so bright, but His has ouer-shone?
^ow, then, may Man, with GOD, be just defined?
(...), He be Clean, that is born of Womankind?
^hold, the Moon, before Him, is not bright:
^arres are not pure in his (All-piercing) sight.
^hen, How-much-lesse? How-much-less Man (alas!)
The Son of Man: a Worm, a VVorthlesse Mass?
Cap. 26
^OB, hereunto replies incontinent:
Well have ye said; but, How impertinent!
^ow have Thou holp the weak and feeble wight?
^ow fit desended him that has no might?
How sweetly taught the simple and unwise?
How full declared the Matter, as it lies?
To Whom do Thou this Speech of thine direct*
What mooues thee to it? and to what effect?
For, I (for My part) know, that, Not alone,
The Eternal rules, on his supernall Throne
The things above, in their harmonious Course;
But here below, the Better and the Worse.
Beneath the Waters, dead things formed bin;
And, dumb (their own Inhabitants) within:
Hell is not hid from Him: Destructions Cave,
From His inspection, can no Covering have. 11

He, the ample Heavens over the Void extends:
He, upon Nothing the sad Earth suspends:
Within his Clouds He bottles up the Rain,
Which with it weight tears not the Clouds in twai^
He has in-bowd the forefront of his Throne,
And spread his clowdy Canapey thereon:
He has begirt the Waters with a List
Shall ever last, till Day and Night desist.
The massy Pillars of the Pole do shake
If He but chide; and at His check they quake.
He, by his Power, does the deep Sea divide:
His Prudence smites her in her fellest pride:
(...), by his Spirit, the spangled Heavens has dressed
^th glittering Signs; the Serpent, and the rest.
^o, These are parcells of his Ways suprem:
(...), o! How little do We hear of Him!
^o can conceive? Who understands the Thunde^s
(...) His more secret, and most sacred Wonders?
Cap. 27
^VHile none replied, JOB gravely Thus goes on:
As lives the Lord, the Almighty Holy-One,
^ho seems a space my Verdict to suppress,
^^ding my Soul with brunts of Bitterness;
^bile Breath is in me; till my Spirit, inspired
(...) GOD, be gone, and from me quite exspir'd;
(...) Lips shall speak no wickedness, no wile;
^r shall my Tongue deliver any guile.
No; GOD forbid that I should justify
^ur rash miss-Iudgement. Mine Integrity
(...) not abandon, to my Dying-day:
^ne Innocence I never will betray:
(...) Righteousness still will I fast retain;
^d, my clear Conscience while I live, maintain.
^t, as the Wicked, be mine Enemies:
^ose, as Unrighteous, that against me rise.
For, what is the Hope of the hollow Hypocrite
though He have heaped Treasures infinite)
When GOD shall take (in a disastrous Day)
His Land (his Life) his Goods (his Gods) away?
Will GOD regard, or hear his howling Cry,
When He is compast with Calamity?
Or, in the Almighty can He comfort take?
Will He to GOD continual Prayer make?
I Will show you, how the Almighty hand does deal:
God's wonted Course I will not now conceal:
Nay; you your Selves, you all have seen it too.
Why talk ye then thus vainly as ye do?
This is, with GOD, the Portion and the Part 11

Of the Ungodly and the Cruel heart:
This heritage shall impious Tyrants have
From the Almighty, This they shall receive:
If many Children he shall leave behind,
As many shall the Sword or Famine find:
Or, if that any in Remain be left;
They, by the Plague, shall, vnbewayl'd, be re^t.
If H^ h^u^ heaped Silver, as the Dust;
And Clothes, as Clay; he may: but sure the Just
Shall joy his Silver, and his Treasures share;
And wear his Wardrobe, how-so rich and rare.
If brave he build; it is but like the Moth
(On others ground, as that in others Cloth)
Soon dispossessed: or, like a Watch-house, soon
^o be set up, and suddenly pull'd-down.
(...) Such Rich, shall die; and lie without regard,
^ga her'd to his Fathers Toomb prepared:
nothing of Him remains in Memory:
^e vanishes in Twinkling of an eye.
^orrors shall seize him, as a Flood, with Fright;
^d as a Tempest, hurry him in the night.
^n Eastern Storm him quite away shall chase;
and, as a W^i^le-wind, hurl him from his place.
(...) pittiless, in wrathful Jealousy,
^Vhile glad and fain he would his fingers fly)
(...) GOD pursue him; and Good men shall smile,
^d clap their hands, and hiss at him, the while.
Cap. 2^
^Vre, there are Mines and veiolings (under ground)
Whence Silver's fetched, and wherein Gold is found:
^on out of Earth, and out of Stone the Brass
^melted down (into a purer mass).
(...) Beyond the bounds of Darkness Man has pried,
and the Excellence of underground descried:
^he rarest Stones, and richest Mineralls,
^om deadly Damps and horrid Dark^ ^e hales:
and, if some Torrent come there rushing in
^uch as no Foot has felt, no Eye has seen)
He can reuert it, or divert it, soon,
Without Impeachment to his Work begun.
Earth's surface yields him Corn and Fruits, for food;
Her vnder-folds, some burning Sulphury flood:
Amid the Quarrs of Stone are Saphires store:
Among the Dust, the precious Golden Ore
(Where never Bird, before did Path discry,
Where never Vultur cast her greedy Eye,
Where savage Whelps had never never trac't;
Nor furious Lion ever by had past):
On Cliffs of Adamant He lays his hands;
Their height and hardness He at will commands; 11

Slents them with Sledges, crops their clowdy crow^
He, by the roots turns Mountains vp-side down:
To let out Rills, He cleaves Rocks insunder:
His Eye perceiues all that is precious, under:
He binds the Waters, that they shall not weep;
And dives for Riches in the deepest Deep.
All This, and more, has Man. But where is found
That souerain Wisdoms, sacred and profound?
That Understanding of the Ways divine,
Of GOD'S supreme and secret Discipline?
Man knows it not; nor kenns the worth of it:
It is not found in any living Wit.
The Deeps confess, the Sea acknowledges;
^is not in Me; nor with Me; the other says.
Nor Gold, nor Silver, nor all Gems that are,
^n purchase it, nor equal it by far:
^o wedge of Ophir, never so refined:
^o Ethiopian Topaze, Pearl of Inde,
^o precious Onyx, neither Sapphire pure
^orall and Crystal pass I, as obscure)
^o Carbuncle, no Diamant so rare;
^o One, nor All, with Wisdoms may compare.
But, Whence is then, and Where is to be found
that sacred Wisdoms, secret and profound?
^h it is hidden from all humane Eyes;
^d from the fight of every Foul that flies.
^each and Destruction; say; We of the same
^ue with our ears but only heard the Fame?
GOD, GOD alone, does understand it Way;
^d knows the place where it abides aye.
^r, He, at once beholds All that is
^all the World: All under Heaven he sees,
(...) poize the Winds, and portion (at his pleasure)
^to the Waters their due weight and measure.
When for the Rain he stablisht a Decree,
^d for the Thunder's Lightning Mutiny;
^en did He see it, and foresee it fit:
^e numbered, pondred, and prepared it:
And unto Man This Maxim did apply;
GOD's Fear is Wisdom and from Sin to fly.
^ap. 29
JOB yet proceeded, and said further more,
O! were it with me, as it was of yore,
In my fore-passed Months, my former Days,
When GOD preserved me; when with gracious ra^^^
His Lightfull Lamp reflected on my head,
Whereby I walked through Darkness, void of Dread:
As in my younger times, when yet the Lord
Vouchlaf't me Blessings of my Bed and Board;
When yet the Lord was with me in my Tents, 11

And showred there his hidden Providence.
When, where I went, my ways were bathed in Butt^^,
And Rocks about me Rills of Oil did gutter:
When I had gone unto the public Gate
To take my place where all our Senate sat,
At sight of Me, would Young men hide them thence
And The Elder sort stand up, for reverence:
Nobles were silent, if I present were;
And, if I spoke, they turned their Tongue to Ear:
And The Ear that heard me blessed me: and the Eye
That saw me, witnest mine Integrity.
For, I delivered every Poor oppressed,
The Orphan and the Helpless I redrest:
He blessed me that was wel-neer undone:
The Widows heart I cheered: I put-on,
^ put-on Justice, as a seemly Gown;
It was unto me as a Robe and Crown.
I, as an Eye unto the Blind became;
And as a Foot, unto the Halt and Lame:
A Father was I to the Poor: and where
The Case was Dark, I would discuss it Clear.
I also brake the Oppressors greedy Jaws,
And took the Prey out of his Teeth and Paws.
Then thought I, sure, to die at home, in rest:
And said, I shall with long good Days be blessed.
For, by the Waters was my Root out-spred:
Upon my Top Heavens nightly Deaw was shed:
My Wealth increast, mine Honor daily grew,
My Bow of Health (my Strength) did still renew.
When I had spoken, every Ear was pressed
To give me ear, and in my Counsels rest,
Without Reply: and as the latter Rain
The thirsty Earth, my Words they entertain.
If I had laughed, or smiled on any, near,
They took no notice, nor would change my Cheer.
I sat as Chief, I only ruled the roast,
Dwelt as a King amid an armed Host;
And, as a Man, amid a mourning Rout,
That, from his lips, pours lively Comforts out.
(...). 30
But now (alas!) My Puisnes Me deride:
The meanest mock me; Yea, and Those (beside)
Whose ragged Fathers I refused, to keep
My Shepherds Curs (much more to cure my Sheep)
For, to say truth, what Service could they do,
So idle bred (both Young and Elder too)
Weakened with Sloth, and wicked Conversation;
And waxen old, in wretched Desolation:
For Cold and Hunger wandering here and there,
With Mallows fed, and roots of Juniper: 11

Pursewd as Thieves, hunted from place to place
With Hue and Cries; and ever had in Chase;
And therefore fain, for Shelter's sake to creep
In Clifts and Caves; in Rocks and Dungeons deep:
Among the Thorns and Thickets roaring rife;
Wild Out-lawes, leading a most Beastiall life:
The Breed of Fools, the Fry of basest birth,
Of name-lesse Men: indeed the Scums of
And yet, to Such am I now made a Song,
A Ballad and a Byword on their tongue:
Yea, These despise me, and despite me too:
Spet in my Face, and make no more adoo.
because the Lord my Bowe-string has unbent,
and slackt my Cord, therefore these insolent
^nsulters Now loose and let-go the Raines
^f all Respect, unto their lewd Disdaigns.
Now, very Boys do take the Wall of me,
^rip at my Feet; and (in their Iollitie)
^is-iudge my Life, and of me Rumors raise,
after their own cruel and cursed Ways:
^hey mar my Path that I have walked in,
^urther my Woes, and have no help therein:
^s a wide Flood-breach they have rushed on-me,
and with the Ruins have roul'd-in vpon-me.
^errors are turned upon me, and pursew
^ly Life as Wind; my Weal, as Vapors flew:
therefore my Soul, in sore Afflictions vexed,
^s poured out, and inly deep perplexed.
Days dark and irksome have upon me seaz'd:
and in the Night (when Others most are cased)
^y very Bones within me are oppressed,
^ay, pierced through; my Sinnewes take no rest:
^y strange Disease, with angry Violence
Of the hot Impostumes loathsome Virulence,
Has staind my Garments: and, with straining Dolor,
About my Neck it gripes me as a Collar.
Laid in the Dust. I roll the Mire among,
Becom'n, indeed, like Ashes, Dirt, and Dung.
To Thee I cry, to Thee the while I call;
But, Lord, Thou hear'st not, nor do heed at all.
Nay, Thou art also Cruel turned, to me;
With hot Aslaults, as on an Enemle:
Thou lift'st me up, (as in a Storm, the Stubble)
To ride a Whirle-winde, while (with Fear and Trouble)
I f^int, and fall (d^sso^ued, as it were)
In deadly ^wound, hurried I wot not where:
But well I wot. Thou soon wilt bring me home
To Death, the House where all that live shall come; 11

Whither, thy H^nd thou will no longer strerch;
And Whence, no Prayers boot, nor need, to fe^ch.
Did not I weep for Others Wofulnes?
Was not my Soul grieved at the Poores Distress?
When Good I looked for, Evil came: when Light,
A dismal Darkness, worse then blackest Night.
My bowels boiled with continu^ll heat;
A troublous Time upon me sudden set:
Not with the Sun, but Sorrow, black I turned:
Amid the Assembly loud I cried and mournd.
With hidious Noise (for horrid Anguishes)
As kin to Dragons and to Ostriges.
^y Harp is tuned to a heavy Tone;
^y Music turned to the voice of Moan.
Cap. ^^
^ Made a Covenant with my constant Eyes,
^ From gaz^ng out on blazing Vanities:
Having my Choice, whereon my thoughts were staid)
(...) by should I once mis-think upon ^ Maid?
^or, O! for such what Part, what Portion is
^ith GOD above in th'Heritage of Bi^s^e?
^ay: is there not Destruction still behind,
^^range Punishment, for Wicked (of this kind)?
^ Are not my Paths apparent unto GOD?
^^^h not He see and sum the Steps I trod?
It I have walked in Vanity and Pride:
^ unto Fraud my Foot have ever by'd:
(...) his just Balance let him weigh me right,
and he shall find me by his Beam upright.
^ If that my Steps have straid, or trod awry:
^f that my Heart have harkened to mine Eye:
^f to my Hand have cleaued any Spot:
^f Blood or Brihes the same did ever Blot;
^hen let me Sow, and Others eat my Crop;
^ea, let my Plant be ever plucked-vp.
If ever Woman have my heart beguiled;
^r I laid wait to have Others Wife defiled:
Let mine again unto Another grind,
And me be punished in my Sins own kind.
For This is sure a high and heinous Crime,
To be condemned and punished in the prime:
Yea, it is a Fire, whose Fury would not cease,
But ruin all, and root out my Increase.
If ever I despised my Man, or Maid,
Debating with me, and them ouer-waid;
What shall I do? What Answer shall I make,
When GOD, as Judge, their Cause shall undertake?
Did not one Maker them and me create, 11

Of Matter like, in Manner like, and Fate?
If ever I delayed the Poor's desire:
Or let the Widows longing Hopes to tire:
Or ever eat my Morsells all alone,
And gave the Orphan and the needy none:
(He has been with me from my Childhood bred
As with a Father: She, in Husband's sted,
Has ever had my Counsel for her Guide,
My Power for Guard; my Purse her Want supplied.)
If I have seen or suffered any Poor
To lie and die, Naked, or out of Door:
Nay, if his Loins be-blest not me from harm,
Because my Fleece and Cottage kept them warm:
If ever I, against the Impotent,
^oore, Father-lesse, or Friend-lesse Innocent
For Fear or Favor, of a Friend or Foe,
^or Gain, or Grudge (that I did ever owe)
^aue lift my hand, or Him in right withstood;
^r, when I might have, have not don him good:
^hen let mine Arm off from my Shoulder fall,
and from the bone be pasht to powder all.
^or, GOD'S drad Judgments did I always fear:
those Highness Wrath I could nor balk nor bear.
If I on Gold have fixed my Hope, or Heart;
^r, to the Wedge have said: My Trust thou art:
^f I have joyed for being grow'n so Rich;
Or for my Hands had gotten me so much:
If, when I saw the Sun or Moon to shine,
My heart (intic't) in secret did incline
^o the idle Orgies of an idolist;
Or ( Heathen-like) my Mouth my Hand has kissed:
Or, if, in Summer of my golden Days,
Or silver Nights shining with prosperous Rays;
^y heart in private has been puffed too-high,
^scribing all to mine own Industry
Which had been impious Sacrilege and Pride:
^or, then had I the GOD of Heaven denied):
If I reioyc't at Ruin of my Foes,
Or have triumphed in their Overthrows;
Or have so much as let my Tongue to roll,
Or Heart to wish a curse unto their Soul:
Though often, my Servants, in their rage extreme,
Would fain have beaten, nay, have eaten them.
If I have shut the Stranger out of Door;
Or let-not in the weary Pilgrim poor:
If I (like ADAM) have conceald my Sin,
And closely cloakt my Wickedness with-in:
(Although I could have ouer-born, with Awe, 11

Whole multitudes; the meanest Groom I saw,
I feared so, I durst not wring, nor wrong,
Nor wrangle with: but kept my Tent and Tongue)
O! that I had an equal Arbitrer,
(To hear, and weigh, consider, and confer).
Behold my Aim: the Almighty I desire
(A certain Sign of mine Intent entire)
For, He, I know, would sentence on My side;
And witness for me, that I have not ly'd.
Then, though against me, (in his fell Despi^e)
Mine Adversary should a Volume write,
It, as a Robe, I on my back would bear,
And as a Garland on my head it wear:
(...) would, by peece-meale, show my Conversation,
^l so unlike to all his Accusation,
that clearing Me, it should him more convince,
^o come and ask me Pardon, as a Prince,
But, If my Land against me plead or plain;
^r, If my Furrows cry-out, or complain^:
(...) Tithe-lesse, Tax-lesse, Wage-lesse, Right-lesse, I
^aue eat the Crop; or caused the Owners die;
(...) sted of Barley, and the best of Corn,
^row nothing there, but Thistl^s, Weeds and Thorn.
Here JOB surceast.

The fourth Book.
(...) 32
Here also ceast the Three forenamed Friends
From farther Speech (as hopeless of their ends)
Since JOB so stiffly still maintained his right
Of Righteousness, in his own proper sight.
Then angry Zeal began to swelt and swel
In Elihu the son of Barachel,
The Buzite borne, and of the Race of Ram:
Both against JOB began his wrath to flame,
(Because, as tenor of his words implied, 11

Rather Himself, then GOD, he iustifi'd)
And also Those his Foe-friends, for so strict
Condemning JOB, vntry'd, and vnconvict.
His modesty him ^itherto withheld,
As giving place to others of more Eld:
But, seeing JOB to a full Period come;
And the other ^hree without Reply, as dumb;
His Zeal burst out, and Thus in brief began.
I must confess, I am too young a man
TO have interrupted you (so old) before
In This Dispute; and therefore I forbore:
I was in doubt; I durst not speak (till now)
My weak Opinion, and present it you.
For, Days (thought I) and Years can farther reach:
And long Experience Wisdom best can teach.
Men have a Soul, and Reason's light inherit:
^ut, Wisdom is inspired by the Holy-Spirit
Which blows where it will, and works free,
Not tied to Age, not to Authority):
^or, Great men always are not wisest found,
Nor the most Ancient still the most profound.
Therefore awhile to Me give ear, I pray;
and let Me also mine Opinion say.
I well observed your words, with diligence
scanned your Reasons, marked your Arguments:
^ea, near and narrow have I watched and waigh'd
What Each of you, and All of you have said:
^et is there None of you (apart, or joint)
Conuinces JOB; or answers to the Point.
^est You should say; We Wisdom compass can,
GOD will evince him; not the Wit of Man.
^or Me, Me yet he never did gainsay:
Nor do I mean to answer him, your way.
Here-with amazed, they still continuing mute
Without Reply, or show of more Dispute
For I expected yet some Speech from some:
waited still: and when as none would come)
I will, said I, now prosecute my Part.
To give my Censure from a single heart:
For, I am full of matter to the top;
My Spirit within me, strains me, stirs me up:
My Breast is like a Wine-Butt, wanting Vent,
Ready to burst; or Bottles, like to slent.
I Will therefore speak, that I may yet re-spire;
And open my mouth* to fan mine inward fire.
Yet None, I pray, from Me the while expect
Smooth, soothing Titles; personal Respect:
For, soothing Titles know not I to give; 11

Nor* should I, would my Maker let me live.
(...) 33.
NOw therefore, JOB, hark with attentive heed
To all the Words that from me shall proceed:
For, what I speak, premeditated is;
Not out of Passion, or of Prejudice:
But most sincere, and from a single heart,
Out of clear Knowledge (without Clouds of Art).
One and the same, of the same Mass of Mire,
Made Me, as Thee; and did my Spirit inspire:
Fear not therefore, if Thou have ought to say;
Oppose and answer: put thy Words in ray:
I am (according to thy wish) to plead
And parley with thee, in The Almighty's stead;
And yet, a Man: My Terrors shall not fright thee,
Neither my hand with heavy Tortures smight thee.
Lo, Thou have said (I heard and marked it well)
In Me, there none Iniquity does dwell:
I am Upright, and Clean, and Innocent:
Yet, as a Foe, He is against me bent:
He picks occasions to inflict me Strokes;
Sifts all my Ways, and sets me in the Stocks.
And lo, in This, even in This saying so,
Thou art not Just: for (if thou know not) know,
That GOD is Greater then All Men: then, Why
Striu'st Thou with Him? whose supreme Sovereignty
Yields us no Reason, nor Account at all,
Of His high Counsels; Why, or How, they fall.
For once, yea twice, to Man The Almighty speaks;
Yet Man perceiues not (or it little reaks)
By Dream, or Vision of the Night, in Sleep
Upon his Bed; or in some Slumber deep:
Then opens He Men's cares, and him reuealeth,
And sweetly there their meet Instruction seals;
To turn a Man from his intended Ill,
And hide the Pride of his ambitious Will:
To keep his Soul back from the brink of Hell;
And save his Life from Death and Dangers fell.
Sometimes, He Is also chast'ned on his Bed,
With grievous Sickness, from the foot to head;
Incessant bu^ning in his Bones and Blood:
So that he loatheth the most dainty Food.
His Flesh consumed, and his Bones so high
That they appear (as an Anatomy):
His Life and Soul draw near unto the Pit,
(The Grave does gape, and Worms do wait for it).
If with Him be a holy Messenger
(One of a Thousand) an Interpreter,
To show to Man the Justice of his GOD,
In his Correction, with his sharpest Rod; 11

And, rightly humbled, re-aduance the Meek,
By Faith, above his Righteousness to seek,
And pray to Him; He will propitious stand,
And to his Servant He will Thus command,
Deliver him from going to the Grave,
I am appea^'d: a Ransom found I have.
Then, than a Child shall fresher be his Flesh,
He shall return unto his Youth afresh:
Then shall he call on GOD, and GOD shall be
Right gracious to him: He with joy shall see
His glorious Face. For, He will render than
(He will impute) His Righteousness to Man.
He visits Men; and if that any say,
(...) have offended: I have gone astray:
(...) have miss-done: I have perverted Right:
^h! I have sinned, and had no profit by 't;
^e will deliver, from Infernal Doom,
^is Soul; his Life from an untimely Toomb*
Lo, all These things does GOD do twice or thrice
Often and again) to Man (too prone to Vice)
^o re-reduce his Soul from Death's dark Night;
^o be enlightened with the living Light.
JOB, mark it well, And harken farther yet
that I shall speak: save, when thou see it fit,
^ought thou have to answer, or object,
^eak on, in GOD's Name (for I much affect
^o justify and clear thee (if I may):
(...) otherwise, if naught thou have to say;
^st, and observe with silence, I beseech;
and I shall teach thee Wisdom, by my Speech.
Cap. 3^
So, he proceeded, and said furthermore:
Hear Me, ye Sages; Men of Skillful lore:
^or, as the Palate does discern of Food,
^h'Eare tries Words (how they be bad, or good).
^t's then debate This Matter, among us;
^xamine it, and what is right, discus^.
For, JOB has said: O! I am Just, ^^rig^^;
And yet (says He) GOD has ^^r^st my ^ight.
Should I b^lye my Cause? My thrilled Wound
Is past all Cure; and yet ^^^ Crime is found.
What man, like JOB, himself so ouer-think^?
Who (wilfully) Contempt, like Water, drinks:
Who, with the Wicked and Ungodly walks,
Iumps just with Them, and in their language talks.
For, he has said; Man has no profit by it
To walk with GOD, and in Him to delight.
But, hear me now, all ye that understand;
O! be it far from the All-ruling hand 11

Of Justice Self (The Almighty GOD, most High)
To do I^iustice, or Iniquity.
No: He to Each man his own Work repayes;
And makes him find according to his Ways.
Undoubtedly, the Lord of Hosts, the Strong,
Nor has, nor does, nor will, nor can, do wrong.
Who has to Him charge of the Earth imposed*
And, Who but He, has the whole World disposed*
If He but please on Man to set his mind,
To reassume hi^ Spirit, his Breath, his Wind;
All Flesh at once (if He but hold his breath)
Shall turn to Dust; and perish all, in Death.
Now note Thou this, if so thou have a heart
^o understand; list what any Words impart*
^al He have Rule, that Judgment loathes (and lacks)*
and for unjust, will Thou the Iustest tax?
^^seems it Any to a King to say,
(...)! Thou art Wicked (in thy partial Sway)*
^r unto Princes (to vpbraid them) Thus
(...) are Ungodly, you are Impious?
^hen, how-much less to Him that puts no Ods
^ouching the Persons of those Earthly Gods;
^or twixt the Rich and Poor, the Great and Small;
^r, they (alike) are his own Hands-work, all.
They (at His will) shall in a moment die;
^ea, even at Midnight (unexpectedly)
^he People shall be troubled and transported;
^d even the Princes, without hands sub^^rted.
^r, evermore His eyes are open wide
^n all Men's Ways, on every Step and Stride.
^here is no Darkness, nor no Shade of Death,
^r Wicked-ones to hide them underneath:
^or, will he, though, Any*so ouer-load,
that they may justly grudge, or plead with GOD.
By Heaps, will He to pieces grind the Great,
and (in their st^^d) set Others in their seat:
For, unto Him, their Works are manifest;
Night turned to Light: and they shall be suppressed.
Them, as most Wicked, smites he (as it were,
In all men's sight, in open Theater)
Because from Him they did revolt and swerue;
And would not any of his Ways observe:
But caused the loud Cries of the Poor ascend
To Him, who always does their Cries attend.
When He gives Quiet, who dares be so bold
To cause Disturbance? And, if He withold
His Countenance, who then behold Him can;
Whether a People, or a Private man? 11

That the Hypocrite no more may Reign (as King)
Nor, under him, the snared People wring.
Us therefore Thus beseems, to say to GOD:
I bear with Patience thy correcting Rod:
I will not murmur, nor burst out therefore;
But sigh in silence, and offend no more:
Show me my Sins I see not, nor perceive;
And, Henceforth will I all Injustice leave.
Or, should it be after Thy pleasure ay?
No: will-thou-nill, He will (not I) repay.
Now, therefore speak thy Conscience seriously;
And let the prudent mark and testify,
^at, void of Knowledge, JOB has mis-auerr'd;
^d, wide of Wisdom, his Discourse has erred.
Would therefore (Father) he might yet be tried:
^h for the Wicked he has so replied;
^r, to his Sin he does Rebellion ad:
^ps hands at us, as He the Better had:
^d (too-too-pure in his too-prudent Eyes)
^amst the Almighty, Words he multiplies.
Cap. 3^
(...) (...), proceeding* Thus moreover said:
(...) Think Thou this right (if it be rightly waid)
^ch thou have spoken (or thy Speech implied)
(...) Righteousness is more than GOD's (O Pride!).
(...), Thou have said, What will it vantage thee,
(...) shall I gain, if I from Sin be free?
^'ll answer thee; and with Thee, All so dreaming:
^ok-vp, and see the Heavens above thee gleaming*
^old, how high: if therefore thou transgress,
^d multiply thy Sin and Wickedness;
^at hurt do Thou to GOD? What Detriment*
(...) the other side, if Thou be ^nnocent,
^ust; What do Thou to his Goodness give?
(...) from Thy hand, What, What does He receive?
^y Wickedness may hurt a Man (like thee):
^y righteousness, to Man may helpful be.
For manifold and frequent Tyranny,
Oppressors make oppressed-ones to cry;
Yea, to cry-out for cruel Violence
Of Mightie-ones, of Men of Eminence:
But, there is None that says (as due belongs)
Where Is GOD, my Maker (Who by Night gives Song*
Who teaches us, has us more Wisdom given,
Than Beasts of Earth, or to the Fowls of Heaven)*
There cry they often; but none does hear or heed,
For the Evils sake (who in all Ills exceed):
For, Vanity, GOD does not, has not heard;
Nor ever will the Almighty it regard.
Now, though Thou say, thou see Him not, He* Just:
With Him is Judgment; therefore in Him trust:
For want whereof, his Wrath has visited;
Yet not so hot as Thou have merited.
Therefore does JOB open his Mouth in vain:
And void of Knowledge, yet, yet, mis-complain.
Cap. 36
ELih^ yet said: A little suffer me;
For I have yet more to allege to Thee,
On GOD's behalf. I Will fetch mine Arguments
From far (confirmed by long Experience)
To justify my Maker's Holiness,
Give Him his own, and right his Righteousness.
I Will speak no Falsehood, nor no Fraud propound:
All my Discourse shall be sincere and sound.
Lo, GOD is Mighty; yet does none despise:
Omnipotent, Omniscient* Strong and Wise.
He spares not the Life of Wicked wights;
But, the Oppressed in their wrongs he rights.
His Eyes are never off the Righteous sort:
Them on the Throne He does with Kings consort:
Them He aduances; and beyond all Term
Does them establish, and them fast confirm.
Or, if that ever Fetters them befall,
Or, they be holden in Afflictions Thrall;
He lets them see their Works, their Wickedness,
Their wandering By-waies, and their bold Excess;
And opens then their Ear to Discipline,
Commanding quick, that they return from Sin.
If they return, to serve and Him obey,
Their Days and Years right happy spend shall They:
If not; the Sword shall smite them sodai^ly:
And in their wilful Folly shall they die.
But, Hypocrites, the Men of double heart,
They heap-vp Wrath: they cry not when they smart.
They die in Youth; their Life among the (...),
Most (...), most (...), (...).
He the humble Poor in his Affliction frees:
Their Ears he opens, in Calamities:
So would He, Thee from thy Distress have freed,
And brought thee forth far from the Streits of Need,
To spacious Plenty; and thenceforth thy Board,
Should with the best and fairest have been stored
But, Thou, too-wicked-like, too-stifie have stood;
As their presumptions seeming to make good;
Not stoopt, but strutted in Contesting Pride.
Therefore, on Thee does Judgment yet abide.
Since wroth he is, beware to tempt him more;
Lest with his Stroke, he sudden smite thee ore:
Or hiss thee hence with his al-mighty Breath:
Then can no Ransom thee redeem from Death.
Will He regard thy Goods? or reak thy Gold?
Thy Stat^, or Srength (how much, or manifold)?
Nor wish Thou (hope-less) for the (hap-less) Night,
When from their place People are taken quight:
Beware, regard not Thou Iniquity;
Neither (alas!) through faint Infirmity,
Choose rather That, than thine Affliction's Part,
With humble Patience of a Constant heart.
Behold, the Lord is, for his Power, suprem:
And, for his Prudence, Who does teach like Him?
Who has appointed unto Him his way?
Or, Who can tell him, Thou have gone astray?
Rather, remember that thou magnify
His public Works, apparent to our eye;
So visible, that both the young and old,
Them from a far do bright and brim behold.
Lo, GOD is Greater then We comprehend:
Nor can the Number of his years be kend.
He makes the thick exhaled Vapors thin,
That down again in silver Deaws they spin,
From strouting Clouds abundantly distilling
For the use of Man, the Plains with Plenty filling.
Also, can Any understand the Extent
Of Clouds, or know the Rattling of his Tent?
Behol^, He spreads out his Light there-ouer,
And even the bottom of the Sea does cover.
For, by the same He works diuers-waies,
Both to his Justice and his Mercie's Praise:
That, through excess causing a fearful Flood;
This, temperate, producing store of Food.
He vailes the Light with Clouds that come between,
Forbids it shine, and lets it not be seen:
Boading a Shower, or Storms approaching rage;
Which often, even Cattle of the Field presage.
^^p. 37
HEre-at, my Heart trembles for inward Fe^^,
As if removed from it own place it were:
Hark, hark with heed unto the hidious Noise,
The horrid Rumbling of his dreadful Voice,
Which, with his Lightning, he directs forth,
Under whole Heaven, and over all the Earth.
After the Flash, a Clash there ^oareth high;
He thunders-out his Voice of Majesty:
And then no longer will He keep them back,
When that is heard over our heads to crack.
GOD* with his Voice, does thunder wondrously,
And works great things that we cannot discry:
He bids the Snow to cover Hill and Plain;
So, drizling Showers; and so, his Mighty Rain;
Whereby, From Field-works He seals-vp men's hands,
That they may know His works; how He co^ma^^^.
Then, to their De^ the Savage Herds do hie;
And for a season intheir Co^crt li^.
From Southern Cha^ber^ the hot Whirlwind co^^^
From Northern Cel^* That which with Cold (...)*
The ^rost is given us, by the breath D^uine;
When Crusts of Crystal (...) Fl^^d^ confine.
The bl^c^^st Clowd He does (...) of (...) ((...)*
And, his bright Cloud (the Ligh^^i^gs shroud ^e) (...)*
And (by the Counsel of his Providence)
All This, by Turns, in round Circumference
Is turned about: and ready at his Call,
Throughout the World, to do his will, in all.
For, He commands them come, for Punishment;
Or Love to His; or else Indifferent.
Harken to This, ^ IO^; stand still, and ponder
The Works of GOD, so full of weight and wonder.
Know Thou (alas!) when He disposed them;
Or caused the Light out of his Lu^p to beam?
Know Thou the Clowd's just Poizes (the high or lower,
And wondrous works of the All-perfect Knower?
How, when He calms the Earth with Southern puff,
Thy thinnest Clothes thou find warm enough.
Have Thou, with Him, spread forth the spangled Sky*
That (liquid Crystall-like) strong Canopie?
If so; then show us, what to say to Him:
For, what to say, we are (alas!) too dim.
Should I mis-speak, needs any Him inform?
Nay, should I not be swallowed up (in storm)?
None fixly can (when clouds be cleared away)
Behold the bright and shining Lamp of Day:
From out the North stream goodly Beams of gold:
With GOD is Light more bright by manifold,
More pure, more piercing, past a mortal Eye;
More dreadful far. His glorious Majesty
( Dwelling above, in Splendors inaccessible)
For us to find, out is a Point impossible.
He Is excellent in Prudence: passing Strong:
Plentious in Justice: and does No man wrong.
Therefore Men fear him: Yet, for Their desert,
Regards not He those that are Wise of heart.
(...) 38.
THen, drad IEHOVA from a Whirlwind spoke
In sacred terms; and Thus with JOB he brake:
Where? Who is He, that (to Himself so holy)
Darkens my Counsails, with contentious Folly?
Come, gird thy loins, prepare thee, play the Man;
I will oppose thee: answer, if thou can.
Why! Where were* Thou, tell (if thou know, dismayed
When the Foundations of the Earth I laid?
Who marked first the Measure of it out?
Or (can Thou tell) Who stretched the Line about?
What Bases had it; and fixed Where-upon?
Or, Who, thereof laid the first Cornerstone,
When Morning-Starrs for loy together sang,
And all GOD's Children cheerful echo rang?
Or, Who, with Doors, shut-in the Sea so straight;
When from the Womb it rushed with such weight?
When as I made the Clowd a Clowt for it,
And blackest Darkness as a Swathe-band fit:
And cradled it, in mine appointed place;
With Bars about, and Doors at every pace:
And said unto it; Hitherto extend;
And farther, not: Here, thy proud Waves be pend.
Had Thou the Morning from thy birth, at beck?
Mad^st Thou the Dawn in his due place to break;
That it might reach the Earth's Circumference,
And that the Wicked might be shaken thence:
To stamp it (various, as the Potters Clay)
With many Forms, in manifold array,
When as th* Ungodly shall be all descried;
That Justice hand may break the arms of Pride?
Have Thou gone down into the Sea it self;
Walked in the Bottom; searched every Shelfe;
Survaid the Springs? Or have the Gates of Death
Been opened to Thee; and those Doors beneath
Death's ghastly shadows? Know Thou (to conclude)
(^ell, if thou know) the Earth's just Latitude?
Which is the way where lovely Light does dwell?
And as for Darkness, where has She her Cell;
That Thou shold'st Both, in both their bou^d^ co^prise;
And know their dwellings, and their Paths, precise?
Needs must Thou know them: Thou were born yer than:
No doubt Thou were, Thou art so old a man.
Have Thou the Treasures of the Snow suruay'd?
Or seen the Storehouse of my Hail (vp-layd
And hid in heaps, against a time of need)
For Warlike Battery, where I have decreed?
Which is the way whence Lightning flasheth out,
Scattering th* unhealthy Eastern Gales about?
Who has disposed the upper Spouts and Gutters,
Whereby the Air his ouer-burthen vtters?
Or given the Lightning and the Thunder way,
To cause it rain on places parcht away;
On thirsty Deserts, where no People pass;
On barren Mountains, to revive the Grass?
Had Rain a Father? Or, begot by whom
Was pearly Deaw? Or, from what pregnant Womb
Came crystal Ice? Or, can Thou rightly render,
Who did the hard and hoary Frosts engender,
When Waters creep under a Stone-like cover,
And The Oceans surface is thick-glased over?
Can Thou restrain the pleasant Influing
Of Pleiades (the Vshers of the Spring)?
Or, can Thou lose Orion's Icie Bands
(Who rules the Winter with his chill Commands)?
Can Thou bring forth (the soultry Su^mer^ Guide)
Bright Mazaroth (or Dog Star) in his Tide?
Or can Thou lead Arcturus (and his Train,
The Autumnall Signs) his Sons (or Charles his Wain)?
Know Thou the Statutes of the Heavens above?
Or can Thou (here) them in their order move?
Will Thou command the Clouds, and Rain shall fall?
Will Lightning come, and answer, at thy call?
Who has infused Wisdoms in the inner part?
Or Understanding who has given the har^?
Who can sum-vp the Clouds, or clear the Sky?
Or open Heavens bottles, when the Earth is dry?
To steep the Dust, and knead the clotted Clay,
Yerst ouer-baked with too-hot a Ray?
Will Thou go hunt, the old Lioness to help;
Or fetch-in prey to fill her greedy whelp,
When they are couchant in their Den, or watch
For passant Herds, their wonted Boot to catch?
Who, for the Raven, provides timely Food;
When as her hungry greedy-gaping Brood,
VVandring about, and wanting what to eat,
Do (croaking) call, and cry to Me for meat.
Know Thou the time when mou^tain Goats and Hinds
Do yean and calue (according to their Kinds)?
Can Thou keep reckning of the Months they go,
And how their Burdens to their Birth-time grow;
When they but bow them, and forthwith let fall
Their tender Fruit, and all their Pains withal.
Who has sent out the Wild Ass, free to feed;
Or let him loose (from serving humane need)
Whose house and haunt I have ordaind express
Within the brackie barren Wilderness.
He scorns the Cities multitude and noise:
He reaks not of the yawning Driuers voice:
The craggy Cliffs his shaggie Pastures been;
Where, off he croppeth what he finds green.
Will the Unicorn thee willingly obey?
Or, will he come unto thy C^b, for Hay?
Will he be brought to harrow or to plow?
Or, will he bring thy Corn unto thy Mow?
Will Thou presume of Him, for strength in fight?
Or leave, to him, thy Labor to acquit?
Did Thou bestow the Peacoks goodly Fan?
Or, gave Thou Feathers to the Stork (or Swan)?
Or* to the Ostridge her delicious Tresse
(The Ambitious Badge as well of War as Peace)
Who lays her eggs, and leaves them in the Dust,
To hatch them there, with radiant Heat adust,
Without her help, or heed; lest Tread or Track,
Of Man or Beast them all to pieces crack:
Vnkindest Dam, the labor of her womb
That dares annull; while Hers not Hers become:
So void I made her of Intelligence,
And kind instinct of Natures Influence:
Yet, with her Wings and Feet so fast she skippes,
That She the Horse and Rider both out-strips.
Have Thou indew'd the Horse with strengthful wonder
And clothed his crest, and filled his breast with thunder?
Can Thou affright Him, as a Grass-hopper;
Whose nostrills pride snorts Terrors every where?
He paws the Plain, he stately stamps, and neighes,
And glad goes-on against the armed Arraies,
Disdaining Fear. For, for the Sword and Shield,
Dart, P^ke, and Lance, He Will not forsake the Field,
Nor turn his back (how-euer thick they shiuer)
Nor for the Cross-bow, and the rattling Quiver.
He swallowes-vp the Earth in furious heat;
Nor will believe the Sound of the Retreat.
Among the Trumpets, sounds his cheerful Laugh,
Ha-Ha ha ha: he smells a farre-off
The wished Battle; hears the thundering Call
Of proud Commanders; and loud Shouts of all.
Is It by thy wisdom that the Hawk does mew,
And to the Southward spreads her winged Clew?
Does The Eagle mount so high at thy Behest,
And build aloft (so near the clouds) her Nest?
She dwells upon the Rock and ragged Cliffe,
And craggy places the most steep and stiff:
From whence, about to seek her prey she flies;
Which, from afar, her quick keen Sight espies:
Her young ones also, only Blood do suck:
And where the Slain are, thither do they ruck.
^^p. 40.
Moreover, yet, The LORD, proceeding, said
To JOB: shall He that dares with GOD to plead,
Teach Him His part? Let him (who GOD does tax)
Here let me hear the Answer that he makes.
JOB sadly then Thus humbly did reply:
O! LORD, behold; o! most-most Vile am I.
What shall I answer Thee? What shall I say?
Only, my hand upon my mouth I Will lay.
Once have I spoak, and twice; and too-too bold:
But now, for ever I my Tongue will hold.
Again, the LORD out of the Whirlwind spoke,
And said to JOB: Yes, yes; thy Theme re-take:
Gird up thy loins again, and play the Man:
I Will question thee: now answer, if Thou can.
Will Thou make void my Judgments (just and hic)
Condemning Me, thy Self to justify?
Have thou an Arm like to the Arm divine?
Or is Thy Voice as Thunder-like as Mine?
Put-on thy Robes of Majesty and Might:
Deck Thee with Glory, and with Bewty bright,
Dart forth the Lightnings of thy wrathful Frown;
Against the Proud, and bring them tumbling down:
Behold Thou all and every one that is Proud,
And down with Them, and all the Wicked Crowd:
Trample upon them, in their very Place:
Hide them in Dust at once; there bind their Face:
Then will I grant (what Thou have urged so brave)
That thine own Self thine own right hand can save.
But, Now, behold (thy Fellow) BEHEMOTH,
Thy fellow Creature; for, I made you Both.
He, like an Ox amid the Field does graze:
In's Loins and Navel his most Strength he has:
He whisks his sinewie Tail, stiff as a Ceder;
His Stones (within) with Nerves are wreathd together.
His Bones and Ribs be strong as Brazen Bars,
And as vnyeelding as the Iron-Spars:
He Is of the Master-peeces of the LORD,
Who also armed him with a ready Sword.
The Mountains yield him meat; where night and day,
All other Beasts do fear-lesse feed and play.
Beneath the broad-leau'd shady Trees he lodges
Amid the Fens, among the Reeds and Sedges,
Compast with Willowes of the Brook about;
Where, when he enters (in the time of Drought)
The massy bulk of his huge body bays
The Torrents course, and even the Current stays:
There, yer he go, the River dry he drinks;
And in his Thirst to swallow Jordan thinks.
Dare any come, before him, Him to take,
Or ^ore his Snowt, of Him a Slave to make?
^^^. 41
Can Thou hale up the huge LEVIATHAN,
With hook and line amid the Ocean?
Can Thou his tongue with steely Crotchets thril;
O^ with a Thorn his snuffing Nose, or Guil?
Will He come sue, by Supplications, to-thee?
Will He with smooth and soothing Speeches woo-thee?
Will He by Covenant, serve thee, at thy beck?
Or be thy Slave, for ever at thy Check?
Will Thou with Him, as with a Sparrow, play;
And give him tied, unto thy Girls, away?
Shall Fishermen of Him a Feast prepare?
Shall They his flesh among the Merchants share?
Can Thou his Skin with barbed pheons pierce?
Or plant his Head with groves of Otter-speares?
Lay hold on Him: set on him: but, before
Think on the Battle, and come there no more.
For, it is so far from hope of Victory,
That even His sight would rather make thee fly.
There Is None so fierce that dares Him rouse or hunt.
[Then, Who shall safely Me my Self affront?
Who has prevented Me? To Whom have I
Been first beholding for a Courtesy,
Or bound at all for any Benefit
Bestowed on Me, that I should guerdon it?
Why? is not All Earths ample arms confine,
All under Heaven, All in the Ocean, Mine?]
I will not hide his Parts and Properties;
Neither his Strength, nor seemly Symmetries.
Who shall vnhood him? Who with double Rain
Shall bridle him, with Snaffle, Trench, or Chain?
Or put the Bit between his laws (his Portall)
Impaled with Terror of his Teeth so mortal?
His Shield-like Scales, he chiefly glories in,
So close compact, glew'd, sealed; that, between,
No Air can enter, nor no Engine pierce,
Nor any Point disioyne them or disperse.
His Sneesings cause a Light, as brightly burning;
His Eyes are like the Eyelids of the Morning;
Out of his Mouth flow blazing Lamps, and fly
Quick Sparks of Fire, ascending (wift and hie:
Out of his Nostrils, Smoke, as from a Pot,
Kettle or Caldron when it boileth hot:
His Breath does kindle Coals, when with the same
He whirleth-out a Storm of Fume and Flame:
Strength dwells in his Neck; so that he joys
In saddest Storms, and tryumphes of Annoics:
His Flakes of Flesh are solid to his Bone;
His Heart's as hard as Wind-mils neather-stone.
To see Him rise, and how he breaks withal;
The stoutest stoop, and to their Prayers fall.
No Weapons of Defense, or of Offense,
Can Him offend, or from Him be Defense:
Iron and Brass He waighes as Sticks and Straw:
Sling-stones and Arrows Him do never awe:
Cap. ^^
Darts daunt him not, more then they Stubble were:
He laugheth at the shaking of a Spear:
Sharp ragged Stones, Keen-pointed Sherds and Shells,
He rests on, amid his muddy Cells.
He makes the deep Sea like a Pot to boil,
A Pot of Ointment (casting scummie Soil):
Where He has past, he leaves upon the streams
A shining Path, and The Ocean hoarie seems.
In Earth is Nothing like Him to be seen;
So Fear-lesse made, so full of hautie Spleen;
Despising all High things, Himself beside.
He is the King of all the Sons of Pride.
Cap. 43.
JOB, prostrate then, Thus to the LORD professed:
Drad GOD, I know, and I acknowledge pressed,
That All Thou can; and All Thou kennest too:
Our Thoughts not hid; Thine own not hard to do.
^ am the Man, Who (to my self too-Holy)
^arkned thy Counsels, with Contentious Folly.
For, I have spoken what I understood not,
Of wondrous things which comprehend I could not.
Yet, LORD, vouchsafe, vouchsafe, I thee beseech,
^n Ear, and Answer to my humble Speech.
Till now, mine Ear had only heard of Thee:
^ut, now, mine Eye thy Gracious Self does see.
Therefore, My Self I loath, as too-too-bad;
and here repent in Dust and Ashes, sad.
Now, after This with JOB; it came to pass,
The LORD did also speak to Eliphaz
The Thaemanite; and Thus to him said He:
^y wrath is kindled with thy Friends and Thee:
For None of You have spoken of My Path,
So right and just as JOB my Servant has.
Therefore, go take you Rams and Bullocks fair,
Seav'n of a sort; and to my JOB repair;
Bring for your Selves your Burnt Oblations due,
And JOB my Servant He shall pray for you
(For, Him will I accept) lest, Iustly-strict,
After your Folly I revenge inflict;
Because You have not spoken of my Path,
So right and just as JOB my Servant has.
So Eliphaz, the ancient Thaemanite,
Bildad the Shuhite, the Naamathite
Zophar, (together) them prepared and went
And did according GOD's Commandment.
Also the LORD accepted JOB, and staid
His Thral-full State (when for his Friends he praid)
And turned it to Solace-full, from sad;
And gave him double all the Goods he had.
Then all his Brethern, Sisters all, and Kin;
And all that had of his acquaintance bin,
Came flocking to his House, with him to feast;
To wail his Woes, and comfort him their best,
For all the Evil which the LORD (of late)
Had brought upon his Person and his state.
^d Each man gave him (as best bear they could)
^peece of Money and E^r-ring of Gold.
(...) So, that the LORD blessed Job's later Time,
^th more abundance then his flowery Prime.
^or, Fourteen Thousand Sheep were now his flock;
^mels six Thousand; Steers a Thousand yoke;
^ee-Asses twice five Hundred; Family
^st as before: Seven Sons, and Daughters Three.
(...) The Eldest Iemima, Kezia the Next.
(...) Keren-Happuch (says my sacred Text)
^e Third he named (Names of gooly Sense,
^uding to some Graceful Excellence:
^he first, as much as Luster of the Morn;
(...), the Next; last, Alabastrine Horn)
(...) In all the Country were no Women found
(...) fair as These. JOB, of his Goods and Ground,
among their Brethren gave them Heritage.
(...) Yet, after This, JOB lived a goodly age,
^wice Seauenty years, and saw his Sons Sons Sons,
^cessiuely, Four Generations:
and then He died, Ancient and Full of Days.
(...) GOD, for Him, and all his Saints, be Praise,
and for His Succor in These sacred Lays.
AMEN.
EPITAPHIVM IOBI.
Qui Se, qui Seclum vicit; qui saeua Suorum Funera, Amicorum iurgia, Pauperiem;
Vlcera qui carnis, qui Coniugis impia verba;
Qui Coelum iratum, mente tulit placida:
Inuictum virtute IOBVM, Patientia Virgo,
Nunc vidua, hoc Sponsum condidit in Tumulo.
Who, SELF, The World, and Satan, triumphto're;
Who, Wealth's, and Health's, and Children's ruefull* Loss;
Who, Friends Rebuke, Foes rage, Wifes cursing Cross;
Hevn^ Frown, Earth's force, Hels Fury, Calmely bore:
The Invincible in Virtue, JOB, Her Pheere,
The Virgin Patience ( Widow now) toomb'd Here.
MEMORIALS of MORTALITY: Written ^n Tablets, or Quatrains, BY By PIERE MATHIEV.

The first Centurie.

Translated, and Dedicated To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of South-hampton.

By Iosuah Sylvester.

TO The Right Honorable, HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, Earl of South-hampton, etc.
Shall it be said (I shame, it should be thought)
When After-Ages shall record Thy Worth;
My sacred Muse has left SOVTH-HAMPTON forth
Of Her Record; to Whom so Much she ought?
^h from Thy Town (where My Sarauia taught)
Her slender Pinions had their tender Birth;
And all, the little all she has of worth,
Under Heavens Blessing, only Thence she brought.
^r lack, therefore, of fitter Argument;
And lother Now, it longer to delay;
Here (while the Part of PHILIPS Page I play)
^onsecrate This little Monument
Of grateful Homage, to Thy noble Bounty;
And Thankeful love to (My deer Nurse) Thy County.
Humbly devoted Iosuah Sylvester.

MEMORIALS of Mortality.
1
LEt whosoever list, think Death a dreadful thing,
And hold The Grave in horror and in hate:
^ think them, I, most worth the wel-comming;
Where, end our Woes; our Joys initiate.
2
Man, Death abhors, repines, and murmurs at-her,
^lind in that Law which made her, good, for Him:
^oth Birth and Death the daughters are of Nature;
^n Whom is naught imperfect, strange, or grim.
3
Death's vgliness is but imagined;
under foul Vizard a fair Face She wears:
Her Vizard off, there is no more to dread;
We laugh at Children whom a Vizard fears.
4
Death, in strange Postures daily is disguised,
With Darts and Sythes in hand, Beers on her back:
As Angels are with wings and locks denised;
So, Her a Body of bare Bones they make.
5
Who fears this Death, is more then deadly fick;
In midst of Life he seems even dead for dreed;
Death in his breast he bears, as buried Quick:
For, fear of Death is worse then Death indeed.
6
Each fears this Death: and with an equal Dread,
The Young as from a hideous Monster hie-them.
The Old, at her sight shrink down into their Bed;
All shun her aye, the more She draws nigh-them.
7
What Good, or Bad, boads Life or Death, to give;
To be so fond of That, and This so flying?
Thou would not die, yet know not how to li^e;
Not knowing, Life to be a liuing-dying.
8
One loves this Life, Another loathes it wholly:
Some look for Ease, Promotion some, some Profit:
To love it, for the Pleasures here, is Folly;
Weakness, to hate it, for the Troubles of-it.
9
The Storm at Sea under a Calm is bred:
Within Good-hap, Ill-hap has life included;
Begun in Tears, in Toiles continued;
And, without Dolor cannot be concluded.
10
Life, like a Taper, with the weakest Blasts
Is waued, wasted, melted, puffed out:
In some, sometimes, even to the Snuff it lasts;
In others hardly to the half holds-out.
11
Fruit on the Trees first blooms, the^ buds, the^ grows,
Then ripes, then rots: Such Our condition just;
^egot, born, bred, live, die; so roundly goes
^imes Wheel, to whirl our Bodies back to Dust.
12
This Life's a Tree, whose good^y Fruits are Men;
^ne falls, Himself; Another's beaten down:
^'s ftript at last of Leanes and Apples then,
^y Time's same hand which had them first bestown.
13
This Life's a Table, where, in earnest-iest
^oure Gamsters play: Time, eldest, vantage takes,
and bids Pass: Love fondly sets his Rest:
Man needs will see it; but, Death sweeps the stakes.
14
This Life (indeed) is but a Com^die,
Where This, the Kaiser plays, and That, the Clown^;
But, Death still ends it in a Tragaedie,
Without distinction of the Lord from Lowne.
15
This Life's a War, civil, and foreign too;
Within, without, Man has his Enemies:
To keep the Fort, Death does the T^wne undo;
To save the Soul, the Body She destroys.
16
The World's a Sea, the Galley is this Life,
The Master, Time; the Pole, Hope promises;
Fortune the Wi^^e; the sto^mie Tempest, Strife;
And Man the Rowe-Slaue, to the Port of Death.
17
The World (me thinks) is like our Parliaments,
Where Right too often is ouer-born by Wrong;
Where Quirks and Quidits are of Consequence;
Where lastly naught Death's Sentence can prolong.
18
The World is much of a fair Mistress mood,
Which, wily, makes more Fools then Favorites;
Hugs These, hates Those; yet will of all be wooed:
But never keeps the Promise that she plights.
19
Life's smoothest gloss is like the Sphere of Glass
Archimedes framed, and filled with Stars;
As frail as fair: for, the least storm (alas!)
That raps it, snaps it; and the Pleasure marrs.
20
The Honor thou thirstest (as one Dropsie-sick)
Weening to quaff it, often stops thy wind:
'T's a swelling Bladder; which when Death shall prick,
(Thou will confess) thou but a Puff did find.
21
And that Ambition which affords thee Wings,
^o seek new Seas beyond Our Ocean's Arms,
^or Mounts of Gold and Pearl, and precious things;
^hal not preserve thy Carcass from the Worms.
22
That Pleasure too, which stops thy Reasons ears,
^esots thy Soul, intoxicates thy Sense;
and sad Repentance still behind it bears;
^or moment Joys, leaves Sorrows Monuments.
23
Pleasure which tires thee, but contents thee never,
Thy Body wearing more, than wearying:
^ike Danaides Siue-like Tub, a-filling ever,
^ut never full, for all their bucketing.
24
Beauty, which makes the prowdest Kings to crouch,
Which serves the Soul as Letters in her favor;
To see, delightful; Dangerous, to touch;
From Death's drad Fury, may not, cannot save her.
25
But, Beauty, Grace-less, is a Saile-less Bark,
A green-less Spring, a goodly light-less Room,
A Sun-less Day, a Star-less Night and Dark;
And yet this Grace cannot escape the Toomb.
26
When Body's Bewty with Soul's Bewty dwells,
There Is a Perfection passing all the rest:
Without This, Bewty seems a Blemish else:
Without That, Virtue seems not seemly dressed.
27
That Bewty, which the Air, Age, Ague quails;
Which busies so our Eyes, Toungs, hands and hearts;
At fifteen, buds; at twenty, flowers; and fails,
Or falls, at thirty, and to Dust reuerts.
28
Gold, the Worlds God, the Sun of Pluto^'s Son^;
Whom Fire and Sword incessant serve so fell;
Gold, Virtue's Friend, and Vices Fort at-once,
Serves often for Bridge to pass in post to Hell.
29
Man's Knowledge here, is but mere Ignorance:
We see the wisest foulely stumble often:
Learning is puffed with Doubt-full Arrogance:
And Truth is lost while it is too-much sought.
30
With Mysteries the Idiot meddles most;
Peeps into Heaven, into Kings Counsels pries:
In Pulpit Phormio does darrain an Host:
Therfites prates of Arms and Policies.
31
The Assyrian's Empire is now seen no more:
^he Medes and Persians did the Greeks intomb:
^reat Allexander's Kingdom kinged Four:
those Crowns, in fine, stoopt to the State of Rome.
32
Where are Those Monarchs, mighty Conquerors,
those brows ere-while the whole Worlds Laurel dressed,
^Vhen Sea and Land could show no Land but Theirs?
^ow, of it All, only Seven Hills do rest.
33
Where are Those Cities (great and goodly States)
^f Niniue, with thrice five hundred Towers?
^reat Babylon? Thebes, with a hundred Gates?
^^rthage (Rome's Rival) Didoe's dearest Bowers?
34
All These huge Buildings, These proud Piles (alas!)
^Vhich seemed to threaten, Heaven it self to seal;
^aue now given place to Forests, Groves, and Grass;
and Time has changed their Names and Place withal.
35
Nay, will thou see, how-far Great Kings are foild?
^ee how sometime in Gold they swallow Poison:
^ee Ptolomeus Cross't, Boleslas boild,
^aiazeth in a Cage, Richard in Prison.
See, see a Prince, near Cairo, flayed quick:
See Sapores by his proud Victor trod:
See Monk-like shav'n our Cloistred Chilperick:
See Denis bear, for Scepter, Pedant's Rod.
37
See Gordian there in his own Girdle hung:
Se Phocas bones broken with furious Batts:
See Diomede to his own Horses flung:
To Wolves Licaon, Popiel to Rats.
36
See, see proud Salmon sudden Thunder-slain:
See Theodorick with horrid Terror thrild:
See Longuemare hanged in a golden Chain:
See a fierce Courser dragging Brunechild.
39
See Attalus, having, for Court, a Forge:
See Phalaris burnt in Perillus Bull:
See Memprice left the greedy Wolves to gorge:
Cambyses Sword sheathed in Himself too full.
40
Who but will fear amid the Frights of France;
Seeing how Death Two Henry's reft of Life?
The Sire, in Paris, with a splinterd Lance;
The Son, before i^, with a poisoned Knife.
41
That Queen, whose Court was in a Castle coopt,
A Prisoner, here; above, a Princess, hoped.)
Whose royal Throne to a Tragic Seaffold stoopt,
^er Head she felt with whiffing steell off-chopt.
42
That King, who could within his Kingdoms drad,
^ee Sol still shine, when hence he vanishes;
Who, past Our Seas, another Empire had,
^or All he had, had but a louzie Death.
43
Who more his Garden of Salona prized
Than ROME's great Empire and the Worlds Command,
Knew well the Cares from Corwnes insepariz'd;
And Scepters sad Weight in the strongest hand.
44
Toward our End insensibly we ^lip:
For, speaking, sporting, laughing, s^oringdeep.
Death still draws on-wards: as at Sea the Ship
Sails to her Hav'n-ward, though the Master sleep.
45
Death Each-where kills: in hunting, (...);
In's Cave, Calig^la; Aristobulus,
In Bath; by the Altar, Philip; (...),
In Camp; in Council, conquering JULIUS.
46
Death seeks the Aemathian; and from Nero flies:
One in a Shallow drownes, who Seas did escape:
An Emperor in eating Mushromes dies:
A Holy-Father in a Harlots lap.
47
No hand but serves Death's turn: Edric by's Mothe^
Alboin by's Wife; Aristo by his Friends;
By's own Son, Baiazeth; Conrad, by's Brother;
Mustapha, by his Sire; Self, Cato ends.
48
Death diversely makes him familiar here:
Henry the Black, a bit of Bread could fine;
A King of Goth's died, in a Tub of Beer;
Thalis, of Thirst; of Hunger Antonine.
49
Death, euery-where, in eue^ry thing distills
Her fell Despite; Fire, Aier, Earth, Ocean:
Drusus, a Pear; a Fig Terpander kills;
A Fly (in drinking) choaketh Adrian.
50
As soon, a Souerain, as a Shepheard's gone:
Men dying here have but one equal Quality:
By Birth and Death is Their Condition one;
Their Stay, and State, between, make the Inequality.
51
There Is no Death Sudden to the godly- Wise:
^is heart goes out to meet all haps before:
^Vhen he embarks, he casts Wracks Ieopardies;
and when Wind serves not, He will row no more.
52
Not knowing then, When, Where, thy Death will (snatch;
^t Sea, or Land; young, old; Morn, Noon, or Night:
^ook for it ever, euery-where keep watch.
^or, what we look-for, little can affright.
53
If Infants often, no sooner breathe then die;
(...) Good-men little-last, and Wicked long:
^e not too-curious in that Secret's Why?
^h' are strokes of that hand which struck never wrong.
54
Why Good men go, and Why th'Vngodly stay,
^ispute it not; GOD has permitted so.
those die, to live: These live, to die for aye:
^hese, live at ease; Those in a World of VVo.
55
If from thy Days thou but thy Nights subtract;
^hy Sleep's, thy Care's, thy Mawe's, thy Muse's waste,
^Vhat thy Wife wears, What thy Friends exact,
^hy Griefs, thy Suits: How short a Life thou have!
56
The Headache, Toothache, Gout, or Fever ^ise.
Or Ulcer in the Leg, Stone, in the Reins,
By lingering Drops strains out the tedious Life;
Yet art thou loath that Death should rid thy Pains.
57
Thy Term expired, Thou put'st-off Payment yet,
And weenst to win much by some Months delay.
Since pay thou must, were not as good be quit?
For, Death will be no gentler any Day.
58
The affairs of Parting poast not to to-Morn.
For, on Delay, Repentance waits with Woe:
The Wind and Tide will in a Moment turn:
All hours are good for Those resolved to go.
59
Grudging to die in flower of thine age,
Thou grieu'st to be too-soon discharged from Prison^
Repin'st, too-soon to have don thy Pilgrimage,
Loath to haue-in thy Harvest in due Season.
60
Make of thy Deeds, not of thy Days, account:
Think not how far, but think how fair thou passe^^
See to what Sum thy Virtues will amount;
For, Life and Gold are chose by weight; the (...)
61
Life's valued by the effect, not by the age;
^he labor, not the lasting, praise it most:
^ong has he lived that lives to be sage;
^ood life (too-often) in long life is lost.
62
Long Acts commend not most a Com^di^,
It Is still esteemed as the Parts are played:
(...), in our Lives, not Years considered be;
^ut, worthy Actions by the Wise are waigh'd.
63
Who grieves because he lived not here, yet born,
^ hundred years; is double worthy laughter:
^ut, trebble He who at his Death does mourn;
^ure not to live a hundred years heer-after.
64
Man's not more Happy for long-liuing here,
Number of Days do not more Blisses bring:
More Compass makes not a more co^plete Sphe^^.
^s round's a little, as a larger Ring.
65
And, if that Death wait on thee, and protract;
With Usury, she will make thee pay it double:
Thy Joys in Dream, thy Dolours still in act,
To make long Life a long Repenting Trouble.
66
If He that here thee in his Vineyard hired,
Pay thee at Noon thy Wages, full as much
As Those that there all the whole Day have tired;
Why murmurst thou? why do thou grieve and grutc^
67
He casts his Work well, well his Workmen kens;
Thy Slackness, Slowness, Weakness to hold out:
Therefore, yer weary, he thy Way-fare ends;
Lest, staying longer, thou mar all, it is doubt.
68
He gives our Task, and he again will take it;
Who Him, unwilling; Him, unworthy serves:
Before he call, it is folly to forsake it;
And who-so leaves it, to be left deserves.
69
Or first, or last, on All this Stamp is set;
Early or late, into This Port must We:
Who gave the Charge, ordained the Retreat;
One self-same Law did Life and Death decree.
70
The more the Body dures, Soul more indures;
Never too-soon can She from thence exile:
Pure, in she came; there living, She impures;
And suffers there a thousand Woes the while.
71
The Soul is forced within the Flesh to dwell;
^ danger there she lives, and sleeps in fear:
^o hatch her Bird, she needs must break her Shell,
and think It never can too-soon appear.
72
Soul blames the Body, Body blames the Soul;
^t, Death surprising, ends their Quarrel pressed:
^own goes the Body, in the Dust to roll;
^he faithful Soul, up to the eternal Rest.
73
Death frees the Soul from Bodies wilful Errors;
^om the Souls Vices, She the Body saues:
^he Soul's Annoyes, are to the Body Terrors;
^he Bodies Torments, to the Soul are Graves.
74
This Body is not Man: His Stuff's more fine;
^is Beauty, with Heavens Beauty has Affinity:
^he Body dead, That euer-liues, divine;
^s even a Beam from the supreme Divinity.
75
If then the Soul, so long Here languishing
^ithin the Body, do not gladly part;
^e has forgotten her own Source or Spring,
and that She must, from whence she came, reuart.
76
But, more then Death, Death's Pain appalleth the^*
That Is but a Stream which swiftly vanishes:
There Is, as no Pain, in that Extremity:
For, the Body, down, does nothing feel in death.
77
Then quit those Fears that in thy Phantsie stick:
For, violent Evils have no permanence:
If that Death's Pain be keen, it is also quick;
And by the Quicknes takes away the Sense.
78
To leave thy Babes behind, thy heart it gripes;
In Whose Thou shall revive, from lap to lap:
Happy who has them; for they are our Types:
And often Who has None,'s happy by mishap.
79
To leave thy Wife thou wail'st, well worth excusing
'T's a necessary Ill, Good stranger-like;
Which, cleerest Eyes (Self-wife) too-oft mischusing,
In little Flesh find many Bones to pick.
80
Thou Art loath to leave the Court's Delights, Devices,
Where None lives long vnbrau'd, or vnabhorred:
Where Treason's Prudence; where the Virtues (...)
Where some no Eyes, and where some have no Forehead.
81
The Mariner, that runs from Rock to Rock,
From Wrack to Wrack, dwelling in dangers rife,
Wauc's Bal, Wind's Thral, and Tempest's Shuttlecock,
Would not exchange His for the Courtiers Life.
82
The Court beguiles thee, as black-Angel-Bands,
In giving Leaves for Fruits to Circes Sisters:
Their brightest Torches are but funeral Brands:
And, in the Court, All is not Gold that glisters.
83
Thou wold'st in Death revenge thy wro^ged Worth,
Make known thy Love, have shown thy brave Ambition,
Why fram'st thou not thy Death unto thy Birth,
Which brought thee naked forth, and void of Passion?
84
Fain wold'st thou see thy Learning's fruit (perhaps)
Ripe, yer Thou rot; that is but a vain Desire:
Art now-adayes may starve, while Ignorance
Has Shades for Summer; and for Winter, Fire.
85
All day thou trudgest thorough thick and thin,
For that dull Bulk which does thee daily brave:
Phinice wreaths Ropes, which aye his Ass windes-in:
The Soul that serves the Body, is a Slave.
86
As many steps in Death as Life we tread:
Esteem, for Deaths, all Days since thou had breath:
To come's not Thine; Present, is instant fled:
And Time, in time, is overcome by Death.
87
When Man's imbarkt on the Universal Deck,
He neither can swiften his Course, nor slack it:
Tide, Wind, and Weather, are not at his Beck;
And, To put back, has many often wracked.
88
Some, sometimes grieve for one that gladly dies:
Socrates joys, since wrong he suffers:
Xantippa melts in Tears; He laughs, She cries:
Diversely judging of these Darts of Death.
89
To run unto this Death, is Desperate rage:
Wise Patience only waits it euery-where:
Who scorns it, shows a Resolution sage;
For, Cowards fly it, and the Idiots fear.
90
When the last Sand of our last Glass goes out,
Without recoiling, we must step our last:
As, without grudge or noise, dislodge the Stout;
And when they must go, stay not to be chac't.
91
The Pilgrim longs to have his Journey done;
^he Mariner would fain be off the Seas:
^he Workman joys to end his Work begun;
and yet Man mournes to finish his Disease.
92
For a short time Thy Sun is ouer-cast:
^t, Thou shall once re-see't more bright than ever:
and, that same Day, which here thou think thy last,
^a New Birth Day, to be ended never.
93
What Wrong does Death, I pree-thee Worldling
^hen, losing (under hope of happier matches) (say,
^^atting thy Life, he takes thy Card away;
^^d when, to save thy Life, thy Light he snatches?
94
Fear thou, Faint-hart, that narrow Plank to pass
which GOD Himself has gone; which all Men must?
that, like a Child, held by the sleeue (alas!)
^ith Eye still glancing on the brim thou go?
95
Beyond it, thou shall see those pleasant Plains,
those boundless Beauty all Discourse transcendeth:
^here Kings and Subjects souls, have fellow Raigns,
^n blessed Thrones, whose Glory never ends.
96
What shall thou see more, for more living Heet?
This Heaven, this Sun, thou often before have seen:
And should thou live another Plato's Year,
This World would be the same that it has been.
97
Death's end of Ills, and only Sanctuary
Of him that cannot escape the Grudge, the Gall
Of a severe Judge and proud Adversary:
It is a Point which Heaven appoints to All.
98
At that Divorce sigh Bodies, Souls do solace;
The Exile exulteth at his Home-Retreat:
This Body's but the Ione, it is not the Palace:
The immortal Soul, bath an immortal Seat.
99
Death's as the Dawning of that happy Day,
Where without Setting shines the eternal Sun,
VVhere-in who walk, can never never stray:
Nor Fear they Night who to the Day-ward r^^.
100
There Is Rest eternal for thy Labors rife:
There Is for thy Bondage bound-less Liberty:
There when Death ends, she begins thy Life.
And where is no more Time, there is Eternity.
FINIS.
MEMORIALS of MORTALITY: Written ^n Tablets, or Quatrains, BY PIERE MATHIEV.

The second Centurie.

Translated, and Dedicated To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Essex.

By Iosuah Sylvester.

TO The Right Honorable, ROBERT DEVREVX, Earl of Essex and Ew, etc.
YOur double Title to My single heart,
Both by your Purchase, and your Parents Right;
Claims both a better and a greater Part
Of grateful Service, than This slender Mite.
Yet, since (to profit, more than please) I write
More Sighs than Songs (less used to Smiles than Smart)
Disdain not These Restrainers of Delight;
Though bitter, fitter, than the Soothing Art,
To keep the Mind and Body both in Health;
To cool the Fits of Lust, Ambition, Pride
(Surfaits of Ease, Youth, Liberty, and Wealth)
And cure All Sickness of the Soul, beside.
Whence, Ever free; and full of Every Good
From GOD and Men, be ESSEX Noble Bud.
Ex Animo exoptat Iosuah Sylvester.

MEMORIALS of Mortality.
1
That height of Kings, Crowns Ho^^^, Worthies Wonder,
(...) Is now but wind, dust, shade. He whose Approach
^all'd the Prowdest: Whom; All trembled under;
^rsed base hand butcherd in his Coach.
2
^ll Triumph, yesterday; today, all Terror:
^y; the fair Morning ouer-cast yer Even:
^y; one short Hour saw, live and dead, Wars Mirror,
^ing Death's speed-stroak vndiscerued given.
3
^n all This World, All Is sickle; naught is Firm:
(...) a Sea sanz, Safety, Calm, or Port:
^es, Cities, Empires have but here their Term:
^at ever 's born must under Death resort.
4
Time flits as Wind, and as a Torrent swifteth:
^as^eth quick, and Naught can stop it flying:
^ho knows what Ills it every Moment drifteth*
^ems, that To leave to live, is To leave dying.
5
Man in the Womb knows nothing of his State:
(...) wile of (...)) for, there, had he Reason,
^e should foreknow this Worlds too-wretched Fa^e;
^d rather would intom be him in that Prison.
6
Our Birth begins our Beer; our Death, our Bre^^
On that Condition Here aboard we come:
To be 's as not to be: Birth is but Death:
There 's but a Sigh from Table to the Tomb.
7
Life 's but a Flash, a Fume, a Froath, a Fable,
A Puff, a Picture in the Water seeming;
A waking Dream, Dreams Shadow, Shadows Tab^^
Troabling the Brain with idle Vapors steeming.
8
Life, to the life, The Chesse-boord lineats;
Where Pawnes and Kings have equal Portion:
This leaps, that limps, this cheks, that neks, that (...)
Their Names are diverse; but, their Wood is one.
9
Death, Exile, Sorrow, Fear, Distraction, Strife,
And all those Evils, seen before suspected;
Are not the Pains, but Tributes of this Life;
Whence, Kings no more than Carters are protected.
10
No: Sacraments have been no Sanctuary
From Death; Nor Altars, for Kings offering-vp:
The Hell- hallowed Host poisons Imperial Harrie:
Pope Victor dies drinking the immortal Cup.
11
Thou ow'st thy Soul to Heaven; to pay that De^^
(...) not compeld; Christians are willing Payers:
^t, yet, thy Soul as a good Guest entreat;
^om no good Host will tumble down the Stairs.
12
^Tis better fall, then still to fear a Fall:
(...) better die, then to be still a-dying:
^e End of Pain ends the Complaint withal:
^d nothing grieves that comes but once, and flying.
13
This Life 's a Web, wouen fine for some, some gross;
^me Hemp, some Flax, some longer, shorter some:
^od and Ill Haps are but the Threeds acrosse:
^d first or last, Death cuts it from the Loom.
14
These Names, which make some blubber, some so brave
^ames sprung from Injury, or from Ambition)
^ Death are equal: Earl, and Sir, and Slave,
^der his Empire, are in one Condition.
15
For Friends Deceast, cease not Repast nor Sleep;
^ch Sorrow suits not the Intellectual part:
^ho wailes man's Death, that He was man does weep:
and, that He promised, coming, to depar^.
16
The Young and old go not as equal pas't:
The one ambles swift, the other gallopeth:
It Is good to die, yer we out Life distaste.
A valiant Man should dare to feel his Death.
17
Happy who leave the World when first they co^^
The A^er, at the best, is here contagious thick:
Happy that Child, who issuing from the Womb
Of's Spanish Mother, there returned quick.
18
The Body's Torments are but Twigs to be^^
And brush the Dust from Virtues pleights about;
And make the Passions of the Soul more neat:
As the Aicr is purest when the Winds roar-out.
19
Grieuing that Death shuts not thine Eyes at ho^^
And where the Heavens vouchfaf't them first to op^^
Thou fear the Earth too-little for thy Tomb,
And Heaven too-narrow for thy Corpses Cope.
20
Heavens have no less Order, then at their Birth,
Nor Influence: Sun, Moon, and Stars, as bright;
All hold their own; Fire, Water, Aier, and Earth:
Man, Man alone's fallen from his pristine Plight.
21
Worldling, thou ^aist, It Is yet not time to mend;
But, GOD hates Sinne^s that in Sin delight:
To grossest Sinners does (...) Mercy send;
But, not to Sinners ^i^ning in despite.
22
Who, Morn and Even, does of Himself demand
Account of All that he has done, said, thought;
Shall find him much ^as'd, when he comes to stand
To that Account where All shall once be brought.
23
For bitter Checks that make thy Checks to flame,
And to thy Teeth tell Truths, thou have no Action,
To do the Evil, since thou had no shame,
Be not ashamed to sufferthy Correction.
24
Perhaps, this Child, shall Rich, or Poor, become*
Perhaps a Wretch, perhaps a Liberal:
Perhaps a Wiseman, and perhaps a Mome:
But, past perhaps, assured, die ^e shall.
25
When Wine runs low, it is not worth the sparing;
The worst and least does to the Bottom diue:
Wrong not thy leisure (years vouchsafe) in daring:
But sometimes look into thy Grave, alive.
26
Sinner, thy GOD is not inexorable;
No Rhadamanth, Returning hearts to hate:
There is no Sin, in Heaven unpardonable;
Nor no Repentance, in this Life, too late.
27
The Eye that fixlie the Sunbeams beholds,
Is sudden daz'd: so, in GOD'S Judgments high,
Men's cleerest Judgments are as blind as Moulds:
None, none but Aegles, can the Lightning eye.
28
O wrecked Virtue! wretched is Thy state;
For, Fortune has the Fruit, Thou scarce the Flower:
Thou art a Stranger at thy proper Gate,
Thy Friends thence banished, and thy Foes in Bowe^.
29
Man, Knowledge still, to the last gasp, affects;
In learning, Socrates lives, grayes, and dies.
Free from Death's Process Knowledge none protecteth:
But, to learn Well to die, is to be Wise.
30
To live, is to b^gin One-Work, and end it,
Life has, with All, not same Repute, Report;
'T's an Exile, to the Sot; Sage, Journey ween'd it:
Wherein He walks, not as the Common-sort.
31
For having a good Prince, Peers just and wise,
Obedient People, Peace concluded fast,
^ State 's not sure: Storms after Calms arise;
and fairest Days have foulest ouer-cast.
32
Man, though thou be from Heaven Originarie,
Presume not yet to Peer thee with thy God:
He Is Soueraign King; Thou but his Tributary.
He Is every where; Thou but in one poor Clod.
33
Of Elephants, the biggest leads the Band;
The strongest Bull over the Heard does reign:
But, Him behooues who will Mankind command,
Not ablest Body, but the aptest Brain.
34
Kings Majesty seems as eclipsed much,
Unless great Servants in great Troops attend:
^Tis sure an Honor to be served by Such;
But, on Their Faith it is fearful to depend.
35
To build a Palace, rarest Stones are sought:
To build a Ship, best Timber is selected:
But, to instruct young Princes (as they ought)
Ought all the Virtues to be there collected.
36
Art's now-adayes a Desert desolate:
Kings gracious Rays are there no more discerned:
Philosophers wait at the Wealthies Gate,
And rarely Rich men do regard the Learned.
37
The hand binds not except the heart with-go:
What coms not thence, nor Thank nor Thought d^seru^
He gives All that does Himself bestow;
He Nothing gives who but his heart reserues.
38
That curious Thirst of Travail to and f^o,
Yields not the Fruit it promised men in mind:
Changing their Air, their Humors change not tho;
But, many Lodgings, and few Friends they find.
39
In vain the Soul has Reason's Attribute,
Which unto Reason cannot Sense submit:
For, Man (alas!) is bruter then a Brute,
Unless that Reason bridle Appetit.
40
Self-swelling Knowledge, Wits own Over bearer,
Proves Ignorance, and finds it Nothing knows:
It flies the Truth to follow Lies and Error:
And, when most ^ight it weens, most wry it goes.
41
The Vicious trembles, always in Alarmes;
(...)' Eye of the Virtuous keeps him as at Bay:
^hen All the World feared Rome's All-reaching Ar^^^,
^ne virtuous Cato did all ROME dismay.
42
Vice blinds the Soul, and Understanding clogs,
^akes good of ill, takes foul for fairest look,
^a, Dirt for Dainties: ^o-liue loathsome Frogs,
^ather in Puddles than in purest Brook.
43
In Greatest Houses Vice has battered,
those Honors though no less have shined bright:
What are the Graceless to the Good* Not dead,
^ut living Branches, in the Tree have Right.
44
If Men might freely take Essay of Court;
None, having tasted, would return so near:
The happiest there meets many a Spite in Sport,
And knows too-well be buys his W^^l too-deer.
45
Toloue None; All to doubt; to (...), to flatter;
To form new Faces, and transform true hearts;
To offer Service, and ^lie-off in Matter;
Are Contiers Lessons, and their Ground of Art^.
46
Set not thy Rest on Court, Sea's barren sand;
There grows no Goodness; good, there, evil grows:
Rest's Temple yerst did forth the City stand:
No Sent's so sweet, as is the Country Rose.
47
Who weens in Court to thrive, will find him weak,
Without two Aiders; Impudence, Immunitie:
For, first behooues him his own Brows to break,
Yer Others heads he break with Importunity.
48
Who is not sorry for Time's loss, in stay
For Kings slow Favors, seems to have no sense:
The loss of Goods a Prince may well repay,
But loss of Time Kings cannot recompense.
49
Is It not the Top of Follies Top, to note
An Old Sir Tame-asse gallanting in Court,
To play the Yonker, and Swan-white to dote
On Venus Douelings, in despite of Sport?
50
A mean Man hardly scapes the Mightie's Claws;
He Is as a Mouse play'ng by a sleeping Cat;
Who lets it run, then locks it in her Paws:
And all her sports boad but the Death of That.
51
World's Vanity is rife in every place,
(Alas! that good Wits should be'witched so!)
Maskt in the Church, in Court with open Face.
For, there is the place her perfectly to know.
52
By evil Manners is good Nature marred;
None falls at once, all Virtue to de^ie.
^ice, in the Soul is a strange Plant transferred:
And were not dressed, it would quickly die.
53
With By-Respects Impiety we cover:
Earth more then Heaven is prized among us Now:
At GOD's great Name we scarce our heads uncover;
When Kings are named, every knee does bow.
54
Disorder Order breeds: good Laws have sprung
From Euill-liues: Would All keep Justice line,
In Westminster there would be soon less Throng,
Less Work, less Wrack, less Words for Mine and Th^^^.
55
Law-Tricks now strip the People to their shirt:
Shift is their Shield, Gold in their only God:
Wasps break the Web, Flies are held fast and hurt:
The Guilty quit, the Guiltless vnder-trod.
56
There Is now no trust: Brother betraies his Brother:
Faith's but a fancy, but by Fools esteemed:
Friend's false to Friend; and All deceive each-other;
The ^ui^ pulls down the Wall by which it climbd.
57
Treasons be Trifles: Man's a Wolf to Man:
Crimes be but Crumbs; Vice is for Virtue vanted;
Sodom's and Cypris Sins we suffer can:
And Impious tricks in all their Tracks are hanted.
58
In perfect'st Men some Imperfection's found,
Somewhat amiss among their good is seen:
Gold, and pure Gold we dig not from the ground,
There Is Dust and Dross, and grosser stuff between.
59
Merit, of old did Friendship feed and six;
Where now-adai^s it is founded all on Profit,
With deep Dissembling and Deceitfull-tricks,
And evermore the Poor is frustrate of it.
60
The Earth cannot fill thy hearts unequal Angles;
Thy Hearts a Triangle, the Earth's a Round:
A Triangle is filled but with Triangles:
And the infinite the finite cannot bound.
61
^T's a Death to die far from ones Native City:
^t Death's not milder there, then else-about:
^ath without ROME, did not Rutilius pity;
^ither, within ROME, Him that never went out.
62
When Man is com'n to the old last Cast of Age,
^^en Nature can no longer lend nor borrow;
(...) thinks not yet to pack, and leave the Stage;
^t still, still hopes to live until to-Mor^ow.
63
Fain, would thou fly Love's wanton Luxury?
^ut-off Occasions: speak farre-off; fly Fitnes:
^un Solitude: live still in Company:
^hey fall alone that would not fall with Witness.
64
Muse not, to see the Wicked prosper fair:
^he Sun his Shine even unto Thieves does give:
^hen of their Patients Leaches do despair,
^^ey give them over as they list to live.
65
Slander is worser than Hell's burning Torture,
^he Force more fierce, the Heat more vehement:
^ell, after Death, does but the Guilty martyr;
^ander, alive, torments the Innocent.
66
Affliction razes, and then raises hearts:
As, under Weight, victorious Palms are wont:
As, under Seals the Wax does swell (in part);
Under the Cross the Soul to Heaven does mou^^.
67
Envy, in vain pure Virtues Anuil bites,
Breaking her Teeth: as on a Stone the Cur,
That barks of Custom, rather then Despite,
At every poor and harmless Passenger.
68
Enuie's a Torture which does Men molest;
Even from their Birth; yer they ought else can do:
Behold Two Infants nursed at one Breast;
They cannot brook their Teat for meat to Two.
69
This is the Ods twixt Honest men and Knaves;
The one tells his Neighbor, All mine own is mine,
And all Thine too: The other (void of Braues)
Says, Thine's not Mine; but, what I have is Thi^^
70
What Envy likes not, that she makes a Fault:
Joseph, with Ismael, for his Dream, was bartered:
Abels pure Offering to his End him brought:
And for the Truth the Innocent are martyrd.
71
Flat-Cap, for whom, hoord'st thou thy heaped Treasures?
^hy Bodies Sweat, thy Soul's deer Price (poor Sot!)?
(...) Prodige-all (thine Heir) in Protean Pleasures,
^ill waste, in one Day, All thine Age has got.
72
True Liberality would be entire:
^t not at-once, at all times, and to all.
^ne may mis-giue, to give yer one require:
^et Gifts vn-asked sweetest Gifts I call.
73
Content with Fruits from thine own Labor grow'n,
fore-hand still, a set Reuenew save:
^^r, He Is a Fool in more respects than one,
that spends his Store, or more, before he have.
74
There is no Goodness in a groueling heart,
^^nt on the World, bound to this Rock below:
^Vere not the Moon so near this Nether part,
^he would not, could not, be Eclipsed so.
75
Goods are great Ills to those that cannot use them:
^isers mis-keep, and Prodigals mis-spend-them:
^ell-hounds, to hasten toward Hell, abuse-them:
^s Wings, to Heav'n-ward, heav'n-bent-Soules extend the^.
76
Presumptuous Spirits spring not from right N^^^^y
Courage, that comes from Pride, proves never true:
Pride ruins hearts, whose Raiser is Humility:
The humble Shepherd the proud Giant sl^w.
77
Pride glitters often under an humble Weed:
Often lovely Names are given to loathed Effects;
Men sooth them in the Cause, to 'scuse the ill Deed:
And blame Light, rather than then Sight's Defect.
78
A Prudent man is, for Him-self, sought-forth:
He Is more admired then what the World most vant^^
Praises are due unto ones proper Worth:
Not purest Gold adds Price to Diamants.
79
The Humble, does Others prize; Him-self depress*
Save against Pride he never bends his Brows:
The more his Virtue mount^-him, counts-him less:
God the humble Sinner, not proud Just, allows.
80
O! Hypocrite, which have but Virtue's Veil,
Seem what thou art, and what thou seem be:
To hide thy Filth, all thy Fig-leaues will fail:
Thou can not hide thee from thy God, nor Thee
81
Mock- Saints, whose Soul-weal on your Works you lay,
^ith eyes and hands to Heaven, while hart's els-where:
^or shame you durst not to the least man say,
that you (profane) dare whisper in Gods ear.
82
Gold's fined in fire: Souls in Affliction better:
^oths gnaw the Garment locked in the Chest:
^ill water stinks, vnwholesom, black, and bitter:
^ords rust in Sheathes, and so do Souls in Rest.
83
Opening thy Soul to God, cloze Mouth from Men:
^or let thy Thoughts roame from thy due Intent;
^OD sees the hearts, his judgment sounds them,
^^d them confounds whose Words and Deeds dissent
84
Gamesters may well All to Tomorrow post,
^o see, or to be seen, the have never leisure:
^ith adverse Winds their Minds are ever ^ost;
^^sse bringing Grief, more than the Gain brings Pleasure.
85
To shun Affairs, behoues exceeding heed:
^roubles vnsent-for, and unlooked for, haste;
^n-set, vn-sowen, too-early grows the Weed:
^e meet too-soon the Care we hoped past.
86
All Idleness, dis-natures Wit, dis-nerues-it;
A moderate Travel makes it quick, addressed:
Sloth quels and kills it; Exercise preserues-it:
But, He Is not Free that has no time to rest.
87
Who seeks Rest in troublous Managings,
Thinks to find Calm amid Tempestuous Seas:
The World and Rest are Two, two adverse things:
Thick streams re-cleer when Storms and stirrings (...)
88
Fortune in Court, is fickle, apt to vary:
Favors sort seldom to the Suitors mind:
They many times even in the Port mis-carie:
The hotter Sun, the blacker shade they find.
89
Gifts, Honors, Office, Greatness, Grace of King^
Are but the Vshers of Adversity:
For their last mischief, have the Emmets wings:
And height of Health betokens Sickness me.
90
Youth has more Lures, more Traps, more (...)
Then Fouler Sins, or Baits the Fisherman:
Age would, but cannot what it would, fulfill:
Senex, thou leau'st not Sin: Sin leaves Thee, than.
91
^h'Eye tends to Bewty, as the Center of-it:
^r the Eyes, Heart and Affections draw:
(...) hard to keep safe what so-many covet:
(...) men's Desires Kings cannot keep in Awe.
92
Good or Ill-hap that here happens thee,
^es from Opinion (which All-ruling seems).
^ion makes us Other then we be:
(...) not unhappy, who him happy d^ems.
93
from contrary Effects is formed Sadness:
^h Smoke and Smiles have made the Eyes to water.
^o sow in Tears, shall one day reap in Gladness;
^o sow in Joys, shall reap Annoys hereafter.
94
^s leave out I, and No, in Conversation:
^rds now trans-posed, and wax-nosed, Both,
ROMES New Doctrine of Equi^ocation,
^^ich gives a Lie the Credit of an Oath.
95
Friends, now-adayes, wake at the noise of Gain.
Bees to Flowers, as Crows to Carrion haste,
Flies to Flesh, as Birds and Ants to Grain;
Friends to Profit thickly flock and fast.
96
Who reaues thine Honor, scoffs, if he pre^^^^
TO have don thee favor, that thy life he left:
Why should the Bird live, having lost her Pl^^^^?
The rest is nothing when the Honor 's rest.
97
Little suffices Life, in the vn-delicious;
The Sun for need may sometimes dress our Vi^
I blame, alike, the Cynik and Apicius;
This, for his too-too-much; That Is, too-too-(...)
98
Too-oft is made too-ill Interpretation
Of Words and Deeds best meant and built on Re^
All Is evil to the Evil, by Self-flation:
Whence Bees their Honey, Spiders suck their Po^
99
Happy the People where Iust-Gentle Prince-i^:
Whose Sword is Justice, and whose Shield is (...)
For These Augustus Deified long-since-is:
And without These, Kings Scepters maimed (...)
100
Good-hap, Good heart, Favor, and Labor (...)
Bring Men to Riches and to Honors here;
But that is the Way about: To be born Great,
Is great Advantage; Not to buy so deer.
FINIS.
HENRY THE GREAT, (The Fourth of that Name) LATE King of FRANCE and NAVARRE:
HIS Tropheis and Tragedy.

Written By PIERE MATHIEV.

Translated, and Dedicated To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM Earl of Salisburie.

By Iosuah Sylvester.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM CECILL, Earl of Salisbury.
^Esides the Bonds which did most Vows engage
To your dear Elders; and besides the Due
Which to your Self might justly thence accr^w;
^apparant Virtues of Your April-age,
^alleng'd of right This Poems Patronage:
The rather, since we first received from you,
The speedy Notice (no less quick than true)
HENRY'S Death, through Hells dis-chained Rage.
(...) saw this Sun, at his High-Noone-shine Set
In sudden Clowd of his own Royal Blood.
^O Horrid Hap! Who ever can forget
^th Fate, such Hate; of one so Great, so Good:
O! Just Revenge, root out the Ignatian Pack,
The Moules that moved in Faux and Rauaillac.
Ios. Syl.

THE ^opheis of the Virtues and Fortune of HENRY the Great.
^nce first Apollo lent the World his light,
And Earth empregned with his heatfull might,
^pe has seen no Potentate, no Prince,
Parallel Great HENRY's excellence.
Term, no Time, his fresh Renown shall shed:
^er was King more dear, never more dread.
^hoenix of Kings, wonder of Christendom,
^ing all past, and without Peer to come;
Courage only matched His Clemency;
(...) should his Tomb to These Two equal be,
^h Spain and France, could not contain the same,
^ich have so often seen his feats of Fame.
^is Life's a lamp to Princes, and a line;
^rophey reared by Miracle divine:
Theater to all the Virtues built;
goodly Garden with such plenty filled
^hoisest fruits and flowers, that choosing, there
^oundance troubles more then Want elsewhere.
The year that EDWARD in Great Britain died:
That France (beyond the mountains) Spain de^^'d:
That Therwin walls were thundered to the ground:
That a fair flower our Royal Hymen Crowned:
In The vvinter Solstice (when the year is worn)
Within Pau Castle This young* MARS was born.
Born for the Worlds Good, as his Entrance
Presaged him then the HERCULES of France;
To re-aduance her Lillies long decayed:
For as (by chance) bare-head, abroad he played,
At four years old, a Snake he finds and kills;
At forty, foiles the Hydra of our Ills.
Nor was He bred in soft delicious wise
(Which forms young Spirits into the form of Vice)
His Grand^ire used him to all VVeathers Ire,
His Sauce was Labor, Exercise his Fire,
His noble Heart did never ought inflame,
Save Heavens desire, and The Honor of the same.
Scarce fourteen times had ^e beh^ld the birth
Of th'happy Planet (which praesag'd his Worth)
Predominant in his Natitiall;
When he became an Armies General,
Whose hottest flame, without Him was but fume;
Nor, but by Him, durst any good presume.
He purchased Peace, the which eftsoons was staind
^th His Friends blood, and his young soul constraind
(...) feign some Change of His Religion:
Vinseine Castle He was seaz'd upon,
^d to the Court confined; where, discontent,
^s Spirit droopes, out of His Element.
Escaped thence: with restless toil, He tends
(...) save the Side of his Afflicted Fi^nds;
(...) peace again he brings all in ure:
^d Mounsieur's death does well his Hopes assure
^f th'after Crown, who but between him stood;
(...) now was He the first Prince of the Blood.
Then from afar he does new Storms discry,
(...) threat his fortune, and his force to try:
^e meets the danger with undaunted front,
^d in four years bears ten brave Armies brunt,
^l with the might of a great Monarch graced;
^hereof, at Co^tras he defeats the last.
At last, the King to extreme Streights reduced,
doubt of all, and daring none to trust,
^^plores This Prince, who rescues him from Tours,
^ith just Revenge; and had, yer many hours,
(...)-humbled Paris to her Princes yoke,
^t for Saint Clements Paricidiall stro^ke.
After which stroke (which all true Frenchmen ha^^
France sadly falls in a most wretched state:
Who has least Reason, has most Insolence;
Who has most Power, has least Obedience.
Nor Awe, nor Law; Disorder euery-where:
Good, without hope, and Wicked without fear.
Rebellion spaunes as fast as (in the Spring)
Fruit-fretting vermin; it does Discord bring
In Families, dearth in Towns, death in Field:
O! happy you who never daign'd to yield
Unto that Hagge; but, Loyal to the Crown,
Have left your Heirs, Heirs of a true renown.
Who counts the Cares that on a Crown do wait,
As well may number Autumnes fruitful freight,
And Flora's too. Yet this great spirit of man,
'Mid th'ebbs and floods of This vast Ocean,
Seems a tall Ship; which ma^gre Winds and Waves,
In wished Haven her and her Burden saues.
He Is never idle, nor his Exercise
Other than stands with princely offices:
MARS, and DIANA, and CUPID wait on Him:
Maugre his Loss, he always gains by Time.
Unto Affairs his ears are open aye,
Nor waits he lazying on his bed for day.
^afts, Tigers, Torrents; no nor Lightning flies
^e swift about, than This bold Eagle plies
^nid all perils) to preserve his State,
^h Heed and Speed, from Rebels Pride and Hate.
^attells first, last in Retreats: in brief,
Action, Soldier; in Direction, Chief.
^iepe saw his Fortunes on a desperate Die:
^e League presumed he needs must yield, or fly:
(...), as a Brook the more we stop his Course,
^aks down his Bay, and runs with swifter force,
(...) foiles his Foe^ at Arques, and shows them plain,
that Heavens just hand does his dear Right sustain.
It Is* buzzed in Paris, and believed in part,
that he is taken; or constraind to start
^om Diepe to Dover, to seek Englands Aid;
and, while Him coming Prisoner-wise, they said,
^o the Bastile; He came and ouer-came
their Suburbs soon, to their Suborners shame.
Conquest attends Him, whether he encamps,
^r marches on: again he takes Estampes:
^izieux, Eureux, Man's, Meulan, Vandosme, Perch,
and Honfleur, fo^most in His T^ophie march;
^s earnest-pence of His recouer'd State,
and Crown of France, which well admits no Mate.
Tiber and Iber then together flow
(Too strong in wrong) his Right to ouer-throw*
There proudeth Power, Here Prowess brighter shi^^^
And daily shows us by a thousand Signs,
How great Advantage a true Birthright brings
(Against Usurpers) unto lawful Kings.
In IVRY Fields, he seems a Blazing Star;
Seen in the Front of all his Host, afar:
Maiestick Fury in his Martial Face,
The brauest Troops, does in an instant Chase:
And boldest Rebels, which the rest had led,
Came Charging one way, and by forty Fled.
Melun surrenders, to his Warlike Lot,
Chartres is chastizd with his thundering Shot,
Louuiers lies humbled at his Conquering Foot,
Noyon lamenteth her Three Succors rout,
Espernay yields her wholely to his hest,
Dreux twice besieged, opens as the rest.
The League that late so violently burned;
To a Cold Fever now her Frenzy turned;
And trusting still in Strange Physycians aid,
Neglects her Cure till all her strength decaid:
In dread of all, In doubt her own will quail;
As a weak Ship afraid of every Sail.
That (late) ACHILLES of the Spanish-Dutch,
^uezean Parm^ that atchieu'd so much
Anwerp's Siege, by match-lesse S^ratagem;
^d weend the World had had no Peer to Him:
^d here the heart, twice, to refuse to Fight;
^d twice departed and bod none Goodnight.
Fortune, for Him, no longer used her Wheel;
^t, kind and constant, follows at his heel:
^e's Happy every where, and over all
^ring Palms and Laurels: only near A^male
^murderous Bullet put him to some pain,
^t hindered not His Rescue of his Train.
Who weens to vanquish Him, makes Him invict;
^lde to the Meek, to Proudlings stern and strict:
^e loves the Laurels without blood be-sprent,
Cruel Conquest He does even lament.
^is Thunder batters but Rebellious Walls:
and who least fear him, on them first he falls.
France, Self to slay, and her own Throat to Cut,
^rms her own hands; and (in strange rage) does put
^he Knife to whet, in Spaines ambitious paws;
^pain that would Spoil her Crowns primordial Laws,
and would a Scepter with a Distaffe blin:
^ut all in vain: The Lillies cannot Spin.
Re-Romaniz'd, so (say They) Heaven coniures;
His Errors at Saint Denis he abiures:
This Change, in Court yet changed not one nor other;
For, though his Subjects have not all one Mother,
He holds them all his Sons, They him their Sire;
And Christians all, all to one Heaven aspire.
Within the Temple of The Mother-Maid,
That bore her Son, her Sire, her God, her Aid,
With Heav'n-sent Oil He is anointed King,
Dons the Order-Collar; and by every thing,
To prove, in Him, Saint Lewis Faith and Zeal,
The Sick he touches, and his Touch does heal.
By law of Arms, a City taken by Force,
Should feel the Victors rage, with small remorse;
Paris so taken, is not treated so:
Though well his Justice might have razed low
Those rebel Walls which bred and fed These Wars;
To save the guilt-less, He the guilty spares.
There, There Is the Hope and Safety of His Side;
If There he fail, then farewell all beside:
The Spaniard therefore Thither speedy sends,
A great strong Conuoy to confirm His Friends.
Which soon defeated, There began the End
Of Civil Wars, and all to Union tend.
The Honor of saving and restoring France,
^s not alone due to His Valiance?
His Clemency has part; which lets him in
To strooger Holds, than all his Arms could win:
That, satisfied with Tears, makes from all parts,
Repentant Rebels yield him up their Hearts.
Lions, the Porter of one Part of France,
Rouen, that sees none like strong in Ordinance,
Orleans, which England did undaunted prove,
Marseillis, jealous of old Neptune's love,
Aix, Bourges, Sens, Meaux, Poictiers, Troy, Thoulouse,
And Reins; of These, each to his Bounty bows.
This gracious Prince excused the simpler sort,
Whom (Malice-lesse,) blind Passions did transport,
Against the Laws, with fury of the Time,
Who self-affraid to fail in fowler Crime,
Seduc't by others sly seditious Lore,
Followed (like Sheep) their Fellows straid before.
This heauenly-humane Clemency of His,
Yet cannot shield Him from some Treacheries;
One wounds him in the Mouth and breaks withal
One of his Teeth, (O Act unnatural!)
And had not God in part put-by the blow,
Even then in Paris had he perished so.
But, having quenched the Civil Fires in France,
Against his ill Neighbors now his Arms advance;
In Piedmont-Fields his Lilly-flowers he plants,
Pills Bourgogn^e, and all Artois He dants,
And makes the great Castilian MARS to fly,
With Fear within; without, with Infamy.
Then, those great Warriors that had disobeyd
(Whom not their Courage but their Cause betrayed
Which came with shame and sorrow (as was meet)
To cast their swords at his victorious Feet,
Fearing his Rigor; He receives them (rather)
With King-like grace, and kindness like a Father.
Heaven daily works, for Him, some special Mira^^
His Faith's an Altar, and his Word an Oracle:
His greatest foes have never found him fail.
And should Sincerity, in all men quail,
Exiled from the World (as Moors from Spain)
In This Kings soul she had been found again.
Spain by a train of many Wyles well laid,
Surpriseth Amiens, France is all afraid:
The Spaniard, hence prouder then cuer, swells,
Undaunted HENRY Thence him soon repells,
Regains his City, and constrains His foes,
To beg their Peace, or to abide his blows.
The Storms that long disturbd the state are val'd,
^'ill Vapors now are from all hearts exhaled,
^d France is now all French even all about:
^ly the Breton stiffly yet stood out.
^t, those white Ermines at the last must need,
^th' only Sent of the fair Lillies feed.
Old PHILIP longs to see the Waters calm,
^ds all designs vain to supplant This Palm;
^h the more shaken, it more fast does grow:
(...) seeks Peace, the Pope solicits so,
(...) does treat it, Bruxells swears it don,
and PHILIP pleased departs the World anon.
France yet retains one sensible Offense,
^r which she vows Revenge or Recompense:
among the Alps her thundering Canons roar,
^oud-browd (...) flaunts and vaunts the more
(...) stop her fury, but in fine is fain
(...) rue her rashness and repent in vain.
God hastens his own Work: This Monarch marries
(...) Lions Church, the choice, the Chief of Mary's;
^he Heavens delight, our Lilies ornament:
(...) in one heart two lovely Souls has blent:
^hence Peace is more confirmed, and Discord, dashe:
^r, by This knot many great Plots are quasht.
At Fountainbleau (a Paradise for site)
She brought him forth his Dolphin, his delight,
Whose tender youth gives happy hopes of Worthy
One Daughter also did she there bring forth,
And two Sons more (Supporters of the Crown),
Two daughters more, Paris for birth does own.
His Clemency has conquered Rebels rage,
Made of dis-loyall loyal Vaslalage;
Yea forced Wills by Pardons and by Grace,
The proof whereof is writ in every place;
Through all the Towns of France both great and (...)
Where, for Revenge, Reward was daign'd to all;
Once, only once, his Mercy admirable,
Was deaf to Biron and inexorable;
Since when he might, his bault despite would no^^
I wonder not to see that Myrmidon,
In the Bastile, a shameful death to bear:
But This I wonder, that he would come there.
Of factious spirits, of close deep hearts and (...)
(Whose Life is strife, whose Rest is best in trouble)
He knows the drifts, and know en dissolues the (...)
As falst as fire melts Lead within the flame.
His voice alone, as Dust cast up aloft,
Breaks Hornets buzzing and their swarming, (...)
Discord disturbing holy Churches rest,
^wixt Rome and Venice did debates suggest:
^mbition set in foot, fore-Iwald with hope,
^o bridle both the S^nate and the Pope;
^th pressed to fight: His Prudence reconciled
their Difference, and dad their minds remil'd.
He relisht now the harmeless Sweets of Peace,
^illing his People should partake no less;
^t yet some-where be feels a Thorn to prick:
^o pluck it out he arms and marches quick,
^en to the Frontier: There (...) his will,
^isedome (so) fitly takes her Season still.
You Nations, that for forty years have seen
^ELLONA 's Tempests, and felt MARS his Teen;
that for your Liberties have paw^d your Lives:
(...) freely now you joy your Wealth, your Wives:
^now your Trades into the East you bring,
^der Heavens Kingdom) only thank This King.
^hus heapt with Honors, This brave King is loath
that his brane Knights, (...) by Slo^th,
^id Games and Damas, during so long a Peace,
should still lie still in Cities pomp and ease:
therefore be (...) an Army strongly dight,
(...) Gulich's (...) his wronged friends to right.
A noble Prince, whose Prowes and Prudence, l^^^
Buda admired, and Rome has wondred-at
(The Honor of His Time) was General;
So stoard with Gold, with Guns, with Arms, with all,
That neighbor Princes all were in alarm:
Yet Them This Thunder brought more fear then harm.
Fearless it marches; and, respectless, threats
What -- ever Log its ready Passage lets;
Gesture and voice already skirmishing,
And under Conduct of so brave a King,
Great-Britaines, Germans, Switzers, Belgians,
Scrue all the Greatness of the Crown of France.
Els-where, the while, The Duke that rules the (...)
Seemd to have his heart no more beyond the Calpes;
Brave noble heart, Saxonically-French.
Fuentez, afraid, with shoulder-shrinking wrench,
Doubts lest that Milan stoop to France again;
And CHARLES provoked prove the Scourge of (...)
Heavens now, to Crown his Tropheis, had set down,
That at Saint Denis he his Queen should Crown
With royal Diadem; and in one Day
The State, the Majesty of France display.
Nothing but Great; but great Magnificence;
But, MARY'S Grace excelled all Excellence.
HEnce, hence false Pleasures, momentary Joys;
Mock us no more with your illuding Toys:
^strange Mishap, hatched in Hell below,
^th plunged us all in deepest Gulf of Woe,
^^ught us, that all Worlds -- hopes as Dreams do fly,
^d made us all, Cry All is Vanity.
Four hours from Noon, forth from the Lonure rode
^his mighty Prince (without his Guard) abroad,
^o see His Arcenall: To his Caroche,
(...) a straight Lane, a Hell-hound durst approach;
and with a Knife, twice stabbing, killed him quite,
^urning that fairest Day to foulest Night.
Twice did the Monster stab: for else, the first
and not been mortal; but, the Knife, accursed,
^hrilling his Lungs, cut at the second stroke
^h' artereal vein, whose bloud-floud soon did choa^^
^he peerless Prince; His dying Eyes and Heart
^^ploring Heaven, soon did his Soul depart.
Fell Tiger, tell us, tell us Why, or Whence,
^hou durst (accursed) assault so Great a Prince?
^herein had He to Thee or Thine done wrong?
^he^ once (yer this) Thou did too near him throng*
^is Guard rebuk't thee; but, He Them, for That:
^aus'd That Thy Malice, and His Murderous fate?
Fates ruthless Law allots his royal breast
To die the death that CAESAR thought the best;
Death without sense of death, a death so quick,
It sildome leaves Kings leisure to be sick;
Nor gives Him leave of his sixth Decads date
To fill the Roll; but seven six Months did bate.
He, He that was the Hope, the Prop of His,
He that restored France to what it is,
He that confined the Power of Princes still,
He that Commanded Victory, at will,
That was the Worlds delight, Kings glory sheen,
He, He receives Deaths treacherous stroke unseen.
The Unhappy street where This fell Hap fel-out,
Where woeful Paris saw her Light put out,
Where cursed Iron pierced her Princes heart,
In shall no more be clept The Iron-mart:
It shall be called The cursed Corner, still;
The Hag-street, or The Hell-street: which you will.
Lord! where were Thou! When That distoiall (...)
With cruel hand did Thine Anointed reach;
Quenching the Rays of Royal Majesty?
No heart is hid from thine All-piercing Eye,
It sees the Center, knows the thoughts, yer thought;
Could it see This, and suffer it be wrought?
Hell often before, out of his black Abyss,
^ad spewed up Monsters to have acted This:
^ut, still thy hand from former wounds did ward.
and had he not still trusted to Thy Guard,
^is Own had waited Round about his Coach,
and This fell Tiger never should approach.
These Words, these rasher Words escapt my tongue;
^hen I beheld That Monarch laid along
^ead on his Bed; so dead, so butchered;
^blamed Heavens, and Whispering soft, I said,
because They stopped not This strange Hap before,
their slu^bring eyes now watch the World no more.
But, are mine eyes mine own? Is This That Prince
which might have made all Europa His, long fince,
^ad he not thought The Empire of France enough;
that Lion-heart, that Courage Cannon -- proof,
^Vhich did so often Impossibles atchicue?
^ee it is He: yet scarce my sight believe.
Is This That Mighty King, Gods huely Image,
^o whom the greatest in the World did Homage?
(...) Peace a Dove, in War an Aegle quick,
^ESTOR in Court, in Camp ACHILLES-like;
that with a hundred horse, a thousand foiled:
that from most Dangers never yet recoiled.
Great Rome was strangely mazed and all a-mor^,
When She beheld her CAESAR'S bloody shirt:
And say, Great City, how were Thou dismayed,
When first thou saw Thine HENRY sadly laid
Along his Coach, and covered with a Cloak?
" I thought the Prop of all my Fortunes br^ak.
Those that have seen in Towns surprised (whileyer)
When to the Churches All have fled for fear,
May well imagine Paris deep Affright.
Nothing but shiuering: Nobles armed bright,
Clergy at Prayers, People weep and houle:
And HENRY'S wound has wounded every Soul.
Paris in Honor of her peerless Queen,
Had plotted Shows (more pompous never seen)
As, rich to the outward, rare to the inward sense;
But, all those Archs (Marks of Magnificence),
Those Tropheis, Terms, Statues, Colosses, All,
Make but more Mourners at the Funeral.
I yield My Pensill: help APELLES, here,
To Limn (to life) Her dying-liuing Cheer:
Belief is hardly in Man's heart impressed,
Her Grief more hard to be by Art expressed.
Therefore o Queen! Great Stay, Great Star of Fr^^^^
This Veil I draw before Thy Countenance.
Heaven steeled Thy Heart with Fortitude That Day,
^hy Courage kept the Kingdom from Decay;
and to the Throne Thy Son our Soueraign heft:
though angry Fates of Father him bereft,
^et Merciful, they left him such a Mother,
that France could hardly have been ruled by other.
The sudden Clap of This drad Thunder sounds,
from Alexander's to Alcides Bounds:
^he Kings and Princes stand amazed all,
^ith horror of an Act so Tragical.
^ome, Rest forsake: others, Repast forbear,
and Each like Fortune to himself does fear.
So suddenly to see Day turned to Night,
^ryumphant Palms, into Funereall Plight,
The Royal Crown to a deep Mourning Vale,
(...) living King, to a dead Corpse and pale,
Our Flowers to Thorns; seem Tricks of Sorcery,
Wherein, Conceit consents not with our Eye.
Yes, He is dead: and his eyelids no more
To view this Light shall open (as before);
Those lovely Eyes, the Load-starrs of the Court,
Whose gracious glances, on the Worthy sort,
^aue Virtue vigor; and Whose awefull frown
Dis-dared Vice: are now Eclipst and down.
Where are those ready Battaile-ranging Hands?
Those lightning Eyes whose wrath no wall with. stand^
That Voice so dreadful to the stoutest hearts?
That Heart which wrought so many wondrous parts
That piercing Wit, dispersing Clouds of Doubt?
Where is that mighty King, so Famed about?
Inexorable Death! inhumane, cruel,
Thou shall no more rea^e us so rare a Jewel;
Nature has broke the Mould she made Him in.
In all thy Triumph (trayling every Kin)
Shall never march His March, nor worthier Prince,
To Have been exempted from thine Insolence.
Ah! poor, weak Virtue, zealous Love of Thee,
Prolongs not Life, protracts not Death (I see):
This Prince that gave Thee eue^ his Heart for Temple
This Prince whose Reign shall serve for rare Exempl^
To future Kings, in future Things dismayed,
Should have come sooner, or have later stayed.
His Piety, was neither Fond, nor Faind;
His Prowess, neither Fear, not Rashness staind;
His Prudence cleared his Cou^cells, steerd his State;
His Temperance his Wrath did temperate;
His Justice with his Clemency did Yoke:
Yet could not All free Him from Fatal stroke.
^nuincible in all: only, the Dar^s,
which have not spared the Gods immortal hearts,
^ue often batterd His: but, by your leaves,
(...) fairest Bewties! ( Beauty it self deceiues)
^on never were the Souerains of his breast:
^e You (perhaps) You never Him possessed.
^lu Arms-Art, what He knew not, none can know it,
(...) either attempt what He attempted not,
^eason was aye the Aim of His designs;
^is brave Exploits (worthy immortal lines)
^all furnish Theme to Thousand learned Clarks.
those Works shall Honor Him, He more their Warks
His Royal Gests are euery-where extold,
^rauen, Carved, Cast, in Marble, Wood, and Gold;
^is Life alone's an History admired,
^herein all Pens, all Pencills shall be tired.
(...) pourtraying all His valiant Feats to-forn,
those Tables ever shall all Courts adorn.
His Bounties Temple had a hard Access.
Not known to any but to Worthiness:
That Gate (indeed) did seldom open quick.
His Liberality, (coy Bewty-like)
^ou'd to be wooed, pressed, and importuned still;
Yea, forced to give, what glad and fain she will.
Yet, by the effects to weigh his Clemency,
Me thinks His Heart must more then humane be,
Me thinks therein some higher Power did shine,
It surely seemed celestial and divine,
And but I saw him dying, pale and wan,
I could have scarce believed This Prince a Man.
He ever loved rather to save then spill,
Not cementing his Throne with Blood, with Ill;
Nor ween'd, by Fear his Diadem assured;
With mildenes rather, grieved minds he cured:
His Memory did never wrongs retain;
Beloved Kings, He thought, securest reign.
Praise you his Bounty, you that, past the Poles,
Bear Heavens Embassage to Belief -- less Souls:
HENRY restored your Country, and your Credit,
He gave you leave over all France to spread it;
Restored you Bizance, and each pleasant part,
Left you his Court, bequeathed to you his Heart.
If France now flourish, proyning, round about,
Olives within, and Laurels all without,
If now, She give the Law to other States,
If Peace and Plenty reign within her Gates,
If now She fear no Civil Storms again,
These are the fruits of This Great HENRY's Reign
If now Her Schools with learned men abound,
(...) Her rare wits be through the World renownd,
(...) doubts of Faith be cleared and explored,
(...) Learning be to her due Place restored,
(...) now Desert the Charge in Church attain,
^hese are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Reign.
If now her Buildings pass for bewty far
^he Worlds old Wonders (which so famous are)
(...) Paris Thou be peerlesse to behold,
^or State, for Store, for People, Goods, and Gold,
^f in thy City, Cities sprout again,
^hese are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Reign.
If the French Scepter be now Self-entire,
^ear-less of Forain or Domestic fire:
^f France have Fellows of ACHILLEs Fame;
^f now in France be nothing out of frame,
^f now the Indies her Bastile contain;
^hese are the Fruits of this Great HENRY's Reign.
If now we joy to see our Country free
from Theenes and Rebels (which exiled be):
^f Justice now do keep the lewd in awe,
^f Desperate Duels be now curbd by Law,
^f now the Weak weigh not the Strongs disdain,
These are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Reign.
If Merchants rich, If Magistrates be sound,
If Officers like Emperors abound,
If Pursie Lawyers live Prince-like at home,
If now Inventions to their height be come,
If now good wits find where them to sustain^,
These are the fruits of This Great HENRY's Reign
Who loved not Him, never beheld his brows,
Who knew his Fortunes, must admire his Prowes,
Who feared him not, His greatness did offend,
Who weend Him to beguile, his Wisdom kend:
Who durst displease Him, knew his mercies store;
Who durst not speak, his mildnes did ignore.
Who waileth not his Death, knew not his Life,
Glory of His and Others Envy rife,
Incomparable, Admirable Prince,
Excelling all the old HEROEs Excellence.
For, His true Story shall their Fables shame:
Inin^table Life, Illimitable Fame.
O Frenchmen, stop not yet your weeping flood:
This Prince for you has lauisht often his blood.
O! be not niggards of your Tears expense,
(Veil here, my Verse, do ANNE a reverence;
Rare ANNE that shames the rarest wits of Ours,
Her divine Stances furnish theethese Flowers).
The Heavens may give us all Prosperities,
^stain our State, remove our miseries;
(...) cannot dry up our Tears bitter stream:
(...) extreme Evils remedies extreme.
^^store our King, quick shall our Joys recover:
(...), never look our Sorrows should giue-ouer.
Eech-where our Grief finds matter to augment it,
(...) Names remembrance does each-where present it,
(...) famous Gests do busy every Sort,
^me tell his Wars, others his Works report.
others his Favors past, glad-sad deplore;
^en, not to monrn, is not to mind Him more.
Ah! must we live, and see so sudden dead
^e Life that late our Lives inspirited?
^ike sail my Soul, let us put-into the Port,
^hile HENRY lived 'twas good to live (in sort):
^t let us after: since He Is reft of breath,
^^sire of Life is now far worse then Death.
Sorrow, with us does both lie-downe and rise,
^rinkles our Brows, withers our Cheeks and Byes:
^e shun what-euer might our Griefs allay,
^e wish the Night, w' are weary of the Day,
^ight brings sad Silence with her horrid Shade,
and even her Color seems for Mourning made.
Extremest Woes yet are with Time ore-past,
Rivers of Tears are dryed-vp at last:
But never Ours; Ours, ever fresh shall flow:
We defy Comforts, We'll admit no mo,
Nor seek them, but as Alchimy profound
Seeks that which is not, or which is not found
Who, from the Ocean, Motion can recall,
Heat from Fire, Void from Air, Order from All,
From Lines their Points, from IRIS all her Dies,
Perils from Seas, from Numbers Unities,
Shadows from Bodies, Angles from the Square,
May free our Hearts from Grief, our Minds from (C^
He must be hart-les that is smart-les found:
The Soul that is not wounded with This wound,
Most brutish, has no humane Reason in it:
There is no breast of Steel, no heart of Flint,
But must be-mone so great a King, so slain.
Who would not wail a Gally-slaue so taken?
Let us no more name HENRY^S, Kings of Fr^^^^
Death with two Knives, and with one shiuer'd Lance,
Has killed Three HENRYS: one at Iousts (in jest);
The Other in's Closet; in's Caroche, the best:
So, Three King RICHARDS, and Five Other, cry,
Some fatal Secret in some Names does lie.
that worse Disastre can you have behind,
^hreaten France? O Destinies unkind!
^t greater Mischief can your Malice bring?
^ood a Father reft, so great a King?
^t will you more? since we no more can hope
any Good that with This Ill may cope.
^his noble Spirit does to his Spring re-mount,
^s Bounties Flood retireth to his Fount,
^s Atomie to's Unity unites,
^s Star returns to the first Light of Lights,
^s Ray reuerts where first it light did take,
^l mortal wounds, This Prince immortal make.
^e-well sole Honor of all earthly Kings,
^e-well rare Prince for All-kinde Managings,
^e-well Great HENRY, Heavens and Natures Gem,
^e-well bright Star of Kings, Glories great Beam,
^e-well sole Mortal that I keep in mind:
^e-well false Hope, Fortune, and Court unkind.
^eer, lest Oblivion should vsurp her room,
^ME writes in Gold, These Lines upon thy Toomb.
^his Prince, vn-Peerd for Clemency and Courage
^ly Sur-nam'd, the Great, the Good, the Wise,
^ror of Future, Miracle of Fore-Age;
^short Mis-hap for-euer Happi^ies.
FINIS.

