The confescion of the faith of the Sweserla^des.



This confescion was first written and set out by the mini sters of the
church and congregation of Sweuerland / where all godlynes is received / and
the word had in most reverence / and from thence was sent unto the
Emperors majesty / then holding a gryat counsel or parliament in the year
of our lord God. M.v.C.xxxvii. in the month of February. Translated out of
laten by George Ussher / a scotchman / who was burned in Scotland / the year
of our lord M.v.C.xl.vi.



Of the holy scripture.
THe canonycall or holy scripture which is the word of god taught and given
by the holy spryte, and puplyshed unto the world by the prophets and holy
apostles, which also is the most perfyte and ancient science and doctrine of
wysoome / it alone contains consumatly all godlynes and all sort and manner
of facyon of life.

Of the exposicion of scripture.
The interpretacion or exposicio^ of this holy writ ought and should be sought
out of it self, so that it should be the own interpretour, the rule of
charity and faith having governance.

Of man's tradicions.
As to other things, of tradicions of men how bewtifull and how much received
soever they be, what so ever tradicions withdraws us and stops us fro the
scripture, of such do we answer the sayenges of the lord as of things hurt
full and unprofitable, they worship me in vain teaching the doctrynes of
man. Mathi. xv.

Of the holy fathers.
For the which sort of interpretacyon so far as the holy fathers has not
gone fro it, not only do we receive them as interpretours of the scripture but
also we honor and worship them as chosen and beloved instruments of God

The end and intent of the scripture.
The pryncypal intent of all the scripture canonical is to declare that God is
beniuolent and friendly minded to mankind, and that he has declared that
kyndnes in and through Jesus Christ his only sone, the which kind nes is
receyuyd by faith, but this faith is effectuous through charity and expressed
in an innocent life

Of God.
Of God we believe in this sort, that he is almyghtie, being one in substance
and three in persons, which even as he has created by his word, that is his
sone, all things of nothing, so by his spirit and prouydence gouerns he,
preserve, and norysheth he, most truly, ryghtously, and wisely all things.

Of man.
Man which is the perfectest image of God in earth, and also is the chief
dignite and honor among all creatures visible, being made of soul and
body, of the which twain the body is mortal, the soul immortal, when he
was creat of god holy, by falling in vice and sin through his own fall,
drew with him in that same ruen and fall, and so subjected all mankind to the
same calamity and wretchydnes that he fell in.

Of original sin.
And so this pestiferous infection which men calls original, has infecte
and ouerspred the whole kind of man, so far that by no help (he being the
sone of wrath and vengaunge and enemy of god) could be healed by any means
but by the help of god only, for if there be any good that remains in man
after the fall, that same being ioyntelie made weaker and weaker by our vice
tournes to the worse, because the strength and power of evil ouercometh it,
and another suffers it us to follow reason nor yet to exersyse ye godlynes of
our mind.

Of frewyll.
Wherefore we attribute so free will to man as we which wyttynge and willing
to do good, feel experience of evil, Also evil trewly we may do of our own
will, but to enbrace and follow good (except we be elluminat styred up and
mounted, by the grace of Christ) we may not, for god is he which works in
us, both to will, to perform, and to accomplish for his own good will sake,
and of god comes our health and salvation, but of our self comes perdicion.

Of the eternal mind of God to restore man.
And howbeit that through his fault man was subject unto dampnacion, and also
was run under the just indingnacion of God to take vengaunce of him, yet god
the father never seaced to take a merciful cure over him, the which thing is
manifest not only of the first princes and the whole law, which as it is
holy and good teaching us the will of god, ryghtuousnes, and truth, so works
it wrath and storeth up sin within us, and slacketh it not, and that not
through any fault of it self but through our vice, but also clearly appears
it through Christ which was ordained and given for that purpose.

Of Jesus Christ and that is done by him.
This Christ the very sone of God, and very God and very man also was made our
brother, at the time appointed he took upon hi whole man, made of soul and
body, having two natures vnpermyxte and one deuyne parsone, to the intent that
he should restore unto life us that were deed, and make us arise of God annexte
with him self, he also after that he had taken upon him of the immaculate
virgin by operacion of the holy ghost flesh, which was holy because of the
union of the godhed, which is and also was like to our flesh in all things
except in synfulnes, and that because it behooved ye sacrefice for sin to be
clean and inmaculate, gave that same flesh to death for to expel all our
sin by that means, and he also to the intent that we should have one full and
perfect hope and trust of our inmortalitie has raised up again fro death to
life his own flesh, and has set it and placed it in heaven at the right
hand of his almighty father.

And there he sytteth our victorious champio^, our gyder, our captain, and
heed, also our highest bishop in deed / sin, death, and hell, being
victoriously overcome by him, and defends our cause and pleateth it
perpetually until he shall reform and fascion us to that lykenes to which we
were create, and bring us to be partakers of eternal life, and we look for
him and believes that he shall come at the end of all ages to be our true
ryghtuous just Judge, and shall pronofice sentence against all flesh, which
shall be raised up before to that Judgment / and that he shall exalte the godly
a boue the heavens, but the ungodly shall he co^de^pne both body and soul to
eternal distructio^.

And as he only is our mediator, and entercessour, host and sacrifice,
bishop, lord, and our king. Also do we acknowlage and confess him only to
be our atonement and ransom, satisfaction, expiacion, or wisdom, our
defense, and our only deliverer, refusyng utterly all other mean of life and
salvation, except thus by Christ only.

The end of the preaching of the Gospel.
And therefore in the whole doctrine of the euangelystes anu^nciat and show to
be the first, and chefely to be inculcated and taught that we are safe only
by the marcie of God, and merit of our savior Christ. And that men may
perceive and understand the better how necessary is the mercy of god, and
Christ's merits for the^, their sins should be clearly showed to them by the
law, and remission by Christ's death.

Of faith and of the power of it.
And these so godly benifites with the very sanctificacion of the holy spirit,
do we obtain by faith, the very true gift of God, and not through any other
power or strength of our selves or merytes.

Which faith is one certain and undoubted substance and aprehensyon of all
things that we hope for to come of the kyndnes of god, and it comes first
out of the self charity, it works noble fruits of al virtues, yet not with
standing we atribute no thing to the deeds, although they be godly yet be
they men's works and acts, but the health and salvation that is optayned, we
atribute to the grace of god only, and truly this worshypynge a lone is the
very true worshypynge of god, faith I mean most pryngnaunt and plentiful
of good works without any confydence in the works.

The congregation or church.
Also we hold and believe that the church, which is the congregation and
eleccion of all holy men, which also is the spouse of Christ whom he shall
present without spot unto his father washing it in his own blood, is of
such lively stones aforesaid laid upon this lively rock on this manner.

The which church howbeit, it be euydently known only to the eyes of God,
yet be certain eternal ryghtes institute by Christ and be one publyke and
lawful teaching, teaching of the word of god, not only is it spyed and
known, but it is also so constituted by them that without the ceremonies there
is no man reconed to be of it, except it be by a synguler preuilege of God

The ministers of the word of god.
And for this cause we grant the ministers of the church to be Cooperators of
God as Paul calls the^, by whom God gives and ministers both know ledge
of our self, and remission of sin, and conuerteth men to him self, rayseth
them up, and comfort the^, affrayeth them also, and judges them / but so
that the virtue and efficacy thereof we ascrybe also to the Lord, and the
ministracion of the sacraments. For it is manifest that this efficacy and
power is not bound nor knytte to any creature, but is dyspensed lyberally and
fre ly who soever and when soever he shall please / for he that waters is
nothing, nor yet is he that planteth any thing, but he that gives the
encreasment, which is God.

The power of the church.
The aucthorite to preach Gods word, and to feed the Lords flock, the
which properly is the power of the keys, prescribynge and co^maundyng, all
men both hye and low all like, should be holy and inuiolat, and should be
committed only to them that are mete therefore / and chosen other by the
eleccion of God, or else by a sure and aduysed eleccion of the church, or by
their will to whom the churches depute and apoynt that office of choosing.

The chosyng of ministers or officers.
This ministracion and office should be granted to no man but to hi whom the
ministers of the church, and they unto whom the charge is given by the
churches, and found judged to be of knowlage in the law of god, and of inocent
life, the which seeing it is the very eleccio^ of God, it is well and iustlye
approved by the voice of the church, and the imposicion of hands of the
heedes of the priests.

The heed and sheperd of the church.
Christ verily him self is the very true heed of his church and
congregation, and the only pastor and heerd, and he also gives presyde^tes,
heedes, and teachers, to the intent that in the external administracion they
should use the power of the church well and lawfully, wherefore we know not
them that are heedes and pastors in name only, nor yet the Romenishe heedes.

The duty of ministers or officers.
The chief and pryncypall office of this ministracion is to preach repentance
and remission of sin through Jesus Christ, to pray continually for the
people, to give diligence wholly to holy stodyes and to the word of God, and
resyst and pursue the devil always with the word of god, as with the sword of
the spirit, and that with a deadly ha tered, and by all means to chasten him
away, to defend the holy citezens of Christ.

And by all means compel and reprove the fautie and vicious, and to exclude
from the church them that stereth to far, and that by a godly consent and
agreement of them which are chosen of ye ministers and magistrates for
correccyon, or to ponyshe them by any other way convenient and profitable
means, so long until they come to a mendement, and so be safe, for this is
the returning of the church again, for one such Citezen of Christ if he
acknowlage and confess his error with converted mind and life, for all this
doctrine seeks and wylleth that we require willing and helthefull correccion,
exhilarite, or comfort all godly by a new studdy of godlynes.

Of the power or strength of sacraments.
There is twain which are named in the church of God sacraments, Baptyme and
howslynge, these be tokens of secret things, that is of godly and spiritual
things, of which things they take the name, are not of naked syngnes, but
they are of signs and be cites together, for in baptism the water is the
sign, but the thing and verytie is regeneracyon and adopcion, in the people
of God. In the howslynge and thanks gyuynge the bread and the wine are synes,
but the thing and verity is the communion of the body of our lord, health
and salvation found and remyssyon of sins, the which are receyuyd by faith
even as the signs and tokens are received by the bodily mouth.

Wherefore we affirm the sacraments not only to be badges and tokens of
christian society, but to be also synes of the grace of God, by the which the
ministers works with God, to the end yt the promise brings the work to
pass, but so as is aforesaid of the ministracion of the word, that all the
same power be ascribed to the lord.

Of Baptym.
We affirm Baptym to be by the institucion of the lord, the lauer of
regeneracion, the which regeneracion the lord exhibiteth to his chosen by a
visible sign by the ministracio^ of the congregation as is a foresaid, in the
which holy lauer we wasshe our infantes for this cause, because it is
wyckednes to reiecte and cast out of the fellowship and company of the people of
God the that are borne of us which are the people of God, except them that
are expressly commanded to be rejected by the voice of God, and for this
cause chefely, because we should not presume ungodly of their election.

Of the sacrament of the altar.
But the mystical supper is in the which the lord offers his body and his
blood, that is his own self verily to his own, for this intent he might
live more and more in them and they in him / not so that the body and blood of
the lord are co^muned naturally to the bread and wine, or closed in them as in
one place, or put in them by any carnal or marvelous presence, but because the
body and blood of our lord are receyuyd verily of one faithful soul, and be
cause the bread and the wine by the institucio^ of the lord, are tokens be
whicha the very communion or participacyon of the lords body and blood are
exhibited of the lord him self through the mynistracion of the church, not
to be a meat corruptible of the belly, but to be a noryshemente and meat of
eternal life

And this holy meat do we use often for this cause, for when through the
monicion and rememberaunce of it, we behold with the eye of our faith, the
death and blood of him that was crucified, and remember our salvation and
health, not with out a taste of heavenly life, and very true feeling of
eternal life / when we do this we are wonderfully refresshed through this
spiritual living and eternal food.

And that with an unspeakable swetnes we exulte and rejoice with a mirth
inexpressible in words, for the salvation that is found, and we all and whole
are effused with all our power and strength, utterly in doing of thanks for
so wonderful a benefyte of Christ toward us

Therefore it is greatly without our deservings that some aleges and says of
us that we attrybute little to the holy sacraments, for they are holy thyn
ges and honorable, because they are in stitute and ordained by our hye priest
Christ, and received exhibiting the thiges that they syngnifie in their own
manner as is aforesaid, being wytnes to the thing that is done in deed,
representynge so hye and hard things, and brings by wonderful
corespondence and lykenes of similitude a light and a clerenes to the mynysters
that they syngnifie, so wholly is our believe and estimacion of the sacraments,
but verily appropriattynge the virtue of quickenynge and sanctifienge to him
only which is life, to whom be all honor and praise for ever Amen.

Of coming to church.
We believe and think the holy conuencions and gatherynges should be holden on
this manner and sort, so that first, chefely, and before all things the word
of God be preached to the people openly in an open and publyke place, and that
daily, and the secret and the obscure places of the scripture be opened and
declared by mete and compete^t me^. And that by the holy supper of thanks,
called howselynge, the faith of the godly be often exersysed, and that they
should be contynually in prayer for all men, and for the necessities of all men.

But the rest of ceremonies, which as they are unprofitable so are they
innumerable, as vescels, garments, wax, lyghtes, alters, gold, silver, in
somoch as they serve to subuerte the true relygion of God, and chefely Idols
and Images, that stand open to be worshyped, and give offense and slander,
and all such profane and ungodly things do we aba^don reiecte and put away
from the holy congregation and conuencion.

Of heretyckes and sysmattyckes.
We also abandon and reiecte from our holy conuencions all them that departs
from the society and fellowshyp of the holy church, and brings in strange
or ungodly sects and opinions, with the which evil the Anabap tistes are
chefely infecte this time / the which we judge should be constrained and
punished by the maiestrates and hye powers, if they obstinatly do resyst and
will not obey the monission of the church, and that for the intent that they
should not infecte and corrupt the flock of God through their wicked evil.

Of things indyfferent.
The things that are called, and in deed also are indifferent, howbeit a god
ly man may use them freely and in every place and at all times, yet not
withstanding he should use them with knowlage and of charity to the glory of
God trewly, and the edificacio^ of the church and congregation.

Of Magistrates or governors.
And seeing every magistrate and high power is of God, his chief and
pryncipall office is (except he would rather use tyranny) to defend the true
worshipinge of God from all blasfemy, and to procure true religion, and as the
prophet does teach of the voice of God, to execute for his power, in which
part a true and sincere preaching of the word of God remains with a right
and diligent institucion of the discipline of citezens, and of the scooles just
correccion and nurture, with liberality toward the mynystres of the church,
with a solicitat and thoughtfull charge of the poor, to the which end all
the richesse of the church is referred. This I say has the first and chief
place in the execucion of the magistrate.

Then after to judge the people by equal and godly laws, to excersyce and
maintain judgment and justice, to defend the commune welthe, and punysshe
transgressors according to their fauite, outher in goods, their bodies, or
their lives, and when the maiestrate executes these things he honoreth god as
he should in his vocacio^, and we (howebeit we be free both in our boby and all
our goods, and in the studies of our mind and thought also with a true
says) knows that we should be subject in holiness to the maiestrate, and
should keep fydelitie and promise to him so long as his commandments,
statutes, and imperes evidently repungneth not with him for whose sake we
honor and worship the maiestrates.

Of holy matrimony.
We Judge marriage which was instytute of God for all men apt and mete
therefore, which are not called from it by any other vocacio^, to repugne to
holiness of no order, the which marriage as the church auctoriseth it, and
celebrates, and solempniseth it with orison and prayer. And therefore we reiecte
and refuse this monckely chastity and all hole this slouthful and slouggishe
sort of life of supersticious men, as abominablye invented and excogitat
thing, and abandon it as a thing repugnant both to the comune weal and to
the church. And so confyrmeth and stablissheth it, so it belongs to the
magistrate to se that it be worthily both begone and worshypped, and not
broken but for a just cause.

A declaracion or wytnessynge, of our mind.
It is not our mind for to prescribe by this brief chapters a certain rule
of the faith to all churches and congre gacyons, for we know no other rule of
faith but the holy scripture / and therefore we are well contented with them
that agrees with these things, how beit they use an other manner of speaking
or confession dyfferent apartly to this of ours in words, for rather should
the matter be considered then the words.

And therefore we make it free for all men to use their own sort of speaking
as they shall perceive most profitable for their churches, and we shall use
the same liberty.

And if any man will attempt to corrupt the true meaning of this our
confession he shall hear both a confession and a defense of the verity and
truth.

It was our pleasure to use these words at this present time that we might
declare our opinion in our religion and worshypenge of God.

FINIS
The truth will have the upper hand.

