Sermons, Meditations, and Prayers, upon the Plague. 1636.

BY T. S.

Oh praise the God of Heaven, for his Mercy endures for ever.

Ps. 136. LONDON, Printed by N. and Io. Oaks, for John Benson, and are to be
sold at his shop in S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable EDWARD Bromfield, Lord Mayor, and to the right
Worshipful Aldermen, Governors of this Honorable City of London.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
THE lines following begin mournfully, and end thankfully; the mourning was, if
not altogether, yet almost only the Cities; the Thankfulness is most of all,
if not only by, yet for the City: of these the beginning express the one, the
ending the other: nor one, nor other coming abroad could find shelter more
safely or more justly then under the umbracula of your Honors and Worships
protection: Into which custody if it shall please you to take them, the Author
will, as he is bound, pray that Gods judgments may ever reap your Repentance,
your Repentance receive his deliverance, his deliverance accept your
thankfulness, through Jesus Christ; in whom is ever ready to serve you,

Your Honor, and Worships devoted, T. S.

The Disease. 1636.
2. Chron. 7.13.14. If I send a Pestilence amongst my people. If my people, who
are called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray; and turn from their
wicked ways, and seek my face; I will hear in Heaven, and forgive their
sin and heal their Land.


THE Text is a piece of a Promise, to a piece of a Prayer: the Prayer was made
in the day by Solomon to God: the Promise was made at night by God to Solomon:
Solomon's whole prayer was, That what prayer soever should be made of any man,
or of all the people of Israel stretching their hands toward the Temple that
he built, that then God would be pleased to hear in Heaven and be merciful,
Chap. 6. 29. 30.
and give to every man according to his ways; and Gods whole promise was,
Chap. 7. 12.
That he had heard his prayer, and chosen that place to himself, for an house
of Sacrifice.

Solomon distinguishes this whole tree of his Devotion, into particular
branches, viz. If thy people be put to the worse before their enemies, chap.
6. 24. 25
because they have sinned against thee, and shall return, and confess thy
name, and pray, and make supplication before thee in this house: Then hear
Thou from Heaven, and forgive the sins of thy people Israel, and bring them
again to the Land, that's for War, and therefore not for us; for blessed be
the name of God, we have peace.

He goes on: When the Heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, c. 6. 26. 27
because they have sinned against thee; yet if they pray toward this place,
and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou do afflict
them; then hear thou from Heaven, and forgive their sins, and send rain
upon the Land. That Is for Dearth, and therefore not for us, for yet, blessed be
the name of God, we have plenty.

He proceeds: If there be Pestilence, c. 6. 28. 29
or any other sore or sickness whatsoever, then hear thou the prayer and
supplication of thy people. That Is for the plague, and that is for us: For it is
a time of plague, a fearful time it is; yet as fearful as it is, it is not
desperate; for we have Gods particular promise for this, as well as for the
rest, If I send a Pestilence amongst my people. If my, etc.

Nay, we have not only Gods Promise, but our own experience also for the
truth of that Promise: For in Anno 1625. when in one Week there died 3344. the
next week fell to 2550. the next to 1612. the next to 1551. the next to 852.
the next to 558. the next to fewer, and the next to none. I pray God, we may
see none of those great Weeks. But if we do, what then? shall we despair? no,
we need not, he that performed his promise then, will perform his promise now;
so that we will perform our conditions, and humble our selves and pray; etc.
And so I have brought you by a circular motion to my Text again: and my Text is
for all the world like a pair of Inde^tures, the one on Gods part, the other
on man's part: God the Master, Man the apprentice; and both their conditions
run on former conditions: Man's sin, and Gods judgments; chap. 6. ver. 22.
When a man shall sin against his neighbor: ver. 24. When there shall be no
rain because they have sinned. When there shall be sickness, and Famine, and
Plague, if they sin against thee. ver. 36. So, Gods conditions of
Destruction, run upon man's condition of Transgression, and again, Gods
condition of Deliverance runs upon man's condition of Repentance. And they
are four on either side: first on Man's, 1. Humility. 2. Prayer. 3. Seeking. 4.
Turning. Division.

If my people, etc. These are the conditions of our Indentures. And Gods are
answerable: 1. He will Exalt. 2. He will Hear; hear in Heaven. 3. He will
forgive. And 4. He will heal the Land.
Or you may consider this Text, as a Malady and a Medicine; as a Disease and a
Cure: the Disease, the Disease of the time, Pestilence; the Cure, the Cure of
that, and all Diseases, Repentance.

In the Disease I ask: first Propter quod, the provoking cause. Secondly,
Quid, the matter, what it is? thirdly, Vnde, the Author. Fourthly, Inquos, who
and what they are that are sick of the Plague. Fifthly, Ad quod, the end and
final cause. These five are in those five first words of my Text. If being a
supposing Word, implies the first and last: If God does it, something must
provoke him to it: And if he be provoked to do it, he has some end in the
doing of it: And then I the second word, describes the Author: and Pestilence,
the third word, the matter; and amongst my people, the last word tells you who,
and what they be. In the Cure, I look upon the several simples; they are made
by Man, as the Apothecary: And made effectual by God; as the Doctor. The first
is the gesture of Repentance, Humble. The second is the voice of Repentance,
Devout. The third is the care of Repentance, Diligent. The fourth is the
Digesture of Repentance, Wholesome, If my, etc.

And thus you see the coherence of the Text, and Context; and the concordance
of the Time with the Text: For it is a penitential Season, and this is a
penitential Sermon; it is a sorrowful Time, and this is a sorrowful Theme:
it is a fearful Time, and this is a fearful Text: And yet it is a Hopeful
time, and this is a hopeful Text too, for even in this Fear we hope: We
sin, Heaven frowns, God strikes, that is fearful; we repent, Heaven
laughes; God strokes, that is Hopeful.

Now, if I draw not these conditions like a perfect Scribe, if I compound not
this Recipe like a learned Galen; you must impute part of that to my ignorance,
and God mend it: part you must impute to my negligence, and God forgive it what
I fail, you in your meekness pardon, God in his goodness perfect. I begin
with the first, The Disease, If I send a pestilence, etc.

The first word is a tottering word, Pars 1. Si, If.
If; it runs upon wheels, and so has set my brains backward and forward:
if I go forward with it, I enter into an house of diligence and Devotion, a
Haven of Happiness and Deliverance; into a^^ House of Humility, and Prayer, o^
Seeking and Turning; into an Haven of Hearing and Healing, o^ Mercy and
Forgiving; and this may be seasonable for some. If (...) look backward with it,
I enter into a ship fraught full of iniquity; into a sea casting up waves of
judgments: a ship full of sin; that is the lading, into a sea full of
pestilence, that is the exchange. If: so loath is God to send some judgments
amongst us. If: If he does it, it is a chance; and a great mischance must force
him to it. Some punishments come hardly from heaven; but if they come, they
come as hardly upon man. No punishment at any time, but for sin: but such
punishment as the pestilence, surely it is for great sins; and that resolves
my first Quaere, the propter quod.

Why is the pestilence amongst us? 1a 1ae Propter quod? Why the plague
Why so great a punishment as the plague? Because we are sinners, because we
are great sinners: Ingentia peccata, ingentia supplicia, God visites often,
because we sin often; but never sends his great visitation of the plague, but
when sins are very great: ordinary sins beget ordinary diseases; but the
desolation of the pestilence never followed, unless some great abomination
preceded. Never was destruction threatened, until transgression was conceived.
Never such a destruction as the plague executed, until some great
transgression was committed.

The word of God, the history of man, this very time, they all make this true;
Not a misery since the beginning of the world was, not a^ misery to the end of
the world will be, not a misery at this present is, but they are all the Brats
of sin; but the Plague; the Plague, Oh, that was evermore the spawne of some
Whale-like sin. Sin and Happiness could not stand together in Paradise; as
soon as sin entered in, man was thrust out. Mala gens bonam terram malam
efficit: an ill people makes a good land bad. Psalm. 107.33.34.
He turns the flood into a wilderness, and dries up the water springs: a
fruitful land makes he barren for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
For the wickedness of them that dwell therein: mark you that. Never was an
ounce of judgment without a pound of sin. Zephan. 1.1.2.
I will surely destroy from the land, says the Lord, I will destroy man and
beast, I will destroy the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and
ruins shall be to the wicked, and I will cut off man from the land, says the
Lord. And why will the Lord bring such a destruction upon the land? Why? why
because there were a remnant of Baal, and Chemarims; because there were some
that swear by the Lord and by Malcham: because there were some that turned
back from the Lord, and enquired not after God: Because there were some
clothed with strange apparel: Because there were some daunced proudly upon
the thresholds. Run to and fro through the street of that chapter, from the
head to the foot, from the beginning to the ending, and see, and hear, and
fear, and tremble. Sins were the cause of that threatened destruction: Sins
were the Engines, Whirle-windes, Thunderbolts, Earthquakes, and devastation
of that state.

And what is the cause of this plague? I do but ask the question; and I would
to God that you could return a Negamus to my question, an Ignoramus to my
interogatorie. Have not we Schismatiques and Heretics amongst us? Papists
and Anabaptists? Papists for their Baalites, and Anabaptists for their
Chemarims? Have not we hollow-hearted Hypocrites? men of two religions? that
say with their tongues, Vivat Rex, and wish in their hearts, Praevaleat Papa?
Have not we Apostataes and Atheists? people that turn back from God? people
that forget God? that forget even God that made them? Have not we Gulles, and
Gallants; and painted Iezabels? Have not we Crane-paced levaltoes, that walk
with stretched-out necks? Have not we covetous, deceitful, greedy, sinful,
oppressing Usurers, Brokers, Tradesmen, and Gentlemen? and is it any wonder
then, if God send a plague? Very loath he is to send it, and therefore he
says, If: If I do it; but such sins as these will enforce him to it.

Why 14700. of the plague at one time, besides them that died in the
conspiracy of Corah? Because they murmured. And have not we them amongst us,
that spurn at authority, and murmr against God himself? That chide with
God himself, if he send not a shower of rain when they would have him? And is
it any wonder if the plague be amongst us? God is loath to shoot these
arrows, very loath, and therefore he says, If: but such sins as these,
murmr and distrust, will bend his bow, and make ready his quiver.

Why 70000. in the time of King David? 2 Samuel ^4.
But because King David would number his people, and trust in his own
strength. And have not we them that Sacrifice to their own nets? that trust
in the multitude of their riches? and think they shall never be removed? No
wonder then, if the plague be amongst it is. Very hardly is God provoked to
draw this Sword; but selfe-confidence will whet it.

And the history of man, the very Heathens tell you as much. Why was the
plague so grievous upon the Scythians? It was inflicted, says Herodotus, Lib.
1. page 57.
for their sacrilege in sacking the Temple of Venus. And have not we
Church-robbers? Do not many of you pay the parson by an under-verted lease?
and yet you will not give the overplus to your painful priest. And is it then
any wonder that the plague is amongst us? God is loath to lift up his hand
against you: but these sins will prevail.

Why was the pestilence sent aamongst the Jews? It was, In Achaic. page 279.
says Pausanias, for the profane lust of Menalippus and Camaetho. And have
not we as barbarous lusts amongst us? Some Poligamists, that have many wives:
some Incestists, that uncover the mothers and the daughters nakedness, some the
sisters, and many their neighbors? Is it then any wonder, that the plague is
amongst us. God i^ loath to consume us this way; but such sins as these must
provoke him.

Why was there such a devouring plague in the time of Romulus? I was inflicted,
In vita Romuli, page 67.
says Plutarch, for the treachery that was practiced in the murder of
Tatius. And do not we deal treacherously one with another? Do not we hunt
every man his brother with a net? Do no^ we seek to undermine and cir^
co^ve^t one another? Is it then any wonder that the plague is amongst us? God
is hardly drawn to send this judgment; but such sins as these, will
persuade him to send many more, and many worse.

You see the Quare, why the plague is sent; Now upon the Qua^e, you must give
me leave to play ^he Lawyer, and propose a cross ^^terogatorie, by Quomodo,
How the ^lague may be sent away again. Applic. 1.
It is ^^y application of it: And no way ^o remove it, that I know, Numb. 16
46.47.
but A^^ons way, or Phinee's way, or King David's way. When there died ^4700. of
the plague, Aaron takes censor, puts fire therein from the Altar, and put
incense thereon, and goes into the congregation, and a^^onement was made. Sic
vos, so do you; Take the censor of humble devotion; put therein the fire of
^eale from the altar of the Cross; and put thereon the incense of Christ's
merits, and offer it quickly for the congregation; and Gods ^and is not
shortened, his ear is not stopped; but as then, so now, he will be reconciled,
and accept of this for atonement, and stay the plague; only you must stand,
as he did, beewixt the living and the dead^ your dead sins with sorrow, and
the living graces of God with desire, and desire God with those tears, That
from plague and pestilence he would deliver us, for ^esu^ Christ his sake,
Amen.

Or, if it increase to Phinea's number, and there dye 24000. why then you must
do as Phineas did and what did he? He rose up from amongst the congregation,
and took ^ Iaveling in his hand, and thrust Zimri and Cozbi through the belly,
so the plague was stayed. Sic vo^, so do you: you are Phineas, Christ has
made you so to God his Father, Kings and Priests. Rise up^ from the
congregation, for you are down; down and asleep in the sins of your
companions: But at last awake; awake by repentance, and arise; Rise by faith,
and take a Javelin; the Javelin of Reluctancie ^^d Fear; and smite Zimri, the
^^entation of sin, and Cozbi, your ^onsent to, and delectation in sin; ^^d
smite them through the belly, ^^at there may never again be a conjunction of
your consent with ^^e Devils tentation; and entreat God, and he will do it,
say the ^^ague through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Or if yet the sickness increase far^^er, as in King David's time, from ^^an to
Beersheba, and slay 70000. ^^en; why then you must do as King David did: He
spoke unto the Lord when he saw the Angel smite ^^e people, and said, Lo, 2 Samuel 24.17.
I have sin^ed, and I have done wickedly; but these sheep, what have they
done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and my fathers house. Sic
vos, so must you. If any of you are more conscious than others; and which of
you is not? why then you must; or, if you are loath to bewray yo^^ selves, why
then I will, I will spe^^ unto the Lord; for I have seen t^^ Angel smiting,
and I will say; Wh^^ have the people of this parish, (...) this City done, O
God: it is I th^^ have sinned, it is I that have do^^ wickedly; they, alas,
knew not ho^^ to contrive these sins that I have committed; so that thou will
spa^^ them, let thy hand be against me, and my house: for I am the greatest
sin amongst them all; and yet, but of th^^ extent I trust whom JESUS CHRIST
will save; and if thou will save me and them from the plague, and he^^ then we
will go up, and rear thee a^^ Altar, and offer burnt offerings, an^ peace
offerings unto thee. From ou^ sins we go up, and the altar of ho^^ly
protestations we rear, and swear^ unto thee, to meddle no more with sin^
which has brought this plague: an^^ will for ever offer unto thee the burnt
offerings of broken and contrite spirits; and the peace offerings of Turtle
repentance, and Dove charity, and (...) leavened sincerity upon the altar ^f
faith, in the cross of Jesus Christ, for whose sake hear us, and help us,
and have mercy upon us, and bid the Angel that destroys thy people, to ^old
his hand, that we may live and ^raise thee in the great congregation
^^ilitant, till we come to thy congregation triumphant, to sing eternal
Hallel^jahs to him that sits upon the ^hrone, and to the Lamb at his right
^and for ever. Amen.

If any of you think the removing of the plague is not worth so much ^aines, I
entreat you to go along with me, and be resolved upon my second Quaere, the
Quid, 2a 1ae, ^^uid, what is the plague
what the plague is. And what is the plague, think you? To know what it is,
you must not look upon it under the genus of sickness: for then it is but
Humores male dispositi, an ill di^position of the body, so Secundum
definitionem, it is defined so, sickne^ is; or, it is a want, a defect, a
privation of health. It is not a thing i^ nature; but it is a thing against
nature, a violation of nature: for therefore is sickness called Disease (...),
because it is sine sanitate without health. So secundum ^em or it is Macula, a
spot, quia corporis formain deformat, because it disfigures the beauty of the
body: i^ makes him mauc and meagre, pal^ and wan: and it is Debitum, a debt,
quia ad mortem obligat, because i^ binds us over to death, and arrests us at
his suite. So it is, secundum nomen, it is named so, sickness is: Nay,
sometimes it is a double debt, a debt to nature, and a debt to physic: if we
dye, then natures debt is paid: if we recover, yet we are still in debt to the
physician: so far sometimes, that we spend the ^^st farthing of our
substance: So it (...) as said of the woman in the Gos^ell; she consumed her
whole estate ^^on the Physicians; or, it is a percus^on, and desolation; either
a smiting (...) a desolation; so the Prophet ^^yes, I will make thee sick in
smiting ^^ee, in making thee desolate: Mica. 6.13.
And I ^^ink the Prophet there means the ^lague; for the plague is a smiting
^^cknesse, and the plague is a desolating sickness. It is a smiting, and
therefore called (...), for the fierceness ^f it, it leaves a scarre behind
it: and (...) is a desolating sickness, and is therefore called (...), because
it spreds and diffuses it self into many, if not into all people: so secundum
divisio^em, it is distinguished so, sickness is, and this distinction complies
most with the plague, such a thing is the plague, such a fearful thing is the
plague, and I pray God deliver us all from it.

You will see the Fear of it mo^^ perspicuously, and be afraid of (...) more
heartily, if you look upon it comparatively, and if you lo^^ upon it
consequently; what it is (...) respect of other Diseases; and wh^^ it does,
which no other Disease^ can, which all other Diseases cann^^ do.

Compare it first with the Agu^ the Ague only weakens a Man; (...) seldom
kills a Man; but the Plague that weakens and kills both, seldo^^ any Man dies of
the Ague; an^ therefore is the Proue^be become^ truth, An Ague is Physic, if
in the Spring, for the King; seldom an^ Man recovers of the Plague; some do,
but they are but some; and pray God deliver us from that hazard.

Compare it secondly with the Fever; the Fever distracts some times, and
sometimes destroies; but it is but sometimes: but the Plague often distracts,
and oftener destroies; few it leaves undistracted, few it leaves undestroyed;
few it does, and they are but few. I pray God we may never try it.

Compare it thirdly with the Plurisie, That is but Membranae inflamatio
intrinsecus latera and costas succingentis, a pain in the side, an
^nfla^mation of the Liver, and blood^etting lets it out: But the Plague, that
is, Totius inflamatio, inferius pedes, superius caput, interius Cor, Exterius
corpus succingentis, an inflammation of the whole, and a pain all over; a
pain in the head above, and a pain below in the Feet; a pain within in the
heart, and a pain without, all the body over; and bleeding, and purging, and
Sweating will all hardly help us. I pray God help us so, that we need no such
help.

Compare it fourthly with the Epilepsie, the Falling Sickness, they that are
troubled with those Convulsions, fall down, and rise again^ but they that fall
down of the plague seldom rise again: that we may not fall, or if we do
fall, that we may rise again, God deliver us from the Plague.

Compare it lastly with the Leprosy, and of all Diseases, it is most like
that; and yet the Leprosy was never so as this. Like it it is, for as the
Leprosy might not be pronounced, till the white Scab, or some other Symptom
appeared: So, till the Soar arises, or the Spots appear in the Body, no Body
can say, any Man is infected with the Plague. Like it it is, for as the Leper
was, so the Man infected with the Plague is shut up, and shut ou^ from the
Congregation. Cyrill. lib. 2. De Adv.
Like it, i^ is, for as Lepra est morbus adeo gravis, ut medicorum vim superet
and Scientiaem. The Leprosy is such a Disease, that no Doctor can meet it,
either by his Extractions, or his Instructions. Gravior, says the Father, quam
ut a Medicis ei succurri possit, aut illorum peritia expugnari: Such a strange
Disease, that it withstands the Physicians Science and his Ingredients: So I
wonder, what Galen, what Doctor can cure the Plague! let him that can do it,
Dic bone Damaetas, and eris mihi magnue Apollo: He that can, shall win the
golden Fleece.

Like it though it be, yet it is a great deal worse; for the Priest might go
to the Leper: Might? nay he was bound to it; but no Priest is bound to go to a
Man sick of the Plague, not bound by any Law of Man or God. So fearful a
thing is the Plague comparatively; but it is a more fearful thing
effectually; For it brings with it the two greatest punishments this World can
inflict. It brings with it an Outlawrie^ and it brings with it an
excommunication. An outlawrie is the greate^^ punishment in the common Law and
an excommunication is the greatest punishment in the civil law, and the plague
does both. I^ excommunicates us, and it outlaw ^ries us too: It out-lawes us
from all works of civilitie in the Commonwealth, and we cannot go about our
lawful callings: and it excommunicates us from all work of piety in the
Church, and we^ may not go to public prayers. No body will go to visit
them not, or very hardly, the Physitian^ They may not go to visit any body,
not the Divine. Their doore^ are shut up, the red Cross upon their doors, to
bid us stand farther off, and over their doors, Lord have mercy upon us. And I
pray God have mercy upon them that are infected, and howsoever he deal with
their bodies, save their ^oules: and I pray God have mer^ie upon us, that we
may not be in^ected: not in our bodies with the plague, nor in our souls with
sin; but deliver us through Jesus Christ, Amen.

You see the Quid est, what it is, Applic. 2.
what the plague is; I must propose upon this Quaere, another Quomodo, for the
application of it: for being a thing so fearful, I make no question, but they
that are infected, would willingly be restored; and they that are not yet
infected, would willingly be so preserved: How then first, may they that are
infected, be restored? The Physicians prescribe Bleeding, Purging, Sweating; so
I entreat you to Bleed, to Purge, to Sweat: to bleed by Confession, to Purge
by Contrition, to Sweat by Restitution. Zacheus heard of no Salvation, vntil^
he had made Restitution. If there be any accursed thing in your hands, as the
Babylonish garment, o^ Wedge of Gold in the hands of A^chan, restore it, that
the plague may be stayed, that God my have glory and your selves health.

King David heard of no Transtulit peccata Deus, 2 Samuel 12.13.
the Lord has taken away thy sin, till he had confessed, and said, Peccavi,
I have sinned. If there be any sin lies heavy upon your soul, if any sin
that in your conscience has provoked God to this displeasure. If any rich man
amongst you all, have taken away the poor man's lamb; i^ any Usurer, or
Bro^er, has taken the poor man's bed to pawn, upon which he should lie, and
for want of which he lies in straw, or upon the hard boords, or the poor man's
clothes which he should wear, or for want of which he goes naked, or in
such rags that he is ashamed to come to Church, confess it, for peccatum
est, it is a sin, and restore too: for, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum, no hope of remission without restitution: never think to
be forgiven by God, till thou have restored to man. No hope to be delivered
from the pestilence, till this accomplishment of repentance. Make confession of
your enormous sins to the Priest, that he may ease you, and make restitution
of your ill gotten goods to the true owner, that he may pray for you, and then,
and not till then, it is to be feared, will God have mercy upon you, and
deliver you from the plague.

Nor did the Publican hear of any Justification, until he had purged by
Contrition: No, Abiit justifiaetus, dones venit mortificatus; He went away
justified, but first he came mort^^^ed. He smote his breast, and begged for
mercy, and cried aloud, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.
before God in mercy did put away his sins. And so do you, smite your
breasts, break your hearts, bruise your spirits, and write upon the posts of
your souls, with the earnestness of your desires, Miserere, that God may have
mercy upon you, and open your doors, and bring you into the open gates of
Sion, to sing praises to the Lord. Go with the Leper, and say, Domine, si vis,
Matthew. 8.
potes, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean; and ten to one if he
do not make thee clean. Go thou that art outlawed, and take out a writ of
Reversation, and unfile the outlawrie. Go thou that art excommunicated, and
appeal: appeal from God to God: from Gods wrath, to Gods mercy; from God
offended, to God appeased, and say with them, We have sinned, Judge. 10.15.
we know not what to do; deliver us his day, we beseech thee, and he will; or
if not restore you, yet he will do that which is better for you, if you ^ave
faith, and present you to himself a glorious body, through Jesus christ.

But Quomodo. 2. How may we ^e preserved? How may we that ^re not yet
infected, be kept still from infection? How? why thus; ^y Abstinence, and
Patience, and Charity, and Zeal: the Abstinence of David, the Patience of
Job, the Charity of Cornelius, and the Zeal of S. Peter.

If sins that you have longed for, your neighbors wife, your neighbors
house, or what else soever, be brought home to your door, as the water that
David longed for, was brought to his cave; yet do as he did: and what did he?
Marry, he powered the water upon the ground, when he had weighed his folly, 2 Samuel 23.17.
and said, God forbid that I should drink this water: Is not this the blood of
these men? So do you; though you have played the fools, and longed for a cup
of Drunkenness, to please your palate; or a kiss of Uncleanness, to please
your flesh; yet now, before you drink that cup, or touch this woman, consider
your folly, and power them upon the ground, and say, God forbid I should commit
these sins: will they not damn my soul? Did not Jesus Christ suffer death
for them?

If goods that you have gotten honestly, be lost by thieves; if children that
you have brought up carefully, and prayed for fervently, be destroyed by fire;
if the body that you have kept temperately, be blained with plague sores: yet,
as Job did, so do you; rent your hearts, and say, Deus dedit, and abstulit
Deus, Job. 1.^1.
benedictum nomen Dei. God has given, and God has taken, blessed be the name
of God.

If the poor be about you, your neighbors; or under your charge, the
pensioners, let them not languish at home, nor starve in your streets; but give
alms as the Centurion did, Act. 10.4.
that God may respect you. It is no Popery, I assure you, to say, That God
respects men for their charity.

If any Magus shall offer you money for Res sanctas, or Res sacras, for the
holy things of God, or the holy things of the Church, answer him with zeal and
indignation, as Saint Peter did, Acts. 8.20
Pereat tecum pecuniatua, Thy money perish with thee.

When you have done all, keep a constant fire of Devotion, to purify your
hearts, that no corruption may come in by the windows o^ your eyes; and perfume
your apparel with the righteousness o^ Imputation, that the infection
mistake you not; and pray, pray with the Church, From plague and pestilence
good Lord deliver us: and pray with the Church again, O Almighty God, which in
thy wrath in the time of King David, did slay with the Plague, etc.

For who else can? 3a 1ae, Vnde? The Author.
who can remove the Plague, but he that sends the Plague? and who is that but
God? If you look upon it as praemium, or meritum; a wages, or a merit, so my
sin, so your sin is the cause of it; Causa deficiens: but if you look upon
it as it is Paena, or Correctio, a punishment, or a chastisement, so God is the
cause of it, Causa efficiens: So the Prophet Micah points to God; Mica. 6.13
I will make thee sick, I: and so does the Prophet Moses too; Number. 16.46.
Wrath is gone out from the Lord, and the plague is begun: And so does the
Prophet Amos too; Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done
it? Amos 3.6
that is, any evil of punishment, not of sin; for God is not the Author of
any sin, though he be the Author of all punishment. Not any punishment, not
any mercy; but we may discern in it Digitum Dei, The hand of God, and so
says David; Storm, hail, tempest; they are all his Ministers to fulfill his
Will: and so says God himself of this particular, If I send a pestilence; If
I.

And the very word it self speaks no less, Plague; it is Verbum asperum, A
killing word, the plague is: but it is the Lord that kills, says Moses, and it
is therefore called (...), To kill, to kill as (...) were with the sword; but
it is th^^ Sword of the Lord, no hand ca^^ weild this Sword, but the hand o^^
the Lord: 2 Samuel 24.14.
And therefore it is called sometimes the hand of the Lord because in this
punishment the Lord shows his power after a wonderful^ and fearful manner:
sometimes it is called an Arrow; Psalm. 91.6.
The Arrow that flies by day: But no Bow can shoot this Arrow, but Gods: An
Arrow it is, for the suddenness of it; and an Arrow it is, for the swiftness
of it; it brings a sudden destruction; for it creeps not as do other
Diseases, by little, and little; but it pierces suddenly, and it flies with
speed too, through a whole City, over a whole Country, even from Dan to
Beersheba; and who can shoot so suddenly, or so swiftly, but God?

And therefore take you heed of that fearful curse and imprecation which is
too rife in your mouths, (...) your servant do but anger you; ^our servant did
I say? if your Child that comes out of your ^ines; nay, if your Wife do but
displease you, by and by you say, what do you say? that which I ^m afraid to
think of; but you say (...); The plague, the plague of God light upon you: You
see how God has heard, not your prayers, but your sins; and now you pray with
all your souls, Good Lord deliver us from plague and pestilence.

But In quos? 4a, 1ae, In quos. Amongst whom.
Amongst whom is the plague? for the plague being a thing so fearful, and
God, a God so gracious, surely he sends it not, but In hosts, Amongst his
enemies, if any; Does he? man indeed would do so; He will love his friends,
and plague his enemies, but Gods ways are not like Man's; He loves his
enemies, and punishes his friends (...) for his enemies, he will not love
them so well, as to be angry with them; and that is the worst God does to any
man in this world^ when he does not love them so well, as to be angry with
them. The Israelites were in a good case, so long as God whipped them; but when
(...) came to Auferam zelum, I will take away my jealousy, Ezech. 16.42.
and be no more angry; by and by Loammi followed They were none of Gods people.
A sure mark, They are Gods enemies, he wi^ not frown upon.

But if it be not, in hosts, amongst his enemies, that God sends a plague^ yet
in peregrinos, is it not? If not amongst his enemies, that he hates, yet
amongst strangers, that he cares not for. Man indeed would do so; if he cannot
spit his venom^ upon his enemies, yet he will never do it upon his
acquaintance: but if upon any, upon them he knows not: But Gods ways are not
like Man's; for strangers that will not know him, he will suffer them to run
on in their course; but for his acquaintance, he will visit them, sometimes
with plague and pestilence; so he dealt with David, so with Job; two men, his
nearest Acquaintance, and dearest Favorites of all men upon the face of the
Earth.

It is not In hosts, amongst my enemies; it is not In peregrinos, amongst
strangers; nor yet In vulgus, amongst the common people; no, none of these; but
it is In populos, and In meo^, My people; If I send a pestilence amongst my
people.

So sure are they, they that are his people, above all men in the world, of
Rods: The Father whips his own Child, not his Neighbors, or a strangers: Nor
does God whip another people, but his own; they come in no misfortune like
other folk; so King David speaks of the wicked: They have children at their
desire, and leave the rest of their substance for their babes: but the troubles
of the Righteous, they are many. All crosses, and amongst them, the Plague,
tell us, we are children; and somewhat more, they tell us, we are sons of
Age, sons grown to some strength and ripeness; for Babes, and Infants are
too weak for the yoke. Prove. 3.11 12.
My son therefore says Solomon, that is God by Solomon, despise not the
chastisement of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him: for the
Lord corrects every one that he loves, as a Father does his son, whom he
receives.

The Comic said as much, when he said, Castigo te non quod odio habeam, sed
quod amem: Why does the Master whip his Scholar? Because he hates him? No,
because he loves him. Does God send a plague amongst us, because we are not?
No, because we are his people.

I draw this to a period; but the period of this I must speak to you in tears
and comfort: in the tears of sorrow, and in the words of comfort.

But first, in tears: For though God does send a plague amongst his people;
Application.
yet he does not send a plague amongst his people with de-delight: because
amongst his people, therefore you that live, must take heed how you censure
them that dye: for the plague, to dye of the plague, is no evidence of
reprobation. No, it is the mad zeal of some foolish people to say so: were it
so, King David would never have desired God to set his hand, his hand of plague
against him, if he must have gone to hell for it: but yet it is an evidence of
wrath, and therefore you must take heed of security; God takes no pleasure in
our smarting: No, he would willingly lay aside his blows, if words would
serve. If: if he does send a plague, it comes hardly from him. He would feign
lay aside this sharp plough, but he cannot otherwise break up the fallow
ground of our hearts. Feign would he lay aside these hammers, but he cannot
by the instrument of words, beat understanding into our brains. Such stout
and stubborn Scholars are we grown, that no Schoolmaster will fit us, but
this severe and swinging one. God deals with us by these foul, because we
will not be overcome by fair means. Oh God, thou do not willingly plague
us, but the strength of our corruptions necessarily enforce thee thereunto;
which will not otherwise be subdued. So Physicians and Chyrurgeons are
constrained to cut, and lance, and burn, when milder remedies will not
prevail. When God did first lift up his hand against us in this plague, me
thoughts, he pulled it back again, as if he were loath to do it; yet, says
he, I will give them a testimony, that they are my people, it may be, they
will repent and cry. That's the first. It desires your Tears to be wail the
hardness of your hearts, though you are his people; because, If he sends a
plague.

But secondly, though you cry, because the plague is amongst you for the
hardness of your hearts; yet, despair not: for the very plague sent by God,
testifies that you are his people. Never despair, till God leave you to your
self; when he does not love you so much as to afflict you. When God gives you
not so much peace as to trouble you, then you may despair. But if you have
trouble and sickness, though that sickness be the plague, and sent, despair
not; for you are yet his people. So long as God punishes you, he gives you
physic: If he draw his knife, it is but to prune you; you are his vine. If he
draw blood, it is but to rectify a distempered vein; you are his patient. If
he break your bones, it is but to set them staighter. If he bruise you in
mortar, it is but that you may breathe up a sweet savor into his nostrills;
you are his handy work: and if one hand be under you, let him lay the other as
heavy as he pleases upon you: let him handle you which way he will, if he
does not throw you out of his hands, it is no matter. If GOD frowns upon you,
his threatenings are hopeful: But if God look not upon you at all; then, oh
then; you are gone. If he pursue you, you are well; but if he have left you to
you to your selves: then, oh then, farewell: but so long as God studies your
recoverie, you are well. Vox est animi non habentis in promptu quid statuat,
and desperantis salutem. When God has tried all means to reduce you, and
failed in all, and then leaves you to your own desperate ways; then, oh then,
thou art gone. It is the worst that ever God did say, Ezech. 16.42.
Auferam zelum. This is Gods greatest anger, when he will not let us know that
he is angry. Ier. 6.30.
Refuse silver shall men call thee, because the Lord has rejected thee. Cain
cries out, Genesis 4.
My sin is greater than can be forgiven. But why does Cain cry out so? Because
I shall be hid from thy presence. Cain grew desperate, not because God looked
not graciously upon him; but because God would not look upon him at all.

See then, if God look upon you any way, though with frowns in his brow, rod
in his hand, menaces in his mouth, plague-sores upon your bodies; submit unto
him, and repent, and turn from your evil ways, and God shall not only turn
from the evil which he has brought upon you, but your trembling soul also
shall no sooner cry out, Why am I thus visited with the plague^? but your faith
shall make a sweet reply from this Text, Therefore has God sent a pestilence
to assure us we are his people, if we will humble our selves.

That Is the ad quod, 5a 1ae, Ad quod, The end.
the end why we are plagued; To put an end to our sins. But this end of the
sickness, is the beginning of the cure; and therefore I say no more of it, but
Blessed be the name of God for calamitous days; praised be the Name of God,
even for the plague, since by this be calls us to repentance, and writes upon
our doors, Lord have mercy upon us; And do thou, O God, in mercy look upon
us, and send such a blessing with this punishment of plague, as that we may
humble our selves, and pray, and seek thy face, and turn from our wicked
ways, that thou also may hear us, and forgive us, and heal our land
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Cure. 1636.
The second Sermon.
2. Chron. 7.14. If my people, who are called by my name, shall humble
themselves and pray; and turn from their wicked ways, and seek my face; I
will hear in Heaven, and forgive their sin, and heal their Land.


THE words are, as I told you, Pars. 2a.
the Cure of the Disease: In the composition there are four simples, and
several ingredients, and they are four dosses of Pills: The first is a
preparing Pill: It preprepares us to receive of God, and prepares God to give
us Exaltation, If we humble our selves, he will hear in Heaven: and it is a
great Exaltation that God in heaven, should hear us upon earth. The second is
an opening Pill, it opens our lips to pray, and opens Gods ears to hear our
prayers: If my people pray, I will hear. The third is a purging Pill; it
purges us of sin, and God of wrath; If my people turn from their wicked
ways, I will forgive their sin. The fourth is an healing Pill; 1a, 2ae.
if my people seek my face, I will heal their Land. I begin first with the 1.
the preparing Pill, Humility; and in this I shall with Gods leave, show you
first, Quid est: and secondly, Quid efficit: First, what Humility is; and
secondly, what Humility does: And first, Quid est? What is it?

Humility is the first Ingredien^ that cures the plague, for pr de is the first
sin that brought the plague, and all other Judgments into the world: Genesis 3.
Eritis sicut Dij, To be like God: Oh, it tickled Adam to the heart, and
therefore he made himself unlike a man, he made himself like to the beasts
that perish: In forma servi, Philip. 2.7
To be like a servant, this rejoiced Christ at the heart; and for this cause
has God exalted him with a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow.

There is a Ladder of seven steps, by which we go down to Hell, and the
first of those steps is pride; pride has got the first place of the seven
deadly sins; and there is a Ladder of eight steps, by which we go up to
Heaven: And mark that, seven to go down, and eight to go up, for facilis
descensus Aver^i, sed revocare, etc. We easier, and with less pains go to
Hell downe-wards, than to Heaven upwards: but seven steps down to Hell, eight
up to Heaven; and the first of those eight is Humility; Humility has the first
place of all Gods graces, so Cromatius.

The eight Beatitudes are like Jacobs Ladder, that reach from Earth to Heaven,
and the very first step, as the foundation of the rest, is Humility; so Christ
begins the Sermon of his Blessings: Blessed are the poor in spirit; blessed
are the humble; Matthew. 5.
for humility is a poverty in spirit: that is the Quid est, and Definition of
it. 1a 1ae, 3ae. What is Humility.


If any one asks you, what humility is, you answer him truly, if you say, It
is a poverty in spirit; and as poor men are in their attire ragged, in their
diet course, and hungry, in their speech lowly, and reverent: so Humility has
a lean^ body; it keeps the body under, an^ many times empty; a freeze coate^ a
coat of sackcloth, and covering of ashes; and a submisse language, (...) ever
speaking in a low style, and phrase. Look else upon the Centurion for the
speech of humility; he has an high conceit of God, and a low conceit of
himself: looke^ else upon King David for the die^ of humility; he will
neither eat, nor drink: look else upon the King of Niniveh, for the dress
and garments of humility; he will have no gay clothes in a time of destruction
upon his gray heart: The Centurion speaks the voice of humility, King David
cooks the diet of humility, the King of Nineveh cloths the back of humility,
and they all act the gesture of humility upon their knees.

1. And first, what says the Centurion for the voice of Humility? Humilities
voice. Math. 8.8.
what but this? Lord, I am not worthy thou should come under the roof ^f
mine house: Non sum dignus, I am not worthy, is evermore Humilities ^anguage:
Non sum dignus, I am not worthy, says Jacob, not worthy of what? de maximis of
Gods Rega^ioes; Genesis 32 10.
it may be so, very likely: no de minimis; I am not worthy of the least of all
thy mercies: Non sum dignus, says St. John Baptist. I am not worthy; no not to
carry Christ upon his shoulders, as it is reported of St. Christopher: not so;
but Non sum dignus calceamenta portare: Mat. 3.11.
I am not worthy to unty his shooestrings; a poor office we would think: Non
sum dignus says Daniel, Dan. 9.7.
We are not worthy of any thing but confusion. Quis ego? says Gideon, that
mighty man of valor: Who am I that I should save Israel? Jud. 6.15.
behold my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my fathers honse:
I am not worthy to do it. I? Qui^ ego ut alloquar? says Abraham the Father of
the Faithful. Who am I, Genesis 18.17.
that I should speak unto the Lord? I am not worthy, I.

So low a value does the humble man ever set upon himself, that no man lower:
proud men take it well if we humble our selves lower than is cause: so Jacob
the Patriarch pleased his proud brother Esau with saying, Thy servant: and does
not God take such submisse extenuations of our selves very well? I am a worm
and no man, says David: and God made David a King, and no subject, I am more
foolish than a man, and have not the understanding of a man in me; and God made
him wiser than his enemies. Who did ever brag to God, even within the
compass of his desert, and was accepted? we may be too lowly in our dealings
with men, with God we cannot: the lower we fall, the higher he raises us: so it
was with Naomi: o call me no more Naomi, quoth she, but Marah; no more Beauty,
but Bitterness; and God made her the Grandmother of David: But now, how many
be there, that set faces upon want, and in the bitterness of their condition
affect the name of Beauty? Are there not too many in this age, that care more
to seem, than to be good?

But a good Christian hates this Hypocrisy, and those whom God has humbled,
and those who humble themselves before God, care not to be respected of men:
Good men think it not dainty, if the world think them filthy; but are
commonly the first proclaimers of their own unworthiness: the Pharisie coms
with Gratias in his mouth. Luke 18.11.1^
I thank thee oh God that I am not as other men are; but the Publican thinks
not himself worthy to lift up his eyes to Heaven: such a voluntary
dejectedness shall you ever find in the humble: they humble themselves,
though not humbled by God; but if humbled by God, then much more humble:
whereas the wicked, though humbled by God, yet will not be humble; such were
Pharaoh, Herod, and Julian, Exodus 5.2.
and such I fear, there are many now. Who is God, that I should let the people
go? says Pharaoh: What is the Plague, these foolish preachers speak of? say
some wicked men now, that I should forsake my sins? vicisti Galilee, says
Julian in scorn and contempt to Christ: Thou have overcome me, thou Carpenters
son of Galilee, but for all that I will not ^^oope to thee; and so does many
a son of Belial say now: There is a Plague amongst us, and destroies many,
but for all that I will not yield yet.

And for all this, I trust there are some Godfrees too, who in the top of his
honor refused to be crowned with a Crown of Gold at Jerusalem, because
Christ was there crowned with a Crown of thorns: some Aurelius's of whom St.
Cyprian writes: Ep. 3 4.
In quantum gloria sublimis in tantum verecundia humilis at du^ nihil in honor
sublimius, nihil in humilitate submissius, as humble as the lowest in their
places of highest honors: Some St. Austens, Li. 13. cum Falci Manich.
who acknowledged himself the least, when indeed he was the best Bishop of
his time: Some David's, that are humbled in their own heart; now they are
humbled under Gods hands by the Plague: And I pray God make us all so humble,
that he may take off this heavy hand; to seek him early, now he slayes us; to
confess our selves worthily punished for our former sins, that we may be
partakers of his future mercies, Health and Happiness: Health here, and
Happiness hereafter, a continued preservation from the plague, and eternal
deliverance from hell, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

But I must entreat you to testify your humility not only by your tongue,
but also by your back; either like Job, Ioh. 42.6.
I abhor my self in dust and ashes, or like the Ninivites, Let Man and Beast
put on sackcloth. Iona. 3.8.


Some there be that say, Humilities clothes.
and say truly, that Humility confists not in the outside, but the inside;
and Beggars may be as proud with rags, as Gentlemen with robes. Nor are the
rich denied, or dissallowed by any wise man, such vestiments as are fit for
their callings, and their estate and substance will bear. And yet for all
this, in times of mourning, it wants not proof, that the Back should testify
the humility of the Heart so well as the tongue. So when the approach of
Holofernes was feared, Judith 4.9.10.
every one cried to God with great fervencie, and their souls were greatly
afflicted, and they, and their wives and children, and their cattle, and every
stranger, and hireling, and their bought servants, put on sackcloth upon their
loins. So Achaeb, when he heard of evil upon himself, and his posterity, 1
Reg. 21.27.
He rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh.

Never did gray heart delight in gay clothes; humility is as well content with
base freeze, as the proudest gallant with his Silk and Tissue. But I forbear
to speak of the attire of Humility: for I believe, if I should spend a whole
Sermon, as the Prophet Isaiah spent almost a whole Chapter, and tell the proud
Dames of England, That the Lord will make them bald, Isa. 3.17.
and take away the ornament of the slippers, and the Cawle, and the round tyres
of the head, and the head bands, and the rest there named? I should be
answered, That this as the fashion of the time; or, it may be, laughed at for a
fool. I am content, but not satisfied: for it is verily imagined, that the
raritie, and superfluity of such strange dresses, are abomination unto God,
as if we might follow the times; yet in a time of mourning, such as the plague
is, a modest dress fits with an humble heart. Howsoever, I shall turn the
Prophets reproof into a wish, verse. 24.
That God in stead of sweet savor, may not give you a stink; and in stead of
a Girdle, a Rent; and in stead of dressing the hair, baldness; and in stead
of a Stomacher, a girding of Sackcloth; and burning in stead of beauty. Surely,
when God clothes our bodies, as he did Jobs, with Byles and Plague-sores, we
should then testify our humility, even in our clothes. Howsoever our
clothes be without, I pray God our clothes within be black and white; Black
with Sorrow, and white with Purity, that he seeing our repentance for our
sins, may also repent of this plague, and cloth us with those white raiments
which they wear that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Amen.

And so from the Dress, I pass to the Diet of Humility, which is always
spare and thin; either like that of Daniel, Water and pulse; Dan. 1.12.
or that of David, when he ^ourned for his child, He would not eat: 2 Samuel
12.17.


A Doctrine it is, This, That Papists ascribe too much to, the Schismaticke too
little to. They make it an immediate matter of Religion, These no matter of
Religion at all: They superstitiously observe it; These scrupulously decline it.

Such an act of Religion it is not, as wherein principally we worship God,
Romans 14.^^
For the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink. says Mr. Paul, Et
qui Deum per ventrem colit, prope est us Deum ventrem haheat, says Tertullian,
He that worships God by his belly, is not far from making his belly his God.
And yet for all that, it is a religious work; else why did God command it,
saying by his Prophet, (...) 2.15.
Proclaim a fast.

This Fast is either corporal, in abstaining from meat; or spiritual, in
restraining the affections from sin. The corporal is not always commanded
by the State, nor do I meddle with it; the spiritnall is evermore commanded by
God, especially in time of Plague, and Famine, and War. And this from God I
beseech you to observe, Let your wanton eyes fast this time of weeping, from
the sight of vanity; Let your curious ears fast this time of mourning, from
idle rumors, and unsavourie talk; Let your glibbe tongues fast this time of
fear from evil speaking.

But what need I press you to this? The time presses you enough; for let but
your eyes imagine, they see their eyes, who are shut up by the plague, watering
and washing their bed, bedewing their cheeks; and then your eyes will have
little list to roave upon forbidden flesh. Again, by as strong a fancy, let
your ears imagine they hear their doleful complaints, O Lord, thou have
justly restrained me of my liberty, for I have abused my liberty. I am worthily
deprived of health. These soars are deservedly upon my body: for I have
infected my soul more than once, and often: And then your cares will have
little desire after news and vanity. And with your tongues speak what they
speak; How long, Lord, how long shall thy jealousy burn like fire? for ever?
O when shall I come into thy house? O forgive my sins, that brought this
plague. O remove this plague, the just scourge of my sins; and I believe your
tongues will not easily lie and swear, or talk idly.

In a word, let your polluted souls fast, and deny their own wills, to do
Gods; so diet your bodies, that you may fat your souls; so feed your bodies,
so fat your souls, that your Humility may have her perfect work, and that
brings me to my second consideration.

Quid efficit, What it does: what does humility? Exaltat, it exalts: 2a1ae,
2ae. what doez Humility.
Humilitas est Schola, and scala coeli: He that desires to build high, and
seek those things which are above, must lay his foundation low; for
humbleness of mind is the School teaching, and the Scale reaching Heaven: so
he, and so the Poet, Quo minor est quisquis, maximus, etc. He that is least in
his own conceit, Prove. 18.12.
is highest in Gods; so the Prophet, Before honor is humility: and so the
Apostle, Iam. 46.
God gives grace to the humble. Pride is the beginning of sin, and Humility
is the A, B, C, of our Christian Ethics; and therefore says the Apostle
again, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may lift you
up. Iam. 4.10.
Humility mounts the soul that uses it, to Heaven; Pride keeps us down, for
it is a plague. The plague is Tumor in corpore, and so pride is Tumor in mente;
That a swelling in the body, this in the soul. (...) the plague be exalted,
and become Macula in corpore, Tokens in the body, then the body dies: so, if
prid^ be exalted, and become Macula in anima, Spots in the soul, then the
soul dies. And yet it is observed by some, that though the Tokens do appear,
yet lying upon the earth, and breathing into the earth, may possibly cure it:
And so humility, the lowest, and lowlyest of all Gods graces, will cure the
plague of the soul, pride.

O quantum crimen superbiae, says St. Ambrose, ut ei etiam adulteria
praeferantur! Oh how great a sin is the sin of Pride, that even Adulteries
are preferred and saved before it! Noverca virtutum, matter vitiorum, The
stepmother of virtue, and the mother of vice. The stepmother of Virtue, because
it hates them, as many women do those children their husbands had by former
wives; and the mother of Vice, because there is not one vice in the world, but
therein is found the contempt of God, and that is Pride.

Humilitati autem nihil aequale, Tom. 5. p. 171. De Humilit.
says St. Chrysostom, haec est bonorum matter, and radix, altrix, and occasio,
simul and vinculum: What is comparable to humility? Humility is the mother of
all Graces, the root, the nurse, the occasion, and the bond of all Graces: The
mother of all Graces she is, for she conceives them; God had respect unto the
lowliness of his Hand-maiden: Luke 1.
The lowliness conceived a respect in God toward her. The root she is, for
they grow upon her; if they be not upon the stock of humility, they turn into
vices: Nothing more wicked than to cleanse the Leper, than to heal the lame,
than to raise the dead, says St. Chrysostom; How? nothing more wicked? why,
these are good works, how then are they wicked? Why, the Father tells you,
Ibid.
Si sit cum insolentia, If it be done in arrogance, and selfe-conceite, if it
be done without humility: No fire of Charity, if it be not raked up in the
cindars of humility; and the Nurse she is; for the Graces of God, if they suck
not upon the Breasts of humility, they wax lean, and starve: He has filled
the hungry, (Humble) with good things, but the rich he has sent empty away.
And the occasion of other Graces she is; when Saul sought his Fathers Asses
humbly, he found a Kingdom gloriously: when he sought himself vainly, he
lost himself, and his Kingdom foolishly. And the Bond she is; for when the
other Graces of God, sever themselves from humility, they become sins: Luke
1.51.
God puts down the mighty from their seat, but exalts the humble and meek.

You see what Humility does; It exalts, I could tell you much more that it
does; for all that I could and would tell you, I tell you, it secures. Socrates
secured himself from death, when the Tyrant threatened him with death, saying,
volo mortem I would dye: Nay, but then says the Tyrant, thou shall live: why
says he, volo sive mortem sive vitam, I will either dye or live, as you
please, and so was safe: And so is the Humble man; as the Reed answered the
Oak, The Oak wonders why the strongest of all Trees should be sometimes
Eradicated, rooted up by the Roots, and sometimes blown down by the wind;
when the Reed, the weakest of all things, should never be hurt by the wind:
Why, says the Reed, thou need est not wonder at this, for thou art a proud,
and inflexible piece of wood, and will not yield; and therefore the wind that
is stronger than thy self, breaks thee; whereas, I yield to every wind, and
so no wind hurts me, but I am secure; so says the Humble man: Now God has
sent a Plague, I am willing to dye, and if it please him to take it away
again, I am willing to live: If I live; says he, I will live to thy glory in
newness of life, and ascribe it to thy mercy, if this destroying Angel pass
over my house; and if I dye, I will dye to be glorified with thee, through
Jesus Christ my Savior: if I dye, in Heaven I will praise thee; and if I live,
in Earth I will pray unto thee.

And that is my second part I am to speak of: 2a, 2ae.
The second ingredient for the cure of the Plague; Prayer: It is an opening
Pill, it opens out hearts to conceive, our lips to utter a Prayer; and it opens
Gods ears to hear our Prayer: If my people shall pray. I will hear.

In this I shall, if God will, show you: 1. Quid est, what Prayer is: 2. Cui,
to whom we must pray: 3. Quid efficiat, what Prayer does: And 1. Quid est, What
is Prayer?

Some have defined Prayer Comparate, 1a. 2ae 2a. Prayer what?
and some Absolute: They that define it by Comparison, tell us, That Prayer is
the sacrifice of a Dove; that is, a Peace offering; and they that define it
thus, direct us to first, Electio, the choice of a clean one, by preparation,
they mean, as the Psalmist says, That our hearts indite a good matter: Psalm.
45.
and secondly, Corpus, a Body, verba pura, viz. good words, and not to speak to
God, as too many speak in this place to you, Non sense, by speaking Quicquid
in bucc am vener it, whatsoever comes next to hand: but so to speak, as God
hearing, may accept, and man hearing, may not pity, if not laugh: not to
complement with God in uncoth language, nor yet to slight God with slovenly
words, nor yet to weary God with tedious bablings, but with words well
composed, that it be neither a lean body, nor a lame body. And thirdly Anima^,
A Soul: viz. Intentione^ fixam, a fixed intention; not to suffer our heart to
roave and wander, while our lips moove and speak, but to observe what we
pray for, as we desire God to observe and grant our prayers. We pray often,
and God hears us not; and the reason is plain, because we hear not our
selves. And fourthly, Alas, Wings, viz. Fidem, and spem; faith, and Hope;
Faith, to deliver the message in Heaven; and Hope, to return the answer upon
earth, believing he does hear them, and hoping he will grant them: And grant
them God will, if fifthly, this Dove have plumas, and be not bare of feathers,
viz. Gemitum and lachrymas, sighs, and tears. But last of all, you must be
sure they have pedes, feet too, opera Charitatis, Works of Charity: And then,
when GOD sees your prayers so complete, he will, questionless he will accept
it for a peace offering. They that define Prayer absolutely, tell us, it is
Expressio mentis ad Deum in Nomine Jesus Christi, an expression of our desires
in the Name of Jesus Christ to God.

An expression of our desires, not that words are ever necessary; for sometimes
the heart may be so overcharged with grief, as that the tongue cannot speak.
So we read of Hannah, and so of Moses; but that we would make our tongues the
Ambassadors of our hearts, when there is not a greater occasion to keep them
at home: For God made our Tongues, so well as our Hearts; and we desire to
have our Tongues in Heaven with our Hearts, and therefore must glorify the God
of Heaven equally with our Tongues and Hearts. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 45.
My heart is enditing of a good matter, and my tongue is the pen of a ready
writer; I will speak of the things which I have made unto the King. And so we,
we must utter, utter with our Tongues, what we desire with our Hearts.

But both our desire and expression must be in the Name of Jesus Christ; no
promise but in him; no purchase but by him: Whatsoever you shall ask in my
name, God will give it you: In nomine ejus it must be: for without him, we are
like to have as course entertainment with God, as Joseph promised his brethren,
if they brought not Benjamin. By the Princes favorite, the subject obtaines
the Princes favor; and by Jesus Christ, in whom, and in whom only, God is
well pleased, Math. 3.
we obtain whatsoever we obtain: and therefore as the Apostle, so I to you,
Let your prayers be made known by him (viz. by Jesus Christ) to God.

And being made known by him, our prayers are sure of acceptance; for he has
purchased Gods favor for us, and that by a bloody rate, Hebr. 5.
By his own blood; By that he entered into the holy place, to make
intercession for us, this makes our Evangelicall sacrifices acceptable to God.

To God, I say: For as our prayers must be offered, By; 2a, 2ae, 2ae.
and in the name of Jesus Christ, so they must be offered to God, and to God
only; for God only is the Cui, the object, To whom we must pray.

Not to Patriarch, or Prophet; for no precept for that. Not to Angel or
Archangell; for no promise to that. Not to the Virgin Marie, or any she
Saint; for no example of this, let Rome say what Rome can to the contrary. But
this is a matter of dispute, and so disputed it has been, that it needs no
dispute here; for they are not able to reply. And besides, their own Doctrine
and Example choakes them: for their doctrine never taught to offer, their
example never did offer any thanksgiving to any Saint, or Angel whatsoever. And
yet thankesgiving is a part, and a chief part, of prayer: and therefore where
no thanksgiving is due, there no prayer is due. Nor the one nor the other has
any object, but God: I shall therefore conclude this with a prayer to God.

God grant we may never betake our selves to any other shelter, than Vmbra
altissimi, that of God; for blessed be the people that be in such a case; yea,
blessed are the people which have the Lord for their God. God make us Saints in
Heaven, and give us grace never to pray to any Saint; and to pray to him so,
that when we pray, he may hear.

It is my third consideration, in Quid efficit? what does prayer? 3a, 2ae, 2ae.
And did I propose it so low, What does prayer? I should rather have proposed
it thus, What does it not? It opens Heaven, and it shuts Heaven. 1 Reg. 18.
Rain or no Rain, are at the command of prayer. It defeates our Enemies: So
David overthrew the counsel of Achitophel by Prayer. 2 Samuel ^ 31.
It obtaines favor with Kings: Neh, 2.4.
So Nehemiah won grace with Artaxerxes the King, by Prayer. It opens Gods
hands, and it shuts Gods hands: Numb. 11.2.
So Moses, when God was angry, shut his hands, by Prayer. and when the people
were hungry, by prayer Moser opened Gods hands to give them Manna. In a word,
Prayer is, as Luther, speaks, though Hyperbolically, yet Divinely, Res
omnipotentissima, an Almighty power. By this, 2 Samuel 24 Psalm. 106.^^.
prayer, David in his time, and Phineas in his time, stayed the Plague. As they
did pray, so God give us grace to pray, and to pray so, that this plague may
be stayed, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Many objections are made against the necessity of prayer, and against the
efficacy of prayer. I have solved those objections else where; The third
Sermon.
and all that I say here, is, If any one amongst you all miss the aim of your
prayers, it is, I will lay my life on it, it is because your prayers are
amiss: Mend them, and God will hear them; hear them, and forgive your
sins, so that you mend your selves, and turn from your wicked ways.

It is the third thing I am to speak of, 3a, 2ae.
and the third ingredient for the cure of the plague, Repentance is; It is a
purging pill, it purges us of sin, and God of wrath. If my people turn from
their wicked ways, I will forgive their sin. And herein I shall desire you
to observe with me, 1. Qui, who are to turn, populus, and populus universus,
my people, and all my people. 2. Quid est, what it is to turn. That we must
take by the example of Turners. 3. A quo, from what we must turn, from our
wicked ways, from all our wicked ways. 4. Ad quem, to whom we must turn:
for every motion has a double term, To God; turn to me says the Lord. 5 And
lastly, Quid efficit, what good turning does us: It obtaines forgiveness,
forgiveness of sins, forgiveness of all sins. And when they are once
forgiven, there is no fear, but with one help more, but the land will be
healed, and the plague removed.

Of which, may I so speak, and you so hear, and all of us so do, Turn from
our wicked ways, that God may forgive us all our sins, and preserve us from
the plague, and remove the plague from us, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

I begin with the first, 1a, 3ae, 2ae. Who to turn.
Qui, Who should turn; populus, and populus universus, My people, and all my
people: 1. Gods people: for they that are not Gods people, either cannot, or
do not: They cannot, for want of grace; they do not, for want of skill: They
have no correction to drive them to it, they have no direction to guide them in
it: so unhappy they, they that are not Gods people, that they have no
unhappines; They come in no misfortune, like other folk. So happy we, we, that
are Gods people, that we have many unhappinesses. We come into misfortune
above all other folk; only our mis-hap becomes a good hap; and our
misfortune, a Fortune, a good fortune.

For when God whippes us, we read it in Corrigit, a Chastisement; but when
God whippes them, it is in punit, a punishment. Chastisements are always for
amendment, punishments commonly for amercements. When God does Castigare,
correct his people, it is to amend them: When God does punire, punish them that
are not his people, it is to end them. With his people, God deals as a Father
with his Child, as a Master with his Scholar. And why does the Father whip
his Child? to make him better. Why the Master his Scholler^ To make him learn
his book. But with them that are not his people, God deals as a Judge with a
malefactor: and why does a Judge condemn a Thief? To hang him, to hang him
out of the way. Thus did God deal with the Egyptians, He sent them Frogs,
Exodus 6. etc.
and Lice, and Flies, and Grasshoppers, and Murraine: and what was the end of
all this? To overthrow them in the red Sea. But why did he send Fiery Serpents
amongst the Israelites? Numb. 21 9.
To make them look up to the Brazen Serpent, that they might be healed. Why
did he smite them at Ai? Josh. 7.13.
But to make them up, and sanctify themselves, Why did he suffer the
Philistimes and Ammonites to oppress them? but to make them say, We have
sinned against thee, Judge. 10.15.
deliver us we pray thee, this day. Why did he send them Thunder and Rain in
Harvest? 1 Samuel 12.19.
but to make them pray unto the Lord, and confess the addition of their
sins. Why a plague in King David's days? 2 Samuel 24 17.
but to make him confess his sins. Why a plague now? but to make us that are
his people, to turn from our wicked ways.

Such a happiness there is in being Gods people, for all the plague; and as
Plato said, He thanked God, he was a Man, and not a Beast; a Grecian, and not
a Barbarian: So we must, at least, so we should, bless the Name of God, that
we are men, and not beasts, Christians, and not Infidels; his people, and not
them, nor of them that are not his people: and God make us all so happy, that
all of us may always, especially in this time of plague, as to turn from our
wicked ways.

For it is not only first, Populus, 2. Vniversus, all the people.
but secondly, Populus universus; not only My people, but All my people must
turn: For all the people are sinners; and therefore all the people are in
danger of the plague; and in more danger, because this sickness is more
dangerous than all other sickensses, it is infectious; it is amongst us that
tarry here in the City; it may overtake them that are gone into the Country.
I pray God it may not overtake them; I pray God remove it from amongst us: But
yet it is amongst us, and for ought they know, or any man else, it may go
after them. If in King David's days, it went from Dan to Beersheba; it may in
our days go from London, to the farthest parts of England: No way to remove
it from us, no way to keep it from them; but for them, and us, and all the
people of God, To turn from our wicked ways.

Were the sin but private, and particular, and the punishment answerable, why
then happily that particular man's turning might turn the plague out of doors.
But the sin, alas, is universal, and the punishment Epidemicall: All of us
are sinners, all of us, though not happily all of us in the same degree, yet
all of us in some degree are sinners, and most of us all in a very high degree,
God have mercy upon us; and all of us are punished, some by feeling, some by
fearing; some of us smart actually, all of us potentially; and therefore all of
us must turn.

Nay, now I think on it, though the sin were but private, and that private
man had the passion of Repentance in respect of his own sin, and cried out
with the Publican, God be merciful unto me a sinner; yet notwithstanding all
men should be compassionate toward the ill case of others, and communicate
with him in a joint Repentance; the reason is, because he is a member of the
same Body. But the sin, as I said before, is general; we all say, and many
of us, God mend our manners; do but say so, We have erred and strayed from thy
ways like lost sheep; and therefore all of us must participate in Repentance,
and say, There is no health in us; but thou oh Lord have mercy upon us
miserable offenders: For the Church is Corpus Homogeneum, and therefore Eadem
est ratio partis and totius. All men are one Body, and every man is a member of
that one body; and therefore the same remedy serves both; what every man must
do in particular, all men must do in general.

All men are but one Body, and thus the Members are placed: The King is the
Head, the Divine is the Heart, the Physician is the Liver, the Lawyer is the
Tongue, the Soldier is the Arms, the Merchant is the Lungs, the Commons are
the Feet. The King rules, the Priest prays, the Physician feeds, the Lawyer
pleads, the Soldier fights, the Merchant breaths, the Commons travail: None
of these can be spared, for then the Body will be imperfect; and therefore all
of these, all Gods people must Turn. The King, though a King, and therefore
the best of men; yet he is but a man, and therefore a sinner: and a Carbuncle
may come upon the Head; but I pray God, preserve our Head, King Charles, from
plague and pestilence: The Priest, though a Bishop, and the holiest of then,
yet he is but a man, and therefore a sinner; and the poison of the plague may
possess the Religion of the Heart; but I pray God preserve the Heart of our
Religion, and Devotion, the Clergy, from plague and pestilence. The Physician,
though the liveliest of men, yet he is but a man, and therefore a sinner; and
the plague may by his venom stop the Fountain of Blood; but I pray God
preserve the Liver of our Body, the Physician, from plague and pestilence. The
Lawyer, though the nimblest of men, yet he is but a man, and therefore a
sinner; and the Sore may rise in the throat close by the Tongue; but I pray God
preserve the Tongue of our State, the Lawyer, from plague and pestilence. The
Soldier, though the strongest of men, yet he is but a man, and therefore a
sinner; and the Plague, stronger than himself, may break the Arms; but I
pray God preserve the Arms of our Kingdom, the Soldier, from plague and
pestilence. The Merchant, though the richest of men, yet he is but a man, and
therefore a sinner; and the plague may suffocate the Lungs; but I pray God
preserve the Lungs of o^^ Kingdom, the Merchant, from the plague. The Common
people is a man, and but a man, and therefore a sinner; and the plague may
weaken the Feet, a Sore may rise in the Groine, but I pray God preserve the
Feet of this Kingdom, the Common people, from the plague.

No way to persuade God to this, but for the Head, and the Heart; and the
Liver, and the Tongue; and the Arms, and the Lungs; and the Feet, and all; all
Gods people to turn from their wicked ways. Some there be, that think
themselves too good to humble themselves, and turn; and some that think
themselves too unworthy to pray, and turn; but here is a check for the one,
and a comfort for the other; all my people must turn, The good man has need,
and the bad man has leave.

Be thou as good as King David, a man after Gods own heart; yet K. David may
fall into an adultery, and a self confidence: and therefore not he so good,
but he must turn. And indeed, how often did he turn? Sometimes himself to
God, and sometimes God to him, God to him by prayer, Turn not away thy face
from thine anointed. And sometimes himself to God by repentance, Turn me, O
God, and I shall be turned. And this is to teach good men, that when God is
turned from them, or they from God, then that they by prayer should turn God
to them; and they by repentance turn themselves to God, by turning from their
wicked ways.

Nor none so bad neither, but he may turn; not the Publican: and therefore
Saint Matthew was called, and Zacheus saved. Not the Thief; and therefore the
Thief from the Cross went into Paradise. Not the Harlot, and therefore Mary
Magdalene had many sins forgiven her. Not the Persecutor, and therefore Saint
Paul was converted. Not the Denyer, and therefore Saint Peter wept bitterly.
And I pray God give us all grace to weep so bitterly, and to turn so truly,
that God may remove the plague speedily, and send health into our houses
perpetually, and grace into our souls eternally, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

This is not only our Ministry persuading: for you may think, and too many
of you do too often think too lightly of that; but it is also Gods Majesty
commanding: and which of you dares think but highly of that? God commands all
men every where to repent, Acts 17.30.
viz. To turn. All men, deep Politicians, rich Citizens, great Sinners, holy
Saints, all his people, to turn.

But what is it to turn? 2a, 3ae, 2ae. To turn, what.
That Is my second consideration must tell you; and I must tell it you from the
examples of Turners: And for these examples, I look upon Nehemiah; he met with
an uneven piece of Timber, and he turned it round. I look upon King David, he
met with a knotty piece of Timber, and he turned it smooth. I look upon King
Nebuchadnezzar, he met with a lofty piece of Timber, and he turned it thin
and low. I look upon Israel, she met with a rotten piece of Timber, and she
turned it into the fire. I look upon S. Peter, he met with a foul piece of
Timber, and he turned it clean and fair.

1. Nehemiah at his return from the Captivity, Nehem. 13.3.23.
found in Jerusalem an uneven piece of Timber, a mixed multitude; Jews that
had married wives of Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab, people that spoke half the
language of the Jews, and half of Ashdod, and he rounded them: he put away
all their strange wives. Sie vos, so do you: If you have in your house a mixed
multitude, goods gotten honestly, by your labor; and goods gotten dishonestly,
by Rapine, or Theft, or Usury, or Lying: away with them, return them to the
true owners, that Jerusalem may be repaired, that the plague may be stayed,
that your bodies may be healed, that your souls may he saved.

If the affections of your souls have married strange wives, the World, or the
Flesh; if you come to Church, and speak half the language of Canaan, and yet
serve the World, or lust after the flesh; take out a divorce, that you may
serve God only, that God, who only can, may repair the breach of the people.

King David met with a knottie piece of Timber, 2 Samuel 11.4.^ 8.13
he commits adultery with Bathsheba, when Ioab is besieging Rabbah, and sends
for Vriah her husband to cover it; and when he would not go home, neither
drunk nor sober, he dispatches him with letters, to dispaeth him of his life.
And when his subtelty was found out by Nathan, he smoothes it, 2 Samuel
12.13.30.31.
and says plainly, and sorrowfully, Peccavi, I have sinned; Et transtulit
Dominus,, And the Lord took away his sin. Sic vos, so do you. If any of
you, while your tongue has been besieging Hell by prayers, as Ioab Rabbah by
weapons; and in the mean time your heart has committed adultery, by roaving
and wandering imaginations upon your gold at home, your business abroad, or
your neighbor in the Church, either by lust, or talk, as David with
Bathsheba; and you have sent for your eye, the husband of your heart, to cover
this wickedness, by lifting up the white of it to Heaven; why then dispatch
it, pull it out: and now that Nathan your Minister, has told you on it, be
sorry for it, and confess it, and say, I have sinned, that God may forgive
your sins, that your tongue may conquer Hell, that the Crown of the King
thereof, Lucifer, that Crown which he ware when he was in Heaven, may be
put upon your head, and all his people, his tentations, and sins, and
plagues, may go under the Harrowes, and Axes, and Sawes of your repentance:
and so shall the plague be stayed, and you saved.

3. Dan. 4.30.31.32.37.
King Nebuchadnezzar met with a lofty and proud piece of Timber, Is not this
great Babel that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my majesty? And by and by his kingdom was taken
from him, and he was driven from men, to eat grass as Oxen, and his body was
wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers,
and his nails like birds claws, and he confessed that Gods works are truth,
and those that walk in pride he is able to debase. Sic vos, so do you. If any
of you rich Citizens, that came hither with a staff, like Jacob over Jordan,
and are now become great, and have built you fair houses, City houses for
profit, and Country houses for pleasure, yet walk not in the pride of your
heart, say not, you have got this by the policy of your brain, or the strength
of your hand; or if you have said so, as too many of you have said so, why then
go, eat grass with the Oxen, feed hardly: wet your body with the dew of
heaven, with thowres of ne^venly grace, with tears of true repentance: let
your hairs grow like Eagles, like Estridge feathers, to break off the Iron
chains o^ your sins; and your nails like birds claws, to pick out the
eyes of these proud tentations: Break off your sins by righteousness, and
your iniquity by showing mercy to the poor, that there may be an healing of
your error, and a lengthning of your days, and a staying of the plague,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

4. Israel met with a rotten piece of Timber, coverings of graven Images, and
ornaments of molten Images, and she cast them away as a menstruous cloth. Sic
vos, so do you. Isai. 30.22.23.26.
If you have p^^ your crust in the graven Images of silver, or m^l^ea Images or
gold; If you have worshipped your wealth, before you have your God; if you have
taken more delight and pains in getting this trash, then the favor of God,
why then, throw away these, be angry with these selfe-confidences, that God may
send you seasonable weather, and give you bread, and bind up the breach of the
people, and heal the stroke of your wound.

Fifthly and lastly, Saint Peter met with a foul piece of Timber, a Damsel
meets him, and charges him to be Christ's servant, and he denies him: Another
charges him, and he denies him again; and so the third time. Then Jesus
looks back, the Cock crows, and he goes out, and weeps bitterly. Sic vos,
so do you: If when you have met with a Maid, with a Woman, you have denied
Christ, and defiled your self, his members. If a second time you have polluted
his Temple, and lay with your neighbors wife: if a third time, you have
defacced his Image, and denied him; and belyed him, by selling his Wares at
high rates, and put them off by Oaths and lies: Why see, Jesus looks back,
looks back with pity, and anger both: The Cock crows, his Ministers call
to you, do you go out, and turn from such wicked company, and weep
bitterly; that your Faith may not sail, that your bodies may not dye, that
your Souls may not be damned; that you may live to praise God here joyfully,
and in Heaven eternally.

For by turning here, God means a motion opposite to going on: you are in a
way of sin, that has made away for the plague; if you go on, you go a
wrong way still, and still the plague continues: If you would have the plague
away, why then turn from that way; turn from it with indignation, and hate
your sins as the Israelites did, turn from it by contrition, as
Nebuchadnezzar did, and be sorry for your sins: Turn from it by confession,
as King David did, and acknowledge your sins: Turn from it by Resolution, as
Nehemiah did, and divorce your sins: Turn from it by compunction, as St. Peter
did, and weep for your sins: send up St. Peter's tears to Heaven, that God
may send some showers from Heaven, send up King David's groans to Heaven, that
God may send health upon the Earth: Turn you from, that God may turn you to:
They that will not turn, shall be turned; The wicked shall be turned into
Hell, and all the people that forget God. If you would have a turn to Heaven
when you go from hence; Then while you are here, turn from your wicked ways.

That Is the A quo, and my third consideration, 3a, 3ae, 2ae. From what we must
turn.
From what must we turn? From our wicked ways. And And here by the way, I
look upon the Metaphor, Ways; and by ways here is meant Manners, Courses,
Conversations, 1. From our wicked ways.
and the meaning is, Turn from your wicked manners, your wicked courses, your
wicked conversations. And again, by Way is meant, not only a course, but a
settled course; not a starting, or a fit: but a constancy. Good men may start
aside; as David into an adultery, Peter into a denial. but, Non est via
eorum, It is not their way. This, and so the wicked may sometimes try the right
way. Cain may stumble upon a sacrifice, and Saul upon an offering, and Caiaphas
upon a prophecy, but it is not via eorum, they quickly take their former road
again; and so the whole meaning is You that are good, turn you from your
wicked startings; you that are bad, turn you from your wicked courses: 2. From
al our wicked ways.
from all your wicked ways. For not a sin, but must be repented of.

Israel was guilty of other sins; yet Israel could not get the victory, till
Achans sin was done away. Other sins there were, but Rabbah could not be
taken, till King David turned from his wicked way of adultery. Other sins
there were, but the plague would not be stayed, till King David turned from his
wicked way of selfe-confidence. Many other sins there are now, for which this
plague is amongst us, but there are some ways we walk in, some continued
sins, either inwardly or outwardly, Drunkennesses outwardly, Hypocrisies
inwardly; Adulteries outwardly, Concupiscences inwardly; Pride outwardly,
Ambition inwardly; Usury outwardly, and Avarice inwardly. And answerably we
must turn; Turn outwardly from our outward wicked ways; and turn inwardly
from our inward wicked ways. Outwardly we must be sober, continent, humble,
and liberal: and inwardly we must be sincere, chaste, humble, and content.
And this we must especially do; especially turn inwardly: for if we do
turn inwardly, we do turn outwardly. Whereas many men turn outwardly, that
do not turn inwardly. We may be civil, yet hypocrites: we may be chaste
for the outward man, and yet adulterous within: we may be humble outwardly,
as Achab was, and yet ambitious in our hearts, as Absalom was: we may be
prodigal in the outward acts of charity, and yet covetous within in our
desires.

And what say the Schools of this? Our actions are so far virtuous or
vicious, as the will has a hand in them. Vera bonitas and malitia sunt tantum
in cord. True goodness, true wickedness is only in the heart. And God
oftentimes takes not off his heavy hand, because we turn not from our wicked
ways with all our hearts. Non facta numerat, sed corda. He looks not upon
our hands, but upon our hearts. Animae amaritudo est anima poenitentiae. The
turning with our heart, is the heart of turning; the repentance of the soul,
is the soul of repentance. And because this is all in all, I shall show you in
a word for all, whether you do turn from your wicked ways with your hearts.
There are two special rules to know it by: The first is Si in, the second is
Si post.

1. Si in: if in the act of our turning, we resolve never to have any more to
do with sin: if we throw our sins away, Hosea 14.8.
as repenting Ephraim did: What have I any more to do with Idols? Fie, Get you
hence. Give me leave to ask some of you, Why do you Usurers call in for your
money now? Because you will have no more to do with usurie? or for fear you
should loose your money in this sickness, and that when the sickness is past,
you may have money to put out to use again? It is a turning this; But such a
turning, that for all this, the plague may turn you into the earth, and these
Reservations into Hell. I could ask the Drunkard the same question, Why does
he lay aside his pots now? Because he will never be drunk again? or because
he fears by such quaffing, he may inflame his blood, and get the infefection?
and that at the fall, he may have his health, and fall to his Healths again?
It is a turning, this but, etc.

If you would have the plague turn from your heart, turn you from your
sins, with all your hearts, with the resolutions and protestations of your
hearts, That you will never have any more to do with sin. That is the first
note.

2 The second, Tertul.
Si post sequatur emendatio vitae, If after this resolution there follows
amendment, and a better life. Poenitentia sine emendatione vitae vana, quia
caret fructu cui Deus eam servit. In vain is that repentance, which is not
followed with a better life; because it bears not that fruit, for which God
planted it: that is, the fruits of Righteousness. If thou find thy self
after the plague, as bad as thou wast before the plague; in the plague thou
have repented, but so, that for all that, God will follow thee with another
plague, or send thee into hell for it. The plague never kills, till it has
poisoned the heart: nor is the plague ever killed, til the heart has poisoned
it with Repentance.

From Plague and Hell good Lord deliver us all. And that we may all be
delivered thence, God give us grace to turn from all our wicked ways with all
our hearts; and assure us thereof in our holy resolutions presently, and in our
holy conversations futurely; that presently we may obtain health, and
futurely salvation, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

But being turned from our wicked ways, to whom, 4a, 3ae, 2ae. Turn to what.
or to what must we turn? Why, we must not turn, as too many wicked men in
this world do turn, from one sin to another; not from prodigality to
covetousness: This is to turn from one Devil to another; not from the
extortion of pawn taking, to the oppression of usurie. This is to turn out one
Devil by another: and for such a turning we may fear, That God will turn the
plague of Pestilence into the plague of Famine, and that is worse: and turn
out the plague of Famine by the plague of War; and that is worst of all. If
you would have God turn away all these sore plagues, and leave a blessing
behind, then you must turn to him. Joel 2.12.
Turn to the Lord your God, says the Prophet.

We need not go so far for the example: Look but in the former chapter
upon the petition; and there it is in the 38. verse. 2 Chronicles. 6.38.
If they return to thee with all their heart.

And indeed, to whom else should we turn? He is the Lord and so only can: He
is our God, and so surely will: With the Lord is power, with our God is mercy.
By the power of the Lord he did create us, and does preserve us: and therefore
says the Psalmist, Psa. 100.3.
It is he that has made us, and not we our selves: and therefore says the
Psalmist again, Psa. 124.2
If the Lord himself had not been on our side, now may Israel say, etc. And
may not we say so now? If the Lord himself had not been on our side, when the
plague destroys a thousand on our side, and ten thousand on our right hand,
but that it should light upon us too? No hand can keep it from us, but the
hand of the Lord. And by the mercy of our God he did redeem us, does forgive
us, and will save us. He redeemed Israel, he will save his people, says the
Psalmist. Luke 1.71.
He has redeemed us from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us,
says Zachary: and says he here, I will forgive their sin.

It is my fist and last consideration of this part, 5a 3ae, 2ae what good by
Turning.
Quid efficit, what good does this turning from our wicked ways to God do?
Why, it obtaines forgiveness, and here I shall show you, God willing, first,
that God only can forgive sins: Secondly, that God certainly does forgive
all sins.

First, God only can forgive sins; so the Iewe^ disputed well, 1a, 5ae, 3ae
2ae. Muk 2.20
when they said, Who can forgive sins, but God only? Nor did Christ
gainsay it, though he said again, The Son of Man has power to forgive sins:
for that was by virtue of the Union of the Godhead and Manhood into one
Person; Originally it is in God, I, and only too.

Nor is Quorum remiseritis any Bar, Ioh. 20.
Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven: for the power of the Priest is
but a Delegate, a ministerial, a dependent power; a power to ascertaine us,
that such a thing is done Sicut in terra, sic in Coelo; As in Earth, so in
Heaven: It is Primitive, Imperial, and Sovereign in God; therefore says the
Church, O God, whose nature and property is always (It will bear only too)
to have mercy, and to forgive; therefore says Daniel, To thee o Lord belongs
mercy: Dan. 9. 2 Cor. 1.3.
therefore St. Paul calls him, The Father of mercy, and God of all consolation;
and so GOD proclaims himself, Exodus 3 4.
The Lord, the Lord God, strong, gracious, merciful, and ready to forgive,
etc. And so King David prays, According to the multitude of thy mercies do
away all mine offenses. Psalm. 51.1.


In a word, sin is only directly against God, and therefore God only can
directly forgive sin. As David therefore to his Auditory, Trust not in wrong,
and robbery, nor in my child of man, for there is no help in them: so I to
you, trust not in Indulgences, nor in Supererogations though the Churches,
though the Saints; they are fallen, that you may stand upright; go to God, but
go to God in the face of Jesus Christ; for as it is Gods property to forgive,
so it is his property to forgive in Christ. GOD looke^ graciously upon none,
but in the face of Jesus Christ: And then Ec^ Agnus Dei qui tollit peccata
mund^ Behold the Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. Ioh.
1.29.


And secondly, 2a, 5ae, 3ae, 2ae.
as God only ca^ forgive sins: so God certainel^ does forgive all sins,
all sinne^ that men turn from, and ask for givenesse for: so Christ himself
tells us, All sinues shall be forgive^ save the blasphemy against the Ho^
Ghost. Mark. 3.38.


all sins? Christ there speaks of; He speaks not, De personae Spiritus, Of a
sin against the person of the Spirit, but Dona, Against the graces of the
Spirit: No sure; for, God bless us, which of us have not sinned against the
person of the Spirit? Which of us have not resisted, quenched, and grieved the
Spirit? I: o God have mercy upon us, and against the Graces of the Spirit too;
yet not to death, we trust ^n God.

For howsoever the Schools say, The sin against the Holy Ghost, is ^ot a
sin of Ignorance; No, that is ^ardonable, as St. Paul's was; because a man may
affect too much knowledge, as Adam did; nor yet is it a sin of Infirmity; no,
that is ^ardonable, as St. Peter's denial was; because a man may affect too much
Sovereignty, as the Angels did; but a sin of Malice it is, because a man
cannot affect too much Love. Yet with submission, I dare not send any weak
conscience to despair for this; for which of us have not sinned, when we have
known sin to be sin, and that against the arguments and persuasions of our
own Conscience; yes, against the motions of Gods Spirit^ and what is this
less than a sin of Malice? and God forbid, this should be sin against the
Holy Ghost, and unpardonable.

No sure, it is not: The sin against the Holy Ghost, that which is
impardonable, is for all the world, like the mad man's sickness; not that it
cannot be cured, but because it will not be cured: The Glasse^ which brings
his health, he throws against the Physicians head, and fights against his own
Cure: And such is the sin against the Holy Ghost; when God has tried all
ways, Judgments, Mercies, promises, and threats; and all these are received in
vain, and the man will not repent: then, ah, then, I say no more; but as from
all sin, so from this sin above all sin, Good Lord deliver us. Till then,
blessed be the Name of God for it, there is no sin against God, but may be
forgiven.

No sin, though Tam multa, though Tam magna; though they be as many as
Manasses's, more than the sands of the Sea; though they be as heavy as King
David's, a sore burden, and too heavy for us to ^eare; why yet for all this,
God ^orgave them, and why not us? surely he will forgive us, if we will ^oe as
they did, Repent, and turn from our wicked ways. For all this, Repentance
does, or rather entreats God to do all this, you may be sure on it, so that
your Repentance be not like a Planet; sometimes i^ Conjunction with God; some
times in more, sometimes in less aspect; sometimes in plain opposition, for
then you are not forgiven else if your Repentance be fixed, be sure on it; so
that your Repentance be not like the plague: The plague takes one away, it may
be to day and then shuts up that house for Month; when the Month is expired
within a Week, and the poor souls hope for liberty, the the plague takes
away another, an^ shuts up the house for a Monet longer: So if your Repentance
b^ only for fits, you may doubt o^ forgiveness; otherwise, if it be steady
and constant, if you are so^ry for what is past, and resolu^ for the time to
come, and sin (...) more, why, behold thou art man whole. All that I have to
say to you more of this, is this, to beseech you to labor for forgiveness: To
be a sinner, Oh God, a sinner, it is the greatest plague that man ever pulled
upon his own head; but to be a forgiven sinner, to have our sins forgiven,
this is a blessing of blessings; I, this makes a man blessed indeed: Ps. 32.1,
2.
For blessed is he whose un^ighteousnesse is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin.

Many there be that care not, so they may have the carnal desires of their
hearts; but as Abraham ^ayd to God, when he had given him Canaan, and many a
larger promise, Lord, what is all this, seeing I go childlesse? Genesis 15.2
So say I to them; they have children at their desire, pleasures at their
command, ^ches at their beck; but what are all these, if they want
forgiveness: Oh happy, oh peaceable forgiveness, let me be as poor as Job,
as sick as Hezechias, as hungry as Lazarus, I care not, so I may have the
forgiveness of my sins.

If you once have this, you may be sure, the next thing will be, The Land will
be healed, if you seek the face of God. It is my fourth, and last part, but
the time parts this, and that; for that I must rest your Debtor till we meet
again: In the mean time, God give us grace so the turn from our wicked
ways, that he may forgive us our sins through Jesus Christ: To whom with the
Holy Ghost, three persons, one God, be ascribed all honor and glory, now, and
forever, Amen.

The third Sermon.
2. Chron. 7.14. And seek my face, and I will heal their Land.


THis is the fourth, 4a, 2ae.
and last Ingredient that cures the Plague; I called it the healing Pill, and
so it is, and so it had need to be: For the purging Pill left some
Excoriasions; we did not so turn from our picked ways, but there were many
infirmities left, even enough to de^troy us; many bleeding sores for all that,
even enough to drive us to despair, if God enter into Judgment with us: But
there is mercy with God, mercy with him to heal us; and to obtain it, we must
seek his face. And here I shall show, with Gods leave, and your patience,
first, what it is to seek; and secondly, what is the Face of God.

In the first of these, we must observe first, a Quando; secondly, a Quomodo,
thirdly, an Vbi; and them from all, which may be a third general part, what
all this does; it heales our Land, or rather intreat^ God to do, what here he
says, (...) will heal their Land, and first of the first, what is it to seek.

Quaerere est actus diligentiae, 1a, 4ae, 2ae. What it is to seek. Romans 3.23
to seek proposes diligence, and supposes (...) loss; so we are all at a
bay, an^ loss. Having sinned in Adam, w^^ are all deprived of the glory of God
and so it came to pass with Adam as with a griping Usurer, who extorting more
than was due, lost all, both Principal and Interest: For Adam, by striving to
know more than was allowed him, lost that knowledge which before was granted
him; and so became ignorant of God, and ignorant of himself; and what befell
him, befell us. For as a man that is in the dark, cannot see any thing, no,
not himself: so Adams brats being borne in sin, which is the thickest
darkness, are ignorant, and cannot see either God their Creator, or
themselves, his Creatures.

And hence it is, that there is a con^inuall seeking up and down in the world;
so that if a question were asked, what all men in the World ^oe? it might be
answered in a word, Quaerunt, They seek: somewhat we want, somewhat we would
have: though when we have it, we are not contented with it; Multa pete^tibus
desunt multa; until we find that which is able to satisfy us, and that is God
himself. So St. August. Ate Domine sumus, and irrequietum est cor nostrum,
Lib. Confess.
donec revertamur ad te: From thee oh Lord we are, and we are not at quiet
till we are with thee again. The wanton seeks to please his Flesh, the
worldling seeks to fill his Purse, the profuse seeks to corrupt his manners,
the Devil too, he seeks to damn our Souls; all these, and many more, run
about the street, and seek, and are never satisfied: Only God seeks our
Conversion, and is well pleased in it. As I live says the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.11.
I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that the sinner turn^ from his
wicked way, and live. And the godly man seeks the face of God and delights in
it: Oh when shall come and appear before the face of God says David?

So all men seek, and therefore all men are lost; lost all in themselves,
because they have all lost God: Tua perditio ex to o Israel, Thy perdition is
of thy self oh Israel; They are all gone out of the way, they are altogether
become abominable, Romans 3.12
there is also none that does good, no, not one.

We are all, God help us, like the Woman in the Gospel, that lost her Groat;
God give us the grace that she had, To light a Candle, and seek; to light the
Candle of Nature, and seek the face of God in the book of the Creatures, the
Works of his hands: To light the Candle of the Law, and see^e the face of God
in the Words of his Mouth, the Books of Moses, and the Prophets: and to light
the Candle of Grace, and to seek the face of God in the express Image of his
person, the Son of God incarnated, Jesus Christ. You see what it is to seek;
it is to use diligence for the recovery of what we have lost, and that is the
face of God.

It is my second Consideration, 2a. 4ae. 2ae, The Face of God, what.
wherein I am to tell you, what is meant by the Face of God; and I conceive it
necessary I should unfold this phrase unto you; for we cannot behold the face
of GOD, and live; and how then are we here commanded to seek the face of
God, that we may live, that our Land may be healed? Why that we shall know,
when we know, what is meant by the Face of God, and what is here then meant by
the Face of God?

1. Some by the face of God do understand, Facies majestatis, The face of his
majesty and glory, but this in this life we cannot enjoy; and whether we
shall thoroughly and perfectly enjoy it in the next, it is a question: For the
Cherubims, as glorious and unspotted creatures as they are, cannot behold it
for glory, Isai 6.2.
and therefore they do veil their faces with their wings. In this life it is
only desirable, and we may say with David, O when shall I come and appear
before the presence of God? Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will still seek after ever,
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, to behold the fair beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his holy Temple. In the next life it is admirable, and
full of glory.

2. Others understand, Facies Iustitiae, The face of his justice and judgment;
But this is formidable, and full of fear; we dare not behold it, we dare not:
For King David, a man after Gods own heart, did not dare; and therefore did
he so de precate it, Psa. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. So fearful it was to him; how much more fearful to
us? For we fear and tremble now we see but the back parts of it, the plague.
The plague, and all other judgments in this world, are but the back parts of
the Face of Gods judgment. His judgments in Hell are intolerable. Here we
deprecate, From plague and pestilence deliver us, O Lord; if not from these,
for these tall alike upon good and bad; yet from Hell, for Jesus Christ his
sake. For Hell is only for the bad, and not for the good.

Or if you you will take Iuslitia here in the fairest acception, for
Righteousness; why even so, we are not able to make answer to one of a
thousand. Should God but examine our good deeds, our Devotions, and our
Charities, our Fastings and our Repentances, by the exact rule of
Righteousness, O God, how short should we by them come of Heaven!

3. Others therefore by the Face of God, understand Facies Misericordiae, The
Face of Mercy. And this is it we must seek. The face of his Majesty strikes
us dead, the Face of his Wisdom we admire, the Face of his Justice we stand
in awe of, the Face of his Vengeance we fly from, but the Face of his Mercy,
his Mercy, This is that strong, out of which came this Sweet, and the full
unfolding of Sampsons Riddle, This is that Lion out of which came this
Honie-combe. I will not fear what man or Devil can do unto me, so long as I
can seek the Face of Gods mercy.

This is it, we are here bid to seek, and seek it till we find it, till we
behold it, till it does manifest it self unto us.

But how may we know when we find it? how may we know when the Face of Gods
mercy does manifest it self unto us?

Why that we may know, if we know how and when the Sun does manifest it
self unto us. And the Sun, you know, does manifest it self, 1. Obscurely,
2. Plainly, and 3. Fully. The Sun is manifested, 1. by Day light, that is,
Obscurely, and this manifestation is common to all in the same clyma^ unto
which the Sun is risen. 2. It manifests it self by Sunshine, that is,
Plainly, and this is not in all places where the day light is. It is 3.
manifested in his full strength, that is, Perfectly, and this is only in the
Heavens, where the body is present, and no bodies enjoy it but the stars,
because no other bodies can endure it but the stars; and there by they are
glorious bodies. So God does manifest his Face of mercy. 1. By the works of
his genetall providence to all the world, Act. 1^.28
In him we live, we move, and have our being. This is an obscure manifestation
of himself, as it were, by day light; yet even this, as obscure as it is, is
enough to make all men without excuse, Romans 1.20.
because hereby we may understand His eternal power and Godhead. He 2.
manifests the Face of his mercy, by the peculiar works of Grace to his
Church. This is the Plain Sunshine of his mercy: And blessed are the people
that be in such a case; Psalm. 144.15.
for He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws. The ^est of the world, in respect of the Church, sits
in darkness, and in the hadow of death. May this face of is mercy, the Sun
of his Gospel, ^hine bright and pure within the walls of this kingdom, till
we and our posterities after us, come to see and behold the third
manifestation of his face in Heaven, which is the fullest manifestation that
any creature is capable of whether Saint or Angel, and thereby they are
glorious and sanctified bodies.

That, that is here spoken of, is the second, and the meaning is this; seek my
face, viz. Seek my mercy. My mercy as it is revealed unto you in the Mercy
seat, and in the Sanctuary, where the Incense Altar, and the Ark stood: the
Incense Altar in the middle of the Sanctuary, and the Ark in the Sanctum
Sanctorum; 1 Reg, 8.9.
that in the body of the Church, this in the Quire, or the Chancell. Here stood
the Arc with the Law of God in it, and the Mercy-seate upon it, which was
called (...), or (...), a Propitiatory, or a Propitiation, because it covered
the Law, and hid it, that it might not appear before God, to plead against
man: and there in the Sanctuary stood the Incense Altar, Exodus 30.10.
which was sprinkled once every year with the blood of the Sacrifice, or the
Sin offering once every year, because an atonement was thereby made for the
people. This was a type of Prayer, that of Jesus Christ, with whose blood, if
our prayers be sprinkled, He is the propitiation for our sins. 1 Ioh. 2.22.


That you may be sure this is the meaning, you may look upon the prayer, to
which this Text is the answer. The prayer was this, If there be a pestilence, 2 Chronicles. 6.28.29.
and the people shall pray with their hands spread toward this house, viz. the
Temple of Solomon: that Temple was but a type, that type is long since ruined,
but the truth thereof abides for ever, and it is this, If God sends a
pestilence amongst us Christians, then we must humble our selves and pray, and
turn from our wicked ways, and seek his face by bonding our eyes toward the
mercy seat, viz. his right hand, where Jesus Christ sits making intercession
for us, that our prayers may be accepted, that our Land may be healed.

I conclude this with that of Saint Stephen, when his enemies stoned him, Act.
7.55.
He looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God, Si^ vos, so do you; now the plague
destroys your neighbors about you, look you steadfastly up to Heaven, and by
the light and Eye of Faith, see Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, and with
faithful prayers never leave importuning God, till he have healed your Land,
or saved your souls.

And one of these you shall be sure of, if not both; for mark the Apostles
inference: Romans 8.32
He has given his Son for us, and will not he with him give us all things?
It is as if he should have said, he has delivered the better part, your
Souls from Hell; and will not he deliver your worse part, your Body from the
plague? He did that by Jesus Christ, when you desired him not; and will not
he do this for Jesus Christ his sake, when you desire him? there is no doubt
to be made of it, so that we seek him, as we should: It is my third thing I
have to do, and here I am first to tell you, when you must seek him.

First, there is a time we may find, 1a, 1ae, 4ae, 2ae. Seek God, when.
if we seek; secondly, there is a time we shall find, if we seek; and
thirdly, there is a time, though we seek, yet we shall not find.

First, we may chance to find him, if we seek him upon our Deathbeds, and
never till then. But it is a chance, this, and a mere chance, if we do; some
one, or two there are amongst 10000. that have so done: but it is not safe to
follow this example; he were but a mad man, that having a long journey to go,
would leave his money behind him, because he has heard of one or two that
have found a purse of money in their journey: And little less than mad is he,
that will defer seeking of God till his Deathbed, hoping to find him then,
because one Thief upon the Cross did so: there is no certainty this way; no
wisdom to trust to this.

To seek, I told you before, is an act of diligence, we must stir ourselves,
and turn our selves this way, and that way, and every way; and enquire of
every one we meet, if we intend to find what we seek: But then, upon our
Deathbeds, alas, God knows, we cannot stir our selves, much less turn our
selves; nor hardly enquire what we have to do for pain. All that we can do
then, is to lie still in our beds, and let the Minister speak a few words in
our ears; and if he will be so kind, as to administer a little comfortable
Divinity to our souls, and so send them away, God knows whither: I speak not
this, that any old man should despair, no, despair not, though you never
sought God till your Deathbeds; for one there was, and a Thief he was, that
never sought till then, and then did find: But he was but one, and therefore
do you young men take ^eed how you presume till then: For there were five
Virgins, and this makes the Wager five to one, that were shut out for not
seeking sooner, and received for answer, when they knocked for entrance, Nescio
vos, Math. 25.12.
Away, I know you not; that we may not receive the like answer, I pray God
give us grace to seek sooner. There is more hope to prevent the fire, when it
is upon our Neighbors house, than to quench the fire, when it is upon our own
house: and it is more possible to find God, if we seek his face, when the
plague is amongst us, then if we defer it, till the plague be upon us: If I
send a pestilence amongst my people, is the Text, not upon them: while it is In
aelios, amongst others, let us seek, and not put off till it be In nos, Upon
us; and so happily we may find him so, as to preserve us still from the
plague, and to heal them of the plague. And God grant we may so seek, and
seek so successefully through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Secondly, there is a time, that though we seek, yet we shall not find; so
says the Prophet: Hose. 5.6.
They shall go with their flocks, and with their herds to seek the Lord, but
they shall not find him, he has withdrawn himself from them: And Isaiahs
Limitation says as much, Seek him while he may be found. Isa. 55.6.
And this shows plainly, that a time there is, though men seek him, yet they
shall not find him; And so St. Bernard comments the words, Erit procul dubio
cum inveniri non poterit, In Cantic. Sermon. 75.
and that is when this life is ended. Now is the acceptable time, now is the
day of Salvation: you may put it off if you please, Et expectare salutem in
medio Gehennae, quae facta fuer at in medio terrae: And seek for salvation in
the midst of Hell, which was purchased in the midst of the Earth. But when
this life is ended, our seeking too is ended; if we find not here, we are
sure to miss hereafter; no hope to find either in the Grave, or in Purgatory
or in Hell. Here if we miss, Chrysostom. Com. de Lazaro.
we miss for ever. Non est postea situm in nobis poemtere aut commissa
diluere. No power to repent after this life, says St. St. Chrysostom; and St.
Cyprian, Hic vita amittitur aut tenetur, Here we loose or gain eternity. The
next life is a time of rewarding, this only a time of seeking.

And thirdly, in this life there is a time we shall be sure to find, if we
seek; and this is referred to primum, and that primum is again enlarged to
semper. Mat. 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of God, says Christ. And says David, Psa. 105.4.
Qaerite faciem ejus semper, Seek his face evermore. Remember thy creator in
the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
was Salomons direction. They sought Christ early in the morning, Mark. 16.1.
was the women's commendation: So do you, and you shall be sure to find, if so
be your early be stretched to perpetually; that is, If you seek him first,
and last, and always, why then, you shall find God in grace to your souls,
against sin, in health to your bodies, against, the plague; and hereafter in
glory to your souls and bodies against hell.

That is the first, Tempus opportunum; 2a, 1ae, 4ae, 2ae, Seek God, Where?
Cant. 3.1.
the second is, Locus requisitus, or ubi decet; that a fit time, and this a fit
place: Non in lectulo, not in your bed lazily. In lectulo quaesivi, says the
Church; I sought him in my bed. I sought him, but I found him no^. Non in
tumulo, Nor yet in the grave. The women sought him there, and were reproved
with a Quid quaeritis? Why seek you the living amongst the dead? Non est hic,
He is not here: whereupon Saint Austen reproves Mary Magdalen thus; Quid
quaeris in tumulo, De temp. Sermon. 133.
quem adorare debes in coelo, Why do thou seek him in the grave, whom thou
ought to worship in heaven? Non inter cognatos; Nor yet amongst our
kinsfolk neither: there, amongst them, Joseph and Mary sought; they sought,
but found him not: Whereupon St. Bernard thus; Quomodo, o bone Jesus, inter
cognatos meos te inveniam, qui inter tuos minime es inventus? O sweet Jesus,
what hope to find thee amongst my kindred, when thou would not amongst thine
own?

But where? if not here, nor there, where then must we seek for him? Why, in
sinu matris Ecclesiae, says Saint Gregory, Moral. lib. 18.
in the bosom of our holy mother the Church. But where is that bosom? In
Scripturis in Ecclesia expositis, In the Scriptures expounded in the Church.
There only you shall find both Christ and the Scriptures. Et ubi Christus,
ibi facies Dei, And where Christis, there is the face of God.

The Scriptures are in the Church, Romans 3.2.
For to her are committed the Oracles of God, and the Church is in the
Scripture, and God in both. So S. Austen, In sanctis libris ubi manifestatur
Dominus Jesus, Ad Bonif. Ep. 50.
ibi and eius Ecclesia declaratur. In the holy books of God, there is both the
Lord Jesus and his Church. So Joseph and Mary found Christ in the Temple after
three days search. There is his seat, and there he is still, Luke 2.46.
In medio Doctorum, In the middle of his Ministers, to aid them in preaching.
In medio discipulorum, and in the middle of you to hear you in praying. Sic
amat medium mediator Dei and hominum, Such love bears he to the midst, that
is the mediator betwixt God and Man.

In medio jumentorum natu, when he was borne in the midst of cattle, In
medio Doctorum anno duode^^mo, when he was twelve years old, in the midst of
Doctors. In medio discipulorum doctrina, when he was preaching in the midst
of his disciples. And now, where is he now? but, in medio nostrum, in the
midst of us. Matthew. 18.20.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

So then, that you may find, do you seek the face of God in the Church; in
the Scriptures, but seek him there in the middle part of your selves too, your
hearts.

That is the Modus; 3a, 1ae, 4ae, 2ae. Seek God, How?
the manner how we must seek the Face of God, and the last consideration of the
first part, I am to speak of.

Si quaeritis, Isa. 21.12.
quaerite, says the Prophet, If you will enquire, enquire: If you will seek,
seek. Seek not loosly, slightly, slenderly; but if you will seek to find,
seek him with all your heart: so holy Bonaventure distinguishes these words,
Petite quaerite, In Luke 11.9.
pulsate, Ask, seek, knock; Distinguish these wo^^s, says he, as they are
means to come to glory. Then you must ask by prayer, seek by living well,
and knock by perseverance and holding out; but the sincerity of our heart is
the greatest matter in living well.

Or distinguish them as means to come to wisdom; and so St. Austen does
distinguish them, saying; Ad sapientiam non venitur, nisi quemadmodum Dominus
docet; We cannot attain to wisdom, but by that way the Lord Jesus has
directed us, viz. by asking, seeking, knocking; that is, by praying, reading,
and repenting; but we do not only read with our eyes: no' but with our
hearts too, if we will understand what we read: or else, by believing,
hoping, and working, but hope is placed in the heart: if hope were not there,
the heart would break.

Or distinguish them, Ex part petiti, in respect of the thing sought, so it is
petite venia^, Quaerite gratia^, pulsate ad gloriam, Ask forgiveness, seek
for grace, knock to enter into glory. But grace is no grace, unless it be,
as sought with the heart, so put into the heart. In a word, so he concludes it,
To ask is the labor of the mouth; to knock, is the labor of the hand; and
to seek, that is the labor of the heart. So that there is no hope to see the
Face of God, if we seek it not with our hearts. And so I conclude this part
too, by contracting all that I have said, into these three conclusions.

1. Seek him by the light of his Word: all other lights are but false, and
like so many ignes fatui, as you walk up and down to seek God, let his word be
a Lantern to your steps.

2. Seek him by the conformity of your life; Oculus enim cordis perturbatus,
says S. Austen, avertit se a luce justitiae: for if your life be bad, you dare
not look upon the Sun of Righteousness. By living ill, you may be seen of
God, but shall never see God; whereas by a well ordered life, you shall both
see, and be seen of God: see him with comfort, and be seen of him with delight.

3. Seek him by a heart established in grace: Oculus circumactus non videt
etiam quae ante se sunt, says the same Father, a rolling or a squint eye
cannot see the things that are just before it. Nor the heart that is in and
out, in grace to day, and out of grace to morrow: to day in a state of
Repentance, and to morrow in a state of Sin, can ever seek to see the Face
of God. Look therefore for God in the Word of God: seek God by conforming your
lives to that Word, and see God you shall, if you hold out accordingly to the
end.

But, 3a, 4ae, 2 ae. What good by seeking?
Cui bono? what good o^ all this? Why all this pains? Why seek the Face of
God? Why now? Why early? Why always? Why at Church? Why with all ou^ hearts?
Why, do you aske^ why, it heales our land. It is the last part of this Text,
and high time I had made an end of it: I only prove^ it for the explication;
and for the application, I pray God we may find the truth of it.

Look upon Jacob, Genesis 32.30.
Vidi D^ minum a facie ad faciem, and salva facta est anima mea: I have seen
God face to face, and my ii^e is preserved. He sought the face of God, and God
healed his life.

Look upon Moses, Exo. 4.12.
he sought and saw the face of God, and his tongue that stammered, and was
slow before, was healed.

Look upon Gideon, Judge. 6.16.
he saw the face of God, and his hand that was weak before, was healed, and
strengthened to save Israel.

Look upon the Leper, Mat. 8.3.
he saw the face of God, to wit, Jesus Christ, and was made whole.

Look upon the Hemorisse, Mat. 9.20.
she sought the face of God, and touched the hemme of his garment, and was
healed.

Now, I pray GOD give us grace so to seek his face, in the face of his love,
in the love of his countenance, in the countenance of his well-beloved Son,
JESUS CHRIST, that our land may be healed, this plague stayed, our bodies
preserved, and our souls saved, and all this, and all things else, for JESUS
CHRIST his sake, To whom with the holy Ghost, three persons, one God, be
ascribed all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Meditations upon the Plague.
What is the Plague? whence is the Plague? why is the Plague? three good
questions to propose, they want three good Answers: well proposed, and well
answered: They make a fit Meditation for the time; the Plague is the subject of
the Time; the Time seeks the Cause of the Plague; the Cause desires the End
for which the Plague is sent. First then, what is the Plague?

THis Quid has many an Id, and Hoc; it is this, What is the plague
or it is that: If I look upon it under the Genus of Sickness, why then it is
an ill disposition of the body: 1. Mala dispositio.
so Secundum Definitionem, It is defined so; Sickness is: or it is a want, a
defect, a privation; a privation of health. 2. Privatio.
It is not a thing in Nature, but a thing against Nature, a violation of
Nature; for therefore is Sickness called Disease, (...).
because it is Sine Sanitate, Without Health: So Secundum Rem, it is thinged
so, Sickness is. 3. Macula.
O^ it is Macula a spot, Quia corporis for mam deformat, because it disfigures
the beauty of the body. 4 Debitum
And it is Debitum, ^ Debt, Quia ad mortem obligat, Because it binds us over to
death; It arrests us at Deaths Suite: so it is Secundum nomen, It is named so,
Sickness is: Nay, sometimes it is a double Debt; a Debt to Nature, and a Debt
to Physic: If we dye, then Natures debt is paid; if we recover, yet we are
still in debt to the Physician; so far sometimes, that we spend the last
Farthing of our substance. So it was said of the Woman in the Gospel, she
consumed her whole estate upon the Physicians: Or it is a percussion, 5.
Percussio. 6. Desolatio.
or a desolation; either a smiting, or a desolating: So the Prophet says, I
will make thee sick, in smiting thee, Mica. 6.13
in making of thee desolate by reason of thy sins. It is distinguished so,
Sickness is; and of all sicknesses, this Division best complies with the
Plague; and I believe the Prophet there means the Plague: for the plague is a
smiting sickness, and is therefore called (...), for the fierceness of it: And
it is a desolating sickness, and it is therefore called (...), because it
spreads, and diffuses it self into many, if not into all people.

In a word, the plague is an Outlawry, and the plague is an Excommunication: It
is the greatest punishment in the Civil Law; and it is the greatest punishment
in the Common Law; it outlawes us, and it excommunicates us too: It outlawes us
from all works of Civility in the Commonwealth, and we may not go about our
lawful Callings; and it excommunicates us from all works of Piety in the
Church, and we may not go to public prayers. No body may go to visit
them, hardly the Physician, they may not go to visit any body, not the
Divine; such a fearful thing is the plague, and I pray God deliver us from it.

For who else can? The pla^tre whence.
who can remove it, but he that causes it? and who is the cause of it but God?
If I look upon it as it is Praemium, or Meritum, A Reward, or a Desert; so my
sin is the cause of it, Causa deficiens: But I look upon it as it is Poena
and Correctio, A punishment, or a Chastisement, and so God is the Cause of it,
Causa efficiens: So the Prophet Micaiah points to God; I will make thee sick,
I will: Mica. 6.13
And so does the Prophet Moses too; Wrath is gone out from the Lord, Number. 16.46.
and the plague is begun. And the very word it self, Plague, speaks no less;
for it is Verbum asperum, A killing word, the plague is. But it is the Lord
that kills; and therefore it is called (...), To kill as it were with the
Sword: But it is the Sword of the Lord, no hand can weild this Sword, but the
hand of God. And therefore sometimes it is called the hand of the Lord; 2 Samuel
24.14.
be cause in this punishment the Lord shows his punishment after a wonderful
and fearful manner. And sometimes it is called an Arrow, The Arrow that flies
by day: but no Bow can shoot this Arrow but Gods. Psalm. 91.6.
An Arrow it is for the suddenness, and an Arrow it is for the swiftness of
it: It brings a sudden destruction; for it creeps not, as do other diseases,
by little and little: but it pierces suddenly, and it flies with speed too,
through a whole City, over a whole Country, Even from Dan to Beersheba; 2 Samuel
24.
and who can shoot so suddenly, or so swiftly, but God?

Manes indeed in one of his phanaticall dreams, tells us, that a certain
Spirit in the air, called Messor, diffuses that contagion which breeds the
plague. But wot you what his drift was? Marry to establish that Divellish
conclusion of two beginnings, the one good, the other bad; and so to join
another power in commission with God. But I believe, and I believe all good men
believe the same, with me, that this Messor is one of Gods mowers.

Others there be that say, Beterg. de Vrbib. lib. 2. and 11.
particular cities have their Crytical days, and Clymactericall years; Every
third year is fatal to the Grand Cayre in Egypt, in which 300000. commonly
dye of the plague; every fifth, or seventh year to Constantinople, wherein the
mortality seldom costs her less than 200000. And so some have noted the
twentieth year to be mortal to London; but surely they are out in their
account: for we have had three plagues within less than three parts of twenty
years, one in 1625. another in 1630. and now a third is begun this year 1636.
Surely then, they were then, and this is now, from the hand of God.

Others conclude the pestilence to proceed from nothing else, but a malignity
of course arising from an ill conjunction of planets, or a concurrence of some
other disaffected causes in nature; and their reason is, because they are able
to trace the infection to the first body that dyed, or because they can
distinguish betwixt a contagion received per contactum of other bodies, or
occasioned by an infected air.

They may as well deny Thunder to be the voice of God, because by the help of
Philosophy, they can probably guess it to be the collission of two clouds, and
in them the contestation of two repugnant qualities.

No sure, as there is no mercy, so no judgment neither, wherein we may not
discern Digitum Dei, the hand of God, whether it be Wind or Storm, Tempest
or Hayle, they are all his Ministers to fulfill his will; yea, and the very
plague too: So says another Text, The wrath of the Lord kindled, Number. 11.33.
and smote the people with an exceeding great plague. And another to that, and
many more. If I send a pestilence. 2 Chronicles. 7.13.
But why? Why does the Lord send the plague? The Plague, why.
If it be asked in propter quod, for what reason, It is for our sins. But if
ad quod, to what end; It is to put an end to our sins, that we repenting for
our sins, he may repent of his anger. Our humility is the final cause and
end of the plague; and I end it thus.

I dare not say, God has infected the air; but I dare, and do say, I have
infected the air, I have infected it by my sins; I have made my sins more
infectious than the plague: For the plague infecteth but by sent, and that sent
must be near. But I, wretch that I am, have sent my sins far and near.
Some I have infected with the sores of Drunkenness, near at the table; some
with the spots of adultery, nearer in the bed; some with the tokens of pride,
farther off in the street; many with the swellings of oaths, and many more
far and near with those dangerous symptoms of covetousness and idolatry,
of profaneness and hypocrisy, of theft and oppression, of lying and vanity;
And what fire can purge this air; but that of zeal? And who can kindle this
fire, but thee, O God? O God, that thou would once kindle it in me: And
lest it exalt the infection, I bessech thee to qualify it with the moisture of
wisdom, that my wisdom prove not dangerous subtilty, nor my zeal rash and
saucie presumption: give me grace to tender them both unto thee in the Censor
of an humble devotion upon the Altar of the Cross: and do thou so accept of
both, that thy mercy may purge the air, through the merits of Jesus Christ.
Amen.

I dare not say, God has infected my house; But I do, and dare say, I have
infected my house. My sins of anger, of rash and unadvised anger to my
servants, have made thee my God, angry with me the unworthiest of all thy
servants. My sins of ill example to my children, have provoked thee, my God,
to make me the undutifullest of all thy children, an example to all thy
children. My sins of unkindnesse to my wife, have incited thee, my God, to
deal as unkindly with me, as with any the disloyallest piece of thy Spouse.
And therefore in the lowest humility of a servant, in the submissivest duty of
a child, and in the truest loyalty of a wife, I desire to make an atonement
with thee my God, now while the plague is but yet begun. O God, receive it from
him, who desires to receive from thee a blessing in those garments which he
has put on by the hand of Faith, of thy Son Jesus Christ. I believe he dyed
for my sins, and rose again for my Justification; and in him I trust, as
thou can, so thou will preserve me, and mine this day, and ever, from Plague,
and pestilence.

But whatsoever befalls my body by the hand of man, or by thy hand o God, deal
well with my Soul; which I beseech thee never to behold, but as it is dipped
all over, and dyed clean through with the blood of Jesus Christ: In whose
garments streng then my Faith, that I may not be afraid for the terror by
night, nor for the Arrow that flies by day, Psalm. 91.
nor for the Pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that
wastes at noonday. Oh let not a Thousand fall at my side, nor ten Thousand on
my right hand; let no evil befall them, nor any Plague come nigh my dwelling:
But deliver me from the snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome pestilence;
from the Tentations of Satan, and from the consequents of sin, for his sake who
overcame the Tempter, and suffered for sin, Jesus Christ, Amen.

The Sick man's Recovery, or his Duty after his Recovery.
John 5.14. After that, Jesus found him in the Temple, and said unto him,
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon thee.


WHat a fit Meditation i^ this Text for me? I^ may be called The Sick^ man's
Recovery; or the sick man's Duty upon his Recovery. And have not I been sick?
and an^ ^ not recovered? Blessed be the Name of God, I was sick, and am well;
and what is it fit I should do, but what this Man that was sick, did do
after he was well? and what that was, St. John tells me, He went to the Temple;
and thither he went; as I believe, to give thanks; and after Prayers, he heard
a Sermon, a Sermon of three parts: 1. Of Commemoration. 2. Of Admonition. 3. Of
Persuasion.


Was this Sermon preached only to him? surely it was penned also for me: For
whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction. And the Instruction of
this is, to tell me, whither I should go when I am recovered of a Sickness,
from this man's Example, To the Temple; and what I should do, from Christ's
Sermon: Even first, to remember this benefit, That I am made whole, Secondly,
to obey this Precept, Sin no more. And thirdly, the rather for the
persuasions sake, Lest a worse thing fall upon me.

This is the Theory, and these are the parts of thy Medication; may my
execution and practice of it be answerable, that in the Temple of the Church
Militant, Jesus may find me; and I in the Temple of the Church Tryumphant may
find Jesus, Amen.

In hope I shall have grace to perform thy Desire, I begin; and in my
beginning I desire thee to accept my Duty, it is my Duty, for Moses did it by
way of Duty: He sung praises to the Highest, after that God had delivered
Israel; and so did Deborah, she gave thanks to the Almighty, after that God
had given her victory over Siserah. And did King David, after that God had
blessed him, he blessed GOD again, with a Quid dabo? What shall I render unto
the Lord for all the benesits that he has done unto me? This is the very end
why GOD hears us in the day of trouble, to glorify him. Thus did Christ's
Patient, and woe be to me, if I do not so too: If I am unthankful for what I
have, I am unworthy of what I would have; whereas a thankful acknowledgment of
what I have received already, is a successful invitation to receive more
hereafter.

To thee therefore o God I give thanks for what I have received; I have
received Health, the Health of my Body; I bless thee for it with my Soul. Oh
that thou would with that, give me this, the health of my Soul, with the
health of my Body, and then would I bless thee with my Soul and body: with my
Soul I would give the Soul of Thanks; and with my Body, the thanks of my
Body. The Heart of my body shall bless thee with thankful thoughts, the
Tongue of my body with thankful words, and the Hands of my body with the
works of Thankfulness: My Soul shall be thy Temple continually, and I will
daily visit thy Temple with my body; my Soul shall be a Temple of
Thankfulness, no Inscription shall be there, but Sanctitas Iehovae, but Deo
gratiae: Holiness to the Lord, Thanks be given to Almighty God. And the
Thankfulness of my body I will offer in thy Temple, and testify it to thy
Temples, to thy ruinated and decayed Temples, thy poor and needy servants, I
will give the Oblations and offerings of Thanks: I will cloth them, I will
feed them, and I will offer thee a thanks offering in thy Temple. Fit it
should be offered there, so that I am fit to offer it there. I am fitted, then
no place so fit to offer thankfulness, in as there. I must be fitted to come
there, for Jesus is there: and that is the fittest place, for there thou
requirest it; Jesus will find me there: and there thou acceptest it, for I
shall find Jesus there.

1. And Jesus is an extraordinary person, as the Temple is an extraordinary
Place: and therefore my coming thither, and carriage there, must be more than
ordinary. The place requires Zeal, and Reverence: Reverence in my behavior,
and zeal in my affections. The person requires Zeal and Reverence, Obedience
and Confidence; Zeal, Obedience and Confidence inwardly, and Reverence
outwardly: indeed, all these in the inside of my soul, and outside of my body.
My soul must stoop, and my body must bow: For at the Name of Jesus every knee
must bow. Every knee, not only that of the soul, but this of the body also.
My affections must be servent, and my actions must fly. Sursum corda, and
corpora, not only the thoughts of my heart, but the hands of my body also must
ascend, and be lifted up. My heart must believe, and my tongue must confess:
for both desire to be saved, and both are required to salvation, and with both
I must obey. My heart, by enditing a good matter; my tongue, by being the pen
of a ready writer. The cold of Winter must not quench my zeal, nor the heat
of Summer thrust out my obedience. The Summers drought must not suffocate my
confidence, not the Winters frost cover my reverence. I may not take that
liberty in Gods house, which I take in mine own house. Nor may I be so
arbitrary in my Saviors precepts, as I am in my friends entreaties, and leave
them as I please, done or undone. The place is holy, and the person is
heavenly, and therefore I must wash my hands, before I compass that Altar, and
so present my self before that person, as if I were entering into heaven. And
see, O Jesus, so I do: In heaven there is no worldliness, no fleshlinesse, no
divellishnesse; and to thy Temple I go, without covetousness in my head,
without wantonness in mine eye, without maliciousness in mine heart. O suffer
not the Devil to divert mine attention by any carnal object, left I mind not
my duty; suffer him not to lull my devotion unto a slumber, by heaviness,
lest my drowsy prayers pierce not heaven. Suffer him not to kindle the coals,
or blow the fire of malice in mine heart, by an enemy, lest my thankfulness
prove fectlesse: And what is wanting in me, do thou, for thine own sake
supply, sweet^ Jesus, that thou may est find me in the Temple.

2. Nor do I this, and go thither, to prejudice thy Vbiquitie, in giving thee
a vbi, and a certain place of residence, no more then I diminish thy Eternity,
in giving thee a Quando, and a certain time of obedience. When I pray, Our
Father which art in Heaven, I do not do it to deny thee to be here where I
kneel, when I say that prayer. But it is, that I acknowledge thee to be
there, where thou can grant and accomplish that prayer, that I may look for
thee in the best places, look for thee, as thou grantest my petitions in the
best place of the next world, at the right hand, and in the bosom of the
Father, and look for thee, as thou hear my petitions here, in the best
places of this world; in thine own house, in the Church, in the Temple. For so
thou have Christened thy house, saying, Domus mea Domus orationis vocabitur, My
house shall be called the house of prayer; and my thankfulness, which I am
going there to offer, is a part, and a chief part of prayer.

3. Nor yet do I go thither, to thy house, to give thee thanks, to bar my
self from giving thanks at home in mine own house, or abroad in the fields:
for every where I am commanded to pray, because I am commanded to pray always;
and by the same rule, to give thanks every where, because for all things. For
thy blessings in the field, I must give thanks in the field, else why has the
Church appointed perambulations? and for thy private blessings at home, I must
give thanks at home, for thy bounty at my board, and safety in my bed, I must
give thee thanks at my meals when I eat, and in my chamber when I rise, and
so for my present health, as it is a private blessing, I give thee private
thanks at home; and as it is a public blessing, by continuing a member in
thy Church, I cannot do less, and would I could do more, than give thee
hearty thanks in thine own house, where the public Congregation may take
notice of it in thy Temple.

4. Thither I go, because I am not yet so strong, but that I need help;
because I am not yet so holy, but that I need holiness. In heaven there is no
Temple, but the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, Apoc. 21.22.
they are the Temple of it. There is no danger of falling, and therefore no
need of assistance there. But here, upon the earth, we need both; and to supply
us with both, thy Temple is called Auxilium, an Helper, 2 Chronicles. 4.9.
not only to tell us, that none is so well, but that he needs the help of the
Church; but also, that when we are not well, we shall have the help of the
Church to make us better, if we go to Church, to the Temple. In Heaven too,
they are perfectly holy; but upon the earth we are holy but imperfectly; and
thy Temple is called Sanctificium, Psalm. 78.69.
not only because it is made holy by consecration, but because it makes us
more holy by Jesus being in it. I am in some measure holy here where I am now
at home; but I make no question, but I shall be more holy there, not only
because Jesus will find me there; but also because I shall find Jesus there.
Else, why did thou, O blessed Jesus, resort to the Temple? Not that thou
need a subsidy of local holiness in thy self, but that thy example might
bring others who need it, and amongst them my self, who need it more than all
others, into thy Temple; so necessary is my thankfulness in the Temple, that
I fear me, I shall be no more holy, not longer healthy, unless I offer it
there.

5 Nor yet do I go thither with this offering, to defer my thankfulness
till I come thither; for God is no dilatorie God: he refuses not my
thankfulness in my bed, nor a^ my board; not in my house, nor i^ the fields.
He commands them every where, he expects them every where; but he accepts
them there, in the Temple: for there is the place of reconciliation, there is
the word of reconciliation; and there is the author of reconciliation, Jesus
Christ.

I go, not only for that necessity; but also for this utilitie; not only
because Jesus will find me there, but because I may find Jesus there; And
there, O blessed Jesus do I desire to find thee. As the Tables of the Law
were found in the Arc, as the Arc was covered, and as the cover of it was
called (...), the Propitiatory, or Mercie-seate, because it covered and hid
the Law, 1 Reg. 8 9.
that the Law might not appear before God, to plead against man.

This was thy type, O blessed Jesus, and be thou the accomplishment of it to
me, let me find thee, as thou art called (...), Romans 3. 1 Ioh. 2.2.
my Propitiatory, and (...), my Propitiation. Do thou cover the imperfections
of my best sincerity, or my sincerest thankfulness can find no acceptance. I
may find thee elsewhere, but especially there; my praises may find
acceptance in other places, there they shall be sure of it. The high Priest
once in the year could be found no where, but in the Sanctum Sanctorum, Thou
art my high Priest, O sweet Jesus, and there I desire to find thee.

2. Not only in the Quire, but also in the body of the Church: in the Quire,
as the Mercy-seate in the Sanctum Sanctorum; and in the body of the Church, as
the Incense-Altar in the middle of the Sanctuary. This I find, was sprinkled
once every year with the blood of the Sacrifice by the High Priest: Exo. 30.10.
so let me find thee purifying my prayers; and my praises with thy Blood, else
my prayers will be unavaileable before God, else my praises will be
unacceptable with God: That they may be both availeable, and acceptable, I
offer them in the merits of ^he sweet Incense-Altar, Jesus: So let me find
thee in my Oblations, so let me find thee in thy Directions, so in my service
to thee, and so in thy Sermon to me.

And what is the first part of thy Sermon? what but this? The Sermon.
Ecce sanus es factus, Behold, thou art made whole. But what needs this? Can I
forget this? Can I ever hold from beholding this? When I look not upon this
Ecce, and behold it not, I am worthy to be, and to be called Coece, and behold
nothing: And yet my memory is very brittle, very brittle this way: An injury I
can remember a long time, an (...) turn, or an ill word from my Neighbor,
from mine enemy; Manet alta mente repostum, I cannot easily remove it; such a
thing as this is soundly settled. But Benefits, how quickly, alas, do I forget
them! Hose. 4.6. Psalm. 106.21. Ps. 78.42.
The Israelites forgot the Law of God: Nay, they forgot God that gave them that
Law: They forgot God their Savior, and the day when he delivered them. And my
Soul leaks as much as theirs: His Day, notwithstanding his Memento, I forget;
even that Day which he commanded to be sanctified; whether the seventh, or the
eighth day, or one in seven, I profane them all: That day wherein he made me
whole from the horror of Hell, by the Resurrection of my Savior, and that Day
wherein he made me whole from my Sickness, by the restoration of my self to
my former health. And therefore I bless thy Name for this Ecce, and beseech
thee to put so much virtue into it, as that I may never behold this word
Behold, but that I may there-withall remember I am made whole.

I am made whole; not, I have made my self whole, or the Physicians have made
me whole; but I am made whole by thee, and bless thee for it with my whole
soul and body, in doing what thou command me to do.

Sin no more; for sin caused this sickness, The Precept.
the stopping my ears at thy Word, has stopped my ears from the quickness
of hearing, and the shutting mine eyes to thy Directions, has taken from mine
eyes the quickness of seeing. My sins which weakened my soul in serving
thee, have weakened my body in serving me. And now that I know my sins
provoked thee to inflict this Sickness, and weakened me by this sickness, I
will sin no more, not so much for the smart that I feel, as for the act that
thou forbiddest.

But Durus hic Sermo, and Superbus hic sermo: This is a hard Speech from thee o
God: for who can bear it? and this is a proud speech from me, and I cannot do
it; and yet I will do it as I can, and beseech thee I may do it, as thou will
accept, though I look never so narrowly over my self all day, yet at night, I
cannot say, my Heart is clean; and therefore I beseech thee, Cleanse me from
my secret faults, and that my lips may not break out into out ragiousnesse, or
my hands into wickedness. I beseech thee again and again, keep me from
presumptuous sins, and whilst thou do thus forgive me the one, and preserve
me from the other, I shall so far observe thy Precept, Sin no more; as that
a worse thing shall not fall upon me.

The persuasion.
though I smart by the common accidents of this life, though I am persecuted
for righteousness sake: Haec non durabunt atatem, none of these shall last for
ever: Terminus malorum Mors, the Grave will be a Quietus est, a bed of rest;
and Death an end of these miseries. But, Si amplius peccavero, pejus. If I
sin again, If I sin again presumptuously, my miseries will be longer
lived: There is a worm will gnaw upon my Conscience, a fire that will never
be quenched, a torment that will never be eased, a Devil that will never be
entreated, a Hell that will never give me rest: from whence that I may be
preserved, I beseech thee so to preserve me from sin, as that I may be
preserved into everlasting life through Jesus Christ; upon the Altar of whose
Cross, I offer thee my thanks, and beseech thee to accept them in the
sufficiency of whose Merits, I desire thee to justify me, that I may pray, and
call thee, as he has taught me, Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

Meditations upon the Plague.
IT is I that have sinned, Oh Lord, 2 Samuel 24.17.
it is I, etc. So said King David, and he said it as a King: Is it not too much
sauciness in me, the meanest subject, to say what the mightiest King said? It
would be so, if I did it to emulate it as a King. But alas, I do it as a
sinner; a sinner, not like him, but a sinner far greater than himself. He
committed the sin for which that Plague was sent, and who has provoked God
to send this Plague, but my self? or if any man sins bear mine company, yet
what man's sins can equal mine? Is any man so selfe-confident as I am? who so
bold, so presumptuous as the blind? And for David's selfe-confidence was that
plague inflicted, and why not this for mine? He was the Head of that
Commonwealth, and am not I the Priest of this Parish? The plague was no where
then but there; and where is it so great as here? What Parish about this City
compares with this? In many Parishes, none, in some, one; never a one near
this, never a two: The two greatest of all do but equal this in the For one
Week.
number; and surely it is for my sins, this; though they are all sinners, yet
none of them all can say, It is I that have sinned, It is I; but only I my
self. Their sins alas, are but sins of Ignorance, at worst, but sins of
Negligence: but mine are of Knowledge, and contempt; so I acknowledge my
contempt, and to the confusion of mine own face I say it, It is I, o God, it
is I that have sinned; but these sheep, the people of this Parish, o Lord what
have they done? nothing in comparison of me, theirs alas, are but infirmities:
But mine, woe is me, are impieties: they sin one against another in
unrighteousness, and against other Creatures in intemperatenesse; and so I,
and more I, against my GOD in profaneness. O my God, forgive them, and remove
thy heavy hand; forbid thy destroying Angel to strike them any more; and if
thy anger be not yet appeased, set thy hand against me and my family, See,
here is my self, and what is as dear to me as my self, my wife and
children, take which of us all, or all of us, which thou please, so thou will
spare the Parish; so thou will spare the City; O spare them, and take me: or
if, as thou will, spare us all, and give them all grace to do what thou have
given me grace to promise, that I will do what King David did: Rear thee an
Altar; And this I will no longer put off to do, but I do it now. The Altar of
a holy protestation I rear, that I will never have any more to do with sin,
at the thought of it I will tremble, the tentations of it I will resist, the
company of it I will shun; and those particular sins, to which I am most
subject, I will subdue. Strengthen me, O Lord, to perform this, and be
pleased to accept these Sacrifices, which upon this Altar I offer. Some meals
weekly I will purposely miss, while the plague lasts, and that I will give
to the poor. Not a night will I go to bed, but I will water it with tears,
because it is I that have sinned; and yet thou sparest me. O spare them all,
and accept from me these alms, and put these tears into thy bottle; send us
health, fill us with grace to do thy will, and bless us all with the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

And David built there an Altar unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 24.25.
etc.] And so have I, O God, I have built an Altar; the foundation of it is
laid upon the earth; and I tremble at mine own infirmities: The top of it
reaches unto heaven; and I am constant in my resolutions, I will meddle no more
with sin, not only with those sins which brought this plague, but not with
any sin at all. Nor do I this out of presumption, or that I promise more
than I mean to perform, though I know I cannot live, and not sin; for I
will not live in any sin; And lest the Devil should hereafter suggest
falsely, that I am as selfe-confident as St. Peter was, I do not say, I will
not, as if the power were mine; but, by thy grace, O God, I will not. That I
may not, pursue me continually with thy grace. Never cease giving til I cease
begging. And that I never cease begging, let the begging of thy grace be
evermore the beginning of my prayers; which prayers, as thou have in some
measure heard, so I beseech thee, accept of what thou have heard, my burnt
offerings of a broken heart and a contrite Spirit: For see, O God, I break my
heart, I sigh, I sob, I pine, I moan, and my heart pants after thee, the
fountain of living water, as the Heart does after the fountain of water, that
he may live. Thou have hunted me with this Hound, the Plague: It has been
on my right hand, and there slain; on my left hand, and there destroyed;
behind me, and before me, and not gone empty away; and yet it is not, blessed
be thy name, in my dwelling. O take it out of my parish, take it out of this
City, say to the Angel that destroys this City, as thou did to that,
that destroyed the people in Jerusalem: It is enough: stay thine hand; blessed
be thy Name for the Decrease of this week: Go on o God, go on in thy
Mercies toward us: And as I think it not enough to break my heart, unless I
bruise my Spirit too: by denying it those Recreations, and potations, and
comestions that it desires; so do not thou think it enough to diminish but
distinguish the Plague; and I will, not only not diminish, but increase those
burnt offerings for my passed, and these peace offerings for my present and
continued sins, of Repentance, Charity, and Sincerity: of Repentance to thee
for my sins, of Charity to the Poor for thee; of Sincerity to both: yet not
expecting that thou should be entreated for the Land, and stay the Plague
from the City for this; For I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies:
but that I trust, Thou will be entreated in mercy to accept these my
sacrifices, and stay that thy Judgment, through the merits of him for whose
sake thou have promised to deny nothing that shall be asked according to thy
will: If it be thy will, deliver us from the Plague: As it is thy will, save
our souls, or both; through Jesus Christ. Amen.

In wose Blessed Name and words, etc.

Resolves and Meditations upon St. Matthew. 6. fit for all times, especially this
of the Plague.
Matthew. 6.








UNDER these four Duties Christ comprises the whole sum of Religion: for
what does Religion bind us to do? but to Give? to Pray? to Fast? to Seek? To
give to the Poor? to pray to God, Ver. 16. When thou do Fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the Kingdom, etc.
to fast from sin always, from meat sometimes, and to seek the Kingdom of
God first: Or it may be the former three contains all Religion commands; and
in these three, we are to seek the Kingdom of God; If any other thought
thrust into our Charity, or Prayer, or Fasting, to thrust them out, and only
to entertain this, To seek the Kingdom of God in these; to seek it, and to
take it; to seek it in those two, as with two eyes, of Prayer and Fasting; and
to take it with that one, as with a hand, the hand of Charity, consists
Religion in those three, as the work? and that one as the wages? or in all
four; as the work and wages? (for it is a wages, and a great reward, when we
either give Alms, or Pray, or Fast) it is all one to me; for I do those
three for this end, or seek this end in those three, Ver. 2. When thon do
thine Alms.
Ver. 5.When thou do pray.
and do all four for no other end, but because Christ has commanded me; and
those other ends which are subordinate to this.

It is a Part of thy Sermon, o thou sweet Preacher to thy Hearers, and Savior
of thy doers I amongst the rest have heard this Sermon, and I with the rest,
set my self to do this Sermon; For, I do give Alms, I do Pray, I do Fast,
and I do seek.

I do give Almes', 2. Quam facis Eleemosynam.
else I should put less into the pot, and more into my purse; but what good
will the saving of the one, or the filling of the other do me, if I lose my
own soul? My soul is lost if I do it not, though I do not do it, thereby
to save my soul: My salvation is thy gift, and I beg it, but I shall not
obtain it, though I beg it, unless I work it out, to obtain it: The Alms
of my meat, Ver. 16. When thou do fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the Kingdom, etc.
of my money, of my clothes, cannot purchase it; for Christ purchased it by his
blood, yet for me that purchase is not effectual, without these works: These
works will move thee to such a mercy, as to turn away this Plague, or some
such temporal judgment: These works will make me like thee; for thou art
the Father of Mercy: and these are works of Mercy: These works shall follow
me to the grave hereafter; and are to me now an evidence, and sure foundation
of eternal life: And yet, none of these ends do I look upon in mine Alms;
all that I aim at in them, is to glorify thee, to glorify thee in my
obedience, to glorify thee in my example, to glorify thee in my Faith; and if
thou please to accept this Charity so well, ^s to make it a light to shine so
far, as that others may thereby be stirred up to do likewise, Ver. 2. When
thou do thine Alms.
Ver. 5. When thou do pray.
as to take it done by me, because thou have charged it upon me; as by it, to
make my calling and election sure: I bless thee with my soul, and shall
evermore acknowledge my self created to good works in Christ Jesus, and walk
in them, and so carefully, that my left hand of vanity and vain glory, shall
not know what my right hand of sincerity and obedience does, for I do give
this Alms because thou have commanded me so to do, and beseech thee to accept
them, as that they may abound to my account; through Jesus Christ Amen.

And as I give Alms; so I pray, I pray Deaetically; 5. Quam or as.
and I pray proseucetically; and I pray Eucharistically, and all these
Exteuxetically, I Deprecate, and pray against evil; Lead us not into
Tentation, Ver. 16. When thou do Fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the Kingdom, etc.
but deliver us from evil; I supplicate and pray for good, Hallowed be thy
Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us
this day our daily bread, and forgine us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us: And I gratulate and pray thee in praise and thank
sgiving: Thine is the Kingdom power, and glory, and in all these, I intercede
and pray for all men, as for my self, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven.
In Faith I pray, and dare say, My Father, as Thomas said, and praid to Christ,
My God, and my Lord; but in Charity, I dare not but pray and say, as Christ
taught St. Thomas to pray, Our Father: Father of us all; all Creatures and
things, by Creation, of all men, by Redemption; of all Christians, by
Regeneration; of all Saints, by Adoption, and Obsignation; still, Verse 2. When
thou do thine Alms.
Verse 5. When thou do pray.
Our Father, and that so I may find thee, I pray that prayer in the same
words, Our Father, which art in Heaven; not that my thoughts limit thy Vbiquity
in this place of residence, or confine thee to Heaven: but that this place may
limit the Vbiquity of my thoughts, and give them no other residence but in, and
confine them only to Heaven: to restrain my thoughts from roaving and
ranging, and to fix them only on heavenly things; to level them especially
for heavenly blessings, while I pray to a heavenly Father; and principally for
that, which is the principallest of all things, and all blessings, the
Hallowing of thy Name; not only for the knowing of thy Name to be great, not
only for the acknowledging of thy Name to be good, not only for the allowing
thy Name to be good and great, but for the hallowing of thy Name; Ver. 16. When
thou do Fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the kingdom, etc.
to think of it reverently, to speak of it fearfully, to swear by it
truly, to call upon it confidently, to use it in thought, word, and deed
holily. A good Name is preferred by men above all things; and Thy Name is
preferred by Christians above all Names, and the Hallowing of thy Name, is the
chiefest of all Christian desires: This I desire, and desire that thy Name may
be esteemed, believed, honored, obeyed, and reverenced by all men as Holy: And
to effect this, I desire again, Thy Kingdom come: Thy Kingdom come into us
powerfully to rule us, justly to bridle us, mercifully to pardon us, graciously
to sanctify us; and gloriously to change our vile bodies, and make them like
unto Thy glorious Body; or rather, like His glorious Body, who has taught us
to pray, Our Father which art in heaven, Ver. 2. When thou do thine Alms.
Ver. 5. When thou do pray.
Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, and that we may obey thee in the
kingdom of Thy Grace, and reign with thee in the kingdom of Thy Glory. I
desire, Thy Will be done in Earth, in the kingdom of thy grace, as it is in
Heaven, in the kingdom of thy glory: Thy Will that was delivered by thy Mouth,
written by thy Finger, preached by thy Son, revealed by thy Spirit, expounded
by thy Prophets, and applied by thy Pastors. This thy will I will and desire be
done, as knowingly without error, as faithfully without hazard, as fearfully
without pride, in earth by earthly men, as it is in heaven by heavenly Angels:
i^ carth by sinners, as in heaven by Saints: in the earth of the commonwealth,
as in the heaven of the Church: in the earth of the outward man, as in the
Heaven of the inward man; Verse. 16. When thou do ast.
Verse. 33. Seek first the kingdom, etc.
in the earth of the flesh, as in the heaven of the Spirit, in the earth of
passion, as in the heaven of action; that we may not blaspheme thee in
suffering, by too much adversity, and not do thy will passively, nor forget
thee in action, by too much abundance, and not do thy will actively, I desire
and pray unto thee, Give us this day our daily bread; give freely, for we
deserve it not; give liberally, for we stand in need of it; Give perpetually,
for else our sins will abridge it; give Us thy unworthy servants, Us thy
adopted sons, Us thy divorced Spouse, Us thy defaced Image, Us thy wandering
sheep; Give us this day of the Sun, and delay it not; this day of our life,
else we enjoy it not; this day of the Gospel, and deny it not; this day of
thy grace, and refuse it not, this day of peace, and thy blessing with it;
Verse. 2. When thou do thine alms
Verse. 5. When thou do pray.
give us bread to nourish our booies, to feed our souls, even all things
necessary for our being and well-being: But let it he, as thy gift, so our
bread, gotten by labor honestly, obtained by prayer fervently, sanctified by
than. sgiving holily; and let it be our daily bread, as is eaily fie for us,
and may make us daily depend on thee, without murmr or distrust.

That thy hand may not be shortened to give, I desire and pray thee, to forgive
and drown in the sea of thy mercy, to forgive and blot out of the book of our
accounts, to forgive us, poor, rich, great, small, old, young, all, Our dehts,
both original, wherein we were borne, and actual wherein we have lived;
whether omitted by ignorance, neglect, or disobedience, or committed against
thee, thy creatures, others, or our selves; unreservedly, without future
revenge; Verse. 16. When thou do fast.
Verse. 33. Seek first the kingdom, etc.
unconditionally, without present exception, as we do with our hearts
sincerely, all debts wholly, to all men generally, for Christ's sake lovingly;
in whose name, and for whose sake, I pray by deprecation.

Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil: For if thou join not
perseverance to my repentance, I shall run upon a new score of debts, and make
my end worse than my beginning; give us therefore either freedom from
tentation, and lead us not into it, or assistance in tentation, and deliver us
from the evil of it; either exempt us from the fight, or assure us of the
crown. Our estate is weak, and we desire therefore to be led; the way is
dangerous, and we desire therefore not to be led into tentation; or if by the
leading hand of thy justice, we take some falls in the way; Verse. 2. When thou
do thine alms.
Verse. 5. When thou do pray.
yet by the guiding hand of thy mercy, lead us out, that we feel no harm in
the end. We desire not to be encountered by the Devils fury, or the worlds
subtilty, or the fleshes treachery: not with the force of that Lion, or the
fraud of this enemy, or the falsehood of the other friend; or if thou do
lead us into these encounters of tentation, yet bail us again, and deliver us
from evil. We desire thee to keep thy hand over us, that we be not foiled; at
least to keep thy hand under us, that we be not foundred; we desire such a
trial, that we be not cast, or if so, yet that we be not condemned. We are
fearful, not of thee, for thou temptest no man; but of them, and our selves,
and therefore we deprecate, Lead us not into tentation: and we are faithful,
not in our selves, but in thee; and therefore we obsecrate, Deliver us from
evil. Lead us not; Verse. 16. When thou do Fast.
Verse. 33. Seek first the kingdom, etc.
beyond our ability to bear, above our strength to resist, without thy grace
to quench the fiery Dorts of Satan. Lead us not into tentation of the Flesh
within us, by delight of wanton imaginations, or presumption in vain opinions,
lead us not into tentation of the World without us, by the suggestion of wicked
motions, or motions to wicked suggestions: Lead us not into tentation of the
Devil against us, by the injection of wicked desires, or the illusion of
desperate attempts, but deliver us by thy preventing Grace before the
infection, by thy present Grace, in the assault; by thy redeeming Grace, after
the fall from evil; from the cause of evil, which is the Devil; from wicked
companions, which are the instruments of evil; from worldly vanities, which
are the enticements to evil; Verse. 2. When thou do thine Alms.
Verse. 5. When thou do pray.
from sin, which is the guilt of evil, and from damnation, which is the
curse of evil.

Hear us, o our Faether, in our desire of Holiness, that thy Name be
hallowed; in our desire of Hope, that thy Kingdom come; in our desire of
Obedience, that thy will be done: Hear us o our Father, in our desire of thy
providence, to give us our daily bread; in our desire of Repentance, to forgive
us our sins; in the desire of our Charity, as we forgive others; in our
desire of perseverance, to preserve us from Tentation, and deliver us from
evil; and none of this for our sakes, but thine own; For thine is the
Kingdom: wherein keep us, in the desires of our Holiness, Repentance,
Charity, and Obedience: For thine is the Power; whereby establish our desires
in thy providence, and our perseverance; and thine is the Glory; wherewith
crown our desires in the longing Amen of us the wishers, Verse. 16. When thou
do Fast.
Verse. 33. Seek first the kingdom, etc.
in the needful Amen of us the suitors, in the confident Amen of us the
believers, in the faithful Amen of thy self the promiser, in the certain
Amen of Jesus Christ, the teacher of us, from thee; who to thee, and him, and
the Holy Ghost, ascribe the glory, and power of thy Kingdom, of the Kingdom,
of this Kingdom, and of all Kingdoms; so be it, Amen.

And that these prayers may ascend, and pierce thy Ears, and not return
empty, I send them up empty; for I fast, and I fast not coactively, or by
constraint: for I bless thy Name, I am in health, and have meat for my
stomach, and stomach to my meat: But I fast willingly, I do it chearefully;
not politically. to exchange a meal of Flesh, into another of Fish, not
Hypocritically, to macre my face, Verse. 2. When thou do thine Alms.
Verse. 5. When thou do pray.
and make it look lean; but I do in religiously. For why do I withhold
suftenance from my body, but to cheer up my Soul? Why do I bar my Soul of
her delights, but to keep down my body? why do I keep them both hungry, but
to observe that Law thou gave in Paradise, Eat not this Fruit? but to
imitate the promulgation, the restoration, and the consummation of the Law?
Thou did not pronounce it by Moses, thou did not restore it by Elias,
thou did dest not consummate it by thy Son without fasting; why do I thus
diet them both, but that I may enjoy the promise of the Gospel, and be filled?
be filled with grace to do thy Will upon Earth, as it is in Heaven. Never am I
so like an Angel, as when I fast: For in this Act Nature and Grace conourre;
by Nature his memory is strongest, Ver. 16. When thou do fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the Kingdom, etc.
his mind clearest, his understanding brightest, his affections most moderate
that eats but little: And by Grace his flesh most mortified, his Chastity best
preserved, from evils loonest delivered, and with blessings longest beautified,
who fasts oftenest. Why do I deny my self all manner of food, but to recover
Paradise by fasting, which Adam lost by eating? Why do I not touch so much as
Bread, or Water, but that God may pardon my glutton and drunken sins? why do
I abstain from all meat, but to prevent those sins, which if my belly were
full, my flesh would lust after? why do I restrain my hungry stomach from
that Dish it would, but that my Soul may obtain that blessing it wants? why
do I forbear those dainties my throat desires, but to avert those Judgments
my Soul fears, Ver. ^. When thou do thine Alms.
Ver. 5. When thou do pray.
and in some measure feels already?

And yet I do not fast to merit any of these blessings at att^y hand, oh God:
But, I fast from worldly labor, that my devotion may be quickened, and without
distraction, and I fast from bodily food, because I am unworthy of the least
of all thy mercies; because I deserve the greatest of all thy judgments: I have
abused my self in the use of thy Creatures, and I take this godly revenge upon
my self for that abuse, in the want of thy Creatures; my soul knower not how
to hunger for Heavenly Graces; and to teach it, my body shall hunger from
earthly creatures: my soul has surfeted in times unlawful, and therefore my
body fast^ from meat that is lawful: My senses have been gluttons in the
dishes of pleasure, and therefore my body shall be her Physician, Ver. 16.
When thou do fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the Kingdom, etc.
and prescribe her a more sparing diet by example:

O God, I fast, because I have sinned; and my sins are of those kinds of
Devils, that will not out, but by fasting and prayer; I have sinned against the
mercy of a rather, who has provided for me: I have sinned against the
mightiness of a Master, who has preserved me from evil Nay, I have sinned
against the Majesty of God, a God so righteous, that he has threatened my
sins with curses upon curses, and has at last sent a Plague round about me,
and a God so gracious, that though nothing else could keep me from eternal
damnation, yet rather than I should be damned, gave his son Jesus Christ to
die ^or me: a God, that will upon these considerations, and my rebellions, are
long send some grievous Affliction upon me, Ver. 2. When thou do thine Alms.
Ver. 5. When thou do pray.
or deny me those blessings that I want, unless I prevent the one, and obtain
the other by repentance: But, can my heart bleed with sorrow? can my heart
melt with remorse? can my heart dissolve it self into tears? and repent
without fasting? Therefore I fast, that I may remember my sins and confess
them: therefore I fast, that confessing my sins. I may bewail them; therefore
I Fast, that bewailing my sins, I may forsake them; therefore I Fast, that
forsaking my sins, thou may forgive them; and forgiving them, thou may
divert those judgments my sins cry for; and send those blessings, my sins
kept from me.

Hear me oh my God, I do confess; I confess all my sins, my original,
that I brought into the World, and my actual sins, that I have brought up in
the World but especially amongst them all, that () and that other () and those
() which I committed yesterday, Ver. 16. When thou do fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first the Kingdom, etc.
which I committed then, then and there in thy presence, with a great deal of
delight; I did commit them with pleasure, and do confess them with sorrow:
For see, oh my God, I bewail them, I groan inwardly, and cry outwardly, and
cry out upon my self, What a fool was I? What a Beast was? Oh wretch that I
am, that I should ever be so unthankful to God, so unkind to my self, less
I dare not do, than thus bewail those sins, in punishing my self: I would
I could do more, and I would more than Fast, and bewail them: if forsaking
be more, I vow never again to meddle with them: O God, do thou forgive them,
and (...) possess me of these Devils by the virtue of thy promise made to my
charitable Fasting Prayers, that I may never again be troubled with them,
Ver. 2. When thou do thine Alms.
Ver. 5. When thou do pray
and preserve me from the Plague I have ^eserved, and thy other punishments
which I fear; bless me with obedience, which I have robbed my self of, and
al other thy graces which I love. No other end, oh God, have I in this Fast,
but to subdue my flesh, and humble my self, but to dechne thy punishments, and
enjoy thy blessings, unless happily it be to seek thy Kingdom. Not that I
think by the merit of this, or any thing else that I have done, or can do to
find it, but that by these means, and in this way, I shall the sooner and
more easily find it. Indeed I find it in these, and so seek it first,
because I do these. For though the kingdom of God consists not in meat and
drink, in the belly full, or empty, in fasting, or not fasting; yet it
consists in right ousnesse, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Ver. 16. When
thou do fast.
Ver. 33. Seek first ^he ^ngdome, etc.
And my char^^e gets me righteousness, righteousness before man, my prayers
get me peace, peace with God; my fasting g^^ me joy, joy in the holy Ghost;
(...) faith, all; and all these I have ^^ne faithfully: faithfully for the
manner, for I have done them secretly and sincerely; no body knows of them but
my self, and faithfully for the end, for the glory of God, for I care not to
be seen of men, I care not for the praise of men, and faithfully in the
foundation: for I do believe these works of mine are accepted; and I know, no
works are accepted but by Jesus Christ. And faithfully I enjoy ^ll these,
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy: for none of these are without Christ; but
in Christ all these are, and in Christ, I am righteous, God has justified me,
and being justified, I have peace: Ver. 2. When thou do th n^ Alms.
Ver. 5. When thou do pray
for being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. And the peace of God passes all understanding, and therefore must bring
with it that joy which never entered into the heart of man to understand, the
joy of the holy Ghost.

Thus, O God, I have sought thy kingdom; and thus I have found thy kingdom;
thus I desire to seek it continually, and continually principally; and these I
desire to find in it, till I be taken from the seeking of thy kingdom in
grace to the the seeing of thy kingdom in glory, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Now follows the Sermon of Our thankfulness, and Gods Mercy, which was
Preached in St. Paul's Church the three and twentieth of october. 1636.

Our Thankfulness for Gods Mercy.
PSALM. 136. Verse. 26. O praise the God of Heaven, for his Mercy endures for
ever.


THE Text cannot want a welcome, when it is easy, short, and sweet; easy to
the Understanding, short to the Memory, and sweet to the Affections. This Text,
blessed be Gods holy Name for it, is so, and therefore does not so much desire,
as deserve your kind entertainment, and courteous embraces; so easy, that the
thinnest capacity may understand it, that the dullest understanding may
conceive it; for who understands not Man's duty? O give thanks unto the God of
Heaven: and Gods pity, For his mercy endures for ever; so short that it
consists but of six words, three in the former, Celebrate Deum Coelorum; and
three in the latter part of the Verse, In saeculae misericordia ejus: And which
of your memories is so brittle, that it cannot remember six? I never read but
of one man that could not remember five; not one of you is that one man: you
can remember six. And to invite your Memory, it is sweet to your Affections
too, as sweet as heart can desire. What does the guilty man desire, but Mercy?
Mercy to remit his sins. What does the offending man desire, but Mercy? Mercy
to dimit his faults. What does the leprous man desire, but Mercy? Mercy to
cleanse him of his leprosy. What does the captived man desire, but Mercy?
Mercy to redeem him from his bondage, and to set him at liberty. What does the
sick man desire, but Mercy? Mercy to cure him of his sickness. This, this is
the desire of all your hearts; this relishes sweetly in your affections, that
God in mercy would remove the Plague from amongst us: Why see, to give the Text
a welcome, this is in the Text too; it is the very ground of the Text, For his
mercy endures for ever.

If this be not easy, short, and sweet enough, why then divide the Text, and
the parts of it will be more facile for the Understanding, more portable for
the Memory, and more toothsomme to the Affections: so portable for the Memory,
that they are but two; and those two so facile for the understanding, that they
are the plainest of all other.

First, an Exhortation to the Duty of Thankfulness, O give thanks unto the
God of Heaven: And secondly, a Persuasion to do that Duty; for if any one
should ask why? why give thanks unto the God of Heaven? why? why because his
mercy endures for ever, that is the maine part, and what so delightsome to the
affections of miserable man, as the Mercy of a pitiful God?

Or if you will enlarge it, to make it more delightsome to the affections, and
more plain to the understanding, though a little more combersome to the
memory: Then you have in the Exhortation these three particulars.

First, the passion of the delivery, Oh; not simply, do it, but Oh, do it.

Secondly, the Ingemination of the Duty, Oh, give thanks, in the beginning; and
Oh, give thanks in the ending of the Psalm.

Thirdly, the Excellency of the object, not to the King of men, not to the gods
of the Heathen, no; but to the God of Heaven, or the Heavenly God.

Then again, in the persuasion you have these four particulars.

First, What it is to endure for ever: if you do not ask that question, you
will hardly understand what it means, how his mercy endures for ever.

Secondly, How this is true, His mercy endures for ever: For if you do not
know that to be true, or how that is true, the Affections will by and by, grow
nauseous.

Thirdly, why David chooses rather this than Judgment. If you read the Psalm,
and read therein, He overthrew Pharaoh in the Red Sea, Verse 15.
he slew famous Kings: Verse 18.
Or if you look upon the times, and therein see the Plague; why it may as well
stand, one would think, His judgment endures for ever.

And then fourthly and lastly, why the Prophet repeats this so often, His mercy
endures for ever, Twenty six times in this one Psalm? and when you understand
this, it will make the Duty go down a great deal better; that is my first
part, and I begin with it: I called it an Exhortation, and so it is; for herein
David the King exhorts us that are subjects, to give thanks to the God of
Heaven. Part 1.


A duty this is, and such a duty, that it needs not my Rethoricke to fasten it
upon you: The Heaven and the Earth, the Sea and the Rivers, the Husbandman and
his ground, the Shepherd and his Sheep, the Carrier and his Ass do all
persuade it: Heaven drops down showers, and the Earth in Thankfulness sprouts
up Flowers; the Sea fills the Rivers, the Rivers in Thankfulness empty
themselves into the Sea again; the Husbandman throws his Corn into the
ground, the ground in Thankfulness returns him ten for one; the Shepherd
feeds his sheep, the Sheep in Thankfulness cloth the Shepherd; the Carrier
baits his Ass, the Ass in Thankfulness carries him. I pray God we prove not
worse than the Ass in unthan^fulnesse to God, for delivering us from the
plague and pestilence.

Such a Duty it is, that no duty has stronger precepts for it; no duty has
better patterns of it, no Duty has fairer promises to it. The Old and the New
Testament do both command it, Moses, and the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles did all practice it, and the God of all, will reward it above all
other services.

First, Ps. 50.14. 1 These. 5.
Offer unto God Thanksgiving says the Prophet; In all things give thanks
says the Apostle; and as if Nature did concur with Scripture, Ingratum si
dixeris, and omnia dixeris says the mere natural; you cannot say worse of
any man, than to say, He is unthankful: And well said that Royal King of
blessed Memory, who knew the depths of Nature, and Texts of Scripture as well
as any King before him, Ingratus de praeteritis, indignus de futuris: He that
is unthankful for what he has, is unworthy to have what he wants: And if we
are unthankefull for our preservation from this last Plague, we shall be
unworthy to be preserved from the next Plague.

Christ therefore charged the Leper that was cleansed, to offer for his
Cleansing, as Moses commanded; and what was that, but as at least a Lamb, and
a log of Oil, Lev. 5.14.
and a tenth ^eale of fine flower for a meat offering: Lev. 14.21 22.
(...) two Turtle Doves, or two young Pi^eons; the one for a sinne-offering,
and the other for a burnt offering, for an offering of Thanksgiving.

A Duty you see it is strongly commanded, and so it is secondly as highly
practiced: For Jacob the Pa^iarke did it; Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the ^east of all thy mercies: with my staff ^assed I over
this Jordan, and now ^ am become two bands: A thankful acknowledgment this
was, and David the Prince did it, and did it when ^he plague was stayed: 2 Samuel
2^.25.
David bought the threshing floor of Araunah the Je^^ site, and built there an
Altar unto the Lord, and offered thereon burnt offerings, and peace offerings.
Samuel the Priest did it, Isaiah the Prophet did it, and bids us do it too. 1 Samuel 9.13. Isa. 12.4.
Praise the Lord, call upon his Name, declare his doings amongst the people,
make mention that his Name is exalted. And Jesus, that is both Prince, Priest,
and Prophet, Ioh. 11.41
our Savior did it; Father I thank thee, that thou have hear^ me. And shall
not the children do what the Father did? the Prince did it, and shall not the
Subjects do it^ shall not the people do what the Priest did? Jesus Christ the
Savior did it, and shall not we that hope to be saved by him, do it? and give
thanks unto the God of Heaven, for shame else! For it is thirdly so fairly
rewarded, that no Duty like unto it; if we do the duty of Devotion, and pray,
we are preserved, i^ we do the duty of Faith, and believe, we are justified;
if we do the duty of Love, and forgive, we are forgiven; if we do the duty
of Charity, and give, it shall be given to us: But if we do the duty of my
Text, and give thanks to the God of Heaven, God will glorify us with himself
in Heaven: 1 Samuel 3.30.
They that honor me, I will honor; so sure is the thankful man of glory.

And now I doubt not, but you are all ready to say, Give thanks, who does not?
we all give thanks unto the God of Heaven: Nor do I doubt but you all say
so; my doubt is whether you do so: For Thanksgiving, I must tell you, is no
complement, no verbal thing, but a Reality; it has three words to express it
by, and must be done in all three, else it is not done at all.

The first is, Gratias habere, To have thanks; and it is called Recognition,
his place of residence is the Heart: when we think how gracious God has been
to us this Visitation, the Plague took some away before me, some behind me;
some on my right hand, some on my left, yet I am left; God has anointed the
posts of my door with the blood of the Lamb, that the destroying Angel might
pass over me, and my heart muses what to render to the Lord for this his
goodness? when we do so, why then Gratiaes habemus, we have thanks in our
hearts for God, or we have Thankful hearts to God.

2. Is Gratias refer; To return thanks, and it is called commemoration, his
Elocutour is the Tongue, when we declare the wonders God has done for us, the
Plague knocked at my Neighbors door, but passed mine, I was as fit an object
for that destruction as any man, but God in mercy spared me, Blessed be his
name, and my Tongue says, what shall I render unto the Lord for all the
Benefits he has done unto me, when we say so, why then we do Gratias
refer, give Thanks with our Tongues to God.

The 3. is Gratias agere to do Thanks; and it is called Retribution; the
Actor of it is the Hand, or Life; when the hand gives the oblations of Thanks,
and the Life does the offerings of Thanks in sanctity to God, and is acceptable
to him: in equity to man, and is unreproveable with them: in Charity to the
poor, and is profitable to them: When we do so, why then, Gratias agimus, We
do, and we do give thanks to the God of Heaven.

So we do to man, if a man does us but ordinary courtesies at an
extraordinary pinch; why then we do first study to magnify him in our
hearts: we were in Prison, he has paid our Debts, and set us at liberty: we
were in Captivity, he has redeemed us, and made us free, we were in danger,
he has rescued and made us safe, o what a friend was this, think we! how
good has he bin unto us! and so Gratias habemus. And then secondly we speak
of him to others, how good he has been to us; this, and this he has done for
me, God reward him for it, and so Gratias referimus. And thirdly we cast with
our selves how to requite him; he shall no sooner command, but we obey, and so
Gratias agimus; and shall we not do so to God? From him we have whatsoever
we have, Redemption from the hands of all that hate us, Preservation from the
Plague and pestilence, and therefore we must give thanks to the God of Heaven.

Surely the very Heathens intended no less in their Charites, they were three:
The first was (...), and that signifies Letitia, Joy; but Joy is in the
dilation of the heart. The second was called (...), which signifies to
flourish, and that is in the Tongue. And the third (...), which signifies
Splendour, and who shines more than he, whose life is a glorious Sun? And do
you ever think to shine as the Sun in Heaven, or to flourish like a green
Bay Tree in Paradise, or to be filled with those joys, which never entered into
the heart of man, unless you thus, with your hearts, tongues, and hands give
thanks unto the God of Heaven?

King David surely thought so, else he would never have delivered it with so
much passion, as, Oh give thanks unto the God of Heaven. It is my second
consideration, and the first particular of the first part, Oh; And this
particle is sometimes Vox exhortantis, An exhorting word; so the Psalmist, Psa.
30.4.
Sing unto the Lord o ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness: Sometimes it is Vox optantis, A wishing word: So the Psalmist
again, Ps. 107.21
Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: Here it is both, o the
you would do it says David ^ way of exhorting, and o that could wish you to
do it by way desire.

So passionate he for this duty, the sometimes he exhorts himself Praise the
Lord o my Soul, Psa. 103.1
and n^ only his soul, but also his Tong^^ and his hand; and all that is with
me praise his holy name: sometime his company, Psa. 95.1
O come let us sing un^^ the Lord, and Hymnus is a Psalm of Thanksgiving, Psalm.
134.
sometimes the Clergy, Praise the Lord o house ^ Aaron, praise the Lord o house
of Lev^ sometimes whole Assemblies, Pra^^ ye the Lord, Psa. 13^.1 2, 3.
praise ye the name of the Lord, Praise him o ye servants of the Lord, ye
that stand in the house of t^^ Lord, in the courts of the house of o^^ God;
Praise ye the Lord. Sometimes whole Countries, let Isra^^ now confess that he
is gracious, and that his Mercy endures for ever: Psa. 150.6
sometimes all creatures, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord: and
such he aims at here, a public Thanksgiving for a public Blessing; private
thanks do well, but not well enough; for they do ^ut pierce Heaven, whereas
public scales it. And as he, so we; we should not think it enough to be
^ood our selves, but strive to make others good too: As GOD has ^^fused Grace
into us, so should we ^ndeavour to beget Grace in others. When we see a
choleric hasty man, we should strive to make him a Job, a ^nne of patience;
when we see a dissolute swearing man, we should ^rive to make him a Peter, a
son ^f Repentance, when we see a false ^issembling man, we should strive
(...) make him a Nathaniel, a true Is^aelite, a son of Sincerity; when we ^^e
a natural and unthankful man, a man that ascribes the Plague to the malignity
of the Air only, and the staying of the Plague, to the serenity of the Air
only, we should strive to make him a David, a man of Thankfulness; both
wishing and exhorting with a great deal of earnestness, Oh give thanks unto
the God of Heaven.

This we should do indeed, but indeed, this we do nor; we rather seek to
make men worse and worse, than better and better: We, alas, if we see a
Drunkard, we call him to the Tavern; if an Adulterer, to the Stews; if a
Glutton, to the Ordinary; if a coverous man, to the house of providence, the
Usurer or the Broker: So forward are we for sin, that we infect one another;
and therefore no wonder that the Plague has been amongst us; so backward are
we for Grace, that a wonder i^ is, the Plague is stayed; since we exhort not,
since we wish not one another to give thanks unto the God of Heaven.

Were David living now, or we that live now, of David's mind, the Duty would be
doubled, and the desire would be ingeminated, Oh give thanks, oh give thanks.

It is my third Consideration, and the second particular of my first part, the
Ingemination.

But what needs this? what needed the Prophet to double an Exhortation of such
consequence? had not one been enough? can we forget this, To give thanks? Can
we remember this year 1636, that so many have been swept away, swept away by
the Plague, and we left behind? Can we remember this, and not give thanks
to the God of Heaven, though it were but once spoke of? Such a School master
as David would not; but we, we, such Scholars as we are, have memories so
labile, and so fragile, so brittle, and so short, that, as St. Paul says, we
need Repetition upon Repetition; Exhortation upon Exhortation; else we shall,
and will forget to give thanks unto the God of Heaven. So brittle are our
memories this way, God bless us, that we need an In emination; but so fast,
and strong another way, God be merciful unto us, that we need not so much as
a single remembrance: An injury we can remember a long time, an ill turn, nay,
an ill word from our Neighbor, from our enemy, Manet alta mente repostum, we
cannot easily remove it; such a thing as this is soundly settled: but benefits
and good turns, how quickly, alas, do we forget them?

So forgetful were the Israelites this way, Hosea 4.6 Ps. 106.21
that they forgot the Law of God; nay, they forgot God that gave them that Law:
Ps. 78.42.
They forgot God their Savior, and the day when he delivered them: And do not
our Souls leake as much as theirs? His Day, notwithstanding his Memento, we
forget; even that Day which he commanded to be sanctified, whether the
Seventh, or the Eigth day, or one in the seven, we profane them all. That day
wherein he made us whole from the horror of Hell, by the Resurrection of our
Savior; and that day wherein he made us whole from the terror of the Plague,
by commanding that destroying Angel to hold his hand: And therefore blessed be
his Name for this Ingemination of his servant David, Oh give thanks, o give
thanks unto the God of Heaven.

Deum Coelerum, The God of Heaven: This is the mark whither we must aim in
shooting our Thanks; and my fourth Consideration, the third particular of my
first part: And herein you have three Directions.

to God. for heavenly blessings: and with heavenly praises. The Direction for
the Object, is directly against Papists; the Direction for the matter, is
point-blanke against Mammonists, the Direction for the manner, is absolutely
against Hypocrites.

gives thanks, gives thanks for what he has, and so looks upon Gods bounty.
Now by the rule of Order, he, to whom one part of Prayer is due, to him is
every part of Prayer due: But the Papists by their own Act deny Thanksgiving
to be due to Saints. For where is the Papist that did ever give thanks to
Saint Roch, or Saint Sebastian for staying of the Plague? yet they are their
Plague-saviours: where is the Psalter that has any Benedicamus to any, but to
the God of Heaven? But this is a matter of Dispute, and this is not a place for
Dispute, I therefore say no more of it, but this to the God of Heaven: God
grant, that in the time of the Plague, or any other calamity, we may never
betake our selves to any other refuge than Vmbra Altissimi, The right hand of
God; nor give our praises, when we are delivered from the Plague, than Nomen
Altissimi, The mercy of God, as we do this Day, give thanks to the God of
Heaven, who has delivered us from the plague.

to give thanks to the God of Heaven for his blessings upon the Earth: but for
all that, Heavenly blessings must especially be remembered; for sparing us so
long, and giving us so large a time of Repentance; for his Word and Sacraments,
for a religious King, for a holy Clergy, for a conscionable Magistracy, and
such other means of Grace; for the forgiveness of our sins, and such
heavenly blessings, Ob give thanks unto the God of Heaven.

Thankfulness, I confess, is a common duty for all blessings, and a necessary
duty for all blessings; and yet sometimes the very doing of this duty, is worse
than the neglect of it: When the Tailor looks upon his clothes, which he
stole from the Gentleman he made the last suit for; when the Usurer looks upon
his Thousands which he has gotten by Eight in the Hundred: when the
Shopkeeper beholds his bags, which he has filled by selling his Wares at
unconscionable rates: when the Executor looks upon his large revenues which
he has cou^ened poor Orphans of; and such like as these, shall give thanks
to the God of Heaven for such like blessings is these, it is as acceptable as
the sacrifice of a Dog, or Whore, and that is abominable: You should first
have made Restitution of such ^^ gotten goods, and then come and offer the
sacrifices of Thankfulness, that the God of Heaven might and Salvation into
your houses.

Churches Discipline, sometimes detracting from his neighbors worth, and so he
seems to man to give thanks, he cares not to abuse, and mock, and dissemble
with the God of Heaven.

But I might have spared these three last Notes: for you are not superstitious
Papists; you give thanks to God only: you are not covetous Mammonists; your
blessings that you give thanks for came from Heaven^ you are not dissembling
Hypocrites give Heavenly praises for Heavenly blessings. If I do not now
speak^ truth, you are too blame; and if have done you any wrong in speaking too
well of you, I pray GOD make you such as you should be, and so direct you in
giving thanks ^^ the God of Heaven, that his mercy may endure for ever. As in
it self so ^o you.

It is my second part of my Text; the Reason, and persuasion to enforce us to
perform the Duty: Oh ^ive thanks unto the God of Heaven: Why so? for his mercy
endures for ^ver.

Were there no more but the precept Celebrate Deum Caelo^um: Oh give thanks
unto the God of heaven, I were bound to do it: ^or I am bound to obey God: but
then God is pleased to woo our bedience, and to back his Precepts with
persuasions, we are then much ^o blame, if we obey not: Give ^^anks therefore
to the God of Heaven ^^e must, because his mercy endures (...) ever. It is a
fair Reason; that of all Creatures, God made only one reasonable; if you
look upon your selves, you may soon know who it is; it is Man, only Man, a^^
his fellow servants, the Ange^^ Stones have Being, Plants life, Beast have
Sense; only Men and Angel have Reason: Nor was man ma^^ Reasonable, only to
have Reason and to use it, but to be improved b^^ it, and made better:
Scripture nee^ no Reason to enforce it, yet rath^ than man should neglect
Scripture and not obey it, see the goodnesse^ God; He backs his Exhoration
with such a Reason, as is able (...) turn the most rebellious heart i^^ Duty
and Obedience: Oh give than unto the God of Heaven, for his mer^ endures for
ever.

But I must not stand here for ever my time begins to fade and vanish before it
quite ends, I shall resole those four Inquiries in this part^ cluded, I
proposed but now; the first whereof is; What it is to endure for ever?

To endure for Ever, and Everlasting, are in opinione vulgi, conversible: and a
thing is said to be Everlasting, either, first because it lasts ^ong: as it is
said of the Idolatrous City in Deuteronomy; Deu. 13.16
It shall be an ^eape for ever: and so of Ai; Joshua ^urnt it, and made it an
heap for ever. Josh. 8.1 ^
And yet that heap is mouldred ^ong since into nothing, or into dust, which is
as little, and next neighbor ^o nothing: and here it is Aeternum ^uia
Diuturnum: Or secondly, a thing is said to be Everlasting, because it lasts for
ever, for the time to ^ome: so the fire of Hell is said to ^e Everlasting:
Depart ye hence into Everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.
is the laft and lasting ^oome of the wicked: and here it is Aeternu^ quia
sempiternum; or thirdly, a thing is said to beeverlasting, because it is
continually and perpetually: so God who is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the Ending, and yet has neither Beginning nor Ending, is said to be
Everlasting; and here it is Aeternum quis extra Terminos.

Betwixt these you may distinguish; Eternal is that which has an Everlasting
Fore-noone, and an Everlasting Afternoon; so God only can be said to be
Eternal. Diuturnall, is that which lasts long, though it has both a Morning
and an Evening; it knew a Sunne-rising, and shall know a Sunne-setting: so the
World may be said to be Diuturnall; it was made in the Beginning, and it shall
be destroyed in Ending. Thirdly, Everlasting, or Sempiternall, is that, which
has an Everlasting afternoon, it shall never have a setting, though it had a
rising, no Evening though a morning: So man's soul and Angels may be said to
be Everlasting. In a word, man cannot define what Eternal is. St. Augustine
describes what it is not: Aeternum est in quo non est praeteritum aut futurum,
non fuit aut fuerit sed solum est. Eternal is that, in which there is no Time
past, no Time to come, nor has been, nor none shall be, but only ^s: And
yet other Tenses sensu composito absque presentis temporis exclusione, may
truly, though not properly be given to Eternity, which is God: Rev. 1.8.
I am Alpha and Omega the Beginning and the Ending says the Lord, which is,
which was, and which is to come. Whereupon St. Austine: Fuit, quia nunquam
defuit: Erit, quia nunquam deerit; Est, quia semper est. God was, because never
Time was, wherein God was not: God shall be, because never Time shall be,
wherein God shall not be: God is, because he is Everlasting, Eternal: And who
can define what God is? The Angels enjoy it, but they cannot define it, for
then they must perfectly know what God is, who only is Eternal; and therefore
can only tell what Eternal is.

And yet, that you may know how Gods Eternity differs from other things that
are said to be Eternal, you may please to understand, that things are said to
be Eternal or Everlasting more plainly thus.

First, that have both beginning and ending, or secondly which have beginning,
and no end; or thirdly, which have no beginning, yet an end: or fourthly, which
have neither beginning, nor end.

First, things having both beginning and end, are said to be for ever; and of
these are two sorts: First, things that have no determinate Date, Deu. 13 16
(...) ^.2^.
as the heaps before spoken of. Secondly, such as are immutable while their
Date lasts; so those things which remain inalterable for the time of a man's
life, are said to be for ever, Exodus 21.6 Exodus 12.24.
as the boaring of a man's ear made him a servant for ever: so were the
Passover and Legal Rites called an Ordinance for ever.

Secondly, things that have a beginning, but no end; as good and evil Angels,
men's souls, Heaven, and Hell; all these had a beginning, but none of all these
shall ever have an end.

Thirdly, things that have no beginning, but an end, as Gods Decrees: They
never had beginning; and therefore says St. Paul, Grace was given us before
the world began: 2 Timothy 1.9
but his Decrees have (...) end.

Fourthly, things that have never beginning, nor ending, and so only God; God
the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, and his properties are
everlasting, or endure for ever, and amongst them his Mercy.

It is my second Enquiry how this is true, His Mercy endures for ever? and I
resolve it thus: Whatsoever is in God, is God, and everlasting as God is; and
therefore his Mercy, his Mercy endures for ever; Et a part ante, in the
everlasting Fore-noone or our Election: Et a part post, in the everlasting
Afternoon of our Glorification. Yet here you must consider for ever, either
absolute in God, and so it is (...), In saecula, for ever and ever: Or else
Respective to us; and so it is (...), In saeculum, for ever. As I take it the
Prophet here speaks in the last sense the Respective: so in the three Age^ of
the world; first, Ante, Before the Law; there Gods Mercy endure^ for ever: He
taught them by instinct. Secondly, Sub, Under the Law; there he writ them a
Rule, the Ten Commandments, how they should live, and live well. Thirdly,
Post, After the Law, which lasts to the Worlds end, in the Covenant of Grace,
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which will bring us, if we obey it, from being
beholding to his Mercy, to the beholding of his Mercy for ever.

Or divide the world into six Ages: First, the Infancy of the world, from Adam
to Noah; there Gods Mercy was everlasting, and endured for ever. Judgment
seemed to prevail twice: first, in Adams nakedness, and his exile from
Paradise, but Mercy presently got the upper hand, Genesis 3.15
in the promise of the Woman's seed to break the Serpents head; and covering
our nakedness with the Merits of Jesus Christ, which shall bring us again
into Paradise. Secondly, Judgment seemed to prevail again in the Deluge, and
drowning of the World; Genesis 7.23
but Mercy got the upper hand instantly, in saving Noah and his Family in the
Arc; figuring thereby our Regeneration by his holy Baptism.

Secondly, the Childhood of the World, Genesis 19.16.
from Noah to Abraham. There His mercy endured for ever: Judgment seemed to
prevail in the fire of Sodom; but mercy took place again in saving Lot.

Thirdly, Exo. 2.23.
the youth of the World, from Abraham to David: There His mercy endured for
ever: Judgment seemed to take place in the Egyptian bondage, but mercy
prevailed in their deliverance by Moses.

Fourthly, the Manhood of th^^ World, from David to the Captivity: There, His
mercy endured for ever: Judgment seemed to prevail^ in the demolishing of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar; 1. Chron. 36.19.
but mercy took place again in the reedifying it by Nehemiah: And now I am
upon that hint, I may say the same of this place: Judgment seemed to prevail
upon this Temple of St. Paul, (St. Paul, I say, the only Cathedral Church in
the Christian World, dedicated to the service of God, under the name of St.
Paul) when it lay like the Diacony the Deacons of the Church (...), in the very
dust; but mercy has got the upper hand, and we may say as they said, nay, we
are too blame if we do not say it: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which
has put such a thing as this into the Kings heart; Ezr. 7.27.
to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem: Yea, blessed be the
Majesty of our King, and blessed be all those, who put a helping hand to this
religious work, of Reedifying, and Beautifying St. Paul, and above all,
Blessed be the God of Heaven, because his mercy endures for ever.

Fifthly, the Age of the World, from the Captivity to St. John Baptist: There,
His mercy endured for ever: Judgment seemed to prevail in the departing of
the Scepter from Judah, but mercy took place in the coming of Shilo.

Sixthly, and lastly, the old and last age of the World, from St. John Baptist
to the Worlds end: There, His mercy has endured, and does, and will endure for
ever: Judgment seemed to prevail in Herod, in Pilate, in Judas, in the Jews,
when they put Christ to death and buried him but mercy got the upper hand, and
Christ came up again, and rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, and
fits at the right hand of God to make Intercession for us: Judgment seemed to
prevail, when Arius denied the Divinity of Christ: When Apollinarius stumbled
at the Humanity of Christ: When Nestorius declined the Union of these two
Natures in one person: When Enty^hes forged a confusion of the two Natures: but
mercy got the start again, when the Council of Nice defined Christ to be
(...), God of God, very God of very God, of the same substance with his Father:
When the Council of Constantinople de^^ned Christ to be (...) not only
perfect God, but also perfect Man, of a reasonable soul, and Humane flesh,
subsisting: When the Council of Ephesus defined God and Man to be but one
Christ: When the Council of Calcedon defined Christ to be one, not by
confusion of substance, but by unity of person: for which blessed union; Oh
give thanks unto the God of Heaven; because by the Merit of that union, his
mercy endures for ever to us. And so now, to let other times pass; Judgment
seemed to prevail in the Plague: This Plague that scattered us asunder, and
consumed many of us; but mercy you see has got the upper hand again, and this
week there dyed of the Plague but 555. a fair and a large decrease; for
which, Oh give thanks unto the God of Heaven: And do Thou, who art the God of
Heaven, not only diminish, but extinguish the Plague; command this destroying
Angel to hold his hand; because Thy mercy endures for ever: Amen.

And if Gods mercy endures for ever; Quare tumultuatur anima tua? Why is thy
soul disquieted within thee? because of thy present estate, thou art fallen
into some deadly sin, and can not tell whether thou shall be forgiven; or is
it because of thy future state: thou art holy now, but fearst thou shall not so
continue, and persevere in grace: Why man, thy present falls do but show thee
thine own weakness, and for it thou must be humbled, and repent, that thou
may be forgiven; and the fear for thy future condition, does but show thy
changeableness; and for it, thou must be careful, and pray for a continuance
in holiness, that thou may be sure.

God may for a while forsake thee, and suffer thee to be an instrument of
vexation to others, as he did Saint Paul: he may give thee over to the
Plough, to the Harrow, to the Dung hill, as He did holy Job. He may give thee
over to a Fever, to a Sadness, to a Sickness, to a plague, as he did
Hezekiah; thou may be led into the tentation of an Adultery, of a
Drunkenesse, of a Murder, as was David: to a denying of Jesus Christ, as was
Saint Peter; yet none of these can make a final separation, if thou seriously
repent. The Madianite Merchants of sin, sadness, sickness may buy the
present possession of thy Soul; yet if thou will grow due to God by a new and
true Repentance, thy dejected soul shall no sooner cry out, Quis liberabit? O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? but thy Faith shall make a sweet
Reply from this Text, The God of Heaven; because his mercy endures for ever.
This is a good Reason why we should not despair, and a forcible persuasion it
is, to give thanks to the God of Heaven, for his Mercy endures for ever.

It is my third Enquiry, why David makes choice of Mercy to persuade our
Thankfulness? Will it not stand as well, Oh give thanks unto the God of
Heaven, because his Judgment endures for ever? It may seem so if you read the
Psalm; Which overthrew Pharaoh in the Red Sea; which slew mighty Kings, Og^
the King of, etc. No; rather Mercy for all that, than Judgment; because his
Mercy is more everlasting to us than his Judgment.

For take the disproportion betwixt a Year, and a Month, and that is twelve
for one; betwixt a year and a week, and that fifty two for one; betwixt a
year, and a day, and that is three hundred sixty five for one; betwixt a
year, and an hour, and that is eight thousand, seven hundred sixty for one;
betwixt a year, and a moment, and that is many thousands for one; and such a
disproportion there is betwixt the Everlastingnesse of Gods Judgment, and
Mercy to us.

In the Apocalypse it is said, Cap. 9. ver. 10.
Their tower, the evil Angels was to hurt Men five Months: Then again, Apoc.
2.10
Ye shall have tribulation ten days: And in Daniel, Seventy Weeks are
determined upon this people, Dan. 9.24.
and upon the holy City, to finish the transgression and to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness. And so in the Prophet Isaiah, For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, Isa. 54.7, 8
but with great mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath I hid my face
from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Observe ye now, there is a Month, we may be hurt; five Months; there is a
week, seven weeks for iniquity; there is a day, tribulation for ten days and
there is a moment, wrath for a moment, but Righteousness everlasting,
everlasting kindness, everlasting mercies: And therefore rather Mercy than
Judgment, oh give thank^ unto the God of Heaven, for his mercy endures for ever.

mercy has a prerogative of Alliance; his mercy is manifeste^ in himself; his
judgment never, but for our sins. He made us in mercy, when we desired him
not; he redeemed us in mercy, when we deserved it not; and without desert,
upon desire and endeavor, he will save us in mercy; Oh praise the God of
Heaven therefore, for his mercy endures for ever.

his mercy has a prerogative of Antiquity, his judgment showed not it self in
the Creation, his mercy did, his judgment was in posse, and by way of
condition; but his mercy was in esse, and act, and possession; therefore rather
Mercy, than Judgment.

his mercy has a prerogative of Honor; it honors God, and God honors it; it
honors his power, in overcomming the power of Satan; it honors his Justice,
in satisfying the Justice of himself; and it honors his Wisdom, in finding
out such a Sacrifice which was propitiatory for the sins of the whole World,
Jesus Christ: And whence is all this honor to God, but from the mercies of
God; Ioh. 3.16.
For God so loved the World, that He gave His only begotten son, etc. And
God honors it: for He gives it the right hand at the last day: The Merciful
are those Sheep which he will set at his right hand at Doomes-day: Mat. 25.33.
and the right hand is the hand of Honor. Oh give thanks unto the God of
Heaven therefore, for his mercy endures for ever: His Mercy rather than his
Judgment.

For fourthly, his mercy has a prerogative of Duration and continuance:
sometimes an interruption of mercy there may be by Judgment, but evermore mercy
recovers again. In the year 1602, (to go no farther than the easy compute of
our own remembrances) Judgment interrupted mercy, and there dyed of the
Plague, 30578. but mercy saved many more thousands alive, and took place
again for 22. years: for till 1625. no Plague in this City, and then there
dyed of the Plague, 34576. but many more thousands mercy saved alive, and
reigned sole liver again for 5. years: for till 1630. no Plague in this City;
and then there dyed of the Plague, but 1317. but many, many more thousands did
mercy preserve and keep alive; and has reigned 6. years again; and there
are some thousands dead of the Plague this year, but many more thousands, by
mercies favor, reserved, and amongst them, our selves, blessed be the God of
Heaven: And why are we preserved yet? but to give thanks unto the God of
Heaven, because his mercy endures for ever.

Would you be preserved still? and would you have mercy sweep away this
Judgment? would you have mercy continue for ever, and give no more place to
Judgment for another Plague? why no way so good, as for us to be like God; and
this is a sure way, when our mercy, like Gods, endures for ever.

God has respect to us, for his own mercies sake, and God has respect to us
for our mercies sake too: For his own mercies sake; and therefore it is, that
we are not consumed: And for our mercies sake; for God respected Cornelius for
his works of mercy; so the Angel told him: Thy Prayers and thine Almesdeeds,
are come up for a memorial before God. Act. 10.4.


And do not you think that God has respect to this City, for the merciful
works of this City? Your Hospitals, wherein so many poor Widows, Orphans,
Men, Women, young and old are relieved, so many sick and lame cured: Your
Bridewels, wherein so many idle loyterers are made to work: and so many wanton
Harlots punished: Your Bedlams, wherein so many mad men are Dieted, and some
restored: Your Pest-houses, wherein so many infected persons are regarded, and
some recovered: All these, and many more cry to God, that His mercy may endure
for ever.

Shall I commend one work of mercy more to you all; to all you that are
hard-hearted Creditors, where you see your debtors so poor, that they have
nothing to pay; that then you would be like God, and forgive them all the debt:
Else if nothing will serve your turns, but their bodies, to make Dice of their
bones; then read that Parable in St. Matthew the 18. and you shall find, the
merciless Creditor has little hope of mercy with God.

Nor is this any way advantageous to you who are Debtors, to find out shifts,
and break, and conveigh your wares into your neighbors Storehouses, thereby
to make your Creditor believe you have nothing to pay, and therefore to forgive
you: no, you that are debtors, must pay all that you owe, if you have
wherewith: if not all, yet so far as you have to pay withal: This you must
do, you must do this, as you hope to be saved, and find the mercy of God.
Luke 19.8.9.
Zacheus never heard of salvation, till he had first made restitution: nor may
you hope for it, if you have wherewith to restore; But if you have nothing to
pay, nothing indeed, why then your Creditors must be like God, and forgive you
all the debt: His mercy endures for ever: and so must ours.

Yet one more, for one more work of mercy: And this to you all, all in
general, and together, rich and poor, if you would have Gods mercy endure for
ever to you: your mercy must endure for ever to God. But can a man be merciful
to God? Yes, he may; and no Popery in it upon my life: God complains, and
complains of you, and complains to you: That you press him with sins, Am.
2.13
as a Cart (...) pressed with sheaves: And this pressing him, is a mere
oppressing of him, and therefore you must be more merciful unto him, and lay
no more load upon him: thou (...) the single ears (...) Infirmities yet you
must take head of the double sheaves of Impre^^es, (...) press, (...), and God
forbid that man should press his God: These your Impieties have pressed and
squeezed a Plague out of the Cup of his Wrath, and it has been drunk amongst
us: If you would not drink the dregs of it your selves, be more merciful
to God, press him no more with sins, if you would have this Plague quite and
clean removed: and then you shall live, and live to give Thanks to the God of
Heaven, because his mercy endures for ever: Else if you press him still, His
Judgments will endure for ever. And David you see, makes choice of mercy
rather than Judgment, to persuade our thankfulness: Oh give thanks unto the
God of Heaven, because, not his Judgment, but his mercy endures for ever.

For ever, and Everlasting are the mercies of God indeed: Everlasting, and for
ever in number; so many, that no Arithmetician can number them: Divide them, if
you will, you may, into Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal: Temporal, to our
bodies, Spiritual to our souls, Eternal to both souls and bodies: but
number them you cannot, for they are a multitude, an infinite multitude: Psa.
51.1.
Do away mine offenses, according to the multitude of thy mercies, says
David: A multitude they are, not only in the Genus, but the Species; and in
the particular of the Species too: A multitude of Temporal; Bread to feed us,
Cloth to cover us, Fire to warm us, Wine to refresh us; Oil to cheer us; the
whole World is not able to recount them all: A multitude of Spiritual; his
word to teach us to believe, to work, to pray; his Spirit to help us to pray,
His son to pray for us, His Sacraments to preserve our souls and bodies unto
Everlasting life, and who can name them all? A multitude of Eternals; Beauty to
the Body Joy to the Soul, Glory to both, Everlastingnesse in all.

Everlasting thus in the number, and Everlasting in the extension too; they
compass us round; before us, in his preventing mercy; behind us, in his
forbearing mercy; over us, in his forgiving mercy, under us, in his supporting
mercy; on our right hand is his embracing mercy; As the Hills stand round about
Jerusalem, Psa. 125.2
even so stand the mercies of God round about them that fear him: your selves,
I trust in God: His everlasting mercies are about you.

Everlasting thus, in the Number, and extention; and Everlasting thus, in the
Succession too: His jealousy visites the Iniquities of the Fathers upon the
Children, Ex. 20.5.6.
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate him, but he shows
mercy unto thousands in them that love him, and keep his Commandoments. To us,
o God, we beseech thee, and to our children, and to our childrens children, so
long as the Sun and Moon endures, and for ever, and for ever.

Everlasting thus in number, in extension, in succession, and everlasting thus
too in duration: Si dixerit, tota die, dixerit nihil; sed in saecula
saeculorum, non dixisset amplius. Had he said, his Mercy endures for a Day, he
had said as much as nothing: but saying, for ever, his Mercy endures for ever,
what could he say more? And that is a sufficient Reason to resolve my fourth
Enquiry, why David repeats it so often, Twenty six times in this Psalm, his
mercy endures for ever.

So sweet a Theme it was, that the good man was ravished with it; he thought
he could never speak enough of it. And indeed, who can? There are only two
men that think they speak too much of it, the Papist, and the Schismaticke: If
the Papist did not think he spoke too much of it, he would never come in
with his merit: would Andradius the Jesuit stand up with his Debitum ut donum,
and tell us, that eternal life is not so much of Gods mercy, as of man's merit?
would Bellarmine lay down his Paradisum ex merito, and tell us, We may
purchase Paradise by merit? would Vega more desperately say, Gratis non
accipiam, I will none of Heaven, unless I may merit some part of it, if they
did not think too much were spoke of mercy? You shall amongst them, find
Merit twenty six times in one Chapter, and Mercy not above once: whereas in
one of David's Psalms, you shall find Mercy twenty six times together, and
Merit not so much as once, David and the Jesuits surely were not of one
opinion in this point.

And so the Schismaticke too; if he did not think, he spoke too much of
Mercy, would he ever come in with his absolute Reprobation, that God made some
men purposely to damn them? A likely thing that God should be more cruel then
man! Did ever any of you, nay, did ever any man get, or beget a child purposely
to break his neck when he was borne? Why? if there could be a man so cruel
to his Child that came from his own loins, why yet God would be more cruel,
if he should make any man on purpose for to damn him: for Damnation is a thing
far, and infinite worse than Death; for by Death, a Child is delivered from
the miseries of this World; but by Damnation, a man is taken from the pleasures
of this world, and hurled into unspeakeable torments.

Good God, that any man should think, that God, who exhorts all men to give
him thanks, because his mercy endures for ever, should make any man amongst
them all, on purpose for to Damn him! Reprobation is a word that came from
Fury, not from Mercy; let him believe it that never means to give God thanks,
and despair: I will believe, that I, the greatest of all sinners, that thou,
that any man may be saved, if thou, or I, or any man do believe, that Gods
mercy does endure for ever; so that thou, and I, and any man do live
answerable to that Mercy, and repent, and believe, and pray, and give thanks
unto the God of Heaven, because his mercy endures for ever.

His Mercy! This, this is the only thing we live by; this is the only thing
we hope to be saved by, such a thing, This, his Mercy, so sweet, as in the
Contemplation thereof, I could even Live and Die, or rather could live, and not
Die; for whosoever lives and beleives in Gods mercies, and in Jesus Christ,
shall not die eternally. The Mercy of God; it is David's Amabaeum, and the
burden of this Song, Praise the Lord, for his Mercy endures for ever: And so
twenty six times in this Psalm; Praise the Lord, for his Mercy endures for
ever. His Majesty may astonish us, his Glory may beat us down, his Greatness
may strike us dead, his Omnipotency we adore, his Wisdom we admire, his
Justice we stand in awe of, his Uengeance we fly from; but, his Mercy! his
Mercy! this is that strong, out of which came this sweet, and the full
unfolding of Sampsons Riddle: this is that Lion out of which came this
Hony-combe, I will not fear what Man, or Devil, what Plague, or Pestilence
can do unto me, so long as I can give thanks unto the God of Heaven, because
His Mercy endures for ever. Amen.

That was my beginning, and it is my ending; it was the beginning of us all,
for of his mercy we all are, and are what we are: and I pray God it may be the
ending of us all, and all of us Die in the Mercy of God; while we live, God
give us grace to make such use of his Mercy; his Mercy temporal, and his Mercy
spiritual, that then, when we die, we may enjoy his Mercy, which is Eternal
Eternally, through the merits of his eternal Son, Jesus Christ. To whom,
with the holy Ghost; three persons and one God, be given everlasting
thanksgiving, for his mercy which endures for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

