A NEW Revenge for an old Grudge.

Lately set forth by I. S.

Who builds not upon sure ground,
has often been, and now is found
A loss of time, a vain expense,
Thus says Gods word.
An overthrow of his pretense.
Thanks to the Lord.
Jmprinted at London by Henry Wykes, for Frances Coldocke.

To the Reader.
FOr as much as we are taught in the first of Joshua, that in the book of God
we should record day and night: and also be circumspecte to do according to
the same, that our ways might prosper: so assuredly, they that in that sort
travel, and make thereof a willinge exercise, shall find therein such
Felicity, such fruitefulnes, and comfort, as I (oh Christian Reader) am not
with my pen able to express: for in the Scriptures is wealth to be found
for those that be in misery: health for such as be sick: light to expel
darkness: comfort to those that be afflicted: in extreme peril, present
preservation: and for the defense and sauegarde of such as are of the
householde of Faith, there is also to be fownde both armor and weapon, to
wage battle with that ancient enemy Satan: of whom as the sacred Scriptures
make mention, to have been even from the beginning an utter enemy to Christ,
his Gospel, and professors of the same: and sekinge in sundry wise through
his subteltie to subvert the, whom although the glorious God at no time
leaves undefended, to the greater confusion and shame of that subtle Serpent,
yet for all that seaceth he not still to stir up his Hellish army,
continually to make new attemptes to trouble and assail the flock and famelie
of the Faithful: and that only as much as in them is, to suppress, and
darken the light of the glorious Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ, which
comfortablie shines amongst us, which through Christ we have received,
which we now enjoy, and are partakers of (to God be thanks therefore) who
grant the same a free passage thorough the whole world, to the more
magnifiynge of his mighty name, the continual comfort of his Church, and
utter destruction of the enemies and adversaries of the same, For ever. Amen.

A new Revenge for an old Grudge.
Among the diverse and sundry conflictes between Christ and Satan: the
Church Apostolical, and ye Church Diaboliall; the Church of Christ, and the
Church of Antichrist (whereof the Scriptures plentifully make (...) by many
examples; (...), and at all times when (...) happened, or (...), when God has
suffered them to (...) of his Church, (...), as also for the (...) his glory)
there has not then, I say, wanted among an innumerable sort of deadly
enemies, one Satanicall soldier, which has ever showed him self more
stouter then others: more wickedly bent then the rest: more puffed up in pride:
more desirous by defacinge the truth, to advance Sin: boulder, in the
behalf of his (...) Satan, and to thunder out threatninges against Christ and
his Congregation, which examples (...) the Scriptures (...) many; as of
Herod, Phara^ (...) more: amongst the which I specially note the great
Golliah, that presumptuouse Philistine, who so proudely (...) him self against
the Israelites, (...) according to the Scriptures (...), his Helmet of brass
his (...) mayle, (...) of brass his shield on his shoulder, his sword (...)
his side, and in his hands a spear of great weight: and (...) ^ayes
supposinge that the (...) of his person, the furniture of his armor, and force
of his weapons, should be such a terror to them, as that it should utterly
abashe and discourage the hole Camp to encounter with him, did therefore show
and advance him self before the whole host of the Israelites, making there
callenge to fight with any one that might be chosen out from amongst them. But
(...) ^olde now I pray you, how this (...) Philistine ^earynge bold of him
self, and buildynge upon his (...) strength and despisinge the God of Israel,
was in the twinklinge of an (...) overthrown in the chiefest of his pride, and
that by little David, who for the smalnesse of his stature, and (...) of his
years, Goliath t^ke great (...) that he should (...) ^atche with him, this
king (...) turned up David's (...) was he much deceived: for (...) of a man,
(...) strength of the (...) that (...), but (...) God only that gives (...)
Wherefore how weak (...) man seem to be in body, yet is he mighty and
strong, if the Lord assist him, as he did his servant David: who puttinge his
trust neither in spear nor shield, but having his whole affiance and trust
in the ^inge Lord, who is the geuer of victory and by whom he was appointed
(...) Champion in Isreal's behalf, manlike marched then forward in the name of
the Lord God of Hosts to (...) this (...) enemy, having (...) a Slinge
wherein was a sto^, which he ^ange at Golliah, and there^ (...) him such a
blow in the forehead, that down he falls (...) at David's feet upon the
ground: (...) fly, they have lost the field, to God be thanks therefore.
But behold now a new broyle, and according to the saying of Ecclesiastes.
Ecclesi. 1.
The thing that has been comes to pass again: And the thing that has been
done, is done again, for eue^ so is there now sought, A nevve Revenge for an
old Grudge. See now I pray you the practice and device of the Devil, who, as
he always has been a manqueller, and from the beginning a delighter in
destruction, so now with his dromme of defiance, has he stricken up a new
larum: an other field is pitched, the enemies be armed, ye they have hente
their ordenaunce against the camp of the Christians: hark, they shoot of,
and hear ye not what a noyce their gunnes make? see how the pellets fly
through the Christian camp. For who does not behold the Papists now, how in
place of the Philistines they war against the Israelites? how have this
cursed crew, of late by heaps, dispersed abroad those detestable,
blasphemous, rebellious, and contentious books, in the which is most
manifestly apparent, how they, setting a part all shame, neglect their
obedience to their Prince, despise the truth, and being void of the fear
and grace of God, seek by all means possible how to blemishe and deface the
invincible verity of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ: which although by
the malice of Satan, they of late did, and now again would darken, yet never
shall be able to extinguishe and put it out: yet ^se they not, ^ilthely to (...)
out their own shame, with the battery of their books, so burnished with
blasphemy, and so lewdly enterlaced with lothesome and loud lies, as they are
utterly to be banished, and not to be suffered in any Christian Congregation,
yet such is their folly, and furious fransie, and their hearts so inwardly
fretted with deadly rancour, that they nothing regard nor consider the
Council of the holy Ghost: Who says, VVisedo. 1.
that the mouth that speaks lies, slays the Soul: But rather despisinge
the righteouse, VVised. 3.
and forsakyng the Lord, they are very straglers, and straiers abroad,
showing themselves as they are, even a miserable ^ of vacaboundes, and
maisterlesse men, a careless company void of godly skill: soldiers of
Satan, whose souls are darkened, and blinded through ignorance: and whose
malice has so mouldered away their wits, that they can not retain nor
comprehend godly wisdom, for want whereof, they seek their own death in the
error of their life, and destroy them selves through the wicked works of
their own hands, but their gunnes are not to be feared, for their ordinance,
being but quill gunnes, and their shot but Paper pelllets, infected with the
moisture of their own malicious minds, does, even as poison to (...) selves,
return with rebou^des to their own shame and confusion. But Lord, what a
stony and hard hearted Captain has this careless (...) chosen them to be
their Champion? Fors^th even M. Doctor Harding, who, now has taken upon him,
in the place of Goliath, to stand at defiance with whole Israel, but such men,
such master: such soldiers, such Captain: and no marvel is it that such
a false ^tor be found amongst so great and noysom a number, when amongst
the.xij. Apostles one Judas betrayed his master Christ and for a small sum
of monye, both sold and delivered him into the hands of the (...) Priests:
But according as it is said, Matthew. 26.
VVo to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed, for it had been
good for him that he had never been borne: as the end of his travel well
declared, who through desperation hanged him self, for that he had betrayed
the innocent bloudde. Lo; there behold the reward of an unfaithful servant.
But M. Doctor Hardyng has forgotten this, he has forgotten also whose man he
him self once was, he did were Christ his badge, he was cladde in the
glitteryng garment of the glorious Gospel, and was a member of the Church
Apostolical: but now he has with Judas forsaken his master, and is with him
become of the Church infernal and diabolical: for he has refused and
forsaken the worthy liuerie of the living Lord, and wickedly wrapped him
self in the clouted cloak of the Lords lothesome enemy the triple crowned
tyraunte, whose malice against the truth by no means can be qualified, and
whose insatiable thirste the blood of the saints of God in defense of the
same, can in no wise quench nor satisfy. But M. Doctor Hardinge being
forgetful of Judas his miserable end is also as little mindful of his own,
yet let him take heed: Sirach. 10.
For the seed which transgresses the commandments of the Lord shall be
shamed, for who shall justify him that sins against him self, and who will
honor him that dishonoreth his own soul: VVised. 2.
no, horrible is the death and end of the unrighteous. But to proceed, now is
master Doctor Harding stirred up by the device of the Devil to strive against
the stream, and in every condition even as Goliath was, so is he likewise armed
from top to toe, from the head to the f^te: for in place of an Helmet of
brass, he has close buckled about his ears, the heavy head piece of
Heresies: and in steed of a cote of mayle, he has put on the coat armor of
error, he has hanging about his neck the shield of shamelesnes: and for
boots of brass he is laden with blasphemy against the truth: and for his
spear he has sharpened his cruel wrath: and thus being armed point device
for his purpose as he thinks, abroad he comes, before the face of Israel:
he brauleth, he chideth, he taunteth, he threateneth, he rayleth, he is at
defiance with any that dare come: and f^ynge no peril, but making account
that he has won the field before it be fought, he it is that will fight
in his holy Father the Popes cause, with him that bears an head: but ye shall
(...) the old proverb fulfilled, which is, that pride is taken in a net.
For behold the Lord lives, who as he was not forgetful of Israel, but
delivered them from the Philistines, and that by the hands of David his
servant: by whom that ^les Goliath was overthrown: Psalm. 129.
So has the Lord done great things for us: ye the Lord has done great
things for us alredie, for even now in the defense of his Church of
England, he has raised up an other, whom he has appointed his instrument to
work his will by: and has made him honorable among the congregation, a
reverent Father in God the blessed Bishop of Salisburie, that joyful Iuell
of Jesus Christ, to encounter this new found Philistine Hardinge, and to put
him to the worse: Oh mighty work of God, a meek sprited Lamb, to conquer a
ragynge Lion: the weak to overthrow the strong, weak I say in body, but
sound in soul: whose gifts in Godly knowledge surmounteth, whose ripe
understanding and perfectness in the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
primitive Apostolical Church, is singular, and in Gods book the holy
Scriptures, profounde: whereof I make the whole world Judge, to whom his
worthy works are committed, which in the same do spread abroad his well
deserved fame. Lo, such a Champion has the Lord of Hosts appointed for the
defense of his Church, who builded in heart with Gods might, and ready in
his name to revenge the great blasphemy of this arrogant Papiste, marched
forward, not with worldly policy, not in Armor, not with spear, and
shield, neither high minded, nor yet with proud looks, but with a lowly
heart, and an inuincibly Faith in Jesus Christ, being only furnisshed with
the slinge of Godly zeal, wherein he puttinge the smooth stone of truth,
which he had chosen forth of the brook of Gods blessed Book, the which
he slingynge at the proud arrogant Papisticall Harding, has therewith
overthrown him, and given him such a dreadful dente in his forehead, which is
so festered that all the filthy fraternetie of that butcherly brood, and
blouddie brotherhoode of the Babylonicall, and Antechristian Romanistes, shall
with ye surgerie of their Sisme, never be able to cure. Thus M. Doctor Harding
in a piteous perplexity and as one cast in his own turn by being reproved
in falcifiynge the Doctors, so even as David did Goliath, has the worthy
Iuell cut of Hardinges head with his own swoorde: wherefore well may we now
say with the Psalmist. Psalm. 129.
Many a time have thine enemies fought against us (oh Lord) even from our youth
up, ye many a time have they vexed us from our youth up, yet have they not
prevailed against us, for as the Lord God of power has always, and at all
times, preserved and delivered his choosen Israel, from the hands of their
enemies, so has he now likewise stretched forth his hand upon their
furiousnes, and has appointed this worthy warrior and ine^timable Iuell, to
be a defense for his people, who through the power and assistance of the ever
living Lord, has thus wounded our mortal enemy, not a man, but rather a
Monster, a Doctor by name, but a Devil in heart, a reuolter from the truth, an
enemy to body and soul, and can any man I pray you be counted more careful
and honest, then he that fights in the defense of the truth of Jesus Christ
the only redemer of the world, as this blessed Bishop has now done. Let
Alexander and Hanyball be bruted for Warriors, Iuell in my Judgment has best
behaved him self: wherefore if well doing may woorthely claim a good
report, then give to Gods good Iuell our comfortable captain his wonderful
deserved praise, for if virtue could speak, would she not confess that
Iuell had her in full possession, and let now this question be moved I pray
thee: what might this cherefull champion, this Iuell of joy hope for, by the
matchyng with, and mastering of such a monster otherwise then forced thorough
the love he bears to the flock and famelie of the faithful, the quietness of
the Congregation, and according to his duty, the advancement of the glory
of God, whose servant he is, and whom he therefore has now worthily served,
whereby he has obtained and won unto him self the thing he sought not for,
the very gift of God even immortal fame, wherefore let Israel trust in the
Lord, from this time forth for ever more, and when this act or such other
like comes into our minds: let us remember what a great God the Lord is,
VVised. 6.
that thus has weaponed his Creature, to be aduenged of his and our enemies,
and let us also praise God in them by whom he has wrought such wonders, to
the constante keepinge of our profession made to him in our Baptism: But
shall we think it now sufficient, that Iuell has given Hardinge his deadly
wound: no no, more then it was that David gave the overthrow to Goliath, who
being conquered, we Read that the men of Israel and Judah: 1. Reg. 17.
arose, shouted and followed* then after the army of the Philistines, which
fled: and chased them till they fell down dead, and till they came to the
valley, and to the very gates of Ackaron. Also the like we Read of that
worthy woman Judith, Judith. 15.
who when through the mighty assistance of God she had made a deuition of
Holofernes head from his shoulders, the Israelites then issued forth and
followed the Assyrians with sound of Trumpettes triumphantly, and so
discomforted them, and flewe them with the swoorde, and followed them to the
vttermoste part of their borders.

Also Paul fought not alone with the swoorde of Gods word, but as well the
rest of the Apostles, laid about them with the same weapon, upon as many as
resisted the verity. But now who almost (but only that worthy Iuell)
addresseth him self for the better easement and godly comfortyng of his
Christian brethren? wherefore (oh ye reverent Fathers and fellow Bishops with
Iuell, and also all others whom God has made skillful Soldiers in the
handelinge of the weapon of his Word, and guides to his flock) I beseech you
speak all with one voice, be ye knitte together, be ye al of one, and the same
mind and meaning with Paul: prepare your selves to the battle: and Goliath
being by David overthrown, pursue you his Soldiers with might and maine,
lay about you, down with them, strike, lay on load, not with material
weapon, but with the two edged swoorde of the Gospel: blow up the trumpet of
truth in Sio^, that it may sound so shrillie in the ears of the enemies,
that they may tremble there at and be discomfited: oh furnishe Gods
fortresses, double man them, replenish the pulpittes, let your tounges be
talkinge, and your pens walking, eue^ as darts to perce Gods and your
enemies, follow them to Louen gates, whither they be fled to hide them from
the face of God, from the presence and hearing of his word, and from whence
they daily shoot of their flaunderous shot against you, whom God has made
to be teachers of righteousness, shepeheardes to his flock, Capitaynes of his
camp, and governors of his Congregation: wherefore be careful of the army
royal committed to your conductinge, that when the pay day comes, ye may
at the hands of the King eternal receive the reward appointed for such as
faithfully fulfill his holy will. To whom, and to Jesus Christ his true and
only Son, with the holy Ghost that sweet Comforter, three persons and one
God, be all praise and glory world with out end. Amen.

The wicked falce reports,
of tounges shall never seace:
Nor Pharaos train be clean overthrown,
nor Israel live in peace.
Nor yet Bethulia have just cause
to triumph thoroughly,
Till God our Judith move with swoorde
to strike for Victory.

quod I. S.

FINIS.

