A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF THAT PAINFVLL And faithful servant of
Jesus Christ, Mr THOMAS WILSON, in his own Church at St Georges, in Canterbury
the 25. day of January. In the year of our Lord God 1621.

By WILLIAM SWIFT, Preacher of GODS Word, at St ANDREWS, within the City of
Canterbury.

IOSHVA 1.2. Moses my servant is dead.

ZACHARIAH 1.5. Do the Prophets live for ever?

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Fulke Clifton. 1622.

TO MY NEIGHBOVRS AND VERY LOVING Friends, the Inhabitants of the Parish of St
ANDREWS, within the CITY of CANTERBVRY.
BELOVED being of late requested by some of you, to Preach the Funeral Sermon,
of that worthy Preacher of the word of God, and a lecturer for many years in
this City, M. Thomas Wilson, a man for his singular gift and faculty in
Preaching, and worthy works which he has penned of good note, even among such
as never saw his person in the flesh. And of great esteem, among his own
people, and many others that have profited by his Ministry; You found me
ready to tender my service, as the last duty of my love, to my fellow
labourer in the Lords harvest, and now with the Lord.

But to a second request, made since by some, namely, to publish what was then
delivered; To this, I deferred my answer for a time, yet after a pawse, having
in the interim, duly considered, that it is a thing too common in these days,
among the enemies of truth, secretly, and cunningly, to deprave such after
their death, who have been worthy instruments of Gods glory, in the time of
their life, and that by the publishing, of what was then spoken of him, many
abroad may truly understand the excellent resolution of this faithful Pastor,
the watchful eye he has had always over his flock, his constancy in the
truth, peaceably, and comfortably, shutting up his eyes in that Religion and
Faith, which he professed in his life.

And also on the other side, that others may take notice, of the unfeigned
affection, true zeal, fervent love; of so great a multitude within this City
to the Gospel of Christ, taking to heart, the loss, and deprivation by death,
of so emminent a Teacher, who by the providence of God was planted among them,
whom I may term a painful labourer, and withal a skillful builder in the
house of God.

In respect hereof, I have at length rather satisfied others, then my self, in
publishing by my pen, what I lately delivered by word of mouth.

The reasons why I have dedicated this Sermon unto you (my good neighbors and
friends) are these;

First, because I am persuaded, many of you were well affected to the deceased,
even for his message sake, as you are ready at all times, to harken to all
such as come unto you in the name of the Lord. Your diligent attention to the
word of God, both at home and abroad, deserves a due praise.

Secondly, to whom more fitting can I tender the first fruits of my pen, then
to such, on whom in my younger years, I bestowed both the first fruits of my
ministry in the preaching of the Gospel, and also the residue of my labors,
even now to a riper age?

Thirdly, to signify hereby unto you my thankfulness, for the continuance of
that love unto me your Minister, and Pastor, now 30. years. In which love of
the Inhabitants of this Parish my most loving Father, Mr Thomas Swift, my
predecessor in the Parsonage of S. Andrew the space of 22. years, a Preacher
of Gods word among you, did not a little rejoice.

Yea, I boldly affirm, upon sure knowledge, that in his declining age, he
ioyed not more in any worldly blessing then in the love of his people, who on
his deathbed, when as it was questioned by his friends, where his body should
be interred, charged his Executor in his last Will, in these very terms, that
his bones should rest in that Church where his people so entirely loved him.

The premises considered, I entreat you, to accept this small token I send
you. And as I have so many years past (as you all know) by the preaching of
the Gospel, indevoured to the uttermost of my power, to build you up in the
faith of Christ; So my prayers still are, as they have been daily made unto
God on your behalf, that you, and all yours, may grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, to the salvation of your souls, unto whose blessed
protection I leave you.

Yours in the Lord. WILLIAM SWIFT.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr THOMAS WILSON, in his own Parish
Church at S. Georges, in the City of Canterbury, the 25. day of January. 1621.
ROMANS 8.18. For I count, that the afflictions of this present time, are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.


THis Chapter, the 8. to the Romans, may fitly be termed, a storehouse, or
treasury of spiritual and heavenly comforts, wherein the Apostle S. Paul uses
sundry arguments, to prepare, and arm a Christian against the storms and
miseries of this present life. My Text that I have read, has a dependence upon
the former Verse, wherein the Apostle comfort the afflicted in this manner;
Si cum eo patimur, vna cum illo glorificemur. If we suffer, says he, with him,
we shall also be glorified with him. His meaning is this; That if we now
participate with Christ in his sufferings, the time will come that we shall
participate with Christ in glory.

Ob: But here flesh and blood will object, that heaven indeed may be glorious,
but the way to heaven is long, grievous, unpleasant, full of troubles, fear,
discontent, and the like, so that wkile we here remain, in the participation
of these sorrows, our hearts faint within us. Answered by the Apostle.
The Apostle returns answer to this Objection in the words of my Text read
unto you, not denying the bitterness of the potion, but sweetneth it with the
hope of health, that will ensue upon it; he gain-sayeth not the troubles of the
righteous to be great troubles, but yet not so great, as is the glory in the
life to come, which is the portion and inheritance of the Saints. This is that
which the Apostle resolves and determines in the words I have read unto you.
I count, says he, that the afflictions of this present life, are not worthy
of that glory that shall be revealed unto us.

Out of this answer of the Apostle, we may gather these two several
Aphorisms, being the two parts of my Text.

The two parts of the Text.
First, that Christians are subject and liable to the afflictions of this
present life.

Secondly, that all the afflictions of this life, although they may be many and
great, yet are not to be compared to the glory that shall be showed unto us.
And thus much for the method, order, and disposition of my Text.

For I count that the afflictions, etc.

That which the Apostle here terms afflictions, in the former Verse he
calls by the name of sufferings. What is meant by afflictions.
By afflictions and sufferings he means all such crosses as happen unto us in
this transitory life, and whatsoever is grievous to our nature to bear.

As the sins of man are many, and of diverse kinds, even so the wise and just
God has his many, and manifold differing corrections, according as by their
sins he shall be provoked thereunto.

The afflictions of this present time, as the Apostle here terms them, they
are two fold Outward, or Inward. Afflictions twofold, Outward or Inward.


Outward afflictions, when as God does smite a man in his outward estate, in
his goods, in his good name, in his credit, in the loss of his liberty by
imprisonment; As also with sicknesses of his body, which are many and grievous:
Outward afflictions.
And sometimes with the untowardness and evil disposition of his children, so
that after a careful and chargeable education, when the Father looks for
pleasant grapes, as the Prophet says, Isa. 5.2.
he finds nothing but wild and sour grapes, this is no small cross and
corrosiue unto Parents that fear God. Sometimes also God chastneth man by the
death of his friends, and a people by the death of a careful Shepherd, as we
see at this present time.

There be inward afflictions also, Inward afflictions.
when as man is chastned with the unquietness of his own heart, trouble of
his Conscience by reason of his sins, with a continual fear and expectation
of Gods wrath to take hold on him, yea, with a restless vexation of his own
soul; These inward chastisements, are called by some, soule-afflictions, the
which of all crosses are the greatest, and of all burdens most unsupportable.

For those outward afflictions before named, the Saints of God have borne them
with excellent patience, but these inward conflicts have proved too weighty
for them, and they have groaned exceedingly under them.

How patiently holy Job did bear all outward afflictions, his History will
inform you, but when he felt the heavy hand of God upon him, in the troubles
of his soul, then he cried out amain, as being wounded to the heart; Job 6.4.
The arrows (says he) of the Almighty are in me, the venom whereof does
drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God, fight against me.

Surely, these inward afflictions, have carried so great a weight in the
Conscience of some men, that laboring by all means to be rid of this yoke and
troublesome burden, Nulla poenae gravior quam poena Conscientiae. Isidorus.
and not knowing how, they have laid violent hands upon their own life; many
such fearful Tragedies have been acted upon the stage of this world.

Beloved, The Saints on earth, subject to outward and inward afflictions.
Confirmed by example of Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles.
to these afflictions, both outward and inward, the Children of God are subject
in this present life. Jacob the Patriarch, you shall find complaining of a
wearisome Pilgrimage, for when as Pharaoh demanded what was his age, he
answered, an hundred and thirty years, and withal informs him of his
sorrows, Genesis 47.9.
Few and evil have been the days of my Pilgrimages.

Elias also a famous Prophet of God, with a bitter complaint to heaven,
entreats the Lord to end his Pilgrimage, as being no longer able to endure
the afflictions of Iezebel, 1 King. 19.4.
It is enough, O Lord, take my life, for I am no better then my Fathers.

Saint Paul also, after his conversion to the Christian faith, passed along in
a-like wearisome Pilgrimage, and although the statutes of Christ were his songs
in the house of his Pilgrimage, Preaching the Gospel to Jews and Gentiles, 1
Cor. 9.20.
and to all men, that by all means he might save some; Yet in complaints he
comes not behind Jacob, nor Elias, neither Patriarchs nor Prophets, If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.
then (says he) we are of all men most miserable. I refer you to his reason
in the 36. verse of this Chapter, Romans 8.36.
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, etc.

Now concerning inward afflictions of the mind, trouble of conscience, fear of
Gods wrath before mentioned, it is apparent that Gods children are not exempted
nor privileged from them, besides the example of Job before named, I will
instance only in the Prophet David, whose complaints are as Symtoms of the
sickness of his mind, which are these; Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the deep have I called unto thee O Lord. Again, Psalm. 25.7.
O remember not the sins of my youth. Again, Psalm. 88.15.
I am afflicted, and at the point of death. From my youth I suffer thy
terrors, despairing of my life. Last of all, in another Psalm demanding of
himself a reason of this agony. Psalm. 42.5.11.
O my soul why art thou so disquieted within me, etc.

Now seeing that such are the afflictions of this present life, and that such
manner of persons are subject unto them, to which might be added many more
examples of the Scripture, yea, and Ecclesiastical stories will afford many
Presidents of like nature, of Gods people suffering under many Heathenish
Emperors, in the Primative Church, and since also under Turks and Savages,
and under the persecution of Antichrist, that man of sin, of whom it is
written, Reu. 17.6.
I saw the Strumpet drunken with the blood of Saints.

Seeing then that the afflictions of this present life, do fall into the lot
of the righteous, whereof we have a cloud of witnesses. Heb. 12.1.
This may serve, to show some men their error, Yea plunged into the gulf of
despair.
and spare not to say, that God has forsaken them, they are damned, and cast
away, giving hereby very great advantage unto Satan, the common Adversary,
Satan plays upon advantage.
who labors by his suggestions to bar them of all comforts.

O foolish and ignorant man, A causeless despair reproved.
as thou art a man, Nihil humania te alienum puta, think not that to be
strange in thee which is common to all men: as thou art a Christian, and a
regenerate man, Christ Jesus has invested thee into the sorrows of this life;
you (says Christ) to his own, shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice. Ioh. 16.20.


The Arms of the Church militant, is the Cross. The Arms of the militant
Church.
The motto of the Church, The Motto of the militant Church. 2 Cor. 5.4.
as one says is this. I do well and suffer.

Indeed (says the Apostle) we that are in this Tabernacle, sigh, and are
burdened. If thou will consult with the Scriptures, they will inform thee,
that Psalm. 34.19.
great are the troubles of the righteous; yea, and that 2 Timothy 3.12.
all that will live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecutions. And 1
Pet. 4.17.
that Gods judgments begin at his own house.

Prove. 3.11.
My son (says Solomon) despise not thou the chastizinges of the Lord, for
the Lord will correct such as he loves. This is a sentence of great note and
use in the Scripture. I find it recommended by Christ to the Church of the Rev.
3.17.
Laodiceans, and also by the Apostle it is pressed home to the Hebrews with
this amplification, Heb. 12.5.
seeing that God chastneth whom he loves, and scourges every son that he
receives, if a man be without all corrections, whereof (says he) all are
partakers; this immunitie and freedom causes suspicion in deed, Heb. 12.8.
that the same man cannot be the true child of God.

I deny not but that afflictions, and the crosses of this life, may be counted
tentations, and they that with patience bear them, of such it will be said in
the last day. Luke 22.28.
These are they that have continued with me in tentations, and I appoint unto
them a kingdom.

And out of question, Afflictions are great tentations, but not the greatest.
great afflictions are great tentations, but not the greatest of all. The
greatest of all tentations (says a learned Father) is never at all to be
tempted, which he groundeth upon that saying to the Hebrews, that he which is
without all corrections is a Heb. 12.8.
Bastard and no son.

The holy Disciples of Christ, through the midst of these afflictions found a
passage to Gods kingdom. We must, Act. 14.22.
say they, through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God.

If any man should inquire the way to that City, toward which he travelleth,
if it be truly answered him thus, That the only way to the same, is through
many Deserts, steepie Mountains, after that he must pass by dangerous waters,
and then by rough ways, and the like.

This passenger going on in his travel, he finds most pleasing, delightful,
and smooth ways, and therein no cause of fear, or discontent. Will he rejoice
in this? Nay, has he not cause by these pleasant passages to suspect that he
has utterly lost his right way. Even so fares it with a Christian that is
bound for the kingdom of God, Christ Jesus has given us the marks of the
way, not ease, pleasure, profit, or the like, The false way.
that man who abounds in all these may justly fear, that he is clean out of
the way.

The true marks of the way to the City of God the new Jerusalem, Marks of
the way to the City of God.
by the report of Christ are these; Ioh. 16.20.
Weeping, lamentations, sorrows, Luke 21.16.
treachery of friends, Luke 21.17.
hatred of the world, Math. 23.34.
persecutions, Rev. 2.10.
the Prison, Ioh. 16.2.
Excommunications, Ioh. 16.3.
death, martyrdom, and the like.

If in these thou have thy portion in this life, comfort thy self, for therein
thou have the marks of the true way before thee.

When as the Wisemen came from the East, and sought after Christ, they had the
star for their guide, of whom it is thus written, Math. 2.10.
When they saw the star, (the mark of their way) they rejoiced with an
exceeding great joy. Even so the Saints, and holy Martyrs, being well taught
and grounded in the truth, and bound for the kingdom of God; when as in their
passage they met with those marks, whereof Christ before speaks, they were
full of joy in all their tribulations, singing of Psalms, clapping of their
hands, kissing the stake; for by these tokens and marks, they were well
assured, that they were in the very high way, leading to the kingdom of God.

But let me in the next place minister some instructions to such as are under
the afflictions of this present life. Necessary instructions given to such as
are afflicted.


It is very necessary that the afflicted do understand who it is that has
smitten them, The Lord smites.
Hos. 6.1.
Come (says the Prophet) let us return to the Lord, He has spoiled us, He
has wounded us, etc.

Job 33.16.
Elihu did truly answer Job, That all corrections are sealed of God.
Ascribing the same to God, as being his own absolute proper act and deed.

Amos 3.6.
Shall there be evil in a City (says the Prophet Amos) and the Lord has not
done it.

If the Math. 10.30.
hayres of man's head be numbered, as Christ himself testifies, yea, and these
shall not perish without the will of God, then certainly greater evils cannot
fall upon man without Gods permission.

Ascribe not then thy mishaps to Fortune: Job against the Job 1.15.16.19.
Shabeans, and the Chaldeans, who had taken by violence all his Cattle away
from him; And of a great wind that came from beyond the Wilderness, that smote
the four corners of the house, which fell upon his Children, and killed them,
JOB knew all these to be but Gods agents, and used not so much as any murmuring
speeches against them, but being assured that God has a stroke in all the
afflictions of this present life, very wisely and truly answered in these
words; Job 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed, says he, be
the name of the Lord.

It is also very necessary that man under these chastizements, Sin, the cause
of Man's troubles.
For when as Judge. 13.1.
Israel continued to commit wickedness in the sight of the Lord, the Lord
delivered them into the hands of the Philistimes forty years.

Had it not been for sin, Man had never tasted of sorrow. God may truly say
as much to all such as groan under the burden of afflictions, as Paul did to
those that were in the ship with him; Act. 27.21.
You should, says Paul, have harkned to me, and not have losed from Candie, so
should you have gained this hurt and loss. So if man in the state of
Innocence, had harkned to the voice of God, and not transgressed his law, Genesis
3.6.
by eating of the forbidden fruit, If he had remained in obedience to the great
God of heaven, these afflictions, and crosses, and sorrows of this life, had
been altogether prevented.

Here is a necessary caveat also to be given to all afflicted, God in
afflicting men not unjust.
for concerning thine afflictions, be they what they are, thy sins have
deserved much more. And yet take this with all for thy comfort, Afflictions
sometimes but trials.
but sometimes are trials of thy faith, love, obedience, patience, and
constancy in the true service of God.

If therefore thou find the hand of God to be heavy upon thee, inquire by a
strict examination of thy self, Referred to examination.
what the cause thereof should be. If thy own Conscience shall inform thee of
thy love to God, How this may be done.
and his true worship, and of thy holy desires to please Cod, and that thou
strivest daily against the corruptions of thine own heart, and the like, then
out of question, thy afflictions are but trials.

But if upon examination, thy Conscience shall intimate unto thee, a great
neglect of many holy duties, and that thou live in some sins not as yet
repented of then do thou wisely suspect the worst, that by these afflictions
laid upon thee, haven does challenge thee for the same.

Therefore my counsel unto thee is this, Counsel, not to be rejected, or
refused of any.
If upon inquiry thus made, as thou find thy self to stand with thy God,
if thou take these afflictions to be trials, exercise all Christian patience
under them, but if for thy sins, then hasten forward an unfeigned reformation,
and let me answer thee with CHRIST'S words in the Gospel, Ioh. 5.14.
Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee.

To shut up this point, The final cause of the affliction of the Saints.
the final cause of afflictions of Gods elect, is this, namely, Gods purpose
by them to bend, not to break, yea, where he bends, he never breaks. Elihu
answered Job truly, that the mark that God aymeth at by those afflictions
that he sends upon his own, is Job 33.16.17.18.
to open the ear of man, to cause him to harken unto his word. And that
thereby he may cause man to turn from his own enterprise, and that he might
hide the pride of man.

And by these corrections he intends to keep back his soul from the pit,
and that his life should not pass by the sword.

To this well agrees that saying of Paul, 1 Cor. 11.32
We are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

And thus much of the first part of my Text.

The second Aphorism follows, which is this; The second Aphorism.


That all the afflictions of this present time, although they be many and
great, yet are not to be compared to the glory that shall be showed unto us.

I count (says the Apostle) etc.

The Rhemes Testament reads it thus, I do think that the afflictions of
this present time, but to think, leaves it to uncertainty.

The original word (...), (...). Statuo. Beza Repeto Zuinglius Arbitror
Trimelius. Existimo vulg. latin.
is better by learned Interpreters, translated thus; I count, etc. As if the
Apostle should have thus said, I have summed up together all the sorrows and
afflictions of this life, having first examined every particular, I count what
I find, for by experience I know what they are, namely, that they will not
hold weight with that glory that shall be revealed to the Saints in the life to
come.

Non sunt paria, says Beza, Non sunt paria. Beza. Pares passiones. Trimelius.
If you put them all into the Balance, they will prove too light, much like to
that of Job, Job 6.2.
Oh that says he, my grief were weighed, and my miseries were laid together
in the Balance, for it would be heavier then the sand of the Sea, etc. Even so,
if all the troubles of this life were balanced with heavenly joys, they would
prove much lighter then the same. Which Metaphor the Apostle also uses in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light afflictions (says he) which are but for a moment, causes unto us a
far more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.

When as Paul was taken up into Paradise, he speaks of himself, that he
there heard ( 2 Cor. 12.4. Beza.
(...)) Ineffabilia verba, says the Latin translation, Words not possible for
man to utter. No doubt but it was a more harder task to express what was then
seen, I mean the glory of God, then to utter those words that were spoken
unto him.

Saint Peter calls the joy of Heaven begun here on earth, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Gaudium ineffabile, You do believe, and rejoice says he, with joy
unspeakable and glorious. If heavenly joy, in the heart of the Saints, when as
it is but begun, while it is but in the bud, when man has but a little taste
of the same, by the work and operation of the Spirit of God, be Gandium
ineffabile, that is, unspeakable joy, how unable is man to express the
perfection of it, even that glory, says my Text, that shall be revealed unto
us.

Saint Paul also to the Corinthians does much magnify this glory, but he
explaneth it not; 1 Cor. 2.9.
The things (says he) which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, are which God has prepared for them that love
him. Yea, he proves the truth hereof by Scripture, Isa. 64.4.
according, says he, as it is written, but not explaining the excellency of
this glory, by reason, or demonstration.

The Prophet David also, Psalm. 45.1.
whose tongue was the pen of a ready writer, yet neither by pen, not by his
tongue was he able to express this glory, but in general terms, Psalm. 16.11.
Thou will show me the path of life: In thy presence is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. And again, Psalm. 36.9.
With thee O Lord is the well of life, and in thy light we shall see light, etc.

But beloved, I marvel the less that the Prophets of God, and Apostles of our
Savior Christ, have passed by the description of this glory which we hope for
in the life to come, and without any particular illustration of the emminencie
thereof, when as the Lord Christ himself, praying to God his Father for this
glory to be given unto his Church, calls it only Ioh. 17.5.
that glory, which himself had with his Father before the world was, but he
explaineth it not. We shall all then know, and not before, what this glory is,
when as in the life to come, it shall be revealed unto us, that is, when we are
in the actual possession of it.

For as he that sat upon the white Horse (spoken of in the Revelation) Rev.
19.12.
On whose head were many Crowns, Simile.
had a name that no man knew but himself: So, no man knows the excellency
of this heavenly joy, or the glory thereof, but he himself only that is
crowned with it.

Brethren, for my part I have had but little time to meditate upon this
Scripture, but had I had much longer time, I should not have been able to have
satisfied you in this point, as by any description, or demonstrations, to
present unto you the perfection of this glory, for 1 Cor. 2.9.
if man's heart cannot conceive it, then much less is man's tongue able to
express it.

Neither does my Text put this task upon me, for the Apostle speaks only of
this glory comparatively; comparing it with the crosses and miseries of man's
life.

I count (says he) that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy
of the glory that shall be revealed unto us.

Neither do I see how the comparison can well hold betwixt the one and the
other, things finite, with that which is infinite.

Psalm. 30.5.
The heaviness of the Saints, is but for a night, the joy that comes in the
morning will be everlasting. Psalm. 16.11.
At the right hand of God, there are pleasures for evermore, as the Prophet
testifies.

Saint Paul also himself seems not so well to approve of this very
comparison, even in this very respect; 2 Cor. 4.17.
For (says he) our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto
us a far more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.

And albeit, man's life be full of sorrows, as Job speaks, yet, says he,
withal Job 14.1.
it is of short continuance; his afflictions then be but momentary afflictions,
and the glory of heaven eternal.

Upon this hope of eternal glory, Gods children have gone thorough (with
singular patience) the wearisome Pilgrimage of this life. And although they
have not a little been perplexed with the violent storms of this world, yet
herein was their comfort, an expectation that they had of this haven, where
they should enjoy eternal rest.

Saint Paul gives this for a reason, why he faynted not in his sorrows; 2
Cor. 5.1.
For we know (says he) that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building given of God, that is, a house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens. For therefore we sigh, desiring to be
clothed with our house, which is from heaven, etc.

And again, there is another difference between the afflictions of this life,
and the glory which shall be revealed unto us, which does not a little detract
from the fitness of this comparison, namely, that these afflictions are often
times mixed with comfort, but heavenly joys have no tutch at all of any
sorrows in them.

Saint Peter writing to such as were under great afflictions, yet in his
Epistle mentions their great joy; 1 Pet. 1.8.
You (says he) do believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.
And S. Paul confirms this truth by good experience in himself; 2 Cor. 1.5.
As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds through
Christ.

Now on the other side, in the fruition of the glory to be revealed, we shall
enjoy it, without any mixture of sorrow. This glory will suffer no manner of
eclipse at all. Rev. 7.17. Isa. 25.8.
God will wipe away all tears from the eyes of his people. All which
confirms the truth of this Text, that the afflictions of this present time
are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed unto us. This glory which in
a due time shall be revealed, it is no worldly glory, no vainglory; these
will pass away as shadows without substance, which are lighter then the wind,
they have no weight at all in them, Luke 16.25.
there is no remembrance at all of earthly pleasures when as man leaves them,
they vanish away, as it were, in a smoke, but the glory of God is ever
lasting. And this is the portion and inheritance of the Saints, wherefore (as
the Apostle says else where) 1 These. 4.18.
Comfort your selves one another with these words.

But principally I commend these words of comfort to all that are afflicted,
that groan under persecutions,

To all such our Savior ministers the like words of comfort; Math. 5.12.
Great (says he) is your reward in the kingdom of heaven.

This was Moses comfort in his afflictions, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.26.
He had an eye to the recompense of the reward.

Saint Stephen also the Martyr, in his afflictions, was supported by the
meditation of this glory; Act. 7.55.
Behold (says he) I see the Heavens open, and the son of Man standing at the
right hand of God, etc. And this is it which Paul presses to the Colossians,
Col. 1.5.
for the hopes sake which is laid up for you in heaven, etc. So then all the
afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed unto us.

Finally, if all the afflictions of Paul's time, which have been the greatest
that ever were, I mean the persecutions in the primative Church, as
Ecclesiastical Stories at large will inform you. If all those troubles, yea,
sufferings for Christ, and Martyrdom it self be not worthy of heavens joy,
Good works cannot justify.
then no other works certainly can of themselves merit eternal life, or
procure for man the salvation of God: And so much for the Interpretation of
this Scripture.

Now touching the occasion of this present meeting, somewhat is to be spoken.
TO speak much of little, says one, needs the help of Art; And certainly
no less Art is required in him, that intends to speak little of much, fully
and yet in few words. In which point, I suspect I may fail, having but little
time left, and so plentiful a subject of my speech.

At my coming into this Church, when I beheld the people here assembled, I
remembered that report which the Evangelist gives of our Savior Christ, Math.
9.36.
When he saw the multitude, he had compassion upon them, because they were
dispersed and scattered abroad, as sheep having no Shepherd. It cannot be but
a pitiful spectacle indeed, to behold a people distressed in this kind.

This being your own case (my beloved) I may fitly compare your sorrows, to
the sorrows of Jerusalem, lamented by the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 1.1.
How does that City, says he, remain solitary, that was full of people; she
is as a widow that was great among the Nations, etc. The like say I to this
present people, How comes it to pass, that this Congregation lies desolate,
as a lamenting widow, without a Teacher, or Comforter, who of late, for the
plenty and purity of the Word, rejoiced above all other Parishes and Villages
round about her? Alas, the reason is soon rendered. You have lost a most
painful Pastor, and a careful Shepherd that attended you, Vt Zancheus de
Caelvine. Fuit optimus interpres Scripturarum.
A man called forth to the work of the Lord, and plentifully enabled of God to
the work whereunto he was called. He was a judicious Divine, and Orthodox,
sound in the truth, excellent for interpretation of Scripture; a professed
enemy to Idolatry, superstition, and all false worship: for which he reaped the
malice of some, but especially of one who opposed him to the uttermost of his
power.

But God soon unmasked this Adversary, Mr Wilson troubled by a false brother.
whose vizard being pulled off, it instantly appeared to the world that he had
the mark of the Beast in his forehead, and then gave over the pursuit of him,
when as his own Conscience pursued himself, so that forth with he forsook
his friends, living, country, and all, D. C.
and departed from us.

And as this true Shepherd of Christ was furnished with excellent gifts, both
of Nature and Arts, whereby he was well fitted to the work of the Ministry,
Mr Wilson very laborious and industrious in his calling.
so was he most laborious, industrious, and diligent at all seasons to Preach
Christ. As he had received ten Talents, so he put them all out to the use of
his Master. Otherwise, people find small comfort in the great readings,
knowledge of the tongues, skilfulnesse in the Arts, eloquence, or in any other
emminent gifts of such as are placed over them, if they reap not the fruits of
that learning in the public Ministry of the Word.

And as he was painful and industrious, He was also constant in his pains.
so also was he constant in his labors, as God still increased his gifts, so
he still enlarged his pains, to the farther good of his Church, even from the
time of his first coming to his charge, to the time of his death, He was
resident 36. years upon his charge. Genesis. Isaiah. The Gospel of St John.
having remained among you the space of 36. years, preaching usually in this
place three times every week, lecturing upon three several Books of
Scripture; A task of such labor, especially the same being so exquisitely
performed, that the best learned have most admired him. And in all his Sermons,
he gave good content to such as were most judicious, yet still spoke to the
capacity of the meanest; It is well known to all that knew him, that he was
both an eloquent, Like Apollos. Act. 18.24.
and a powerful dispenser of the Word.

In which constancy of his labors, he fulfilled that saying of one, who would
have Imperatorem stantem mori concionatorem concionantem mori, where should the
Emperor die, says he, but in the field, and where should a Preacher die, but
in the Pulpit? meaning in the faithful execution of his Ministry. His Sermons
you see, were more then quarter Sermons.

To his continued pains of Preaching, He was a very profitable writer.
I may add these excellent Books which he has penned, whereof Divines may
make good use, and all such as desire a progress in godliness.

Hercules, then said he, Number quis Herculem vituperat, Is there any here that
dispray seth Hercules, holding it a vain labor to praise where none
disprayseth.

Or happily to my testimony of this worthy Pastor, some will answer me much
like as the Samaritans answered the woman of Samaria concerning Christ, We
believe all this, not because of your report, but for that we have heard him
our selves.

I answer thus, Answered.
What is now spoken of him, at this present, is not so much for information, as
for confirmation of what ye know and believe, when ye understand that others
are of the same mind with you, but principally it is now spoken of him, that
God may have the glory of his works and graces in him.

If you of this parish do not ingenuously confess, Ungrateful hearers
reproved.
to the glory of God, the manifold benefits you have received by his watchful
labors; I say to you as Christ said in defense of his Disciples, If those,
says he, hold their peace, the stones will cry out; even so, the very stones
of this Church, let them witness against you.

And if any malignant spirits, Depraving spirits censured.
shall after his death deprave him, or detract from his Preaching, or those his
Books which he has penned, all godly Christians have cause to suspect them to
be rotten at the coare, unsound I mean in Religion; or else for their own
insufficiency (the ground of malice) unworthy to carry his Books after him.

When my self did visit him in his sickness, and perceived the great
weakness of his body, I counseled him, upon return of strength (if God so
pleased) to be moderate in his pains for a time; He answered me in these very
words, Were I in health of body, His resolution to be constant in his labors.
1 Cor. 9.16.
I say always with the Apostle, Vae mihi si non evangelizavero, Woe unto me if
I preach not the Gospel, but in my sickness I know the Lord will not require it
of me.

But alas I see tears falling from many eyes, A general lamentation in the
Auditory observed. Deuteronomy. 34.8.
and other signs of mourning in this Auditory; to you that lament the loss of
your Shepherd, as the Israelites did for their Moses, so you for this Prophet
of God, were your Shepherd to return his answer from Heaven, it would be
much like to Christ's words, to the lamenting Women that followed after him.
Luke 23.28.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, says he, but for your selves, and
for your children, for your selves, I say, and for your children, because you
know not what evils may befall you, for these latter days grow evil apace.
Isa. 57.1.
And the righteous are taken away, says the Prophet, because he shall not see
them.

But in respect of himself, For himself no cause of lamentation.
there is no cause of lamentation, for he and all his labors are with God; He
has fed the flock of Christ, and is gone to receive the promised Crown. He
has met with that comfortable greeting of the Lord, Math. 25.23.
Euge bone serve and fidelis, it is well done good servant and faithful, thou
have been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much: enter into
thy masters joy.

And as he was careful for you in his life, so not careless of you at the
instant time of his death.

Even as the Heathen Orator said of himself, Tully.
that he had no less regard, that the Commonwealth should flourish after his
death, then in the time of his life, or rather like unto S. Paul's care, Act.
20.29.
that when he departed from the Church of Ephesus, he would have grievous
Wolves kept out, that otherwise would make a havoc of the flock the which he
very earnestly committed to the care and trust of the Elders of that Church,
and was the more earnest, Act. 20.38.
for that they should see his face no more. Even so this trusty and provident
Shepherd, was so mindful and careful of you all, Mr Wilson very careful of
his flock at the point of death.
that with his last dying breath, he prayed, and wished all good to the Church
of Christ in general, but to you his flock in special, namely, his hearty
desire was this, that the Patrons of his Church would place such a one in his
room, as should be able to teach his poor flock.

And I hope that his worthy Who were present at this Sermon.
Patrons will have a regard of you, even as they respect the glory of God, and
for their own honor and credit, and the rather at the request of their
brother deceased, who in the name of Christ craved it at their hands.

Now to you his grieved flock, His grieved flock comforted.
let me minister a few words of comfort, I say to you as Abraham did to Isaak
his son, My son, says he, God will provide a sacrifice; So, 1. That God
will provide for them.
GOD no doubt will provide a Teacher for you.

And comfort your selves in this, you the inhabitants of this Parish are not
alone, but have many abroad that do share with you in your sorrows, 2. They
not alone in their sorrows.
that sometimes were partners with you in the comforts of your Minister.

Neither be you too much discouraged, 3. Truth remains though true Teachers
be taken away.
though a true Teacher be taken from you, yet God has left his Truth still
with you, and has given you the spirit of Truth, that shall never be taken
from you: You have on every side such as are both able and willing to instruct
you; 4. The spirit of Truth abides for ever.
you are well neighboured also by the cathedral Church adjoining to you,
whether you do often resort, and receive instructions from diverse very learned
Divines, 5. They have many instructers near unto them. Christ's Church at
Canterbury. Eccle. 3.1.
from whence, as from a continued springing fountain you may fetch the water
of life; no small benefit to this City, if they respect the welfare of their
souls.

Finally, Solomon says, Every thing has an appointed time: And a time to
every purpose under Heaven. Why then there is a time to hear, and a time to
practice. You have had a long time to hear, in the name of God, make it now a
time to practice. Be not always hearers, Iam. 1.22.
but doers of the Word. And what ye have heard by your learned Teacher in his
Doctrine (as Mary did the words of Christ) so lay the same up in your hearts.
Luke 2.51.


You have been often, yea, His hearers called upon, to put in practice what
they have heard.
early and late called upon, by your loving and beloved Pastor, God calls you
now to practice what you have learned. Let the crop and harvest be answerable
to that seed that has been here sown, certainly a plentiful seed, let the
effect thereof be seen by a plentiful harvest. When to meet again with their
Shepherd. 2 Timothy 4.7.
That in the end, you may meet again with your Shepherd, who by the hand of
God is now pulled away from you, of whom this remains only to be spoken; He
has fought a good fight, He has finished his course, He has kept the Faith,
from hence forth is laid up for him the Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord shall give unto him at that day; And all this through the merits of JESUS
CHRIST, to whom with GOD the Father, and the blessed Spirit, be all honor,
glory, praise, and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

*

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
COurteous READER, thus have I set down and presented unto thee my Sermon
Verbatim, in the very same manner, so near as memory does afford me help, as I
preached it, hoping it will be the better accepted for that it comes forth,
in the very same plain habit, in which it first appeared to so great a
multitude that heard the same, who with lamenting hearts, accompanied his corpse
to the grave, the which was carried by six Preachers of the word of God,
whereon were fixed diverse Latin Verses, deploring the loss of so watchful a
Shepherd, the which Verses if they had come unto my hands, I would have
brought them forth unto the light.

Because I have given so free and large a testimony of his labors, let me more
particularly acquaint thee what they have been.

The Books of holy Scripture expounded by Mr Thomas Wilson in his ordinary
Lectures, since he came to his charge, were these;
The prophecy of Haggai. The Gospel of S. Luke. The Acts of the Apostles. The
Epistle of Paul to the Romans, which is since printed. And many whole Psalms
of DAVID; As Psalm 15. Psalm 25. Psalm 32. Psalm 73. Psalm 103.
ALSO

The 4. Chapter of Ecclesiastes, his first task. The 3. Chapter of Jonah, in
the time of a general fast. The 26. and 27. Chapters of Matthew, preparation
Sermons to the holy Communion. The first and second Verses of the sixth Chapter
to the Hebrews, the grounds of his Catechism, which since he has printed.
The 53. Chapter of Isaiah, in the time of Lent. The 15. Chapter of the 1. to
the Corinthians, usual at Funerals. Upon these 3. books were his last weekly
Lectures.
The first 13. Chapters of Isaiah, every Sabbath morning. The first 29. Chapters
of Genesis, every Sabbath afternoon. The first 12. Chapters of S. John's
Gospel, every Friday lecture. With very many other Texts of holy Scripture, as
the present times offered occasion. He has also written 12. several Books,
which are printed. His last book which he names, Saints by calling, or called
to be Saints; In the Epistle dedicatory of the same, he calls it, his
Benjamin, or his twelfth and last Book.
Such have ever been the restless labors of this servant of CHRIST, who is
now at rest from his labors, and his works have followed him.

Courteous Reader farewell.

