C23576 Sylvester, Joshua
Sylvester (Joshua) Lachrimae Lachrimarum, on the Distillation of Tears shede
for the untymely death of the incomparable Prince Panaretus, FIRST EDITION,
calf extra (...) 1612 ORIGINAL AND MOST RARE EDITION, and not to be confounded
with the comparatively common reprint of 1613, when it was accompanied by other
productions. The only other copy of the present editio princeps which has
occurred during the last forty years is that in the Huth library. (See
Collier's "Rarest Books in the English Language," 1865, ii. 410-11, for some
account of Sylvester.) The volume is curiously printed on one side of the
leaves, the reverse being in black with the royal arms gartered and crowned in
white relief at the top, and the printed pages having at head and foot a
mourning band, with emblems of mortality at the sides. Sylvester's poem ends on
B4; on C1 begins, and continues to the end, a series of verses on the same
subject in English, French, Latin, and Italian, by Walter Quin of Dublin, who
is styled the Prince's servant.

First Edition.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

LACHRIMAE LACHRIMARVM. or

The Distillation of Tears Shede For the untimely Death of The incomparable
Prince PANARETVS.

by Iosuah Syluester.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon
LACHRIMAE LACHRIMARVM. A funeral Elegy upon the All- lamented Death of the
All-admired (late) PRINCE.
memento mori border

How-euer, short of Others Art and Wit,
I know my powers for such a Part unfit;
And shall but light my Candle in the Sun,
To do a Work shall be so better Done:
Could Tears and Fears give my Distractions leave,
Of sobbing words a Sable Web to weaue;
Could Sorrows Fulness give my voice a vent,
How would! how should my saddest Verse lament
(In deepest Sighs, instead of sweetest Songs)
This Loss (alas!) which unto All belongs:
To all the Godly now, and future, far:
To all the WORLD (except S P. Q. R.):
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

To All together, and to Each apart
That lives, and loves Religion, Arms, or Art:
To all abroad, but to us most of all
That nearest stood to my High Cedars fall:
But more then most, to Me, that had no Prop
But HENRY's Hand, and but in Him, no Hope.
O Dearest HENRY; Heaven and Earths Delight!
O cleerest Beam of Virtues, Rising bright!
O purest Spark of Pious Princely Zeal!
O surest Ark of Justice sacred weal!
O grauest Presage of a Prudent kind!
O brauest Message of a Valiant Mind
O All-admird, Benign and Bountious!
O All-desired (right) PANARETVS!
(PANARETVS (All-vertuous) was thy Name
Thy Nature such: such ever be thy Fame).
O dearest! cleerest! purest! surest Prop!
O grauest! bravest! Highest! nighest Hope!
O how vntymelie is this Sun gonne down!
This Spark put out, This Ark (as) overthrown!
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

This Presage crossed! This Message lost and left!
This Prop displac't! This Hope of All, bereft!
O! How unkind! How, graceless! How, ingrate!
Have We cutt-off Thy likely longer Date!
For, were This Stroke from Heavens immediate hand;
Or (by Heavens leave) from Hells suborned Band:
How c'r it were, We were the Moving Cause
That sweet Prince HENRY breath no longer draws.
We All (alas) have had our hands herein:
And Each of us has by some cord of Sin
Haled down from Heaven, from Justice awful Seat
This Heavy Judgment (which yet more does Threat)
We Clergy first, who too too often have stood
More for the Church-goods then the Churches good:
We Nobles next, whose Title, ever strong,
Can hardly offer Right, or suffer Wrong:
We Magistrates, who mostly, weak of sight,
Are rather feign to feel then see the Right:
We Gentles then, who rack and sack, and sell,
To swim like Sea-Crabs, in a foure-wheeld Shell:
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

We Courtiers next, who French-Italianate,
Fashion our Faith after the form of State:
We Lawyers then, who in the form of Law,
Dis-claiming Conscience like the Horse-leach draw:
We Citizens, who seeming Pure and Plain,
Beguile our Brother, make our God our Gain:
We Contrymen, who slander Heaven and Earth
As Authors of Our Artificial Dearth:
All, briefly All; all Ages, Sexes, Sorts,
In Countries, Cities, Benches, Churches, Courts,
(All Epicures, Witt-Wantons, Atheists,
Mach'-Aretines, Momes, Tap-To-Bacchonists,
Bats, Harpies, Sirens, Centanres, Bib-all, nights,
Sice-sinckap Asses, Hags Hermaphrodites)
And We, poor Nothings (fixed in no Sphere,
Right Wandering Tapers, Erring euery-where)
Scorn of the Vulgar, scandal of the Gown,
Have pulled this Weight of Wrath, This Vengeance down:
All, All are guilty, in a high Degree,
Of This High Treason and Conspiracy,
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

More brute then Brutus, stabbing more then CAESAR,
With Two-hand-SINNES of Profit and of Pleasure.
For, for the Peoples Sins, for Subjects crimes,
God takes-away good Princes oftentimes:
So good JOSIAH (HENRY's parallel)
Was (young) bereft from Sinful Izrael:
So our good EDWARD (HENRY's Pre-cedent)
For ENGLAND's Sins was hence untimely hent.
So here, good HENRY is new taken hence,
For now Great-BRITAN'S great Sins Confluence.
We see the Effect, we have the Cause confessed:
O! Turn we then, with speed, to Save the rest:
O! Turn us, Lord; turn to us, turn away
Thy Frowns, our Fears, with humblest Tears we pray.
O! save our Souverain; save his Royal seed;
That still his Own may on his Throne succeed.
Let Each of us make privy Search within;
And having found, bring forth the Traitor SIN
To Execution, with all Execration
Henceforth renouncing such In-Sin-newation.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

Let Each of us (as Each has thrown a Dart,
A Dart of Sin, at HENRY 's princely heart)
Send-vp in Sighs our Souls devoutest breath,
To Shield our JAMES, ANNE, CHARLES, ELIZA'BETH
And HIM, whose Love shall render HER her Brother,
And make Her soon a happy Princes Mother.
Let Each of us cease to lament (in vain)
Prince HENRY 's Loss. Death is to HIM a Gain
For Sauoy's Dukelings, or the Florentine
He Wedds his Savior (of a Regal Ligne)
Glory, for Gold; for Hope, Possession (there)
Of Crowns so Rich as never entered Ear,
Eye never saw, nor ever Heart conceav'd;
So strong Assured, as cannot be bereaved.
Wail not his death: His Virtues cannot Dye
(Immortal Issue of ETERNITY)
His Soul in Bliss beholds her Makers Eyes:
His goodly Body shall more glorious Rise.
Weep not for HIM: weep for our selves (alas)
(Not for our Private, or Peculiar case:
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

As for our Sonn's, Brother's, or Master's lack,
Or Prince's loss (our Expectations wrack)
Our Places, Graces, Profits, Pensions lost,
Our present Fortunes cast, our future crossed)
Weep for our Sins, our Wicked-Prouocations,
Our heinous, horrid, high ABOMINATIONS,
Both seen and secret; both in High and Low:
Weep, weep for These; and stripped from Top to Toe,
Of guiddie-Gaudes, Top-gallant Tires and Towers,
Of Face-pride, Case-pride, Shin-pride, Shoo-pride, ours
( Like NINIVITES, so near Their threatened Fall)
In blackest Sack and Cinders shrouded All,
With bended Knees, but more with broken hearts,
And the inward rest of right Repentant Parts,
Prostrate our Souls in Fasting and in Prayer,
Before the Footstool of the Empyreal CHAIR:
That So, What-euer bloody Deluge float
From the old Red Dragons wide-wide-yawning Throat,
We, Humbled MOVRNERS, may be Heavenly Marked,
In MERCIE's Vessel to be All imb Arkt.
FINIS
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon
THE PRINCES EPITAPH, WRITTEN BY HIS HIGHN. servant, WALTER QVIN.
memento mori border

LO here entombed a peereless Prince does lie,
In flower and strength of age surprised by death,
On who^, while he on earth drew vital breath,
The hope of many Kingdoms did rely;
Not without cause: for heavens most liberally
To him all Princely virtues did bequeath,
Which to the worthiest Princes here beneath
Before had been allotted severally.
But when the world of all his virtues rare
The wished fruit to gather did expect,
And that he should such glorious works effect,
As with the worthiest fame might him compare:
Untimely death then from us did him take;
Our loss, and grief, heavens gain, and joy to make.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon
Idem in obitum eiusdem Serenissimi Principis.
memento mori border

OCcidit ante diem iuuenum flos, gloria stirpis
Regalis, Patriae spes, columenque suae.
Occidit ante diem, patri populisque Britannis
Flendus, and his iunctis foedere, amore, sacris.
Occidit ante diem, gesturus Principe digna,
Accelerasset ei ni fera Parca necem.
Occidit ante diem, virtutis and vbere fructu,
Et mundum exemplo funere destituens.
Occidit ante diem, si vota and commoda spectes
Publica, vel vitam si breuitate notes.
Sin vitam spectes partam illi morte perennem,
Haud iam, par Superis, occidit ante diem.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon
Stances du mesme Anthour sur le mesme sujet.
memento mori border

TAnt plus qu'vn bien est grand, and rare en excellence,
Et que la iouissance en a plus de plaisir;
Tant plus aussi la perte en a de desplaisir,
Et se fait regretter auec impatience.
Ceci se monstre assez en la fruition,
Qu'auons eu d'vn grand Prince, en tous biens admirable;
Et en sa triste mort, d'autant plus deplorable,
Que rare de tout point fut sa perfection.
Tant l'eurent la Nature, and la virtue ensemble,
Et la fortune aussi de leurs dons enrichj,
Que de quelle des trois il fut le plus cherj,
De pouuoir bien iuger malaise il me semble.
De l'estoc plus ancien d'entre les Roys extrait,
Il fut si bien dove des dons de la Nature
En corpse, and en esprit, que iamais creature
N'a este de son Art chef d'aeuure plus parfait.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

D' elle il eut la beauty, la grace, and bienseance,
Force, address, esprit vif, and invincible caeur,
Grandeur and Majesty meslee auec douceur,
Que reluire on voioit voire en sa contenance.
La virtue se voyant par Nature appreste
Un si rich sujet, l'enrichit dauantage
En le rendant pieux, tempere, preux, and sage,
Just, clement, and plein de largess and bonte.
Ceste mesme virtue luy feit les Arts apprendre,
Par lesquelz un grand Prince a bien regir en paix,
Et a bien soustenir de la guetre le faix;
Quand il en est besoing, capable se peut render.
La fortune enuers luy favorable aussi fut
Sur ses plus chers mignons luy donnant l'auuantage:
Car thresors and grandeurs and le rich heritage
De maint pais and Roiaume, and mainte ville il eut.
Il sembloit que ces trois auec tell largess
L'ayans de tous leurs dons a l'enui estrene,
Parla faueur du Ciol il fut au monde ne,
Pour viure un siecle entier en gloire, heur, and liesse;
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

Et pour fair jouir aux siens l'exemple and fruit
Dos ses faits vertueux and en paix, and en guerre;
Et estendre son loz aux bornes de la terre,
Ou nostre hyuer este, nostre jour se fait nuit.
O que le monde auoit bien besoin de sa vie?
Car il seruoit d'espec, and bouclier aux amiss;
De terreur, and de fleau contre les ennemis;
De rempart asseure, and d'ancre a sa Patrie;
D'appui, and de defense a son Pere Royal;
A sa Mere d'honneur; de miroir a son friar;
D'ornement a sa saeur; aux Princes d'exemplaire;
De merueille, and de joy a tout peuple loial.
Mais, helas, ce grand Prince en la fleur de son age,
Et de nostre esperance (O triste coup du Ciel)
Nous a este raui: don't en fiel nostre miel
Se change, and nostre joy en dueil, regret, and rage.
O Ciel a quelle fin nous prestas tu ce bien,
Ce joyau non-pareil, ce miroir de Noblesse,
Pour nous l'oster si tossed? he que ce coup nous bless,
Nous foudroie, and fracasse, and reduit presqu'en rien?
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon

memento mori border

A quelle fin ie voj: c' est pour prendre vengeance
De noz meschancetez, and horrible meffaits,
Que si cruellement tu descoches tes traits
Sur nous pauures chetife, and miserable engeance.
Trop bon pour nous il fut: reprendre il t'aura pleu
Ton cher gage, duquel auons ioui nagueres,
Affin d'en embellir tes plus belles lumieres,
Et de le reunir a son celeste feu.
Mais enuers toy, cher Prince, o quel deuoir nous rest?
Auec toy nous faut il nous es^ouir du soit,
Qui t'est escheu au Ciel, des bienheureux le port?
Ou regretter ta mort aux tiens par trop funeste?
L'un, and l'autre ferons: t'applaudiril conuient
En ce que tu jouas si bien ton roole au monde,
Et la viens a reuiure ou tout bonheur abonde,
Et ou tout dueil en joye a conuertir se vient.
Mais tant pius que nons fut ta vie douce and chere,
Et qu'en fleur d'ans la mort nous te vint arracher;
Les resnes d'autant plus nous conuient il lacher
Au dueil, en regrettant nostre perte, and misere.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon
De. medesimo sopra il medesimo Suggetto SONETTO.
memento mori border

IL fior' de Prencipi nel fior' de gl'anni,
Et delle nostre speranze, ora e colto
Della spietata morte (ahi lasso) e tolto
A noi dol n^i e miseri Britanni.
A nessun' popol' may die tanti affanni
Morendo alcun' gran Prencipe, per molto
Ch' ^i fosse amato quanti il nostro sciolto
Dal corpo ci lascia e dolari, e danni.
Dal Ciel pareu^ ch' ci c^ fosse dato,
Pe^che del Padr e successor nel Regno
Fosse, eselio^, e chi^ro e'n pace, e'n guerra.
Ma ci vien tolto (ohime) dal Ciel irato
A danni nostri per che disedegno
Stimollo, e indegna esser' di lui la terro
FINIS.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE gartered and crowned English royal blazon
memento mori border

H D
OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes. 1612.

ICH DIEN printer's device: coronet of the Prince of Wales adorned with three
ostrich feathers


