JACOB and ESAV: Election. Reprobation. OPENED AND DISCVSSED BY WAY OF SERMON
AT PAVLS CROSS, March 4. 1622.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

August. lib. 7. de Trinitate. Qui videt haec, vel ex part, vel per speculum
in ^nigmate, gaudeat cognoscens Deum, and gratias agat, qui vero non, tendat
per pietatem fidei ad videndum, and non per cacitatem ad calumniandum.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO MY MOST HONOVR'D FRIEND William Brouncker Esquier, This.
SIR:
WHere I owe a just service, and would publish it, I less fear the censure of
vain glory, than of unthankfulness; you know the age is both tart, and
nimble, in her Paraphrase on those which would be Men in Print; I have found
it; yet will rather hazard the imputation of a weak man, than an vngrat^f^^
Howeuer, I desire not so much to expose my labors to the world, as my
loyalty, that others might take notice how much you have been mine in your
cherishing of those, and how I am ever yours in my expressions of this. He that
does but tacitly acknowledge the bounties of a noble friend, in a manner
buries them, when he that proclaims them, has in a part requited; he has
repayed his honor, and therefore him, and so has satisfied, though not
restored. If this public thankfulness of mine, for those daily favors, shall
meet with so merciful an interpretation of yours, I esteem not any rigid one
of the times; I cannot gloze with them, nor you, yet shall endeavor to be
reputed one of those who unfeignedly honors you, and will do, whilst I wear
the name, and title of

Your ever friend, and servant HVM: SYDENHAM.

JACOB and ESAV.
ROMANS 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will, he
hardens.


THe Text holds some Analogy with the Times we live in, fraught with no less
subtilty, than danger; and as an vndiscreeter providence is soon oreshot in
those, so in this too. We are not here then to cheat our Auditory with a thin
discourse; Mystery is our Theme and subject, the very Battlement and Pinnacle
of Divinity, which he that too boldly climbes, falls headlong into error. A
task, though perchance disproportionable to youthful undertakings, and may
from such challenge the censure of a vainglorious enterprise: yet give me
leave to return, though not satisfaction, answer. In sacred Riddles what we
cannot resolve, give us leave to contemplate; and what not comprehend, admire:
where our pencill fails us to limme in so curious a Portraiture, we will play
Timanthes, and shadow with a veil; and when our reason is once non-plust, we
are hushed in a contented wonder, Where we may behold the Almighty (in a full
shower) pouring down his blessings upon some, scarce deawing or sprinkling
them on others; softning this Wax, and hardening that Clay, with one and the
self same sun, (his will) and yet that will not clouded with injustice. Here
is that will not only stagger, but entrance a carnal apprehension; Not a
circumstance which is not equally loaded with doubt and amazement, and whose
discussing will no less inuit than command attention. That which in common
passages of Divinity does but transport our thought, in those more mystical
will captiuate: Every word is knotty, and full of brambles, and requires the
hand of an exact industry.

It behoues us then to be wary of our choice, how either we traffic here with
corrupt antiquity (where but to taste were to surfeit) or with that modern
Navy of Expositors, where mixture of opinion will rather cloy than feed, and
confound than inform our understanding. I desire not to paraphrase on a
reverend error, nor to chastise there where I beg information. I shall only
request gray hairs thus far to dispense with me, that where their Candle
burns dimly and uncertainly, I may borrow light of a more glorious flame. Not
then to beguile time and so noble an attention with quaintness of preamble, or
division; The parts here are, as the persons, and their condition, Two, Mercy
for whom he will, and they are Sheep; Hardening for whom he will, and these
are Goats. Let us first put them on the right hand, and we shall find a Venite
Benedicti, Come ye blessed, here is mercy for you; After, these on the left
hand, and we shall meet with an Itemaledicti, G^e y^ cursed, here is hardening
for you: Both which, when we have in a careful separation orderly
distinguished, we shall make here the will of the Almighty as free from
injustice, as there his censure, He will have mercy on whom he will, etc.

PART. I. He will.
THat the will of God is the principal efficient cause of all those works
which he does externally from himself, so that there is no superior or
precedent cause moving and impelling it, shines to us no less from the
eternity of his will, than the omnipotency; for with that double attribute
Augustine does inuest it in his 2. book contra Manichaeos, cap. 2. And seeing
there is nothing before his will, as being eternal; nothing greater, as being
omnipotent; we infer with that learned Father, that Neque extra, vel vltra
illam causa inquirenda; There is no cause either without, or beyond it, that
being the source and fountain of all causes, as by a more particular survey of
Gods works we shall discuss hereafter. For illustration. In his eternal
decree, why are some marked out as inheritours of his Sion? others again
expulsed, and banished those blessed Territories? they as vessels of mercy, for
the manifestation of his goodness; these of fury, for the promulgation of his
justice? Doubtless the will, and the bene-placitu^ of the Almighty as the
primary and immediate cause, whereof if there be any more subordinate, they
have all alliance and dependancy on it, Tanquam a principali intention primi
agentis. Like inferior Orbs which have their influence and motion from a
higher mouer. I need not travail far either for proof or instance; our
Chapter is bountiful in both. What was the cause that God did choose Jacob and
reject Esau? The mediate and secondary cause, was, because he loved Jacob, and
not Esau. But why is his love incommunicable, and as it seems, in a partial
reservation, peculiar to that more than this? I know not a more plausible and
higher motive than his will. Insistendum ergo in particulas, cuius vult, and
quem vult. Our enquiry here must be cautelous, and slow of foot, lest we run
violently into error. Here is a cuius vult only for him that he has mercy
on, and but a quem vult for him he hardens; vltra quas procedere non l^cet,
says Calvin. Here is the utmost Verge and Pillar where reason durst to coast;
what is beyond is either unknown, or dangerous; how ever some vainglorious
brains (ambitious of mysterious and abstruser knowledge) have inscribed here
their Multa pertransieunt, and augibitur scientia. But in so stickle and
dangerous a torte^t, how are they o'rewhelmed at last? and whilst they so
ventrously climb this steeper turrer, throwned desperately into heresy? For
mine own part, I have ever thought curiosity in divine affairs but a quaint
distraction, rather applauding an humble (yet faithful) ignorance, than a proud
and temerarious knowledge. And had some of the Fathers been shot-free of this
curious insolence, they needed not have retreated from former Tenants, and so
much in deared posterity, no less in the reuiew than retractation of laborious
errors: Amongst whom S. Augustine (though since entitled Malleus Haereticorum)
shared not a little in the 83. of his Questions, and 68. Where expounding our
place of the Apostle, would thus vindicate the Almighty from injustice; that
God foresaw that in some, Quo digni sunt iustificatione; that in others, Quo
digni sunt obtusione; so making God, will to depend on a foreseen merit. A
position that does not only repugne the discipline of holy story, but thwarts
the maine tide and current of orthodox antiquity, as in a fuller discourse we
shall display anon: and therefore in his 7. Book de Praedestinatione
Sanctoru^, cap. 4. he does chastise his former tenants with 2 Deus non elegit
opera, sed sidem in praescientia; That God did not elect lacob for foreseen
works, but faith. But because in says there is as well a merit, as in works,
he once more rectifies his opinion in the first of his Retractations and 23,
where he does peach his sometimes ignorance, and ingeniously declares himself,
that -- Nondum diligentius quaesiuit, nec inuenit mysteria, he had not yet
thoroughly sifted that of the Apostle, Romans 11.5. That there was a remnant
according to the election of grace, which, if it did flow from a foreseen
merit, was rather restored than given, and therefore (at last) he informs his
own judgment, and his Readers thus; Datur quidem fideli sed data est etiam
prius ut esset fidelis; Grace is given to the faithful, but it is first given
that he should be faithful. Hence Lumbard in his 1 book, 41 distinction,
pathetically, Elegit quos voluit Deus gratuita misericordia, non quia fideles
futuri erant, sed ut essent, nec quia crediderant, sed ut fierent credentes.
God out of the prerogative of his will, and bounty of his goodness, has
chosen whom he pleased, not because they were faithful, but because they
should be, and not of themselves believing, but made so. And therefore, that Vt
sim sidelis, 1 Cor. 7.25. bears a remarkable emphasis. I have obtained mercy
that I might be faithful, not that I was. Here the Pelagian startles, and
lately backed with a troop of Arminians, takes head against this truth,
fancying and dreaming of certain causes without God, which are not subsisting
in God himself, but externally moving the will of God to dispose and determine
of several events, laying this as an unshaken principle, Fidem esse
conditionem in obiecto eligibili ante electionem; That faith and obedience
(foreseen of God in the Elect) was the necessary condition and cause of their
election. I intend not here a pitched field against the vpstart Sectarie, for I
shall meet him anon in a single combat: my purpose now is to be but as a scour,
or spy, which discouers the weakness of his adversary, not stands to
encounter. And indeed both the time and place suggest me rather to resolve,
than debate; and convince, than dispute an error. That faith then, or any
praeexisting merit in the person to be elected; was the cause of his election,
is neither warrantable by reason nor primitive Authority. For God could not
foresee in the elect any faith at all, but that which in after times he was to
crown them with, and therefore not considerable as any precedent cause of
election, but as the effect and fruit, and consequent thereof.

The primary and chief motive then is that (...), Ephesians. 1.5. the good
pleasure of Gods will, which, prompted of it self, without any reference to
praeexisting faith, obedience, merit, as the qualities, cause, or condition of
it, has powered grace on this man more than that; Non solum in Christo, Synod.
Dort.
sed per Christum. And therefore (as that late venerable Synod has awarded
it) Non ex illis conditionibus facta est, sed ad illas; That election was not
framed of these conditions, but to them, as to their effect and issue. And if
we commerce a little with passages of holy story, we shall find that our
election points rather to the free will of God in his eternal council, than
to any goodness in us which God foresaw: so Acts 13.48. where we read of the
Gentiles, that many believed because they were ordained to eternal life, and
not therefore ordained because they formerly believed. And if we will not
suffer our minds to be transported either with scruple or novelty, the text
is open, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us before the foundations of the world were
laid, that we might be holy, not that we were. And in this very Chapter, verse
23. The vessels of mercy are first said to be prepared to mercy, then called: and
therefore Saint Austin in his 86. Tract upon John, out of a holy indignation,
does check the insolence of those, Qui praescientiam Dei defendunt contra
gratiam Dei; Which in matters of salvation, obscure and extenuate the grace of
God with the foreknowledge of God: for if God did therefore choose us, because
he did know, and foresee that we would be good, he did not choose us to make us
good, but we rather chose him, in purposing to be good, which if it did carry
any show either of probability, or truth, we might question our Apostle, who
in his 8 here, and 29. no less persuades, than proves, that those which God
foreknew he did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son, and
therefore God did not choose us, because before election there was a conformity
in us, but because from all eternity he did elect us, in time he made us
conformed to the image of his Son. Whereupon St. Augustine in his fifth book,
contra Iulianum. 3. chapt. thus, Nullum elegit dignum, sea eligendo effecit
dignum. God in the choice of his Elect, found none worthy, but in the choosing
made them worthy. Moreover, our election, which is of grace (as I yonder
proved) could not stand if works and merits went before it. Haec quippe non
inuenit merita, sed facit; Grace does not find works in us, but fashions them,
according to that of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.13. God has from the beginning
chosen you through sanctification of the spirit, and not of works. Nay, some
here so much abolish and wipe off all claim of merit, that they admit not
Christ as the meritorious cause of our election. Indeed, say they, the
Scripture is thus far our Schoolmaster, That we are justified by the blood
of Christ, Synod. Dort.
and reconciled to God by the death of his Son: but where are we informed
that we are elected through his blood, or praedestinated by his death? Indeed,
in the 3 of John 16. we find a -- sic Dous dilexit, -- God so loved the world
that he gave his Son. So that, not because Christ died for us, God loved, and
chose us, but because God loved and chose us, therefore Christ died for us. For
so Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us, that whilst we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. In matters therefore of election, we acknowledge
not a cause more classicke than the Cuius vult here specified, He will have
mercy on whom he will. Insomuch that in the parable of the householder, Matthew.
20. I find but a sic volo, as a sufficient and just cause of his designs. I
will give to this last as much as to thee; and yet this Will so clothed with a
divine justice, that God is not said to will a thing to be done, because it is
good, but rather to make it good, because God would have it to be done. For
proof whereof, a sweet singer of our Israel instances in those wonderful
passages of creation, where it is first said that Deus cre^uit, God created all
things, and the Valde bonum comes aloof, he saw that they were all good, and
the moral portends but this, That every thing is therefore good, because it
was created, and nor therefore created because it was good; which does wash,
and purge the will of the Almighty from any stain, or tincture of injustice;
for though that be the chief mover and director of all his proiects, as the
prime and peremptory cause, doing this, because he will, yet we find not
only sanctitatem in operibus, but justitiam in vijs. The Lord is righteous in
all his ways, and holy in all his works. Hereupon that great treasurer of
Learning and Religion, Zanchius in his 3 book, de Natura Dei. and 4 chapter,
diuides between the cause of Gods will, and the reason of his will: That
though there be no superior cause of it, yet there is a just reason, and a
right end and purpose in it. Morl. Clean. Lep.
Hence S. Jerome, Deus nihil fecit quia vult, sed quia est ratio sic fieri; God
does nothing because he will, but because there is a reason of so doing, in
regard whereof it is not simply called (...), the will of God, but (...), the
good willof God, Ephesians. 1.11. So that in his sacred resolutions and
designements, though we meet (sometimes) with passages, wound up in darkened
terror, the cause whereof we may admire not scan; yet the drift and maine
ends of the Almighty have been so backed with strength of a just reason, that we
may rather magnify his goodness than tax his power; and applaud the calmnesse
of an indulgent mercy, than repine at the lashes of an incensed justice.
Equity and goodness are children of one burden, both the lawful issue of his
will, which though foul mouths of libertines have strangely bastardized,
making that the throne of tyranny, which is the rule of justice, yet let them
know that of Augustine to his Sixtus; Iniustum esse non potest, quod placuit
Iusto. To be God, and to be unjust, is to be God and not God. So fair a
goodness, was never capable of so foul a contradiction, and therefore (as the
same father prosequutes) Iniquitatem damnare nouit, non facere: God knows how
to judge, not to commit a crime, and to dispose, not mould it, and is often the
father of the punishment, not the fact. Hence it is, that the dimnesse of humane
apprehension conceaues that (oftentimes) a delinquency in God, which is the
monster of our own frailty; making God not only to foreknow, but predestinate
an evil, when the evil is both by growth, and conception ours, and if ought
savor of goodness in us, Gods, not ours, yet ours too, as deriuatiue from
God, who is no less the Patron of all goodness, than the Creator, and it is
as truly impossible for him to commit evil, as 'twas truly miraculous to make
all that he had made good. And therefore Tertullian, in his first book de
Trinitate, makes it a Non potest fieri, a matter beyond the list and reach of
possibility, that he should be Artifex mali operis, the promoter and enginer
of a depraved act, who challenges to himself the title no less of an
unblemished Father, than of a Judge. Our thoughts then should not carry too
lofty a sail, but take heed how they cut the narrow straights, and passages
of his will. A busy prying into this Arc of secrets, as it is accompanied with
a full blown infolence, so with danger; Humility (here) is the first staire
to safety; and a modest knowledge stands constantly wondering, whilst the
proud apprehension staggers, and tumbles too. Here Is a Sea vnnauigable, and a
gulf so scorning fathom, that our Apostle himself was driven to his (...), O
depth, and in a rapture, more of astonishment, than contemplation, he styles
it, (...): voluntatis suae mysterium, or (as Beza translates it,) Sacramentum,
the Sacrament, and mystery of his will, being so full of unknown turnings,
and Meanders, that if a naked reason hold the clue, we are rather inuolued,
than guided in so strange a Labyrinth.

To enquire then the cause of Gods will, were an Act of Lunacie, not of
Judgment; for every efficient cause is greater than the effect, now there is
nothing greater than the will of God, and therefore no cause thereof. For if
there were, there should something praeoccupate that will, which to conceive were
sinful, to believe blasphemous. If any then (suggested by a vainglorious
inquiry) should ask why God did elect this man, and not that? we have not
only to resolve, but to forestall so beaten an objection: Because he would.
But why would God do it? Here Is a question as guilty of reproof, as the
author, who seeks a cause of that, beyond, or without which there is no cause
found, where the apprehension wheels, and reason runs giddy in a doubtful
gire: Composcat se ergo humana temeritas, August.
and id quod non est non quaerat, ne id quod est non inueniat. Here a
scrupulous and humane rashness should be hushed, and not search for that which
is not, lest it find not that which is. For as the same Father, in his 105
Epist. Cur illum potius, quam illum, liberet, aui non, scrutetur (qui potest)
iudiciorum eius tam magnum profundum, sed caveat praecipitium --. Let him hat
can, descry the wonders of the Lord in this great deep, but let him take heed
he sink not; and in his answer to the second question of Simplician: Quare
huic ita, and huic non ita, home tu quis es qui respondeas Deo? and cur isti
sic, illi aliter? Absit vt dicamus Iudicium luti esse, sed figuli. Why God does
to this man so, and to that not so, who dare expostulate? and why to this man,
thus, to that, otherwise? far be it, that we should think it in the
judgment of the clay, but of the potter. Down then with this aspiring
thought, this ambitious desire of hidden knowledge, and make not curiosity the
picklocke of divine secrets; know that such mysteries are doubly barred up in
the coffers of the Almighty, which thou may strive to violate, not open. And
therefore if thou will needs trespass upon deity, dig not in its bosom; a
more humble adventure suits better with the condition of a worm, scarce a man,
or if so, exposed to frailty.

It Is a fit task and employment for mortality, to contemplate Gods works,
not sift his mysteries, and admite his goodness, not blurre his justice; And
it has been ever the practice of primitive discipline, rather to defend a
disparaged equity, than to question it, for so that reverend Father (who ever
mixed his learning with a devout awe) in his 3 book, cont. Iulianum, and 18
chapter, Bonus est Deus, instus est Deus, potest aliquos sine bonis meritis
liberare, quia bonus est, non potest quemquam sine malis damnare, quia iustus
est. God is equally good and just, he can save some without reference to
desert, because he is good, he cannot damn any man without a due demerit,
because he is just: Nay had God delivered all mankind into the jaws of
destruction, we could not touch him with injustice, but rather admire so dark
and inuestigable an equity, which we may illustrate by worldly passages and
humane contracts. If I were bankrupt of instance, S. Augustine could relieve
me. A great man (says he) lends two sums of money, to two several men, who
can tax him of obdurateness, or injustice, if at time of repayment he forgive
this man his debt, and require satisfaction of that? for this lives not in the
will and disposal of the debtor, but of the creditor. So stands the case
between frailty and omnipotency. All men (which through Adam became
tributaries to sin and death) are one mass of corruption, subject to the
stroke of divine justice, which, whether it be required or given, there is no
iniquity in God, but of whom required, and to whom given, it is in such debtors
insolence to judge, lest God return their sauciness with a -- Non licet mihi
quod volo facere? as the householder did the murmuring laborers in his
vineyard. Is thine eye evil, because I am good? And indeed I display not a
higher cause of election, and reprobation than divine goodness, which that
learned Schoole-man, Part. 1. quaest. 23. art. 5. does not only illustrate but
prove no less by similitude, than argument. For God (says he) made all things
for his goodness sake, that in things by him made, his goodness might
appear, but because that goodness is in it self, one, and simple: and things
created cannot attain to so divine a perfection, it was necessary that that
goodness should be diversely represented in those things, and hence it is that
to the complement and full glory of the universe, there is in them a diversity
of degrees required, of which some possess a lower, and some a higher room;
and that such a multiformitie may be preserved in nature, God permits some
evils to be done, lest much good should be anticipated: -- Voluit itaque Deus
in hominibus, quantum ad aliquos, quos praestestinet, suam repraesentare
bonitatem, per modum misericordiae, parcendo illis, quantum vero ad alios, quos
reprobet, suam ostendi bonitatem per modum iustioiae, puniendo eos. God in
those he elects, would show his goodness by way of mercy in sparing these,
in others he reprobates, his goodness too, by way of justice in punishing
them. And therefore our Apostle here not only magnifies the riches of his
glory upon vessels of mercy, verse. 23. but his long parience too, to vessels
of wrath, verse. 22. So that in his house there are not only those of gold and
silver, but of wood and earth too, and some to honor, some to dishonor, 2 Timothy
2.20. Of which if any mutinous or saucy ignorant desires a reason beyond Gods
will, I have no answer but that of Augustine, in his 22 Sermon, de verb Apost.
Turatiocinare, ego mirer, in disputa, ego credam: altitudinem video, ad
profundum non peruenio; Dispute and reason he that durst, while my thought and
belief stand at a bay, and wonder; I see there is a height, but cannot reach
it, and know this gulf, not fathom it. For as in things natural (it is
Aquinas similitude) when all the first matter is uniform, why one part of it
should be under the form of fire, another under the form of earth, there may
be a reason assigned, that there might be a diversity of species in things
natural: but why this part of matter should be rather under the form of fire,
and that under the form of earth, depends only on the simplicity of Gods will;
and as it hangs too on the will of the Architect, that this stone should be
rather in this part of the wall, and that in another, although reason and art
require that other stones should be in one part of the Edifice, and others in
another. Neither is there for this iniquity in God, that he does not proportion
his gifts in a strict equality, for it were against the reason and truth of
justice, if the effect of Predestination should be of debt, and not of grace;
for in those thing which are of an unrestrained freedom, every man (out of the
jurisdiction of his own will) may give to whom he will, more or less,
without the least disparagement of justice: And therefore to those recoiling
dispositions which mutter at a free hounty, heaped on others without refere^ce to
desert, I will usurp that of the Parable, Toll quod tuum est, and vade. And
yet notwithstanding though the will of God be the independent prime cause of
all things, so that beyond it there is no other cause, and without it there is
no reason of Gods actions; yet it is not the sole and particular cause, for
there are many secondary concurring with the first, by the mediation whereof,
the will of God brings his intendments to an issue. As in matters of our
salvation the will and working of man shakes hands with that of God, for though
without him we find a Nil potestis facere, Ioh. 15.52. Ye can do nothing; yet
assisted by his will, and the powerful and effectual operations of his grace,
our will cooperates with Gods. Else how could David pray to him to be his
helper, unless he himself did endeavor something? or how could God command
us to do his will, except the will of man did work in the performance of it?
Lum^. lib. 1. (...) 42.
It is true (says S. Augustine) we find a Deus operatur omnia in omnibus, but
we no where find a Deus credit omnia in omnibus. Nostrum itaque est credere,
and velle, illius autem dare credentibus, and volentibus facultatem operandi:
To will, and to believe is ours, but to give the faculty of operation to them
that will and bleeue, is Gods. I have labored more than they all, yet not I,
but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Why God therefore does save some
men, there is more to be alleged than this, God would have them to be saved;
for if this laurel do beautify our triumph we must encounter, he that will
have this Crown must tug for it, and this prize, must wrestle, Qui creauit te
sine te, non saluat te sine te. He that has created thee without thy self,
will not save thee without thy self. And therefore those whom God from all
eternity has destined to salvation, he has in a like privilege destined to
the means: But why those means, not communicable to all, many a busy
endeavor has strugled for a reason, not compast it. Out of more than a double
Jury of Interpreters, which I have (not with a little distraction) observed,
wauing here in doubtful opinion, Hugo de Sancto Victore gives thus his
verdict. Gods grace is indifferently exhibited to all men, to the elect and
reprobate, but all do not equally lay hold on it. Some no less neglect, than
repulse Gods grace, and when its comfortable beams shall shine upon them, they
shut their eyes against it, and will not behold it, and God in justice
with-drawes his grace from these men, because they withdraw themselves from
his grace. Est enim in gratia quemadmodum in solis radio (says he) There is a
proportion betwixt the rays of the Sun, and the eye, and betwixt the soul
of man, and the grace of God. The eye is ordoined by nature to be the organ of
the sight, and yet the eye cannot see except the Sun enlighten it; neither
can the Sun make any thing else see but the eye in man, for it may shine upon
our hand or foot, nevertheless the hand or foot shall see nothing: so the
soul has a possibility to merit by her natural abilities, but that
possibility shall be vain and fruitless, unless it be quickened by the
powerful operation of Gods grace, which grace, if it shall once actuate it,
then the soul will be able to attain to that double life of grace here, of
glory hereafter. Vnde totum est ex gratia, sic tamen vt non excludatur meritum.
Whence he would have all to hang on grace, yet so that we exclude not merit.
But this inference is many stories above my reach, and in the greenness of my
judgment, there is little truth in the consequence, and palpable contradiction
in the consequent. For how can the merits of man challenge any thing, if all
flow from the grace of God? Yes (says Hugo) even as a weak child which cannot
yet go alone, should be led by the Nurse, a man cannot say that the child
goes of himself, but by the assistance of the Nurse; and yet the Nurse could
not make the child go, unless he were naturally inclinde to that motion: so
the soul of man is said to merit by the aid of grace, and by her own natural
inbred ability, but all the glory of the merit must be ascribed to God, because
the soul can do nothing without the support and grace of God. Whencel can
gather no truth but this, that in solo homine sit peten^tia logica ad salute^.
That a man only maybe saved without apparent contradiction; no unreasonable
creature is capable of that everlasting blessedness and beatificall vision;
and the soul of a beast is no more able to see God, than a senseless stock
to behold a visible object. For man only has a passive power to salvation,
and man before his conversion has a passive power only. And therefore the
similies before proposed, if they be referred to the soul before the
conversion, are false, and bear no proportion, for then the soul is stark
blind, and dead in trespasses, and cannot look on the grace offered, or move
one jot in the course of Christianity: But after the conversion when God speaks
Ephata to the soul, be opened, when the understanding is illuminated, and
scales of error once drop from the eyes, then it may hold some correspondency
with truth. As therefore in matters of our conversion, so of election too, all
hangs on Grace, and this grace in a holy reservation limited to a narrow Tribe,
for the cuius vult here insinuates no more, and He will have mercy on whom he
will, sounds in a direct aequiualence with this, He will have mercy only on
some; of which some there is a definite and set number, incapable of
augmentation, or diminution, howeuer those new sprung Sectaries, Arminians.
out of a turbulent brain and thirst of cauillation, blaspheme the eternity of
Gods decree, making our election mutable, incomplete, conditionate, subject to
change and reuocation, and what other stranger birth and prodigy of opinion,
which I conceive not without a holy impatience and indignation. And whereas our
Fathers of old have maintained, even to the sword and faggot, the decree of
election to be no less eternal than irreuocable, these would feign lull our
belief with innovation of vpstart discipline, altering no less the number
than the condition of the elect into the state of reprobate, and of the
reprobate into the elect. And (as the Devil did to Christ) they urge Text and
reason for it. For God (say they) cannot give grace to whom he does give grace,
which if he should do an elect may be damned; and he can give grace to him
he does not give grace too, which if he do, a reprobate may be saved, and so a
reprobate may become an elect, and an elect a reprobate. Thus they shoot by an
indirect aim, and sail by a wrong Compass, for we enquire not here of Gods
power, but of his will, not what he can do, but what he has resolved to do.
Again, it seems no consequence, God can save or damn a man, therefore this
man can be saved or damned, Huge de Saxcto Victore in cap. 9. ad Romans
Non enim posse Dei sequitur posse nostrum, Gods power stands not in relation
to ours: as if God would otherwise redeem mankind than by the death of his
Son. (As there was another means possible (says Austin) but not more
convenient.) That therefore mankind could otherwise be redeemed; and if God
had this in his power, that it should be therefore in man's too? Could not God
(if he would) have saved Judas? does it therefore follow that Judas could be
saved? No, for though this be too ragged and stony for a popular capacity to
dig through; yet if we look back a little into the mysteries of Gods
decree, we shall find that which will no less relieve our understanding,
than remove our scruple; where things from everlasting have such a doom, which
is not malleable either by change or reuocation, For the Lord of hosts has
determined, and who can disanull it? and his hand is stretched out, and who can
turn it away? Isay 14.27. Seeing then that election is from eternity, and that
not obnoxious to mutability or corruption, we neither curtaile the elect of
their primative glory, nor of their number. Which though they be a little
flock, (in respect of that herd and large drove of the damned) yet in those
sacred volumes of Gods diuiner Oracles, we find them numberless. So Apoc.
7.9. These things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which none could number
of all nations and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their
hands. Whence those Factors for the Romish See, would hew out a way to
universal grace; making our election general, manifold, indefinite, and
would have Christ's death no less meritorious, than propitiatory for the sins
of the whole world. A quaere long since on foot between Augustine and
Pelagius, and since in a fiery skirmish between the Calumist and the Lutheran,
out of whose mud and corruption there has been lately bred the Arminian, a
Sect as poisonous as subtle, and will no Iesse allure than betray a flexible
and yielding judgment. For our own safety then, and the easier oppugning of so
dangerous a suggestion, let us examine a little of the extent and bounds of
this grace, which Divines cut into these three squadrons, in Gratiam
Praedestinationis, vocationis, and iustificationis. Gratia Praedestinationis,
is that of eternity, the womb and Nursery of all graces, whereby God loved his
elect, (...). Gratia vocationis, a secondary grace, by which God calls us, and
by calling prescribes the means of our salvation. And this grace has a double
prospect, Either to that which is external, in libro Scripturae, or creaturae,
where God did manifest himself as well by what he had made, as by what he had
written, or to that which is internal, of illumination, or renouation, of that
in the intellect only, which a reprobate may lay claim to, of this in the
heart, which by a holy reservation and incommunicablenesse is peculiar to the
elect, Gratia instificationis, which is not a grace inherent, but bestowed, and
stands as a direct. Antipode to humane merit. Yet not that (...) which the
Schools christen with a gratia gratis data, any gift which God out of his free
bounty has bestowed upon us beyond our desert, as Prudence, Temperance, and
the like; for in these the heathen had their share, whose singular endowme^ts
have made posterity both an admirer, and a debtor; but (...), Gratia gratum
faciens, a gift perfect, and fanctified, which does so qualify the receiver,
that he is not only acceptable, but glorious in the eyes of the bestower, a^
Faith, Hope, and the third sister, Charity, which no less reconcile than
justify us before God.

We conclude then, that the external grace which the creature affords us, is
not limited to a private number, but to all; yet we deny the power and virtue
of salvation in it. We allow a sufficiency of redargution for conuicting the
heathen, who when they knew God, worshipped him not as God, and therefore are
both desperate and inexcusable. Moreover the grace which the Scripture affor
death us, as it is not universal, so not of absolute sufficiency for faluation,
but only in genere mediorum externorum, (as the Schools speak) because it
does prescribe us the means how we may be saved, but it does not apply the
means that we are saved. Again, that grace of Illumination is more peculiarly
confined, and if by the beams of that glorious Sun which enlightneth every
man that comes into the world, we attain to the knowledge of the Scripture,
yet the bare knowledge does not save us, but the application. But the grace of
regeneration is not only a sufficient, but an effectual grace, and as it is
more powerful, so it is more restrained; they only partake of this blessedness,
whom God has no less enlightened, than sanctified, and pointed out, then
sealed, men invested in white robes of sincerity, whose delinquencies, though
sometimes of a deep tincture, are now both dispe^sed with, and obliterated,
not because they were not sinful, but because, not imputed: so inuolucrous,
and hidden are Gods eternal proiects, that in those he relinquisheth, or
saues, his reason, is his will; yet that as far discoasted from tyranny, as
injustice. The Quare we may contemplate, not scan, lest our misprision grow
equal with our wonder. And here in a double ambush dangerously lurk the
Romanist and the Arminian, men equally swollen with rancor of malice, and
position: and with no less violence of reason, than importunity, press the
virtue of Christ's death for the whole world. Alas! we combat not of the price
and worth of Christ's death, but acknowledge That an able ransom of a thousand
worlds; but the ground of our duel tends to this, whether Christ dying
proposed to himself the salvation of the whole world. We distinguish then --
inter (...) Christi, and gratiam Christi. The merits of Christ and the gracious
application of those merits. His merits are able to allay the fury of his
incensed Father, and reconcile unto him the very reprobates: but the
application of those merits are restrained to the Elect, for they only are
capeable of so great a blessedness. For proof whereof we have not only that
venerable Bench and Council of Fathers and Schoolmen, but also a higher
court of Parliament to appeal unto, the Registers and penmen of sacred
Chronicles, Evangelists, and Apostles, which punctually insinuate Christ's death
only for his own, for his Church, for his Brethren, for those whose head he
was, laying down his life for some, and shedding his blood for some, for his
sheep, his little flock, his peculiar Priesthood, his tabernacle, body,
spouse, his Canaan, Sion, Jerusalem, his Ambassadors, Saints, Angels, in a word
this Cuius vult, The Elect. I Will not beat your ears with a voluminous citation
of text and Fathers, I Will draw only one shaft out of this holy quiver, and
direct it to the Roman adversary, which if he shall repel or put by, I Will
proclaim hereafter a perpetual truce. The maine and chief cause that impeld
Christ to die, was his love, John 15. But Christ loved not all, but his own
Ephesians. 5. Therefore Christ died not for all, but for his own. The Jesuit here
retraicts, and we have none now left to encounter us but the Arminian; who
(like a cunning Fencer) has many a quaint flourish, and with a false blow
sometimes staggers, not wounds his adversary. The part most in dangered, is the
eye of our Intellect, and judgment which he thus dazzels with a subtle
nicety. That Christ has obtained reconciliation for all, for Saul and Judas,
Moulin in his Anatomy of Arminianisme
but not as they were reprobates, but as they were sinners; For God (says he)
did equally intend, and desire the salvation of all, and the reason why they
were not saved was their incredulity, and misapplying of this gracious
reconciliation and atonement. Thus they would betray weakness into the hands
of error; and for a fairer gloss, and gilding of this their treachery, they
distinguish -- inter Impetrationem, and applicationem; Pretending that Christ
did impetrate reconciliation for all, but the application of that leanes wholly
to the elect. How crazy and ill tempered this position is, we will declare
briefly. First, we deny that Christ by his death has impetrated
reconciliation for all, for Saul, or Judas: Neither can our thought, much less
our belief give way to so strange a Paradox, Idem ibidem.
That remission of sins is obtained for those whose sins are not remitted,
or that salvation was purchased for those whom God from all eternity had
decreed to condemn. Again, we acknowledge Christ's death sufficient for all,
all believers, nay all, if they did believe. But that Saul or Judas or the
residue of that cursed Hierarchy should reap the benefit of his Passion, we
utterly disclaim as erroneous and heretical. For if Christ by his death has
reconciled Judas, how is it that Judas suffers for his sins? for we cannot
without impeachment both of his mercy, and justice too, say that Christ
suffered for Judas his sins, yet Judas is damned for those sins; And since
Christ as he is God, has from everlasting destined Judas to damnation, how
is it that the same Christ, as he is man, and mediator between God and man,
should reconcile Judas, whom from eternity he had reprobated? Again, if Christ
has obtained reconciliation for all men, then none shall be borne without the
covenant of Christ, so that of the Apostle will be false: That, By nature we
are all borne the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. And can we truly be styled the
children of wrath, if reconciliation be obtained for all men without exception?
And if all infants borne without the covenant are reconciled, Cur non clementi
crudelitate in cunis iugulauimus? (says the learned Moulin) why do we not in
a merciful cruelty murder them in their cradles? for then their salvation
were sealed; but if they survive, they are nourished in Paganism, infidelity,
which are the beaten roades and highwayes to destruction. And if we scan (says
he) the nicety of these words, the obtaining of reconciliation to be applied,
and the application of reconciliation obtained, we shall find it a mere
curiosity to harrow and perples the brain, and torture the understanding,
since Christ has never obtained that which he has not applied, neither has
he applied that which he has not obtained. Yet these men either of a
headstrong opinion, or learned madness, are so violent in the prosecution of
their tenants, that no strength of answer will satisfy their objection, nor
modesty of language suppress their clamor, but a foul mouthed Forsterus
will bray out his witty spleen with an -- Error, and furor Zuinglianorum. His
reasons are as slender as they are many (the vertigoes and impostures of
agiddie brain) fitter for silence, than rehearsal, and for scorn than
consutation. We apply then; Is grace universally bountiful, and mercy
openbrested unto all? What mean then those Epithites of outcast, cursed,
damned, and that triple inscription of death, hell, and damnation? are they
either of policy or truth? Are they things real, or fancied only to
bugbeare and awe mortality? What would the Throne portend? Judge, adversary,
Sergeant, prison, or those horrid tones of worm, fire, brimstone, howling,
gnashing? Is the Scripture the Anuill of untruth, or are these things no more
than feigned and imaginary? What will those flames of your threatened purgarory
prove at last, but the Chimaera and coinage of a phantasticke brain? And a 500
years indulgence, but the sharke and legerdemaine or your Lord God the Pope?
Either your opinion is sandy, or your prison, both which must fleet with your
holy Fathers honor, if the arms of mercy be expanded to all. Again, are the
merits of Christ appliable to all? Swear, whore, drink, profane, blaspheme,
and (if there be in that Alcharon, and cursed roll, a sin of a fairer
growth) baffle the Almighty at his face. Think thou that heaven was ever
guilty of such treason against her Sovereign? or that it will ever entertain
a guest so exposed to the height of dissoluteness and debaushment? No, thou
must know that one day there will be a dread full summons, either at those
particular accounts, at the hour of Death, or at the general audit of the
last trumpe, when thou shall meet with a new Acheldema and vale of Hinnom,
places no less of terror than of torment, the fiery dungeon, and the burning
Tophet, where the fury of the great Judge realls in a flood of brimstone, and
his revenge boiles in a fiery torrent, limitlesse, and unquenchable. On the
other side happily may thou slumber, without howl; or skreeke of conscience,
thou wounded and dejected spirit; Thou whose glorious ornaments are but sack
cloth and ashes, and thy choicest fare but the bread of sorrow and contrition.
Know there is balm of Gilead for the brokenhearted sinner, and oil of
comfort for those which mourn in Sion. Behold how thy Savior comes flying
down with the wings of his love, and sweepts away thy sins that they shall
neither temporally shame thee, nor eternally condemn thee: Who shall wipe off
all tears from your eyes, and lodge you in the bosom of old Abraham, where
there is bliss unspeakable for ever. And thus I have showed you the
happiness of sheep under the state of mercy; Time bids me now to reflect on
the misery of Goats, as they are under the condition of hardening.

PART. II. He hardens.
WHat? he that is rich in goodness, and his mercies above all his works? he
that mournes in secret for our offenses, and vows that he desires not the
death of a sinner, will he harden? How can this stand either with his promise,
or mercy, or justice? Gods unrevealed proiects are full of wonder, which if our
apprehension cannot diue to, our beliefes must sound. Occulta esse possunt,
iniusta non possunt, fraught they may be with sullen and darker riddles, never
with injustice. Let us first then take a survey of Man's heart, and see to what
miseries the hardness of it has exposde our irregular predecessors, and after
try whether we can make providence the mother of so deformed an issue. And here
awhile let us observe S. Bernard tutoring his Eugenius, Cor durum, a heart,
which the softer temper of Gods working spirit leaves to mollify, and its own
corrupt affections begins once to mould. Like that of Naball, to be all stone,
becomes at last so cauterized, Vt semetipsum non exhorreat quia nec sentit,
that it is so far from starting at its own ugliness, that it is
non-sensible of deformity. And hence Theodoret defines it to be pranam animi
affectionem, a corrupt and depraved affection of the mind, which if man once
give way to, he is so screen'd both from Gods mercy and truth; that though it
be about him, and in the masterdome and dominion of his best sense, Non cernit
tamen, nec intelligit, yet his eyes are as blind intelligencers to believe, as
his understanding. And against such that sweet singer of Israel breaks out
into his passionate complaint, Vsque quo filij hominum, vsque quo? O ye sons
of men, how long will ye turn my honor into shame, how long? and that of the
Protomartyr Stephen, in his Oration to the refractary Jews. Dura ceruice, O ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised of heart and ears, ye do always resist the
holy Ghost. And indeed such hearts are but the Wardrobes and Exchequers of
future mischief, whose keys are not in the custody of the Almighty, but
thine own bosom. For so that great Doctor of the Gentiles, Secundum
impoenitens cor tuum thesaurisas iram: According to the impenitency of thine
own heart, thou treasurest up wrath (to thy self) against the day of wrath.
How then can that eye which should be fixed either on the tenderness or mercy
of his Creator, glance so much on his injustice, as to make that the Midwife of
so foul a progeny? Obduration was never the child of goodness, neither can
a sin of so base a descent lay claim to omnipotency. It stands not (I dare
say) with Gods power, I am sure, his will, to reconcile two enemies in such an
extremity of opposition. Do sweet water and puddle flow immediately from one
and the selfsame spring? light and darkness from the selfsame Sun? I
know there is a stiff-necked and bliud-fold Tribe, which God has left, not
made the story of his vengeance; whose affections are too dull and drousie in
his service. Men crestfallen in devotion, whose hearts are so dead in their
allegiance to him, that they seem spiritlesse, having all the powers and
faculties of their soul benumbed, and their conscience without pulse or
motion. And of these the Prophet, Incrassatum est cor populi, Their heart is as
fat as brawne. These stick not to belch open defiance in the face of the
Almighty, and with those Miscreants in Job. are ready to expostulate with
eternity. Quis est omnipotens vt seruiemus ei? Who is the Lord that we should
serve him? Such have forehead^ of brass, which no shame can bore through: and
(as the Prophet spoke of Judah) a face of whoredom which refuses modesty. But
Saint Gregory in his 10. Homily upon Ezechiel, has proclaimed their doom.
Frontem cordis in impudentiam aperit culpa frequens, vt quo crebrius
committitur, eo minus de illa committentis animus verecundetur: Frequency of
sinning does flesh us in immodesty, assiduity, in impudence. Offenses that are
customarie are not easy of dimission, and if thou once entertain them as thy
followers, they will quickly intrude as thy companions. Sins that are sed
with delight, with use, are as dangerous as those of Appetite: which oftentimes
prove no less inseparable, than hereditary; to do well is as impossible to
these, as not to do ill; So can assiduity make a sin both delightful, and
natural. Can the Aethiop change his skin, and the Leopard his spots? then
may ye also do well which are accustomed to do evil. That sin then is
irrazable which is so steeled with custom, and may under go the censure of
that sometime City of God; Insanabilis est dolor tuus: Thy sin is written
with a pen of iron, and with a claw of a Diamond is engraven on the table of
thy heart. How then can we without sacrilege, and robbing of divine honor,
make God the father of so foul and unwashed a crime? Obduration is the issue
of thine own transgression. Perditio tua ex te, o Israel: If destruction dog
thee, thank thy corrupt affections, not blame thy maker, for he does but leave
thee, and they harden. To lay then (with some depraved libertines) the weight
and burden of our sins on the shoulder of Predestination, and make that the
womb of those soul enormities, may well pass for an infirmity, not for
excuse, and indeed thus to shuffle with divine goodness, is no less
fearful, than blasphemous. For, though God from eternity knew how to reward
every man, either by crown, or punishment --. Nemini tame^ aut necessitate^,
aut voluntatem intulit delinquendi, yet he never enjoined any man either a
necessity, or a will to sin. If any then fall off from goodness, he is
hurried no less with the violence of his own persuasion, than concupiscence;
and in those desperate affairs, Gods will is neither an intermedler, hor
compartner, Cuius open scimus multos, ne laberentur, retentos, nullos, vt
laberentur, impulsos (says Augustine.) By whose hand of providence we know
many to be supported that they might not fall, none impeld that they should.
And in his answer to that 14. Article falsely supposed to be his, Fieri non
potest, vt per quem a peccatis surgitur, per eum ad peccata decidatur: for one
and the selfsame goodness, to be the life and death of the selfsame sin,
is so much beyond improbability, that it is impossible. If any then go onward
in the true rode of divine graces, no doubt but the finger of the Almighty
points out his way to happiness; but if he wander in the by paths of a
vicious and depraved dissoluteness, his own corrupt affections beckens him to
ruin. To love then his children, and neglect his enemies, does neither impair
Gods mercy, nor impeach his justice. But why God should love this as his
child, neglect that as his enemy, Nec possible est comprehendere, nec licitum
inuestigara --, is beyond all lawfulness of inquiry, all ken of apprehension.
Let this then satisfy our desire of knowledge, Et ab illo esse, quod statur,
and non esse ab illo, quod ruitur: That his providence is the staff and crutch
on which we so lean that we yet stand; our corrupt affections, the bruzed and
broken reed on which, if we do lean, we fall. If any flagger at those
vnfathomed mysteries, and his reason and apprehension be struck dead at the
contemplation of Gods eternal, but hidden proiects, let him season a little
his amazement with adoration, and at last solace his distempered thoughts with
that of Gregory, Qui infactis Dei, etc. In the abstruse and darker mysteries of
God, he that sees not a reason, if he sees his own infirmity, he sees a
sufficient reason why he should not see. Me thinks this should cloy the
appetite of a greedy inquisition, and satisfy the distrust of any, but of too
querulous a disposition, which, with the eye of curiosity prying too nicely
into the closet of Gods secrets, are no less dazeled than blinded; if not with
profanation, heresy. Divine secrets should rather transport us with wonder,
than prompt us to enquiry, and bring us on our knees to acknowledge the
infiniteness both of Gods power and will, than ransacke the bosom of the
Almighty, for the revealing of his intents. Is it not blessedness enough that
God has made thee his Steward, though not his Secretary? Will no Mansion in
heaven content thee, but that which is the throne and chair for omnipotency to
sit on? No treasury, but that which is the Cabinet and storehouse of his own
secrets? Worm, and no man, take heed ^ow thou struglest with thy Maker;
expostulation with God imports no less peremptorinesse, than danger; and if
Angels fell for pride of emulation, where will thou tumble for this pride of
inquiry? As in matters therefore of unusual doubt, where truth has no
verdict, probability finds audience, So in those obstruct and narrow passages
of his will, where reason cannot inform thee, belief is thy best
intelligencer, and if that want a tongue, make this thy interpreter; so thou
may euade with less distrust, I am sure, with more safe.

And at last when thou have sca^'d all, what either scruple or inquisition can
prompe thee to, in a dei^cted humiliation, thou must cry out with that Jewish
penitent; Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. Yea, but how shall we here
clear God from this aspersion, when the Apostle is the Herald to his guilt?
whom he will he hardens: Induras is an active, and does always presuppose a
passive; And if there be a subject that must suffer, there must be a hand too
that must inflict. How then can we quit the Almighty of the supicion either of
tyranny or injustice, since he is said to send on some the spirit of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and that great Trumpet of Gods displeasure, Esaias in his 63. brings in
the Jews, no less muttering than expostulating with God, Quare errar^ nos
fecist^ Domine? Lord why hest thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our hearts from thy fear? These instances (at the first furu^y,) bear terror
in their looks, and like sophisticated lights in a dark room, make things
seem more ugly than they are; and are but false bills, preferred against a
spotless innocent, which, without search, may convince of public erime, but
narrowly scanned, absolve him, no less from the act, than the thought of guilt.
How God therefore in this is liable to censure and misprision, and how both a
beholder, an intermedier of depraved actions; vouchsafe me a little your
attentive parience; and I doubt not, but I shall inform the understanding of
the shallow, and to the portion of my weak Talent, will strive to satisfy the
waueringly judicious. Whom he will he hardens. Some (too nicely tender of the
honor of their maker) have given way to an interpretation more modest, than
authenticke, and interpret, -- indur^^ -- for ^uritia^^ manifestare, so that
God is not properly said to harden the heart, but rather to manifest how hard
it is, And to this opinion Saint Augustine is a ^lo^e adherent in his 18
Question upon Exodus. But this holds not with the purpose of God, nor with the
scope and meaning of the Text, which if we compare with others of that nature,
we shall find that Gods will has rather a singer in this, than his
promulgation: for so in the 10 of Joshua we read, that'twas the will and the
sentence of the Almighty, that the Canaanites should be hardened; that they
might deserve no mercy, but perish. Others there are (whose opinions border
nearer upon truth) which would have God to be said to harden -- non effectiue,
sed permissiue; Not by way of Action, but permission, and so Damascen in his
third book de fide Orthodoxa, cap. 20. Where his words run thus. Operaepretium
est agnoscere --. It Is a matter no less worthy of knowledge, than observance,
that it is the custom of the Scripture to call Gods permission, his action. So
we read that God sent his enemies the Ipirit of slumber, which is not to be
ascribed to God as an agent, but as a permitter. This gloss suits well with
the approbation of Saint Chrysostom; who speaking occasionally of that of the
first of the Romans, Deus tradidit ^llos -- God gave them up unto vile
affections, he there expounds -- tradidit, by permisit, which he thus
illustraces by a similitude -- As the General of an Army, in the sweat and
brunt of a bloody day, if he withdraw his personal directions from his
soldiers, what does he but expose them to the mercy of their enemies? not
that he led them into the jaws of danger, but because they were not backed by
his encouragement: So God in this spiritual conflict, he delivers us not into
the hands of our archenemie he leaves us to our own strength, and our corrupt
affections drag us thither with a witness. And hence that dicotomy of Caietan
claims his prerogative, that God does harden Negatiuely, but not Positiuely,
with distinction though it be sound and Orthodox, yet it does not exempt us from
scruple, for God has more in the stiffeneckt and perverse, than a maked and
bare permission, otherwise we should too weakly distance obduration from a
lesser sin, for every sin God permits and as Saint Augustine in his Enchir.
96. cap. Nihil sit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel finend^ vt fiat, v^l ipse
fa^iend^. There Is nothing done without the consent and approbation of the
Almighty, and that either by his person or substitute. If God therefore be only
said to harden man because he permits him to be hardened, why should he not be
likewise said to steal, because he permits man to steal? No doubt therefore
but God has a greater ore in this sin of hardneing, than in offenses of a
lesser bulk. And therefore Saint Augustine in his 3. lib. con^. Iulianum, 3.
cap. with many a sinewed allegation proves; that God does concur to the
excaeca^ion and hardening both of the mind and heart, -- Non solum, secundum
paetientiam, and permissionem, sed potentiam, and actionem. Not according to
his patience and permission only, but his power and action: Which position he
thus (after) qualifies with a distinction. Obduration is not only a sin, but
a punishment of a sin. Now, that which is in obduration merely of sin has
it is pedigree and original from man only; but that which is of punishment for
that sin, from God. And therefore I cannot but approve of that of Isiodore,
Qui iusti sunt, a Deo non impelluntur, vt malifiant; sed dum mali iam sunt,
indurantur, vt deteriores existant, -- According to that of Paul, 2 These. 2.
For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they might believe a
lie, that all might be damned that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness. I have as yet but touched the bark and skin of the
controversy, the pith and the kernel is yet vnchewed, and that is, -- Whether
God here (as he is said to harden) be the cause of our transgressions. Which
quaere admits a three-fore distraction, and difference of opinion. Two of them
are extremes, and by hot opposition each of other, they have both lost the
truth, the third runs in a midway, and ever directs to safety. Florinus
(whose opinion posterity records as the monument of a seduced error) with no
less peremptorinesse than blaspemy has arraigned the Almighry, and made him
not only the permitter, but the Author of our sins. The Seleuciani, after him,
were poisoned with that heresy, and the Libertines labored in the defense
thereof. Manes, and his disciples, dreampt of a summum malum, and upon that
fantasy grounded their assertion, that God the summum bonum, is to be seen
only in our good actions, but every depraved Act had its deriuation from their
summum malum. But those of a more solid and well tempered judgment, whom the
influence of the Spirit had taught a moderation, or the danger of Inquisition
forbad curiosity, dare not with Florinus impute (here) sin unto God, yet
maintain against the Manichees, that God is not a bare and idle spectator, but
powerful over, although no actor in the sin, Not in the sin, as it is
merely a sin, but in the sin as it is a punishment of sin. And therefore
in every transgression of ours, there are four thing, remarkable, 1
Subiectum, seu materiale, he subject in which sin subsists, and that is
twofold. 1 Substantia, the substance, or rather the faculties of the
reasonable soul, in which original sin is so riueted, that the natural man
can by no means purge himself of that hereditary contagion; or Actio bona,
on, which all our actual sins are grounded. 2 Formale, the formalitie, or
obliquity of the action. For every sin is (...), the transgression of the
Law, and in the sinner there is nothing sin but this. 3 Reatus, The guilt of
this enormitie, which makes. us liable to eternal death. 4 Poena, the
punishment inflicted upon the guilty, whether temporal, or eternal, or both.
Now we may not charge God with the obliquitie of the action, for that
proceeds from a perverse, and a seduced will, but the substance of the action
(as the Schoolmen speak) that has its original from God. And therefore we
consider sin, either vt malum culpae. as it is a violation of Gods law, or vt
malum poenae. as a punishment laid upon us for the violation of that Law: So
Romans 1.25. The Gentiles turned the truth of God into a lie, There Is malum
culpae. And it follows immediately at the 26 verse. For this cause God gave
them up into vile affections, There Is malum poenae. Now God is author of the
second, not the first. If mists still hang on the eyes of clouded error, I
thus dispell them with that of Hugo de Sancto Victore -- Deus malis potestatem
solam tribuit, non voluntatem, quia licet ex ipsius permissione sit, quod malum
possunt, ex inspiratione tamen non est quod malum volunt. God only gives power
to the wicked, not will, that although it be by his permission that we can do
evil, yet it is not by his inspiration that we will do evil. And therefore
as the Schools do commonly distinguish of the decree of God, so must we of
the execution of that decree, which is either per efficieutiam, when the divine
power does work any thing with, or without the creature, or secundum
permissionem, when the creature has leave to work without the guidance of
that power. Neither will it savor of impertinence, if we insert here that
distinction of Gods providence in efficientem and deserentem: Into a releeuing
and forsaking providence, for whenever God withdrawes his especial aid and
assistance from us, man is hurried where his own corrupter appetite, not Gods
grace carries him. Adam fell as soon as the influence of Gods grace ceased,
and without the supportance of the same grace we all fall, with no less
certainty of peril, than danger of restitution. When the Sun sets, we see
darkness follows immediately upon the face of the earth, and yet the Sun is
not the efficient cause of darkness, but the deficient; so when the Sun of
righteousness shall forsake us, the darkness of error, must needs possess
the understanding, and the will must mistake in her choice and execution. She
must necessitate consequentiae, non consequentis. The necessity is grounded on
a consequent in Logic, not any influence in Nature. And here we may borrow a
true gloss for that in the 2 Acts, where it is said that Christ was delivered
into the hands of the wicked, by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God. We must not thinken hat God was the setter in this villainy, that he
conspired with Judas in his treason, or with Pilate in his bloody sentence: But
that he only gave way to their attempts, and suffered them to crucify the Lord
of glory. Yea, but why did not God curb them in their cruel proceedings? Why
should his conniuence betray the ^ou^ of Innovence? Saint Austine shall answer
for me. Quia melius iudicauit de^ malis bene-facere, quam mala nullae esse
permittere. To extract good out of evil was peculiar only to omnipotency and
goodness; and therefore no less solid than charitable is that caucat of
Du-Plesses -- Male quaeritur, vnde malum essiciatur. It is an ill curiosity to
seek an efficient cause of ill. Let this then satisfy modesten quiry that it
is with the sinner as with an untuned Instrument, and the Musician, the sound
is from the finger of him that touches it, but the iarring from the Instrument.

That our discourse then with the time may draw to wards a Period, we inuolue
and wrap up in this one distinction the very juice and substance of the
controversy. Sin is considerable two ways, ante commissionem, before the
Commission, Sic se Deus habet negative, tum respectu voluntatis, tum
productionis. God does neither work with us, nor countenance us in the act of
sinning. Post commissionem, after the Commission, sic Deus determinat, and
ordinat peccatum. God sets bounds to the malice of wicked men, and so mannages
the disorder in sin, that contrary to the nature of sin, and the intent of
the sinner, it shall redound ^o his glory.

We inculcate then, that God is not the author, but the orderer of sin. He
causes the work, not the fault; the effect, not the delinquencie, working by,
not in mischief. Wherein, according to the rules of Logic, the final and
impulsive causes ever so distinguish the actions, that two doing the same thing
to a diverse intent, are notwithstanding said not to do the same. So God gave
his Son, and Christ himself, and Judas Christ, (says Augustine) why is God
here holy, and man guilty? Nis^ in re vna quam fecerunt, non est causa vna ob
quam fecerunt. I shut up all with that state of Fulgentius in his first book
ad M^^cinum cap. 13. Where having long houered over this question, An peccata
siant ex praedestinatione? He at last thus resolves it. Potuit Deus, sicut
voluit, praedestiuare quosdam ad gloriam, quosdam ad poenam, sed quos
praedestinauit ad gloriam, praedestinauit ad iustitiam, quos autem
praedestinauit ad poenam, non praedestinauit ad culpam. God when he saues any
man does predestinate him as well to the means, as to the end. But in the
reprobation of a sinner, God destines the sinner only to the punishment;
foreseeing, but not determining those sins which shall in time draw Gods
punishments down upon him.

Do our corruptions harden then, and God punishes? Take heed you Pharaohs of
the world, you which persecute the poor Israelite in his way to Canaan, spur
not the goodness of the Almighty to revenge, or justice. Laesa patientia fit
suror --, trample too much on the neck of patience, you will turn it to fury.
It is true, God has feet of Lead (clemency intermixed with slownesse of
revenge) but he has hands of iron, they will grind and bruise into powder,
when they are dared to combat.

Sera venit, sed certa venit vindicta Deorum. Procrastination of divine justice
is ever waited on no less with a certainty of punishment than ruin. What
shall we do then (wretched, miserable that we are) or to whom shall we fly
for succor? The good S. Augustine tells us, -- a Deo irato, ad Deum placatum
--, from the tribunal of his justice, to his throne of mercy, and compassion.
That of Anselmus was most admirable -- Et si Domine ego commisi vnde me damnare
potes, tu tamen non amisisti, vnde me saluare potes --. O blessed Jesus, though
I have committed those transgressions for which thou may condemn me, yet
thou have not lost those compassions by which thou may save me. If our souls
were in such a straight, that we saw hell opening her mouth upon us, like the
red sea before the Israelites; the damned and ugly fiends, pursuing us behind,
like the Egyptians, on the right hand, an on the left; death and sea ready to
ingulse us, yet upon a broken heart, and vndisguised sorrow, would I speak to
you in the confidence of Moses, -- Stand still, stand still, behold the
salvation of the Lord. Thou then which art oppressed with the violence and
clamor of thy sins, and wantestan advocate either to intercede, or pity,
hear the voice of the Lamb, -- Cry unto me, I will hear thee out of my holy
hill. Is any heavily laden with the weight of his offenses, or groans under
the yoke and tyranny of manifold temptations? -- Come unto me, I will refresh
thee --. Does any hunger after righteousness? behold, I am the bread of life,
take, eat, here is my body. Does any thirst after the ways of grace? lo, I am
a living spring, come, drink, here is my blood: my blood that was shed for
many for the remission of sins; for many, not for all. Has sin dominion
over thee? or does it reign in thy mortal heart? are the wounds of thy
transgressions so deep that they cannot be searched? or so old, that they
corrupt and putrify? where is the Samaritan that will either bind them up, or
power in oil? But art thou not yet dead in trespasses? are not thy ulcers past
cure? are there any seeds of true life remaining? is there any motion of
repentance in thy soul? will thy pulse of remorse beat a little? haste thou
but a touch of sorrow? a spark of contrition? a grain of says? know there is
oil of comfort for him which mournes in Sion. Not a tear drops from thee with
sincerity which is either vnpittied, or vnpreserued, -- God puts it into his
bottle. On the other side, is there a Pharaoh in thee? an heart vnmollified? a
stone that will not be bruized? a flint vnmalleable? I both mourn for it, and
leave it: But is this heart of stone taken away, and is there given thee a
heart of flesh? is it soft and tender with remorse? truly sacrificed to sorrow?
know there is balm of Gilead for the broken heart, balm that will both
refresh and cure it. Thou then which groanest in the spirit, and art drawn out
(as it were) into contrition for thy sins; thou which have washed thy hands in
innocence, go cheerfully to the altar of thy God, unbind thy sacrifice, lay
it on. But have thou done it sincerely? from thy heart? lurkes there no
falsehood there? is all swept clean and garnished? does the countenance of that
smile as cheerfully, as the other seems to do of the outward man? if so. thy
fire is well kindled, the Altar burns clearly, the savor of thy incense shall
pierce the clouds. But is this repentance disguized? has it a touch of
dissimulation in it? is not thy old rankor clean disgorged, but must thou
again to thy former vomit? hypocrite, thy Altar is without fire, thy incense
without smoke, it shall never touch the nostrils of the Almighty, thy prayers
in his ears sound like brass, and tinkle like an ill-tuned Cimball; all this
formality of zeal is but a disease of the lip: give me thy heart my son, I
will have that, or none, and that clean too, washed both from deceit, and
guilt. That subtle fallacy of the eye pointing toward heaven, that base
hypocrisy of the knee kissing the earth, that seeming austerity of the hand
martyring thy breast, gains from me neither applause, nor blessing; the
example of a Pharisee could have chid thee to such an outside of devotion, --
Qui pectus suum tundit, and se non corrigit, aggrauat peccata, non tollit,
says Augustine, where there is an outward percussion of the breast, without
remorse of the inward man, there is rather an aggrauation of sin, than a
release; these blanchings, and guildings, and varnishings of external zeal,
are as odious in the eye of God, as those of body in a true Christian; this
gloss, this paint of demureness speaks but our whoredoms in religion, and
the integrity of that man is open both to censure and suspicion, that is
exposed either to the practice of it, or the approbation. A villain is a
villain howsoever his garb or habit speak him otherwise, and an hypocrite
is no less, though sleeked over with an external sanctity, and dressed in the
affectations of a preciser cut. Let us be truly that what we seem to be, and
not seem what we are not; let there be doors and casements in our breasts that
men may see the loyaley twixt our heart and tongue, and how our thoughts
whisper to our tongue, and how our tongue speaks them to the world. A way with
those Meteors and false-fires of Religion, which not only by-path us in a
blinded zeal, but misleade others in our steps of error. Let us put off the
old man in our pride, vainglory, hypocrisy, envy, hatred, malice, and (that
foul disease of the times, and us) uncharitableness; and let us put on the
new man in sincerity, faith, repentance, sobriety, brotherly kindnesses,
love, and (what without it disparages the tongue both, of men, and Angels)
charity; then at length all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and we
shall receive that everlasting benediction. -- Come ye children, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. -- To which, the
Lord bring us for Christ Jesus sake, to whom be praise and power ascribed now,
and for evermore. Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
FINIS.

