PANTHEA: OR, DIVINE VVISHES AND MEDITATIONS: Written by Io. Siluester: Reuised
by I.M. Master of Arts.

Fero and spero.

Whereunto is added an Appendix, containing an Excellent Elegy, written by the
L. Viscount St. Albans, late Lord High Chancelour of England. etc.

person by tree

LONDON: Printed for F. Coules, and are to be sold at his Shop in the upper end
of the Old Bailey. 1630.

To the very Honorable Knight, and Magnificent Baronet, Sr. RICHARD HOVGHTON of
Houghton-Tower: All Health, Honor, and Happiness.
Most Honored Sir:
THe heavenly Light of Divine Truth shining in the sacred Scripture, has
enabled our Souls clearly to see their own Excellence; viz. that they are by
Creation Spirits Eccles. 12.7.
or spiritual Substances; of an Mat. 10.28.
immortal Nature; in Duration, eternal; as being (in Tertullians phrase)
Afflatus oris Diuini, the immediate Handiworke of God; and consequently
Quicquid ex nihilo fit, est incorruptibile.
incorruptible. Yea, such is their exquisite Beauty and absolute Perfection
(considered in their own The Essence of God, Angels, and Souls, is known to
God alone exactly. Athanas. Tract. de Definitiombus.
Essence) as the most amiable Reflex of Diamonds, the Virgin-blushes of Rubies,
the azure veins of Saphires, the green luster of Emeralds, the various beams
of Iacincts, and the radiant constellations of the fairest and most Orient
Unions, are never able to parallel. Thus Nobly-descended and rarely-qualified
is the Soul; a Creature of such Angelical Serenity, as that the MAJESTY of
HEAVEN (enamored on his own bright Image) made this goodly Globe of Heaven
Ita S. Chrysostom.
and Earh for her solace and Contemplation, wooed her with most ardent and
inflamed Affection, stiling her In Salomons Song.
his Love, his Dove, his Sister, his Spouse: and lastly, married her to
Himself for ever, by assuming our Humane Deus and humana natura vniuntur: non
Deus and Homo; quia non Persona and Persona. Assumpsit Deus non Hominem sed
Humanitatem.
Nature, which having hypostatically and indissolubly united to his DEITY, he
accomplished in it the most Admirable Work of our Redemption, invested it with
Jmmortality by his Resurrection, and advanced it to his Heavenly Kingdom (far
above all Celestial Powers) by his Ascension. And now is MAN, in regard of
this superexcellent Honor, become (in this point) superior to the ANGELS, as
being participant of the St. Pet. Ep. 2. chap. 1. v. 4.
Divine Nature subsisting in the most Sacred Person of our euer-blessed Lord
JESUS, whose glorified Humanity is most triumphantly enthroniz'd at the Right
Hand of God on High.

Thus has the King of Angels (in his ineffable love to our Souls) exalted
this humane Flesh, above the highest Hierarchy; to the amazement of those
Heavenly Spirits, (as the St. Pet. Ep. 1. chap. 1. v. 12.
Prince of the Apostles intimates.) Nevertheless, if an exact Survey be taken
of this present World, will there not be found in all Estates such a general
Apostasy from the Love of God, as if Men were altogether Soule-lesse; or (at
least) Sense-lesse how infinitely the Creator of the World values that
peerless Pearl, which this shell of Mortality contains: [a Pearl so
inestimable, as nothing in Heaven or Earth, but the very Our Saviors Heart was
pierced with the spear for our sins: O that our hearts might be pierced with
true compunction and Repentance! otherwise we have no part in his Passion.
HEART BLOOD of the ONLY SON of GOD could redeeme] To instance this sottish
Madness, and Epidemicall Corruption in all Degrees and Delinquents, were
infinite J will therefore (in present) cull out only some, that are (in their
own Conceits) the Cream of Christendoms, the purest and demurest Professants,
in comparison of whom the obedient Children of the Church of England, are
reputed profane and Unsanctified Persons. Eccl. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 7.
Eusebius (an Authenticke and approved Author) has a memorable H^storie
appliable to this purpose. He relates how he saw at Tire (a City of Phoenicia)
diverse naked Christians exposed by their Persecutors to cruel Panthers, mighty
Bears, and (...)
wild Bores, to be devoured by them: which ravenous Beasts, although they were
provoked by the Christians to assail them, (for so were the poor Souls
commanded) yet they utterly refused to hurt or approach them: but on the
contrary, they slew at the Insidels (without the Bars) which exasperated them
against the Christians. To make some Application and Use of this rare and
miraculous Event: I have learned by good Intelligence, and your Noble Self,
with many Thousands (in plaga hyper-Borea) were ocular Witnesses, that certain
external Professors Of these, see an excellent Sermon, called Corona
Charitatis, page 28, 29, 30.
of Christianity, yet internal Contemners of the Ordinance of Christ in the
Ministration of their own Heb. 13.17.
Pastors, having long panted after their Extirpation and Destruction, combined
together at last (as close as See Job c. 41. v. 15, 16, 17.
Leuiathans souls) to strip them of their Revenues, incarcerate A Diabolical
Act. Reu. 2.10. Thus the Arrians raged against Orthodox Teachers, especially
against Athanasius, who was feign to slye from their hellish surie. See his
Apology for his Flight, etc. and his Epistle ad Solitarios: where he writes,
that having been twice deprived by 2 false Synods, he was at last absolved,
and restored to his Church, notwithstanding the former Sentences of the
Heretical Bishops, who (as he elegantly terms them) were rather Catascopi
then Episcopi, Catchpoles then Bishops.
their Persons, disseaze them of their Frecholds, (by Bribery and Legal
Sleights) dissipate their Goods, ruinate their Families, beggar their
Posterities, and (to tear them quite in pieces; O most detestable Immanity!)
infame them with a thousand virulent Aspersions and venomous Jmputations:
assuring themselves, though their tongues ran never so false a Gallop, yet
some maleficiate or other would believe them: [the credulity of the Vulgar
(especially in Clorgie men's Cases) being such, as if a Gnat but spread his
Wings between them and the Sun, to think it eclipsed.] These things being
so, let any Christian or Pagan judge, whether those wild beasts in Eusebius,
were not infinitely more humane, compassionate, and merciful to the designed
Martyrs; then were these unchristian Kernes, masked Miscreants, and Diabolical
Decoy's, to their conformable Preachers; in whose Coats seeing they could not
find a hole, they resolved to fret one. Undoubtedly (you bloody Bores,
selfe-admiring Libertines and Cyclopicall Canibals) your crying Sins and
thundering Crimes of Oppression and Ravine (though mantled with Hypocrisy, the
Devils Masking-sute) have entered the Iam. 5.4.
ears of the Lord of Hosts. For howeuer this unhallowed Crew may (in a
spiritual Phrenzy) flatter and hug themselves in their abhorred Rapacity, and
sing Requiems and Lullabies to their senseless Souls, and cauterized
Consciences, as if they should never tremble before the terrible Tribunal of
the Judge of all the World, for these black Deeds, and execrable Enormities:
yet certainly these artificial Villainies are Vulnera in capite canis, such
mortal Wounds to their inward-bleeding Souls, as those Saluages shall never
lick whole with a general and superficial Confession of their sins, nor be
once admitted to Gods sacred Observe well what our Savior says touching this
point, Matthew. 5. v. 23, 24.
Altar, to make their peace with him, till they be first reconciled to their
offended Brother, and have (to their utmost Ability) made due Repair of
Honor, and Restitution of Liuelyhood to the Parties so hamously wronged. And
albeit this Canting Fraternity seem to have made a League with Satan, and are
yet insensible of the Horror of the Fact: notwithstanding, as that which is
written with the juice of a LIMON, apreares not at first, till you hold it to
the Fire: So, when these dis-gallanted See Act. 14, from the 11. v. to the 20.
Lycaonians shall one day, (without speedy and effectual Repentance) have the
full Vialls of Gods Vengeance powered and pressed on them, (roaring in Hellfire
with In an old Manuscript lately found at Chester, it is recorded, that Pilate
was called Pontius, a Ponte, of a Bridge; and not of the I Will Pontas: Howeuer,
he is generally held a damned miscreant.
PONTIVS Pilate, Barabbas, and other Infernal Monsters) then shall they
clearly read in the black Books of their vast Consciences, their Barbarous
Acts, and Deuilish Complots, written in the hugest Capitals.

But to return where WE BEGAN, and to leave these merciless Wretches to the
Judgment of God; whom (from the Center of my Soul) I beseech to give them the
Grace of The proper ^ct of Peni^nce (in this Case) is Restiution or
Sa^efaction; without which ^t nothing a^aileth the Delinquent, though he should
hang ^imselfe with Judas.
Repentance: J have here (Most Honored Sir) presumed (in lieu of your many
signal Favors) to present you this small Manual of Meditations in Verse,
published under the Conjunction and sweet Aspect of most eminent STARS, and
written (as I am credibly certified) by a Divine Laureat (deceased;) whose
maine Drift is to eleuate the Soul to Heaven, from these bewitching Vanities
of the The Earth was made for Man (...) Man for Earth.
Earth: A Noble and Celestial Theme, and never more seasonable then now: In
which regard, I was confident it would be no unwelcome Newyeeres-gift to your
Noble-spirited Self, whose Heroicke Disposition and pious Affection to Divine
Exercises, and Composures, accompanied with a liberal Hand to learned and
Orthodox Ecclesiastics, and a piercing Judgment wisely to discern betwixt an
accomplished Scholar, and a popular Parakito, or Skip-Iacke-Fellow of empty
Boldness; as also your frequent Largesses to the Peore, and Donatiues to the
Distressed; your grave Moderation and prudent Dispensation of Justice; your
generous Hospitaelity, rare Affability, and unexampled Humanity; your
resplendent Dignity, Illustrious Family, and Honorable Deportment, have
purchased you the singular Love and Observance of all good Patriots. Your
Magnifique Entertainment of his late King James: (In his Return from Scotland.)
Majesty (of Sacred Memory) at your Basilicall TOWER, [one of the brauest
Seats in Europe] was no small Renown to your Self, and your most
Nobly-accomplisht Sir Gilbert Honghton.
Son: But your Munificence to the oppressed and afflicted members of Jesus
Christ, [seasoned with true Faith and Contritio est extremitas doloris.
Contrition; and sugared with Holiness, without Reu. 2.10.
which, no man shall see the Lord] will gain you (at last) Coronam
Amarantinam, an Imperial Diadem Hebrews, chap. 12, v. 14.
of Bliss (with your peerless Lady deceased) in the Empyreall Heaven. Thrice
Happy, O! and most Heavenly Souls, whom the blessed Angels shall so bear in
Triumph to that Glorious Jerusalem! To which Sovereign Felicity, that your
euer-honor'd Self, your Worthy Sons, and Excellent Daughters (the Crystal
Mirrors of Modesty) may arrive (at the end of this Span-long Life;) is the
hearty Prayer of

Augustae Trinobantum. Festo Theogonias. Your Noble Virtues most affectionate
Obseruer, JAMES MARTIN, One of his late Majesty's Preachers, and Commissioners
Ecclesiastical in the Province of York.

To the most resplendent Diamonds of the North, and singular Glories of their
Sex: The Lady IVLIANA WALMISLEY, Sister to the Right Honorable and Excellent
Peer, RICHARD Lord MOLINEVX Viscount Marbrugh: Mistress Mary Walmissey, Sister
to the Heroicke Knight and Baronet, Sir Richard Houghton of Houghton-Tower.
Mistress Grace Houghton, Wife to the thrice-Worthy Gentleman, William Houghton
Esquire; and Daughter to the euer-renowned Knight, Sir Richard Sherborne of
Stonihurst. The Lady ANNE OSBORNE and Mistress Elizabeth Sherborne, Daughters to
the perfect-Honorable Gent. Tho. Walmisley Esquire, and Neeces to the most
Illustrious Lord, HENRY Earl of Danby. Mistress Frances Houghton. Mistress
Gillebert Houghton. Mistress Anne Houghton. Mistress Katherine Houghton. Mistress
Margaret Anderton, Niece to the Generous and Judicious Gentleman, Roger
Bradshagh of Hagh, Esquire.
I. M. the Publisher of these Soliloquies, consecrates them, deuotes himself,
wishes all imaginable Happiness.
LADY IVLIANA WALMISLEY, Her Anagram. I am a Lilly; Diana's Jewel.
Look as the LILLY does each Flower excel,
In Milke-white Luster, and in Purple Die:
So in your Heavenly Face, combined dwell
Pure spotless Candor, Roseat Modesty:
Fame, take thy Golden Trumpe, and her proclaim,
DIANA'S JEWEL; Glory of her Name.
To the same Noble HEROINES.
WIt's, Honor's, Beautie's Angelized Frames,
Virtue's fair Temples, Wonders of your Names,
Which gild that Climate with your Glorious Beams,
Beyond the Luster of Stars twinkling gleames;
Crown with your Favors these Diuiner Lays,
Which tune your Souls to sound your Makers Praise:
So may you shine more bright in true renown,
Than Golden Stars in Ariadne's Crown.
I. M.

A Muzzle for Hylax in limine latrat.
Momus.
IF any (like the John the second great Duke of Moscouia, so abhorred Women,
that he swoonded at the very sight of them. Bodin, de Repub.
Moscouiticke Duke)
Ressent the other Sex, and their just Praise,
Whose Native Splendour needs no other Rays;
May no such Basiliske dart upon this Book
His poisonous Eyes: such A most virulent Sycopha^t. See Aristophan. Equites:
and Thucydides, ( lib. 4.) exquisitly rendered by that Worthy learned
Gentleman, Mr. The. Hobs, Secretary to the late Excellent Earl of Deuon.
Cleon's silenced best
By Noble Scorn. So set I up my rest.
I. M.

A Panegyre, To the Author.
Often have I wished, (thy Worth that Wish did move)
My Seat near to the Muses Bay Tree Grove;
Or by that Spring for Poesy most admired;
That being by some Sacred Power inspired,
I from those Banks might have selected Flowers
Watered with sweet Castaliaes silver Showers:
Then should my Hand thy Brow a Wreath have made;
But since I sit not in the Laurell-shade,
I cannot give what thy Deserts do claim;
Far short be my Desires of their high Aim:
So stands a Shepherd pointing at a Star
As I at Thee, thy Light transcending far:
Thou do our Thoughts to Speculation tie,
Like some clear Fountain, where the Crystal Sky
Her bright-vnwrinkled-azure brow may see,
So do the Heavens behold their Face in Thee:
Thy Heart, the Firmament of faithful Truth,
Thy Arts, the glistring Stars that graced thy Youth:
Thy Soul the Cynthia, whose bright-shining Rays
Lighted the World to have reformed her Ways:
Thy All, a Little-World of richer Frame,
Then that which did possess the Golden Name.
Hence then, you Termagants to AEtnae: supposed to be Plutoes Court.
Mongibell,
You Certain histrionicall Professors, (Disciples of Sr John Lacke-Latine) in
the University of Fooliana; which supernodically censure all Verses whatsoever.
Pantalouns, that POESY damn to Hell:
Peace yawning Goblins, Hob, Dick, Hick and Will,
Spue not your Gall against his Sacred Quill:
To such may every Leaf, and every Line
An Armadillo be, or Porcupine.
S. N. a sacerrimis Catharis and Lavernionibus horrendiffime spoliatus.

The Authors Invocation and Imprecation against his Infernal Enemies.
SVpreame Commander of the Crystal Sky,
That ALL of NOTHING powerfully did frame,
Be It not offense against thy Deity,
With humble Accents to adore thy Name:
Though in this Teare-composed Terrene Globe,
I wear Mortalities Sin-stained Robe.
Let me behold with Contemplations Eye,
The Beauty of thine Angell-guarded Throne:
And let my soul with humble boldness fly,
Above the Starry Constellation:
And there with that most holy Hierarchy,
Sing Hymns and Anthems to thy Deity.
Let my sad Soul, long pierced with Swords of Grief
By Fiends, Alastors, Harpyes, Furies fell,
Receive (my God) from thee Divine Relief,
Which may their Pride and cankered Malice quell:
Make those pure Hell-Dogs in their Dens to couch,
And Beelzebub himself at last to crouch.
PANTHEA.
The Induction.
WHat should I wish for on the Earth?
Goodness is grown to such a dearth;
While want of Grace does make abuse
Of that which might be for good Use:
That who observes what most men wish,
Shall find how fond and vain it is.
Some wish for Wealth, to pamper Pride;
The Medicine good, but ill-applide.
Some wish for Honor, in high thought;
Honor is good, Ambition naught.
Some wish for Health, to live at ease;
Health may be good, Ease breeds Disease.
Some wish for Power, to wrong at will;
Power often is good, Oppression ill.
Some wish for Youth, to nourish Folly;
Youth may be good, the Wish unholy.
Some wish for Love, to answer Lust;
Love may be good, the Wish unjust.
Some wish for Strength to crush and kill,
Strength may be good, but Murder ill.
Thus still the Abuse which Will brings forth
Does make the Wishes nothing worth.
Yet since that Wishes may be good,
When Worth is truly understood,
Let me set down my Hearts desire,
And what has set my Soul on sire.
It is not Earth, nor earthly Treasure,
Nor worldly Honor, fleshly Pleasure,
Nor Power, nor Place, nor Youth, nor Strength,
Nor drawing out this Life at length.
Nor idle pleasing Natures Eye
With fond Affections Vanity.
Not one of these comes near the White
Of my Hearts Wish and Souls Delight.
The Course of my true Cares content
Extends above the Firmament.
The lenell of my Souls chief Love
Is only in the Heavens above;
Where I shall see my Savior sweet,
And how his Saints and Augels meet
With such an Harmony of voices,
As shows how every Soul reioyces
In the beholding his sweet Face,
That is the Glory of all Grace.
This, this, my Wish shall only be,
To live where I may ever see
My Savior sweet, and in his sight
Have all my Hearts and Souls Delight.
Daigne then (my God) this Boon to give
Whiles here upon this Earth I live,
That neither Wealth, nor Poverty,
Nor Comfort, nor Calamity,
Nor Health, nor Sickness; Ease nor Pain,
Nor Hope, nor Fear; nor Loss, nor Gain,
May ever take such hold on me,
But still my Joy in CHRIST may be.
I. Wish, or Meditation.
OH! had I of his Love but part,
That chosen was by Gods own heart,
That Princely Prophet, DAVID, he
Whom in the Word of Truth I see
The King of Heaven so dearly loved,
As Mercy beyond measure proved:
Then should I neither Giant fear,
Nor Lion, that my Soul would tear;
Nor the Philistims, nor such Fiends
As never were true Christians friends:
No Passion should my Spirit vex,
Nor Sorrow so my mind perplex,
But I should still all Glory give
Unto my God by whom I live.
Then Health, nor Sickness, Grief, nor Ease,
Should so my mind disease or please,
But Want, or We, what-ere I prove,
The Lord of Life should be my Love.
To him I should my mind impart,
And to him only give my heart,
And to his mercy only pray,
To put my secret sins away:
To heal my sinful wounded Soul,
And put my Name in Mercies Roll:
In all my Cares and Crosses still
To comfort me with his good Will:
And when I cry and rore in Grief,
In deep despair of Hopes Relief,
My Faith should yet in Mercy find
The Comfort of a constant Mind,
And I should ever joy to see
How Mercies Eye did look on me:
Then should my Heart tune every string,
That to his glory I might sing
A Song of euer-lasting Praise,
To end in neuer-ending days.
Then should I play, and sing, and dance,
And to the Heavens mine Eyes advance,
With joy to see in Triumph so
The Ark of God in Glory go:
And whatsoever I possess
In Power or Honor, more or less,
Nor Earth nor Heaven should me move,
But still my Lord should be my Love.
If I were sick; He were my Health;
If I were poor; He were my Wealth;
If I were weak; He were my Strength;
If dead; He were my Life, at length.
If scorned; He only were my Grace:
If banished; He my Resting Place.
If wronged; He only were my Right:
If sad; He were my Souls Delight.
In sum, and all, All-onely He
Should be All, above All, to me.
His Hand should wipe away my Tears,
His Favor free me from all Fears,
His Mercy pardon all my Sin,
His Grace my life anew begin;
His Love my Light to Heaven should be,
His Glory, thus to comfort me.
Thus was this Kingly Prophet blessed,
To live in Loves eternal Rest.
And since I see his Grace so great,
To all that Mercy do entreat,
And how the faithful Soul does prove
An heavenly Blessing in his Love;
Let me but only This request,
To be but thus with David blessed,
That Joy, or Grief, what-e're I prove,
The Lord of Life may be my Love.
II. Wish, or Meditation.
OH that I were as Wise as Solomon,
He
That did by Observation see
What All things are, with all their Worth,
That under Heaven the Earth brings forth,
How vain they are, and how they vex
The Soul whom Passion does perplex.
Then should I neither carke nor care
For things that so uncertain are;
Nor toil nor labor for a Life
So full of Falsehood, Fear, and strife.
Nor aim at Title, Power, or Place,
Nor Favor, Wealth, or Worldly Grace;
Nor trouble Patience with a hope
Of ought beyond my only Scope:
Nor sooth, nor flatter, lie, nor swear,
Nor stand in Danger, nor in Fear
Of him, of her; of this, of that,
Nor hunt I know not after what:
But love the Measure and the Mean,
That keeps the Soul and Body clean.
Then should I find this Life, but Breath
That Sin has subject made to Death:
For from the greatest to the least,
No Soul but lives at some unrest:
The soundest and the deepest Wit
Sometimes in idle Thoughts does sit;
The fairest and the sweetest Face
Is sometime subject to Disgrace.
The Noblest and the valiant'st Mind,
Sometime may hap go down the Wind.
The richest Hand, and proudest Heart,
May chance to play the Beggars part.
The valiant'st Arm, and strongest Hand,
Sometime at Mercies Gate may stand.
The purest Soul that would not sin,
May chance to fall in Satan's Ginne.
Then since I see there is no state,
But that sometime, or soon, or late,
Is subject to so hard a course
As leaves the Better for the Worse,
Though I be not so wise as He
That made me This to know and see,
Yet will I join with him in this,
Upon this Earth to build no Bliss;
But with the Wings of Faith to fly
Unto my Glorious God on high:
And in his Mercy only prove
The Blessings for my Souls behoof;
From Sorrow, Sin, and Satan free;
And love the World that list (for me.)
III. Wish, or Meditation.
OH! that I had that Patience,
That is the Spirits Excellence,
That Io^n in all his pains did prove,
Unto the Lord to show his Love:
Then should no Loss of Lands or Goods,
Bring in such Flotes of Sorrows Floods;
Nor Childrens Death, nor dogged Wife,
Nor wounded Heart, nor weary Life,
Nor Scoffs of Friends, nor words of Grief,
Nor Hearts Despair of Hopes Relief,
Should make me once (which God forbid)
Offend his Grace, what ere he did:
But say with Job; If he will kill
My heart, yet will I love him still;
And in his sight, my Ways reprove,
That is the God of gracious Love.
That then, when All were at the worst,
And that my Heart were almost burst,
My Soul might feel, that Comfort sweet
Did tread all sorrow under Feet.
But Job was just, so am not I,
His God did but his Patience try;
And made his Faith in Mercy, find
The Comfort of a constant Mind:
But my Soul has so wicked bin,
That I am scourged for my Sin,
In Justice: but with Mercy such,
As I can never praise too much.
For had not Mercy healed my Sore,
I had bin slain for evermore.
But my good GOD is ever One;
His Hand is not to me alone,
But unto All that in distress
Do in his Mercy seek redress;
And whose true Patience, Faith, and Lone,
Do in his Justice, Mercy prove.
IIII. Wish, or Meditation.
OH! that I had that Gracious Call
That from the Heavens had blessed Paul
That chosen Saint of sacred Bliss,
Where only Saints true blessing is:
Who from the way of wicked Thought,
Unto the gates of Grace was brought,
And when his Eyes were stricken blind,
Had such an insight of the Mind,
As made him see through Mercies light,
(That is the Souls eternal sight)
How blind is Reasons ruthful Eye,
Where Error leads the Heart awry;
Whilst Conscience thinking to do well,
Does carry Misconceit to Hell;
Till Mercy meeting on the way.
Brings home the Sheep that went astray:
Then should no Office, Power, nor Place
Make me to secke my Souls Disgrace,
To take a Tyrants powerful Rod,
To persecute the Saints of God.
But I should more in soul rejoice
In Mercies Gracious-Glorious Choice,
All Persecutions to abide,
Where Patience, Feith, and Love is tried
Of the sweet Lord of Heavens Bliss,
Than persecute one Saint of his:
But all my Love, and Loves Delight,
My Meditation day and night,
Should only, all, and ever be
Of Mercy that so called me.
No Grief, no Pain, no Want, nor Woe,
That I should ever live to know,
But I should think too little all,
In Love to answer Mercies Call:
For all the World I would not care,
Nor K^nor Kesar would I fear;
No threats, nor thraldom, scourge nor death;
To speak his Praise, should stop my breath.
But I should plainly speak and write
My knowledge of the Lord of Light:
And to the Glory of his Name,
Throughout the World divulge the same:
My Walk should be but in his Ways;
My Talk but only in his Praise;
My Life a Death, but in his Love;
My Death, a Life, for him to prove:
My Care, to keep a Conscience clean;
My Will from wicked thoughts to weane;
My Prayers for the Good of all,
That Mercy unto Grace does call:
My Labor, for the love of Truth
To lead the life of Age and Youth:
My Comfort, truly to convert
The Souls which Satan did pervert:
My Health, to labor for their Love,
That seek their blessing from above.
My greatest Ease, to work for those
Whom Mercy to Salvation chose:
My Pain, and Pleasure, Travel, Ease,
My God thus in his Saints to please.
Then should I this base World despise,
With all Earths idle Vanities;
And govern mine Affections so,
That Sin should never overthrow
This wounded woeful Soul of mine,
But still in Mercies love divine,
My Soul should find that life of Grace,
As should all Earthly love deface;
And I should only wish to live,
All Glory to my God to give;
And all in all my loy to be
His servant that so called me.
V. Wish, or Meditation.
OH! that my Soul might live to prove
Some part of that sweet blessed Love,
Which JOHN th'Enangelist possessed,
When he leaned on our Sunours Breast;
When Wisdom, Virtue, Grace and Truth,
Embraced the blessed days of Youth!
Then should I fly with Eagles wings
Unto the Glorious King of Kings;
And see that Heavenly Court of his,
The Beauty of the Angels Bliss;
Where Goodness, Grace and Glory dwells,
And Lone, and Lise, and nothing else
But Holiness and Heavenly Light,
All, only in my Saviors sight:
Then should I loath this World of Woe,
That does bewitch the Worldling so;
And seek (but at my Saviors feet)
To find my Souls eternal Sweet;
Till Mercy will vouchsafe me Grace
To have a glimpse of his sweet Face,
In whose least sweetest Look of Love,
A Sea of Joy the Heart does prove;
And swimming in the Souls Deligh
Is ravished with that Glorious Sight:
But though I cannot be so blessed,
To lean upon my Saviors Breast;
As all unworthy of such Grace,
To look on his Celestial Face;
Yet let me beg at Mercies Feet,
That I may but receive this Sweet,
That when his Saints and Angels sing
Their Haleluiahs to their King,
My Soul in Joy all-sounding then,
May have but leave to sing AMEN.
FINIS.
A Funeral PYRAMID
TO the dear Memory of the Most dear,
(...)
I consecrate this Threne, these Funeral Tears: (...)

These are the Cypress Branches that I bear:
The mourning Habit that my sad Soul wears:
This the Impresa that my Sorrow bears
If This not feelingly define my Smart,
It Is not defect of Woe, but Want of skilful Art.
Within the Center of my trouble Soul,
A Monument unto thy Name I Will build:
And there with Tear filled Characters inroule
Those bright Perfections that thy Life did guild,
The Graceful Good that all thy Actions filled:
There shall my Love thy sad Loss memorize;
When all the World shall cease to mind thy Obsequies.
Then daigne to take of the obsecurest hand,
These weldeserued attributes of Praise:
I know thy Trophies not the higher stand,
Because my hand desired thy Name to rail:
Fair Angelized Soul, these humble Lays,
And worth-lesse Numbers give thy light no luster,
But show those shapeles Woes that in my Bosom muster.
ERECTED to the Honor of that rare-vertuous Gentlewoman (now in Glory) Mrs
ELIZABITH GRAY, Daughter to Richard Gray, Esquire, and sometime Wife to I. M.
Master of Arts. (BY her Sister Mistress Mary Drayton; allied to the Prince of
English Poesy, MICHAEL DRAYTON, Esquire) Interred at Atherston: where she
departed this life, calling on the Lord JESUS (to the last) Anno 1614. AEtat.
24.

Sir Tho. More, (sometime L. Chancellor of England) On his own and his Wives
Tomb: Ah! societ Tumulus, societ nos (obsecro) Coelum.
Sic Mors non potuit quod dare Vita, dabit.


Thus rendered: O may one Tomb, and Heaven us re-vnite!
So Death shall riohly my GRBAT LOSS requite. I.M.


MORIERIS, RESVRGES. IVDICABERE.

APPENDIX TO PANTHEA.

Plump. Epigram. Ad PONTILIANVM. Sunt mala quae culpas (fateor) mala Tempora:
sed tu Temporibus pejor Pontiliane malis.

TIT. 1.13. Jncrepa illos dure:

Anno Dionysiano, 1630.

To the Nobly-descended, and Vertuously-accomplisht, Sr RICHARD GARGRAVE,
Knight.
Worthy Sir,
BEing moved to adioyne to the precedent Canzonets, the ensuing Nectarines of
the late Excellent Viscount St-Albans, (the Prince of English Oratory) J
presumed to inscribe them (cum super-pondio) to your Noble Self, whom, for
your honorable Quality, rare Skill in Antiquities, exquisite Judgment, and
generous Love to Learning, I may justly stil^ (sine parpurismo)

Dulce Camaenarum decus, and Fax aurea Phoebi;
The Muses Darling, and bright Phoebus Flame.
The Subject is ponderous and Divine, being a graphicall Delineation of Humane
Misery: And well it were with men of Merit, if in this World of Vanity, so full
of changes and counter-changes, as it seems a very Field of Flint sown with
Tears; they were not ouerpressed with those myoparones (...): Vid. Baysium de
Re Nauali.
piratici, or Land-pirates, which Orat. in Timarchum.
AEschines speaks of; nor by the combination of prodigious Rakehels,
surrounded with an Ocean of Villainy. Such Monsters of Humanity, and
Demi-Deuils, are the Lares et Lemures, the Ghosts and Goblins of this gloomy
Age. I remember I have read in the Digested into 2 Books: The 1. Diabolus
infulatus; or Plutoes Perambula^io^ in the North: Dedicated to the pious uses
of Guzman d'Alfarache. The 2. Diabolus infatuatus, or, A Spectacle of Bribery
and Beggary: Ded. to Mat. Dodsw. of Cork.
Works of Sir Io. CRAG, (a famous Kn. in Cumberland,) this memorable Distich;
ONGE walked the Vrchin and the Elfe,
But NOW the Great Devil himself.


For the Illustration whereof, ^^^y is please you to reflect (a little) on the
ancient Poets Description of HELL, (the Grand-Deuils HALL) which (they say) is
moated round, and for want of a BRIDGE, Charon, Plutoes MAN, ferries over poor
Souls in white Sheets, sometime A (...) of ^ (at once) in ^^^an Church, seen
not long since.
17 at a clap. Under which curious Emblem (for it is no vain Fiction) is
mantled a dainty Moral, well known to learned Mythologists; the Reserch
whereof I refer to intelligent Readers studious of Antique Matters. Certes,
Saint Paul, not without cause, termed Poets, See Titus 1.12. and the Gene^^
Note there.
Prophets: for by the Attestation of profound Theologians, there is (indeed) a
Crim-Tartar, Mogul, or Captaine-Deuill of that Tartarean Region, styled in
Scripture Beelzebub, and (misnamed) by Exoterick Divines, Contrary to the
judgment of Antiquity: for in the Primitive Church diverse were baptized by
that Name: as Lucifer Caralitanus, etc.
Lucifer: which Mille-artifex, and Master-Fiend bath at his beck Legions of
vnder-ministers, and (as I may say) Rural Dromedaries and Diabolitinoes, which
incessantly sharke and ramble abroad for his Prouant, (whiles the Great
Machiauilian. Cacus, or Cacodaemon himself ORDINARILY resides in his Vulcanian
Forge, and dismal Den, whetting his grisly-griping Tallons.)

But to adjourne the further Elucidation hereof to some other Opportunity, and
to return to your Honored Self. If Crispinillus Momax take occasion hereby
(for it is not in my power to stop laxatiue Lips) to hisse-out his
Bane-spitting Murmures, and detracting Spells;
Qualia credibile est rictu ructasse trifauci
Cerberon, and Stygij Monstra tremenda Canis:


I trust you will (in a sacred Fury) bandite the scandalous Baboune, ad Insulas
fustitudinas, or rather to Mount-Falcon. Thus commending the Address of these
Delicatezze to your Generous Acceptance; whose unparalleled Worth, Noble
Esteem, undaunted Valor, and Daring (yet Suffering) Spirit (suitable to the
1. Gaudet Patientia duris. 2. Seruire Dea regnare est. 3. De Governor. E.
Vent. Grace.
Mottoes of your Ancient and Renowned Family) deserve to be recorded to
After-Ages; I recommend you to the Highest MAJESTY: resting

Your Eminent Virtues Votary: Anagrammatismus: Magua summa Artie.
BONVS AMICVS ARTI: Vtriusque Academiae Magister.

Humane Life characterized: By the Right Noble Peer, FRANCIS Viscount St.
Albans, late L. High Chancellor of England.
THe World's a Bubble: and the Life of Man
Less then a Span:
In his Conception wretched; from the Womb,
So to the Tomb:
Cursed from the Cradle; and brought vpto Years,
With ears and fears.
Who then to frail Mortality shall trust,
But limbs the Water, or but writes in Dust.
Yet, since with Sorrow here we live oppressed,
What Life is best?
Courts are but only superficial Schools
To dandle Fools:
The Rural parts are turned into a Den
Of savage Men:
And where is a City from all Vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three?
Domesticke Cares afflict the Husbands Bed,
Or pains his Head:
Those that live single, take it for a Curse,
Or do things worse:
Some would have Children; those that have the^, none;
Or wish them gone:
What is it then to have, or have no Wife,
But single Thraldom, or a double Strife?
Our own Affections still at home to please,
Is a Disease:
To cross the Sea to any foreign Soil,
Perils and Toil:
Wars with their noise affright us: when they cease,
We Are worse in Peace:
What then remains? but that we still should any,
Not to be borne, or being berne, to dye.
A select Epigram, written by a Noble Knight deceased: and now inscribed (as
follows.)
Honoratissimae et Nobiliss. Ciuitati CESTRIAE, Sacru. Of the Pillars of the
Church.
IN old time, They were held the Churches Pillars,
That did excel in Learning and in Piety,
And were to ALL Examples of Sobriety;
Of Christ's fair Field the true and painful Tillers:
But where are now the Men of that Society?
Are all those Tillers dead? those Pillars broken?
No: God forbid such Blasphemy be spoken:
I say, to stop the mouths of all ill-willers,
Gods Field has Harrowers still, his Church has Read P^o^. c. 28 v. 1^. and
the Geneua Note there. [ Certumest, (...) quedam Clereborum, and Crumenimule
Demoborum (his) depin,
Pillars.
(...) An Elogie and Epitome of the Bible.
To the Right Noble, Religious, and excellent Heroldes; The Lady Rumney, Mrs.
Alablaster; and Mrs. Esther Web. THis sacred Volume, in whose precious Leaves
The Mysteries of Heaven entreasur'd lie;
Is a clear Mirror, which no form deceaues;
Th'Obiect and Subject of each Christian Eye:
Who lives by This, by Death can never dye:
Here shines the Sun of GRACE, diffusing wide
His quickening Rays on All, from side to side.
Here God and Man does Both embrace each other;
Met in one Person, Heaven and Earth does kiss:
Here a pure Virgin does become a Mother,
And bare that SON, who the Worlds Father is,
And Maker of his Mother. Here true Bliss
Comes flying from the Bosom of the High,
And clothes it self in naked Misery,
To drag Man out of Hels dark Empery.
Dens se Tibi. Tu te Deo.
CORONIS. A Character of the Divine Graces and Beauties of a Virtuous Woman.
To all Noble Ladies, and Gentlewomen of Honor. THat which makes Women
beautiful and fair,
Is not the plarting 1 Pet. 3. (...)
of their Hair;
Jewels or precious Stones sparkling like Fire;
Or putting on of brave Attire:
But a rich Tablet hidden in the Breast,
With Heavenly Zeal, like Rubies dressed:
The Amethyst of Temperance, enchac't
In Flowers of Gold, with Sapphire chaste:
Th'absequious Plin. Hist. lib. 37. cap. 30.
Helintrope, wild Jasper stone,
And Opal of all Worth in One:
Pure Crystal, glittering with immortal Light,
Showing a rare-sweet-Christian Spright:
The Lilly-Robe of Innocence put on,
Richer then that of Solomon.
Thus decked, you ravish Angels with your Lones,
This is the Beauty GOD approues.
FINIS.

