THE RICH MAN'S WARNING-PEECE.

A SERMON, UPON OCCASION, FORMERLY PREACHED, AND NOW published, by the Author,
Humfrey Sydenham, late Fellow of Wadham College in Oxford.

Monendi sunt diuites, qui tanta paticbantur pro auro, quanta erant sustinenda
pro Christo; inter tormenta, nemo Christum confitendo, amisit; Nemo aurum, nisi
negando, seruauit; quocirca, vtiliora erant (fortasse) tormenta, quae bonum
incorruptibile amandum docebant, quam illa bona quae sine vllo vtili fructu
dominos sui amore torquebant. Aug. lib. 1. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 10. AT LONDON,
Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathanael Butter. 1630.

TO THE GREAT ORNAMENT OF HER SEX, AND NAME, MISTRESS ANNE PORTMAN, etc. THE
accumulation of Honors, here, and of Glory, in future.
My worthiest,
WHat you formerlie vouchsafed to peruse in a rude transcript; J here present
you in a character, like your self, and virtues, fair, and legible; J think
it my prime honor, that it must now wear your livery, and what shall
immortal it, your name; Had it nothing else to make it live in the opinion,
and esteem of others, this were enough to give it both countenance, and
eternity; Greatness can only patronize our endeauours, Goodness glorifies
them. Under that stamp and seal of yours J have adventured it abroad, that
you might know my respects are the same in public, which they were, lately,
under a private, though noble roof; J never yet whispered an observance, but J
dared proclaim it to the world, and then, too, when there might be some
pretense and color to suspect my loyalty; where I am engaged once in my
services, and profess them, J am not beaten off by the causeless distastes of
those J honor; you J ever did, and the name you beautify; on which, though I
am no longer an Attendant, J am still a votary, and such a one, whose knee
speaks as loud for it, as his tongue; his devotions, as his thanks; and both
these from a heart swept so clean of deceit, or falsehood, that could it lodge
so much sophistry as to teach the lips to quauer, and dissemble, J had not
been thus (perhaps) under the furrows of a displeased brow, but might have
proved as fair in the smile and cringe of many, as J am now down the wind,
both in their countenance, and opinion. But, sincerity is the same, still,
whether in exile, or advancement, in disgrace, or honor; wheresoever I travel
J carry my self with me; I am not torn into distractions, and fears, not
parcelled (as others) into doubts, and hopes; but, where J am, J am in the
whole man; and, where J am, so, I am All yours; All in my moral, civil, and
divine obseruances, one that will thank you, honor you, and pray for you,
unfeignedly, willingly, constantly, whilst I am thought worthy of the name, or
attribute of

Your most humbly-deuoted Humfry Sydenham.

THE RICH MAN'S WARNING-PEECE.
PSALM. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not thy Heart upon them.


I Find no dispute here, about the title of this Psalm; it is D^^^ds to
Ieduthun; that Ieduthun ^ho prophesied with the Harp, and with Trumpets, and
Cymballs, and loud instruments of Music, magnified the Lord, 1. Chron. 16.42.

The Theme and Subject of it is various, and mixed; not set mournefully to
strains of penitence or mortality (as in others of his sacred Anthems) but to
Aiers of more spirit and life, such as would sublimate and intraunce the
Devotion of the Hearer. The former part whereof is key'd high, very high, and
reaches God, and his powerful mercies; the other tuned lower, to Man, and
touches on his frailties and weak deportment. That which concerns his God is
(as 'twere) the plaine-song; the ground and burden of it grave, and sober, but
full of majesty, My soul watteth upon God, He is the Rock of my Salvation and
defense, at the second verse; but, The Rock of my strength, and Refuge, at the
seventh. That which concerns Man, is full of Descant, runs nimbly on his
state, degrees, condition; diuides between the humble, and the proud, and
censures both, Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
lie, verse 9. Thus having warbled sweetly about the heart and middle of the
Psalm; at length he shuts up his Harmony in Discord: In the front of this
verse He quarrels with the Robber, and the Oppressor: and at the foot thereof
(as if the Great Man were near allied them) He throws in a cavil concerning
Riches; where He first, put's the case, with a si affluxerint, If Riches
increase, then, the resolution or advice on it, nolite cor apponere, Set not
your heart upon them. These are the parts, plainly, without violence, or
affectation; so is the discourse on them; in the delivery of which, I must beg
that double charity which does commonly encourage weak men in their
endeavors; Patrence, Attention: and first of the si affluxerint, if Riches
increase.

Riches have carried their weight of Honor and esteem through all Ages, Pats.
1.
and, almost, all conditions in them; but not always, at the same hught; Those
of our Forefathers lay most in their Flocks, and Droues; the Fold was their
Treasure-house, and not, the Tent. The word poecunia, money, was not then heard
off, but Peculium, Gain, which (as Viues notes it upon Augustine) was first
derived from pecudes, Cattle, Jn lib. 7. de ciu Dei cap. 12. Aug. etiam lib.
de Domo disciplina cap. 6.
because these were all the wealth of Antiquity, for they were then (for the
most part) Shepherds. The glory and respect of Riches were near their
Meridian in the days of Solomon, when they first began to shine in their full
luster; before a few Asses laden with Lentiles and parched Corn, were thought
a large present for a King; Then, multitudes of Camels, with Spices, gold, 1.
King. 10.2.
and precious stones scarce worth acceptance; Of old, 1. King. 10.27. Exodus
30.18.
a few shekels of silver were a canonized treasure; Now, they were of no
repute, but as stones in the streets of Jerusalem. In fine, 1 King. 10.22.
Lauers of brass were in the beginning rich enough for the Tabernacles of our
God; but vessels of beaten gold must be here hammered, for the v^ensels of a
King.

Riches are now at their high spring; every Tide wafts in silver, in ships of
Tarshish, and gold in the Navy of Hiram; Treasure flows in that abundance,
that it does no more satisfy, but amaze; a Queen beholds it, and there is no
spirit in her. 1. Reg. 10.27. From amazement in this age, it grows to
veneration in the next; that which was, erewhile, but an Ingot, or rude lump,
is, Now, trick't up into a Godhead Gold shall be no longer for use, or
ornament, but for worship; and now the Nations begin to kneel to it, and give
it the devout posture of the whole man; the elevation of the eye, and
expansion of the hands, and the Hosanna of the tongue, and the Magnificat of
the heart; and thus, in a zealous applause of their new-got Deity, the Cornet,
the Flute, the Sackbut, the Psaltery, and the Dulcimer shall sound out their
loud Idolatry. Nay, the ancient Romans were grown so superstitious to their
mass of Treasure, Aug. lib. 7. de ciu. Dei cap. 12. and, de discipl. Christ.
tract. cap. 6.
that they made not only money their God, but called God, money; so their
Jupiter was named pecunia, because there was (as they coniectur'd) a kind of
omnipotency in money, which though it creates not, yet it commands all
things. O magnam rationem Diuini nominis (says Augustine) hoc Auaritia Ioui
nomen imposuit: Avarice, no doubt, thus Christened Jupiter, at first, that Those
which affected Coin, should not seem to love every God, Aug. ibid.
but the very King of gods. Had He been called Riches, the Title had been more
passeable, and the devotion less sottish; for, Diuitiae are one thing, and,
Pecunia, another; we call the Good, and the Just, and the Wise, Rich; which
have little, or nothing but in vertus; the Auaritious, and Greedy, Poor;
because they ever want. Moreover, God himself we truly style Rich; yet not,
Pecunia, but, Omnipotentia; so says the Father in his seventh book De
Ciuitate Dei. cap. 12. And indeed, the God of our happiness we style
Omnipotence, and not Money; but, sometimes, to beautify and set out his
perfections, Riches. So we find, Riches of his goodness, Romans 2. and Riches
of his mercy, Romans 9. and Riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2. and Riches of his
wisdom, Romans 11. Lo, his Goodness, Grace, Mercies, Wisdom, and to show
their Height, and Greatness, and Immensitie, and Ever lastingnesse no thing to
express them, but Riches; which, if they afford such glory in the Metaphor,
no doubt, there is something of worth and estimation in the letter, too;
Riches, as they are Riches, have both their virtue and applause; for the Spirit
calls them Blessings, and Good things; but they are externa media, Good things
without us, which we may, vti, not frui, use only, not enjoy, or rather not
joy in them; if Delight, here, be not more proper then Joy; since Joy (for
the most part) points to things Spiritual; Delight, to pleasures Temporal.
Howeuer, Riches may sometimes lawfully touch, both with our Pleasure, and
Desire, so the Aim be not preposterous, and oblique; either, to make them as
Fuel for our Pride, or Bellows for our Lust, or Oil for our Concupiscence,
or Flames for our Ambition, or Smoke for our Uncharitableness. For though
matters of Beneficence and gift look toward Riches, as their Source, and
Isntrumental cause; yet, commonly, where there is most of Fortune, there is
least of Charity, and so when there is Ability of Distribution, there wants
Will; and that ever strangles the Nobleness of Those which are to give, and
the shoutes and Bencdictions of them which should receive. And this, I believe,
first gave life and breathing to that grey-hair'd paradox: Si opes sint bona
cur non reddunt possidentes bonos? If Riches be good, why have they not
influence into him that ownes them, and so make the possessor good? Soul
(says the Rich man in the Parable) Thou have much good, laid up for many
years, Luke 12.
sleep and take thine ease; mark the Paraphrase. Quid est iniquius homine,
qui multa bona vult habere, and bonus ipse esse non vult? Indignus es qui
habeas, qui non vis esse, quod vis habere: The Father in his 28. Sermon de
Diuersis. What a mass of iniquiquitie is man swollen unto, that still desires
much good, yet not to be good himself? He is unworthy to have any thing that
he might Be, which would not be what he would have.

Riches therefore, though they challenge the Name of good, yet there are such,
as both Good and Bad do indifferently inherit, and whilst they are good,
cannot denominate their Master good; and therefore to rectify this obliquitie,
Saint Augustine acquaints us with a Twofold Good; Bonum quod facit bonum, and
Bonum vnde facias bonum: There is a Good which does make good, and that is thy
God, and there is a Good by which thou may do good, and that is thy Mammon.
Do good; how? Hark, the Psalmist; He has dispersed abroad, Psalm. 1 12.
He has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, Psalm
112.9. Hoc est Bonum, hoc est bonum vnde sis Iustitia bonus; si habeas bonum
vnde sis bonus fac bonum de bono, vnde non es bonus: So the Father warbles, in
his third Sermon de verbis Domini. Behold, thou have large heaps of Treasure;
distribute them; in so doing, thou do enlarge thy happiness; Here is but
giving to the Poor; and then, Righteousness for ever. Lo, an exchange of
infinite advantage; weigh thy Disbursements with thy Gain, thy Diminutions
with thy Increase; thy store, perhaps, is somewhat thinner, but thy Justice is
enhaune'd; That only is lessened which thou were shortly to lose; and this
improoued which thou art ever to possess. In fine, there is only a Dispersit,
or a Dedit, in respect of the gift; he has disposed, or given; no more; but
there is a Manet in aeternum: for the Reward of the giver, His Righte-ousnesse
endures for ever; for ever, why? The Apostle answers, He that has charity
has God, 1. John 4
God dwells in him, and He in God: and where God dwells, there must needs be a
Manet in aeternum; for God is eternity. A Rich man, then, if he have not
Charity, what has he? And a Poor man if he have Charity, what has he not? Tu
forte putas, Aug. sermon. 64. de Temp.
quod ille sit dives cuius Arca plena est Auro, and ille non est dives cuius
conscientia plena est Deo: Thou think, perchance, that He is Rich, whose
chests are thronged with gold, and he not Rich, whose Conscience is filled with
God; But the Father puts the Lie upon this foul misprision with an Ille vere
Dives, in quo Deus habitare dignatur, in his 64. Sermon de tempore. He is
truly Rich in whom God has vouchsafed to dwell, for There is Sacietie, and
full content, Metell is or Croesus not half so rich; and He truly poor, in
whom God has refaied to dwell, for There is nothing but Anxiety and lamentable
Indigence, Regulus, or Irus, not half so poor. Quite, and alia nouit, non
propter illa beatior, sed propter te solum beatus. The same Saint Augustine in
the third of his Confessions, cap. 4.

How miserable then is the condition of those who suffer the current of their
Affections to be inordinately carried from the euer-springing fountains above,
upon broken Cisternes that will hold no water? From the Creator of the world,
to Creatures here, of ouer-valued, and false esteem, a little Idolatriz'd
Earth, or magnified trash; a few garish Transitories, Riches but improperly,
for they have neither Truth, nor Certainty; their worth is lame, and crutched
merely upon opinion; their luster counterfeit, like those false lights which
delude the wandering Seamen; and betray them to shelues and rocks, where both
their Hopes, and they, are untimely split. But suppose those Riches (as I
suppose only) to be as true, as those Lights are false; yet thus to indulge
them is dangerous Idolatry, since that which is ordained for a Servant, they
make not only their Master, but their God. And indeed, Such may be said to
have Riches as we are said to have the Fever, when the Fever has us; Sen.
ep. 78.
They have not Riches, but Riches, them; for They which are either transported
with their glory, or rapt with their possessions, do by Riches as birds do by
Daring-glasses, play with their own ruin; how ever, such are their fair
allurements and inuitations, that Those who are only taken with the outside,
and Bark of things, are strangely infatuated: but in this, They resemble
little Children, which value every painted trifle, as a Treasure; a Bugle, or
glassie Carkanet, as precious as that of Onyx. And what difference is there
(says the Stoicke) between them and us, Nisi quod nos circa tabulas and
statuas insanimus, charius inepti, we are madding after Statues, and Pillars,
more coftly foolish, Illos, reperti in littore calculi leaves, and aliquid
habentis varietatis, delectant, they taken with stones and shells of various
colors, found on the Seashore; Sen. Ep. 119.
we, with pillars of Jasper, and Porphirie, from the Sands of Egypt, or Deserts
of Africa, to shoulder some Porch, or Dyning-roome, to banquet or revel in.
All this Equipage of Greatness is but a Glorious vanity, Sen. vt supra.
and that which the Moralist call's Bracteata foelicitas, a spangled happiness,
a leaf of gold laid on Iron, which for a time glitter's, and then rust's; a
gaudie Vane, or Streamer on the top of some Turret, whiuer's and flicker's with
every blast; a quaint Jewel, hung loose in hair, which, as it dangle's,
falls; a very Glassie Pomp, cum splendet, frangitur; like Bubbles, which in
their swelling, break; Flattering and deluding Blessings, and such as prove
better to them that hope for them, then to those that do enjoy them; For
instead of that Contentment which should assail them by the fruition of their
desires, here is nothing but Calamity, and new torment; Care of their
preservation, and doubt of their disposal, and fear of their loss, and
trouble of their improuement; to these, lean watchfulnes, broken thoughts,
hollow resolutions, interrupted peace, besides a whole Host of selfe-vexations
and) the wheel the Rack not half the Torture. Thus, Gold is a
stumbling-Blocke to him that does sacrifice unto it, and very fools shall be
taken with it, (says Jesus the son of Sirach) shall be taken with it? nay,
shall be taken from it, even when he does sacrifice unto it; so says Jesus the
son of David, Fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, taken
from thee, two ways; First, thy soul from the riches of thy body, and then
thy soul from the body of thy riches; And therefore, there is a vae
Diuitibus, denounced against such, Amos 6.1.
Woe to you that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the mountains of Samar^^,
which, though the Marcionite would make a vae, only of Admonition, and not of
Malediction; yet, Tertullian, in the chasticement of that error, says; that a
Canete is always used in matters of Advice, but a vae never, but in those
thunderclaps of fury and malediction. So, we find only a Cauete against
Avarice, because That is the Semen, and first matter (as 'twere) of Riches,
Beware of Coueteousnesse, for man's life consists not in Abundance. Luke
12.13. But there is a fearful vae against Riches, as though they still cried
for divine Castigations, Woe unto you that are rich, why? you have received
your consolation, Luke 6.24. your consolation, how? Ex Diuitijs, de gloria
illarum, and secularibus fructibus, of your riches, and their glory, and all
secular content, not otherwise. So says the Father in his fourth Book against
Marcion. Cap. 5. What folly is it then to pursue that with violence and
Intention, which when we have gained is no satisfaction, but a torment? what
madness thus to macerate and crucify the whole man for a few titular and
opinionated riches; of which he that carouse's and drinke's deepest is ever
thirsty? Nothing quenches an immoderate appetite, poculum respuit, quia
fluutum sitit (aith Augustine) Cataracts and rivers are but draughts competent
for such concopiscences to swallow Habes Aurum habes Argentum, concupiscis
aurnm, concupiscis argentum, and Habes, and concupiscis, and plenus es, and
sitis; morbus est non opulentia, the same Father in his 3. Sermon de verbis
Apostoli. How miserable are those desires, which are not bounded by what we
do possess, but by what we can atchieue. If a man suppose that Fortune he
is Lord of, not voluminous enough, although he be Monarch of the whole world;
yet is he wretched: he is not happy, Sen. lib de paupertate
that thinks himself happy; he that agrees well with his poverty is a rich
man, and he that agrees not well with his riches is a poor man; he is not
rich that still lack's something, nor he poor that wants nothing, vtrum
maius habere multum, an satis, it is the Sto cks Dilemma; whether had thou
rather to have much, or enough? he that has much, desires more, which is an
argument, he has not yet sufficient; he that has enough, has obtained the
end, which never befalls a rich man. Seneca labor's to press this home to his
Lucillius; Ep 119.
Set before me the reputed rich, Crassus, or Lucinius; let him calculate his
full Revenues, what he has in present, and hoped for Possessions; this man
(if thou believe me) is poor; or (if thy self) may be poor; whether is he
Covetous, or Prodigal? if Covetous, he has nothing; if Prodigal, he shall
have nothing; The Gold thou cal'st his, is but his Cabonet's, Et Quis Aerario
inuidet? who would envy a full coffer? The man whom thou suppose'st to be
Master of his treasure, is but the bag that shut's it up.

Lo then, the base Idolatry of these times, and men, which not only raise
their Hecatombs to their Golden Saint, but Deifie the very Shrine that keepe's
it, A piece of wrinckled providence, or gray hayr'd thrift; nay worse, a mere
decrepit Avarice; when for a little languishing and bedrid Charity, they
embalme the Honors and Memory of rich men with their precious Perfumes and
Ointments, such as should cast only their Odours on the Monuments of good men;
And not only so, but they advance their Statues and Pillars in our very
Temples, I know not, whether more to the dishonor of our God, or to the
Immortality of their own Name. What Is this but to turn Israelite again, and
take off from the glory of the Lord of Hoasts, to worship a Golden Calfe? By
the Law of Nature (says the Epicure) the greatest riches are but a composed
poverty, and by the Law of God, the greatest poverty is but ill-compos'd
riches; for he that pile's them by fraud or violence, builds Aauarice one
story higher, to oppression; and then not only Poverty, but Judgment
follows; God shall rain snares upon them, Psalm 18
That which should otherwise cherish, shall now entangle them; and then, Storm
and Tempest shall be their portion to drink, such a storm as will not be
allaid without a shower of vengeance. Hark, how it blowe's? Woe unto them,
That join House to house, and lay field to field, till they be placed alone in
the midst of the Earth; This is in mine ears; says the Lord of Hoasts; of a
truth, many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without an
Inhabitant; Ten Acres of vineyard shall yield one Bath, and the seed of an Omer
shall yield an Ephah: Is this all? No, the Thunder clap is behind, Hell has
enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, and their multitude
and their Pomp shall descend into it. Esaias 5.14. There is no misery to unjust
riches; no leanness of teeth like those which grow fat with the substance of
another; but, to them which grind Poverty by Extortion, and deuorant plebem,
sicut escam panis, eat up my people, as a morsel of bread, what Hell, here?
what Horror in after times? Oh, the fearful Eiulations some have shrik'd!
Would God had given me a heart senseless like the flint in the rocks of stone;
which, as it can taste no pleasure, so no Torment; no torment, here; but, when
the Heavens shall shriuell like a scroule, and the Hills move like frighted men
out of their place, what Mountain shall they get by entreaty to fall upon
them? what covert to hide them from that fury, which they shall never be able
to suffer, nor avoid? Judgments do not always follow Crimes as Thunder does
Lightening, Instantly; but, sometimes, an Age is interposed, as between two
Earthquakes; though they may escape the darts and wounds of temporal
persecutions here, yet the sting that lie's behind is Dreadful. They shall
suck the Gall of Aspes, Job 20.14.
and the Vipers tongue shall slay them.

Thus, we see, Riches and Blessedness do not always kiss; He Is not ever
Happy that is prosperous; the acquisition of much wealth, is no End of
misery, but a change: the Low-built Fortune harbour's as much Peace, as that
which is Higherroof'd; and has one advantage beyond it, it is less
wind-shooke. The humble Hysope and Shrub of the valley are not so exposed to
Tempests, as the Cedar in Libanus, or the Oak in Basan; they are threatened with
many a Cloud and Exhalation, which the other neither Fear, Epicurus.
nor Suffer. Contented Poverty (says the good Athenian) is an Honest thing;
but it is no more Poverty if it be content; we cannot say, he is poor that
is satisfied, but he that couet's more. He that is at peace with his desires,
and can compose himself to what Nature only requires from him, is not only
without the Sense, but without the Fear of misery; is he poor that has
neither Gold, nor Hunger, nor Thirst? plus Jupiter non habet. Jupiter himself
has no more; That is not little which is enough, nor that much which is not
enough; He that think's much Little, is still poor; and he that think's Little
much, is ever Rich; Rich in respect of Nature, though not Opinion. The man thou
cal'st poor, has, doubtless, something that is superfluous; and where
Superfluity is, there can be no want; where no want, no poverty; on the
otherside, the man thou stil'st Rich, is either Poor, or like a poor man; he
cannot improve his Store but by Frugalitie; and Frugalitie is but paupertas
voluntaria, a voluntary poverty, Seneca call's it so in his fifteenth Epistle
ad Lucillium. Let Us, then, Epist. 91^
borrow Advice from that sacred Heathen (pardon the Epethite, Seneca will own
it) and press it home to the practice of a Christian, Measure all things by
natural desires; only, beware thou mix not Vices with Desires; Nature
content's her self with a little, what is, beyond, or above that, is
impertinent, and not necessary. Thou art hungry, reach not after Dainties,
the Appetite shall make that toothsome, which is next, whether thy bread be
white, or brown, Nature question's not. Illa ventrem non delectari vult, sed
impleri. She would have the body fed, not delighted. Thou art dry; whether
this water run from the next Lake, or that which is arted by Snow, or
foreign cold, Nature disputes not; she labor's to quench thy Thirst, not to
affect thy Palate, whether the cup be Gold, or Crystal, Sabinian, or that of
Murrha, or else the hollow of thine own hand, it matter's not; Fix thine eyes
upon the End of all things, and thou will loath Superfluities: Number tibi cum
fauces vrit sitis Aurea quaeris pocula? Number esuriens, fastidis omnia praeter
pauonem? Hunger is not Ambitious, she looke's not after the quality of
meats, but the measure; how she may Fill the body, not pamper it; These are
torments of an unhappy Luxury, when we seek new ways how to provoke, and
glut the Appetite, and not only to refresh our Tabernacles, Ecclus 37.
but to cloy them. Delicates powered upon a mouth shut up are like messes of
meat set upon a grave, things only for Spectacle, not Repast. Of all
Gluttonies, that of the Eye is most Epicuricall, when it would still see
Dainties which it cannot taste, till the Desire has as much surfeited, as the
Body, and so we abuse the Bounty of a better Nature to satisfy the Lust and
Concupiseence of the whole man; and this Rapine and greediness of the sense,
is as unwarrantable, as that of fortune, which breake's down all banks of
moderation; and therefore, without either Moral or Divine prescription. There
can be no Virtue in Extreme; no good, which consist's not in exactness of
proportion, so that by the diminution or excess of that proportion, Vice
insinuates; insomuch, that in the exuberancie of these outward creatures, Sin
is conceived, Aquin. 2.2. q. 118. Art. 1.
a Capital, and Daring sin, when above a due equality, and measure, we
either acquire or retain them eagerly; And this the Schoole-man call's (...),
an Immoderate hunger, and persuite of temporals, in secunda secundae 118.
quaest. Art. 1. There is no outward state of life so blessed as that which
Diuide's between Penury and Abundance; the extreme on either side is
Misery. And therefore the wisest King that ever was, and the greatest both for
Treasure and Retinue, in his own desire of secular things ever mixed his
Orisons with this Petition, Lord give me neither Riches nor Poverty, Sed
victui meo tribue necessaria, Feed me with food convenient (the English giue's
it) but the Latin, necessarium, is more Emphaticall; there are some things
Convenient for the Majesty of a King, which are not always Necessary for his
person; but Solomon, here, desire's only to have Nature accommodated, and not
State; Riches he would have none; and these are convenient for him as a King,
but something to feed him with, and that is necessary for him as a Man; an
humble request for so mighty a Potentate, and yet so much as he need's to beg,
though, not so much as God has purposed to bestow; his Blessings come
oftentimes in showers when they are sued for but as sprinklings. In that
exquisite plat-forme and rule of Prayer prescribed us by our Savior, all
temporal defires are inuolu'd in this, Give us this day our daily bread, it is
Bread, only, we ask, and bread only, for a day, and these are Both
necessary; Necessary two ways; First, in respect of our selves, for Bread
(says the Psalmist) strengthen's the heart of Man; man's chiefest part, the
Heart; and that chief part, frail; and frailty needs strengthening every day;
Then, in respect of the command; it must be Bread, for a day, too; The Lord
bidd's the Israelites gather Manna, only for a day, and the Gospel enioynes
the Disciples, with a Nolite cogitare in crastinum, Care not for to morrow, but
let to morrow care for it self. Merito ergo Christi Discipulus victum sibi in
Diem postulat, qui de crastino cogitare prohibetur; says Cyprian; Cyp de Orat.
Dom.
He rightly demand's bread only for a day, who is forbid to provide any thing
for to morrow. I came naked out of my mothers womb (says Job) and naked shall
I return. We brought nothing into this world (says Paul) and nothing we
shall carry out; Nakedness? and Nothing? into the world? and out of it? What
then can we require here, but Necessaries? and what these are, the Apostle
giue's in two words, Victum, Tegumentum, Food and Raiment, and enioyne's
Content with these, 1. Tim. 6.8. But what food, what raiment must we be
contented with? Necessarium victum, Necessarium tegumentum, non inane, non
superfluum, Saint Augustine resolue's in his fifth Sermon, De verbis Apostoli,
Food and Raiment necessary, not Luxurient, not Superfluous; Nature require's
not the Latter, but if God sometimes bestow them, make those Superfluities
another's Necessaries, Sint tua superflua pauperibus necessaria; it is the same
Father's advice in the same Sermon. Mistake me not; I am no Disciple of Rome,
nor Athens, no Stoicke I, nor Jesuit, I hate a Cloister, or a Stoa; I like not
the Monk in his Monastery, nor the Cynicke in his Tub, nor the Anchore: in
his Cell; I loath the Penitentiarie and his water, the Capuchin and his Stony
Pillow; I pity the thredbare Mendicant, and the barefooted Pilgrim; such
wilful penancing of the body (for ought I read) God neither command's nor
approue's. A voluntary retirement from Society, or Fortune sauour's more of
Will, then Judgment, of peevishness, then Religion. If God send me Riches I
accept them thank fully, and employ them, in my best, to his service, and mine
own; But if by Casualtie, or Affliction, or some unhappy Accident, I am
driven to Indigence, or Calamity; or else, if God have proportioned me such
an humble Condition; I Will take no indirect course to any higher, but carry this
cheerfully, without Solitariness, or Discontent; and, as with the spirit of
old Attalus, so with his Language too, Torqueor, sed fortiter, been est. Sen.
Epist. 5.
occidor, sed fortiter, beue est.

And hence, (no doubt) it was, that Augustine so magnified his Paulinus; who
having fallen from infinite riches to a retired poverty, Aug lib. de Ciuit.
Det, cap 10.
when the Barbarians besieged Nota (of which he was Bishop) spoiling all as
they went, as a general Deluge, and making him prisoner both to shame, and
want, thus powr'd-out his devout expressions to his God, Domine non excrucior
propter Aurum, etc. Lord, I am not troubled for gold, or silver; for where all
my treasures are, thou know: even there had he reposed all his, where He
advised to lay them, who foretold these miseries to fall upon the world. A
brave resolution, and worthy of that Crown, which wreathe's all Martyrdomes;
and yet but such as we, out of the honor of our Profession, should have, and,
in our fires of Treall, ought to use. That Christian who has sometimes sh^^d
in the glory of outward Fortunes, and afterward endured the Batteries of some
temporal afflictions, and yet in the midst of these cannot awake his Harp,
and Psalterie, and sing with David, My heart O God is fixed, my heart is fixed,
I will give praise, Praise, as well for thy punishments, as thy Blessings, is a
very Coward in temptation, and unworthy either of his Conntenance, or Colors;
He that cannot take up the Cross with patience, and loose all to find his
God, deserue's him not, Minus te amat, Aug. 10. Conf. cap. 9.
qui tecum aliquid amat, quod non propter te amat, says Augustine: He love's
thee little, who love's any thing with thee, that he does not love for thee;
All this shadow and froth of tranfitorie things must vanish, for the hope of
our bliss in future, Master we have left all and followed thee (the Disciples
cry) What shall we have? What shall ye have? All things in having him, so
says Saint Cyprian, Cyprian. de Coen. Dom.
Cum Dei sint omnia, habenti Deum nil deerit, si ipse Deo non desit. Since all
things are God's, to him that has God, nothing can be wanting, except he be
wanting unto God; Nothing, says the Father? No good thing, says the Prophet,
The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord
shall want nothing that is good; Psalm. 34.10. Though all earthly persecutions
entrench thee, and Misery semes to come on like an Armed man; and thou art
fallen into the jaws of those enemie's, whose Teeth are Spears, and Arrows,
and their Tongue, a sharp Sword; yet Angels shall encampe about thee, and the
Lord of Hoasts shall be thy Buckler, and thy Shield; the Neighing of the
Horse, the Noise of the Trumpet shall not invade thee; or if They do, and at
such a strait, that the Arm of Flesh growe's weak, and all earthly
fortification, vain, yet his mercy is great unto the Heavens, and his Truth
reaches unto the clouds; the glorious Host above shall muster all their
forces to assist thee, the Stars shall fight for thee, and Thunder speak
loud unto thine enemies; Nay, God himself shall undertake thy quarrel, He
shall bow the Heavens, and come down; the Earth shall tremble, and the
Foundations thereof shall shake because He is angry; He shall set his
Terrors in Array, and fight mightily thy Battles, his severe wrath he shall
sharpen as a sword, and put on Jealousy for complete Armor; Lo, how he
breaks the Bow in pieces, and Knappeth the Spear insunder, and burns the
Chariots in the fire, Hailestones full of fury he shoots as Arrows, his right
aiming thunderbolts go abroad, and from the clouds, as a well drawn Bow,
they fly unto the Mark. Thus in thy Height of miseries, God shall be thy
Castle, and strong Tower; and under the shadow of his wings shall be thy
refuge, till these calamities be ouer-past. God never leaves His, in their
extremities; whether in the Cave, or in the Mountain; in the Den, or in the
Dungeon; he is always there, both in his Power, and Assistance, and,
sometimes, in his Person, too; when all natural supplies grow hopeless, God
purueye's for his children, by his Miracles; Rocks shall burst with water; and
Ravens provide Bread; and Clouds drop fatness; and Heavens shower Manna; and
Angels administer comforts; And at length. when all these whirlewinds, and
fires and earthquakes of thy persecutions are gone by, God himself shall
speak in the still voice, Peace, peace unto thee; Peace as well in thy outward,
as inward state; he that has given thee Ponerty, can give thee Riches, and
(upon thy Sufferings) will; But when they come, take heed of that disease which
commonly attend's those which are risen from a despised and mean condition;
other goods give only greatness of mind; Riches, insolence. And therefore the
Apostles advice comes seasonably here, Be not high-minded, but fear, Fear,
least that God which bestowed them on thee for thy Humiliation, will take them
off again for thy Pride; and so, when Riches come, put not thy trust in them,
and if they increase, set not thy heart upon them: that is the second part, the
resolution, or advice given on the Case put, If Riches increase, set not thy
heart upon them.

Pars secunda.
Set not thy heart upon them.
THe Rabbines, and Hebrews, of old, attributed the whole Regiment of man to
the Heart, and made that the Throne and chair of the Reasonable Soul; seating
in it not only the powers of understanding; Choice, but of Will and Action
too; So did the anncient Grecians; specially, their Poets. The Philosophers, on
the other side, place them in the Brain; and leave only the Affections to the
Heart; But, Divinity is more bountiful, the Scripture giving it the whole
rational power; understanding, will, judgment, consultation, thought,
endeavor; hence it is, that God so often scourge's the Hearts of men,
commanding us to confess, honor, love, and fear him with all our heart; And
therefore, that part is sometimes taken for the reasonable Soul; sometimes, for
the whole man; Hereupon the Prophet's Lacerate corda vestra, Rent your Hearts,
and not your garments; and This people honor me with their lips, but their
Heart is far from me; the Heart, the Shrine and Temple where I am truly
worshipped; that Holocaust and Oblation only which smoke's from this Altar,
beare's the acceptable Odor; all other Sacrifices are abominable, the Heart is
God's Jewel; he does appropriate it to himself, only, and wholly; the hand,
or foot, or eye are not forbidden to do their office, both in gathering
lawfully, and preserving riches; any member but the Heart may be thus employed,
that must not intermeddle, for this were to whore after a false Numen, and
Burn Incense to a strange God: It Is not the mere possession or use of riches
that offend's, but the Affectation; And to this purpose, Lumbard puts in his
Observation, with a non dicit Propheta, the Prophet saye's not, nolite habere,
but nolite cor opponere; In koum.
we are not forbidden riches; but when we have them, to set our Hearts upon
them; so that, the error hang's not upon those, but us; not on Riches, but
that which Idoll's them, our Heart. And therefore, Moses gave a stong Caveat to
the Israelites, that when their Flocks and herds increased, and their Silver,
and their Gold was multiplied, they should beware least their hearts were
lifted up, and so they should forget the Lord their God. De^t. 8.13.14. Those
sublunarie creatures raise not Distraction in us, so we make them not our
Center, if we rest not in them, if we can look through them, to the Giver;
And, doubtless, we may entertain the unrighteous Mammon, not only as a
Servant, but a Friend, by no means, as a Lord. There is Virtue in the true use
of it, if there be a Qualification in our desires. And therefore, S. Augustine
disputing of that impossible Analogy between Heaven, and a Rich-man, a
Camel, and the Eye of a Needle, would have a Rich man understood there Cupidum
rerum temporalium, and de talibus superbientem, such a one, as ioynes Avarice
to Riches, and Pride to Avarice, in his 2. Book of Euang, quaest. Cap. 47. And
this is the Burden of his Interpretation in three several Tracts more, non
opes damno sed desideria, in his 10. Sermon de tempore; non Diuitiae, sed
Cupiditas accusatur, in his 5. Sermon de verbis Apostoli; in Diuitijs
reprehendo cupiditatem, non facultatem, in his first Book de Ciuit. Dei. Cap.
10. A moderate and timely care of necessary temporalls is not prohibited, but
the inordinate Appetite is cryed-downe by the general voice and consent both
of Fathers and Schoolmen; if you require a Catalogue; view more punctually
Gregory de Valentia upon Aquinas 2.2.3. Tome 4. disputation, 5. question.
Hereupon, Sen. de Beat. vit.
the Moralists, and those of rigid and seuerer Brow, would have a wise man
pass by Riches, in contempt, Nonne habeat, sed ne solicitus habeat, not in
regard of their propricty, and possession, but the difficulty and eagerness of
the pursuit; which as he can manage without Indulgence, in their fruition; so,
without disturbance, in their loss; In what storehouse may Fortune better
lock up her Treasure, then there, from whence she may fetch it without the
complaint of him that keeps it? M. Cato, when he praised Curious and
Caruncanius, and the voluntary and affected poverty of that Age, wherein it
was a Capital offense to have some few plates of Silver, Sen. Epist. 119.
Possidebat ipse quadragies sestertium, says Seneca, had his own store crammed
with many a Sesterce. A wise man, as he will not make Riches the Object of his
pursuit, so not, of his refusal, non amat Diuitias, sed mauult; non in animam
illam gazam sed in domum recipit; nec respuit possessas Diuitias, sed
contemnit; it is Seneca's again, to his Iunius Gallio, he weigh's them so
euenly between, Desire, and Scorn, that he does neither vnder-valew, nor
indulge them; he make's not his mind, their Magazine, but his House, in which
he does not lock but lodge them; he love's them not, properly, but by way of
comparison, not as they are riches, but as they are aloof from Poverty: Yes,
Stoicke, Sen. de Beat, vit. cap. 7.
as they are riches, they may not only be temperately loved and desired, but
also prayed for, prayed for as our daily bread; not absolutely, as for our
spiritual improuement, but by way of restriction; first humbly, with
submission to the will of God; then, conditionally, so they prove aduantagious
either to our civil or moral good. But here we must warily steeere between
a vigilant providence, and a fretting solicitude, a discreet and honest care,
and that which is anxious, and intemperate; for if they are pursued either with
unlawful, or unbridled desire; they lead our Reason captive, Blindfold our
Intellectuals, startle and disturb our sublimated, and better thoughts, weane
our Cogitations from Sacred project to matters of Secular employment, steal
from us the exercise of spiritual duties, and so damp and dead all the
faculties of the Inward man, that in way of Conscience or Religion, we are
benumbed merely; Naball himself not so stony and churlish, not half so supine
and stupefied as we. And therefore, your earthly Sensualists have this woeful
brand set upon them by the Spirit of God. They are men of this world, they have
their portion in this life only. Psalm. 17.14. Riches have nothing substantial
in them that may allure us, but our custom of admiring them, Non quia
concupiscenda sunt, Sen Ep. 119.
lau^antur; sed quia concupiscuntur, laudata sunt, They are not praised,
because they are to be desired, but they are desired because they are praised.
To cut out our desires by weak presidents is at once folly and madness; it is
miserable to follow error by example; That this man hugg's his Mammon, is no
authority for my Avarice; I must chalk out my proceedings by the line of
precept, square them by the rules of Divine truth; and that tel's me Riches
are but snares, thorns, vanities, shadows, nothing. 1. Tim 6.9. Math. 13.22.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? says the Wise man; For
certainly, Riches make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
heaven, Pro. 18. Mark, all their pomp is without certainty, or station:
Things not only fleeting, but voluble; they steal not from us, but they fly
away; fly away as an Eagle does, both with strong, and nimble wing; Their Ebb
is as sudden, as their flow doubtful; the Text only presupposes the one,
with a si affiuxerint, if they flow about thee, as if their increase were
merely casual: But if they do, what then? Nolite cor opponere, set not your
heart upon them; They are transitory objects, they fly away, not only with the
pinions of an Eagle, but with the wings of a Dove, of the Dove, in the
Psalmist, whose wings were covered with silver, and her feathers with gold.
Riches (I confess) have their Beauty, and luster; but they are false, like
globes of Crystal, which though they take the eye both with variety and
delight of Objects, yet have of themselves but a hollow and brittle glory,
nihil ex his quae videmus manet, currit cum tempore: Winds and Seas are not so
roling and unstable as Riches are, when they begin to surge and swell the
Heart, that is set upon them: vides quia fluunt, Ambros. ad Mamm^.
non vides quiapraeter fluunt, fluenta sunt quae miraris, quomodo veniunt, sic
transeunt, et recedunt vt discas superflua non acquirere, Lo, how the Father,
playing on the word, chide's his folly, and opening the stickle condition of
these sliding Temporalls, prohibite's all desire of unnecessary Treasure, to
sweat after superfluities, and vain Abundance, since the way to them is both
steep, and slippery, and like the climbing of a sandy hill to the feet of
the Aged. No man can be possessed of a peaceable and quiet life that toyle's
much about the enlargement of it. Seneca's habere quod necesse est, and quod
sat est, may well complete all earthly happiness, and terminate our desires in
way of riches, to have that which is necessary, and that which is sufficient;
But this latter we must bound again with the rules of Nature, not opinion. The
Epicure tells us, If we live according to Nature, we shall never be poor; if,
according to opinion, never rich. Our natural desires have their lists, and
Bounds; Those that are derived from false opinion, have no pale; to him that
goes in a right way there is an end; Error is infinite. As therefore there are
diverse sorts of Riches, so there are of Desires, too; there are Riches
natural, and there are Riches Artificial; there are Desires of Nature, and
there are Desires of Choice. Natural Riches, such as are surrogated to man for
the supply of natural defects; as meat, drink, clothing; Artificial; by
which Nature is not immediately relieved, but by way of consequence, as Coin,
Plate, Jewels, and the like, which the Art of man first found out for easier
traffic and exchange; or (as the vnhewed language of the School. man rough's
it) propter mensuram rerum venalium. Now natural desires shake hands with
natural Riches; they are not infinite, but have their measure, and growth, and
proportion with the other. Artificial Riches are without period, and come up
to those defires of Choice; which because inordinate, and not modified; are noe
less then infinite. He that drinke's of this water (says Christ, by
temporalls) shall thirst again, Ioh. 4. The Reason is, because their
insufficiency is most known when they are had, and therefore discouer's their
imperfection more; so that Natural Riches are more exquisite because they have
natural desires which are infinite; The other not without Confusion and
Disorder, because their desires depend on Choice, which are mutable and
various; and so, Infinite. Aquin. seeunda secundae, q. 1. art. 1. ad secundum.
Cato.
That Rigid censor of the Romans, was both Home, and witty, to the supefluous
vanities of his time, Any thing will suffice, if what we want we require of our
selves; he that seeke's for content, without him, loses both himself, and
it; not to desire, vis fieri dives Pentifice? nii cupias Mart, Sert Epist. 119.
and have, are of a nere Blood - Quare igitur a fortuna potius impetrem, vt
det, quam a me, ne petam? says the Stoicke, Why should I rather desire of
Fortune, that she would give me? then of my self that I would not desire?
Riches have nothing solid in them; for if they had, they would sometimes either
fill or please us; but they play with our appetites as the apples did with the
lips of Tantalus, which he might kiss, not Taste; or, suppose, Taste them, it is
but as water to one sick of a violent fever, now drinking eagerly to allay his
thirst, enlarges it; and seeking something to cool his Torments, he enflame's
them. We are never in our selves, but beyond; Fear, or Desire, or Hope draw
us ever to that which is to come, and remove our sense and consideration from
that which is, to muse on that which shall be, even when we shall be no more.
Inuentus est, qui concupisceret Aliquid post omnia. There are some, that having
all things, have (notwithstanding) coueted somewhat; like wide mouthed Glasses
brimb'd up with rich Elixars; put gold in them, They are never the fuller; And
this is a punishment ever waits upon unbridled, and immoderate Appetites, He
that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
Abundance, with increase, Eccle. 5.10. Miserable Desires, have miserable
effects; They degrade and deuest Man of that pre-eminence he has above other
Creatures, and bring him down to Beasts; nay, under them; For they having
quenched their Desires, by their Fruition, remain fully satisfied, till Nature
quicken again their Appetites, like plants in a fat soil, which never require
shewers, but in drought; those of Man are ever ravenous and insatiate, like
barren and thirsty ground, which even then lacks moisture, when over flowed.
Thoughts which stream toward wealth, or Honor have no certain channel;
but, like a Torrent or full tide, either beat down or else overrun their
banks. There was never Mammonist, whose Excess of Treasure, or Extent of
Fortune, could limit his Concupiscence; but it might well rival the Ambition
of those Proud Kings of old, who not satisfied with the Glory of their own
Crowns, and having nothing more on earth to be desired, would counterfaite
the Lightning and Thunder, to have themselves thought powerful in Heaven also,
make him Lord of the whole Earth; give him her Mines of Gold, Coasts of Jasper,
Rocks of Diamonds; nay, all the Treasure the womb of the Earth, or bowels of
the great Deep have swallowed; yet, even in these floods, he thirsts, in
this surfeit, he is hungry, in these Riches, poor. O the Inexhaustednesse of
Humane Appetite. Quod naturae sati; est, Homini non est. Sen Epist. 119.
Nature has not in her vast storehouse wherewith to supply our bottomless
Desires; those Desires, I mean, which attend our Choice; For as they depend on
the Imaginations of men (which are fertile, and ever blooming) as this Power
represent's the forms and Images of infinite Objects, so our defires multiply
strangely to pursue all those things the Imagination has propounded; insomuch,
that we prosecute them (oftentimes) without Rule, or Measure, and there is
sooner an end of us, then of our Covetousness. I know there are Desires Innocent
enough, if they had their Bounds; But their Excess, and Restlesnesse, does
blemish their pursuit; the Chrysolite, the Berill, and the Sapphire, and all
the sparkling, and shelly Majesty, of Pearl, and Stone, are the Objects of a
harmless delight, if we could use them moderately; But, we suffer our selves
to be transported with such violent Affections, and we seek them with such
enraged heat, that it is rather Madness, then Desire; Nay, of all humane
Aspirations there are none so lawless, and Exorbitant, as those which wander
after Riches; For whereas the Rest aim only at the Joy and Content which may
arrive them by the possession of their Objects, and so, lull, and stumber,
(like two loud and steep Currents, which meeting in a Flat kiss, and are
silent.) Those of Rich, grow more violent, by Abundance, like the flame of a
great fire, which increases by cafting wood into it. There can be no true
Riches, without Content; and there can be no true content where there is still
a Desire of riches; will you have the Reason? the Moralist giue's it, Sen.
Epist. 112.
but not home, Plus incipit habere posse, qui plus habet, He that has much,
begin's to have a possibility, to have more; and thus, as our Heaps are
enlarged, so are our Affections, and They once Inordinate, the Heart is
instantly rent asunder with the whirle-winds and distempers of various lusts;
sometimes, it hunt's for Treasure, sometimes for Henours and Preferment, and
having gotten the possession of these, still fight's against her own
Satisfaction by desiring more; Insomuch, that if we could empty the Western
Parts of Gold, and the East of all her Spices; the Land of her vndig'd, and the
Sea of her shipwrack't store; if we could lay on our Mass to the very Stars;
yet Desire is as woman, and the Grave, as Death and Hell, which will not be
satisfied. Such are the restless wanderings of our Affections, set once on
Temporalls, that They sinde neither Bank, nor Bottom; there is no rest to
man's Soul, but in God's Eternal Rest; for there being no proportion between
Spirits, and Bodies; it is impossible that the infinite desires of the Soul
should be confined to Creatures here below, as Things too Languishing, and
Transitory, for such Divine Substances to reside in, with full satisfaction,
or final Rest: The heart of man, not fixed in the contemplation of Eternity,
is always erraticke, and unstable, Et omni volubilitate volubilius (says
Augustine) more voluble then volubilitie it self; It trauel's from one Object
to another, seeking rest where there is none; but in those frail and fleeting
Temporals, in which, our Affections are (as 'twere) shackled, and let bound, It
shall never find any Lasting and true Content; For our Soul is of that vast
comprehensiuenesse, and our Desire of that wild Latitude, and Extent, that no
Finite Excellency or Created Comfort, can ever fill it, but it is still
tortut'd on the Rack of restless Discontent, and Selfe-vexation, until it
fasten upon an Object, infinite, both in Endlesnesse, and Perfection; only
admit it to the Face of God by Beatificall Vision, and so consequently to those
Rivers of pleasure, and fulness of Joy flowing thence; and then presently (and
never till then) It Is infinite defire expire's in the Bosom of God, and lie's
down softly, Bolt. walk with God, page 125.
with sweetest peace, and full contentment, in the embracements of everlasting
Bliss.

And now, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord. Thou whose Body
and Soul, and Desires are lumpish, Earth merely, thrice Earth; Raise thine
Affections from this Dull Element where they now grouell, and look up to the
Hills from whence thy salvation comes: why do they flutter here about
corruptible Glories? Why do they stoop to false and vain Comforts, such as
are not only open to Casualtie, but to Danger? Riches are to Both? to Both, in
a triple way; First, in their Acquisition, Secondly, Possession, Thirdly,
Deprivation. In their Acquisition, first; As the Partridge sits on eggs,
and hatcheth them not; so He that gets Riches, and not by right, shall leave
them in the midst of his Age, and at his End be a fool. Ier. 17.11. Next in
their Possession, where Moth and rust does corrupt them, and where Thieves
break through, and steal, Math. 6.9. Lastly, in respect of their Deprivation,
or Loss. He has swallowed down Riches, and He shall vomit them up again;
God shall cast them out of his Belly; the Increase of his house shall depart,
and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath, Job 20.15, 28. Lo, how
the Hand of Justice houers here, and with a Double Blow strike's through the
very Joints and marrow of the Worlaling, even to the sundring and dissipation
both of his Posterity and Fortunes? His goods shall flow away, and the
Increase of his house shall depart; shall depart? whither? to the Grave; with
whom? (two lamentable Companions.) The Fool and the Beast that perishes. So
says the Singer of Israel in his 49. Psalm, thrice in that one Psalm, at the
sixth verse, He trust's in his wealth, and glorie's in the multitude of his
Riches, and at the tenth Verse, He is a fool, and brutish, and leaves his
goods to others. O vain Insolence? O transitory height? what? After all those
ouerflowings and swarms of Treasure, must he leave his Substance to Others?
Yea, to others, perchance, neither of his Tribe, nor Country. Please you to
look upon him at the eleventh Verse, his very heart is transparent, and you
may discover his inward thoughts. He conceiue's his house shall continue for
ever, and his Dwelling place to all generations, and therefore calls his Lands
after his own Name; yet view him again at the fourteenth Verse. He is a
Beast, a silly one, a sheep laid in the grave, Death shall feed upon him, and
the upright shall have Dominion over him in the morning, and his strength shall
consume in the pit from his Dwelling place. Once more, He is twice in that
Psalm styled A Man of Honor, but it is sauc'd with a Nevertheless, He abides
not, at the twelfth Verse; and He under stands not, at the twentieth Verse;
and in both, He is a Beast that perishes. Mark, how the Spirit of God paint's
out this very Earth-worme, this great Monopolist of pelf, and Rubbish. He is
ignorant, Transitory, Sensual; He abides not, he under stands not, and
(anon) he dies; Dies? no, perishes; perishes as a Beast does, as if the
Soul rotted with the Body, or his Memory with the Soul; no Remainder either
of Name, or Fortune, and which is worst, of Honor; so says the Text; What
though rich; and the Glory of his house increased? yet, He shall carry away
nothing with him, his Honor shall not descendafter him, verse 17. what? carry
nothing away with him? not that Glorious Earth? that Gaudy Luggage his Soul
Doted on? that shining Saint? that Burnished Deity, which he could, at once,
both touch and worship? what? not the Cabonet he hugged and clasped? not the
Gold he Idol'd? nothing of Treasure, or Repute, or Name? Of neither; All these
false beams which were wont to dazzle him shall be now clouded in perpetual
darkness, where they shall never see light again; thus the Text doome's him,
at the nineteenth Verse of the same Psalm.

Seeing then, All earthly Dependences are vain and fragile, and there can be
no true peace but that which looke's upward; Take for Conclusion the advice of
Siracides, Lay up Treasures according to the Commandment of the most High; and
they shall bring thee more profit then gold; Eeclus 39.
Treasures of the most high? What are These? How laid up? and where? The
Commandment of the most High tell's thee, Lay up for your selves Treasures in
heaven, Bags which wax not old, the good foundation against the time to come,
the hold of eternal life, the Everlasting Memorial before God; that Treasure
which the Angel showed Cornelius in the Vision; even thine Alms, and thy
Prayers; not thy large-lung'd Prayers, without Alms, such as the old Pharisee
bleated in his Synagogue, or the New one, in his Conuenticle; but thine Alms,
and thy Prayers, hand in hand, with one cheerfulness, and Truth; thy hearty
Zeal toward God, and thy willing Charity toward Man, and both these, in
secret, and without noise. Such, and only such, are Golden Vialls full of
Odours, sweet Incense in the Nostrils of the Almighty; They shall yield a
pleasant smell, as the Best Myrrh, as Galbanum, and Onyx and sweet Storax, and
as the fume of Frankincense in the Tabernacle. Here are Treasures which never
fail, where no Moth corrupts, nor Thief approaches; these shall fight for
thee against thine Enemies, better then a mighty shield, or a strong spear. If
thou break the Staff of thy Bread unto the hungry, and afflicted, God shall
make fat thy Bones, and satisfy thy Soul in Drought; Thou shall be like
awatred Garden, and like a spring whose streams fail not; Treasures thou
shall lay up as Dust, and Gold of Ophir, as the stones of the Brook; Thy
Pastures shall be clothed with flocks, the Valleys also shall stand so thick
with Corn, that they shall laugh, and sing; In sine; Thou shall take root in
an honorable place, even in the portion of the Lord's Inheritance, when thou
shall be exalted as a Cypress tree upon the Mountains of Hermon, like a Palm
tree in Engedy, and as a Rose plant in Jericho: And, at length, when the Glory
of those Earthly Mansions must be left, when thou can be no longer Steward,
but art to pass thy strict Account before the Great House-holder at the
General and Dreadful Audit, when the Book of all our Actions shall be
vnclaps'd, thine shall be found square, and even, and thou shall receive that
happy Applause, and Remuneration, Well done, thou good, and faithful Servant,
Enter into thy Masters Joy. Which the Lord grant for Christ Jesus sake,

Amen.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Rode caper vites, tamen hic eum stabis ad Aras,
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.

FINIS.

