Charitas.
IVSTICIA
Fides.
A mustre of scismatyke bysshoppes of Rome / otherwise naming them selves popes
/ much necessary to be read of all the kings true subjects.

Cum priuilegio.

PRVDENCIA
SPES
Obedientia
Da^entia.
IB

Johan Byddell.



Londini in aedibus Thome Bertheleri typis impress. Cum priuilegio
adimprimendum solum. ANNO. M.D.XXXIX.

Here follows the coutentes of this book.
EIrst a prologue, which discribeth and sets forth the manners, fassyons,
and vsages of popes / right mete and conuenyent for the time that now is:
wherein also the popes power is breuely declared / and whether the word of god
written be suffycient to our salvation or not.

After that a goodly hystory and worthy to be read of al men, of pope Gregory
the seventh / written in the latyne tongue, by a right holy and virtuous prelate
of the church called Beno, cardynall at yt same time / and newly translated
into english.

Last of al follows the life of ye fourth Henry, emperor of Rome and of
Amayne, new turned also in to our mother tongue: which Henry was cruelly
imprisoned and deposed, by the means of the said Gregyry.

The prologue of the translatour. Johan Robertes to the gentle indifferent
reder sends gretynge and well to fare.
COnsyderyng oh well beloved reder, that so many noble authors / as well of
science incomparable as of wit most clear and excellent, have in diverse and
sundry works so lively and expressly depaynted and set forth, as a living
image before a man's eyes, the use, fruit or co^modytees of hystories / so that
nothing more, as concerning the co^mendacyon of them can be well desired / I
thought it therefore a thing little requysyte, as at this time again of any
such things to make declaracion. And though I had attempted so to do, yet I
do not stand (thanked be god) so hyghly in mine own conceyte, but when I had
done the best I could, and sought all the corners of my wit / I think not
the contrary, but there might have appeared as great difference of eloquence and
beautye of oracyon, bytwyxt my encomye or co^mendacyon and theirs, as bytwyxt
ye clerenesse of the son and the leest sterre in the fyrmament. Therefore the
premysses pondred, I have determined to leave that, and to proceed to my
purpose and show the cause of my labors. There is a fond folysshe fantasye
ragynge in many men's heedes now a days (that would to god they were so wise
as they be many in multitude that be troubled with it) and that is this. The
pope say they can not That the pope can not err the tra^slatou^e entenoeth to
disprou^.
err. Truth it is that if he be in a fair hyghway without any turnynges, and
well hedged on both sides, upon his mules back, I think he can not much err
except he would cause his mule to take the hedge. But that lightly he can not,
for a mule (men say) may abide ye spur very well. This fantastycall
blyndnesse was never endued by any man of litterature, but by some pekysshe
peddler or cloutyng colyer, it is so gross of it self. well, be it never so
gross, yet was I ones grossed therein my self: For colyers be not gross
alone. Than chaunsed to come to my hand the life of Gregory ye seventh,
otherwise named Hyldebrande (herafter following) wherein when I had read a
little way, as a man would say, one leaf and one side in the latyne tongue, and
se the abhomynacion that there was written, I begone some thing to be moved, and
bote the lyppe, scratched my heed, and wexed exceeding weary: yet forth I went.
But when I came to the end, and remembered the detestacyon, execracion, and
myschefe that I had there met withal by chance / and again how shamfully,
myserably, and pytously the poor simple souls of Christ's church had been
seduced and mocked / not only my self and one or twain mo, but hundredes,
thousands / ye all the hole world with this pestylent persuasyon, that the
pope can not err / and did se before mine eyes the plain contrary, so clear
yt it can not be denied / me thought I was bound in conscience, no less than
upon the salvation of my soul, to declare unto other the truth yt I had
found, and the darkness out of the which, by the redyng of this foresaid book
I was delivered. Of this conscience, zeal, and occasyon I took upon me to
translate this hystory mencyoned / which although it be not so exquisytely
done, nor with such eloquence of english as some man would look for in an
hystory / yet shall I desire all men, whose chance shall be to read it, to
admyt my good will and endeuoyre. And because no man (in the world that now
is) can mean, say, or do any thing so well or with so clear conscience, but
that the poisoned pestyle^t tongues of false detractours shall peruerte it to
the worste: therefore I The protestaryon of the tra^slatour.
protest here before god, or I proceed any further, that I entende no
derogacyon to holy church, holy popes, holy bishops, holy fathers, holy
doctors, holy man, holy woman, or any other holy thing / but only the
disclosynge and vtteraunce of them that be naught, and yet notwithstanding will
be taken as holy, and would have men believe that what so ever they do is well,
and that they can not err / ^^d will if a man say the contrary call him
heretyke, and be ready to burn him, for other defense they have none. But
truth it is that a galde horse will kycke when he is rubbed upon the gall: and
no man will make a prouder brag, souer than (...) stark thief / as Judas
said when our savior Christ showed his apostels, that one of them had betrayed
him: Not I good lord quod he. Here could I recyte many goodly ensamples of
them that would be estymed good, and yet in very deed be stark naught, were
not for diverse causes: but among so many let us be content with one. In the
time of king Henry Cardynall Johan.
the first, king of England, there came in to this realm a cardynall of Rome,
whose name was John^: this cardynall made a grievous exclamacyon against
priests concubynes / and said that it was a shamfull thing and abhomynable
in the sight of god, a priest to rise from a strompettes side, to sacre the
holy body of Christ / which notwithstanding the same day, after that he had
song mass in the morning, was taken with an harlot him self at night, like a
good eua^gelycall father. This thing was so op^n ly known that it might not be
forsaken nor hyd. If any man be discontent with the productyon of this
ensample, I shall desire him to hold me excused / first because I do it of no
malice, god to record / secondaryly for that, that no man entendyng to
disclose the manners of them that be naught, and yet will be otherwise taken,
can do any other but say ye truth as he knows. And in so doing he must
needs call a thief, by this name thief / a knave, by this name knave, and so
forth / wherewith no good man ought to be offended. Now (leest we be to
tedyous) it is mete we aproche to our matter.

GRegory the seventh, or Hyldebra^de ^ergius the second of that name / before
he was created pope of Rome / was surnamed / os ^^r^i in latin / in english /
swines mouth hogs nose / or pigs snowte / whether ye will. which Sergius
because he was a shamed of so foul a name / and unmeet for such a dignytye
(as he thought) did change his name / and called himself Sergius. So that
ever since all popes have used the same / as ye se here in experience by
Gregory the. v^^. whose surname before was Hyldebrande.
of whom we spoke before, beside that that he was a damnable heretic of the
sect of Arriane, as it is very euydent to be seen in his life / was also so
cruel a tyrant and so leude of manners otherwise, as never god put life in a
worse. And even here without any more business (as an old rotten house,
blown over with the wind) comes down in a myschefe our old rotten
raynebeaten opinyon, that the pope can not err. For that ones admytted that he
was an Arriane, as truth is (if any crede^ce is to be given to a worldly
story) than no doubt but he was an heretyke condemned by the most famous
counsel of Nece. If the popes warryours will fight again thystory, and say
it is of none authorite and credence: I answer that they must approve it
needs, if they will at leest approve him yt is even next cosyne germayne to our
holy father. For he that wrote the book in the latyne tongue, was one Beno
cardynall at yt same time / which I suppose was a very good man, ye and could
err very little, if the pope can not err at all. Neither is it best for ye
saving of this opinyon, that ye deny the truth of this story, leest in your
most need other men serve you of ye same sauce, in the things wherein ye would
best be byleued, as in such things whereof ye have nothing to show but
stories / and than ye be at a pretty point.

Peradventure it will be answered, that likewise as ye aperyng of one swallowe
proves not the spring of the year, no more does the error of one man, no
not of four or five conclude that an other or all have erred in deed. Mary that
is truth / who gothe about to prove that? Our argument is no more but upon
possybylite, as thus. Gregory ye seventh did err and was an heretyke / ergo an
other Five popes stark heretics.
may so do. Or thus: Gregory the seventh was an heretyke. Vrbane ye second was
an heretyke. Liberius was an heretyke. Nouatus was an heretyke. Anastasius the
second was an heretic / and it is not impossible but the rest might be
heretykes: ergo all might be heretykes. Ye, I dare be bold to say, that if
men would make so fat heretykes as be made now a days, they were no better
all for the most part. Some man would say perchance that mine argument is
naught. And than I say again (saving my charity) he understands naught.
For though there were no way to fortyfye mine argument but the common manner of
speaking, yet could I do it. As for an ensample: when men say a dagger is but
death / it is as much to say to al men that have any wit, as all daggers be
death. And when they say: I would not trust my father, if his hoode and his
cote were sowed together, or if he did wear a shorn crown: some wise man
would take it so, that none such were to be trusted / and than me think they
be but even a right bare sort. Semblably (to choke them with their own
princyple) when they say, the pope can not err, their meaning is that no pope
can err: and than must the contrary needs be true, that when men say the
pope may err, it signyfyeth so much as all popes may err. And now I
trust to god our argument stands.

Here have ye proved yt the pope may err, with the experyence of five proved
herctikes, condemned by the testymony of the church and good autentyke
stories, which for the confutacion of this fond princyple might suffyse after
my mind. But because five make but a little show in a field, let us pass
forth and se if we can espy the hole army of these blyssed brethren.

For the more manifest truth whereof ye shall understand that from the year of
our lord god. CC.xliij. unto. M. CCCC.xxxiij. there has been.xxiij. scismes in
the xxiii. scismes in the church.
church, among the popes them selves. Of the which the.xij. scysme endured
xvij. years. The.xxij. scysme.xl. years, and the three and twenteth.xvi. years.

The.xxij. scysme aforesaid, was so dark and doutfull, that the cronyclers
can not tell (all the while it endured being the space of.xl. years) who was
the right pope / no nor the best learned men and most of conscience yt than
were. And yet there was ever more choice of popes enough: for all that same
time there were never less than two or three at ones. So that in my conceyte if
the pope can not err, me thynkes one of them might have tried the matter who
was the true pope. Neither do I doubt but every man said for him self, I am
the true pope. But for as much as none of them in so saying were allowed of
the other, it can not be denied but yt every one judged of an other, that he lied
and erred both / and was for the defendyng of his error an antypope or ydole.
yet the most wondre of all is, that it could not be discerned who was the
true pope, by the best learned and most of good conscience that than were as
the cronyclers say. Upon this it follows that there was never a true of them
all, or else yt the clergy or church was very simple and could not discern
it / and consequently had not Christ amongst them, to enstruct them by his
spirit of all truths: and than they were not the church of god. For Christ
has promised to be with his church to ye end of the world, to enfourme it
in all virtue. Or if they like not that, than must they say their chronicles be
false (wherewith hitherto they have found no fault) and condemn them / and
than we have made a fair brewynge. Considering than that the popes would not
at those days (when they were two or three at ones, ye and at other times when
they were five or.vj. at ones) allow one an other / but judged each other to
lie, err, and to be antypopes / what need we any better proves yt they may
err, than their own mouths?

In the time that these.xxiij. scysmes endured, we find that there were to the
nombre of half an hundred popes, stark errant scismatykes, anty popes, or
ydols / whose names be these.

Nouatus Benedictus.x. Liberius Stephanus.vj. Eulalius Benedictus Laurentius
Hispanus Sysinius Seysmatykes.
Johannes.x. Sergius Petrus de Carbari^ Christoferus Theodorus.ij. Damasus.ij.
Johannes.ix. Formosus Alexander.ij. Benedictus.ix. Romanus.j. Sylnester.iij.
Benedictus.iiij. Gregorius.vij. Eugenius.iiij. Johannes.xxiij. Leo.v.
Johannes.xij. Christoferus.iiij. Leo.xij. Sergius.iij. Albertus
Innocentius.vij. Arnolfus Gregorius.xij. Theodoricus Alexander.v. Petrus leonis
Gregorius ye syxte and two mo with him / beside these four yt Alexander
optayned of. Clemens.vij. Vrbanus.vj. Bonifacius.ix. Benedictus.xiij.
Bonifacius.vj.

GRegory the syxt aforesaid was so Gregorye the.vi.
rude and so unlearned, that needs he must chose an other fellow to execute the
office with him, wherewith because many men were discontented, they elect the
third to put the matter out of strife / for the other twain were fallen by
the ears together.

Nouatus the pope denied that there Nouatus.
was any forgyuenesse of sins to them that had ones offended, but without
remedy to be dampened for ever. If any man can deny that this man erred, let
him say now, for this is the last time of askyng. It were to long to recyte
all their errors / and therefore let us se how some of this half hundred used
them selves, as concerning a part of some of their lives / for to reherce the
hole storye would ask to long a volume.

First to begin withal, Bonyface the Bonyface.
viij. a man of ill name and fame, by his falshode and trecherye, disceyued his
predecessor good Celestyne the fyfth, and caused him by a false pollecy to put
him self down. Bonyface perceyuyng that Celestyne was a very gods creature,
and easy to make a fool of, thought surely to show him a point of sophestry
/ and for the same purpose made as many friends as he could. But amongst all,
he had made a special synguler good friend of one of the popes cubiculers /
whom at the last he entysed (for money) to take a great holowe read / and
therein to speak these words that follow to the pope, in the deed time of the
night. Now a man to speak in a read, makes a very strange noise, as ye
know. The words were these. Celestyne, if thou wylt be saved, renounce the
papacy and pomp of ye world, Celestyne (...) delude^.
and serve me as thou dyddest before (the pope before led the life of an
anchor) and this was done three nyghtes togider. The good poor soul the pope
supposyng this voice to descend from heaven, did as the voice commanded him.
But when he understood the gyle, knowing how falsely he was deluded, than he
prophesied thus of Bonyface: as a fox thou came up, as a lion thou shall
reygne, and as a dog thou shall dye. Bonyface was of such pride and
arrogancye, that he was not abashed to write him self, the lord of all ye
world, as well in tempora^tyes as in spu^altyes. And he instytute the pardone
and indulgence The Iubili^.
of the Jubilee.

Benedict the.xij. was of such disdeyn and skornefulnes, that he thought
skorne Benedi(...) the. x^^.
of his own kynrede / in so much, yt when any of them came to seek him for
aid and succor, he answered that a pope had no kynrede at all.

John^ the.xij. was so hawte, proud, John^ the xij.
and glorious in all that ever he did, and so ill of living / yt he was judged,
not to be saved, but rather to be damned / in so much that good and religyous
fathers in their devout peticions and prayers made unto god, desired to know
ye state wherein he stood. Now if he had made any good end, or like to a
christen man, what need them put any doubt?

Whereto should I recyte the most abhomynable pride that ever was herd of
Celestyne the third, which like an hoar of the stews past all shame, crowned
the Emperor Henry the fyfth, holding the crown between his fete: and when he
had so put it on, he smote it with his foot again, nothing ashamed to say,
that he had power to make and depose Emperoures at his pleasure. when
notwithstanding Christ said that his kingdom was not of this world.

Calixtus the second, took and imprisoned Calixt the second.
one Benedict a Spanyarde, promoted to the papacye by the emperor / but first
set him upon a mule, with his face toward the tail / and caused him to hold
the tail in his hand, instead of a bridle / and to ride through the cite
with much shame before him. Some writers say, that it was upon a camel / and
in deed it is most like to be true / to thentent he might sit a lofte like an
Emperor in a play / and be seen the better / to increase his shame. Lo what
charity is among these holy fathers? But if he had constrained him to take the
tail in his mouth, and play on it with his fyngers, in the stead of a bag
pype / than a man might well have praised the pagent, without any blame.

I do warn the here good reder of one thing / and that is this. I have left
out here the names of ye writers, where I took ye substance of this prologue,
as touching what so ever thou shall find therein concerning the popes, and
Emperors, except Gregorye the.vij. and the emperor Henry the fourth / and
wyttyngly and of this policy, to prove wheder any man be so well seen, to
deny the leest jot or title untrue, and that it can not be fortifyed by
authors hitherto allowed.

Of these.viij. popes that follow / that is Bonyface the sixth / Stephan the
sixth Roman the first / Theodore the second / John^ the.ix. Benedict
the.iiij. Leo the.v. and Christofer ye first / I find no manner of goodness /
but that they be all together sclaunderous, debatefull, and myscheuous, with
such contencyon as has not ben herd of at any time.

And first of all Stephan, confermyng Stephan the.vi.
thactes of John^ the.viij. in that the said John^ degraded Formosus when he
was cardynal, to the state of a lay man / and enforsed him to forswere both ye
cite and ye seat: condemned also in his time ye same Formosus Pope Formosus.
/ with all thactes done of him in the time of his papacye / and took up his
body after it was buried / and smote of one of his hands / and did the hand
to be cast in the river of Tyber / two of the fyngers first smytten of.

Than comes Theodore the second / and Theodore the second.
he condemns Stephan and his acts / and approves pope Formosus and his
acts / and so did John^ the.ix. in the counsel holden at Rauenna
before.lxxiiij. bishops.

Than comes Sergius / and dassheth Sergius.
all that was done of Theodore / and condemns both Theodore / John^ the.ix.
and also Formosus / co^maundyng Formosus body to be taken out of the grave ones
again / and to be appareyled like a priest / and his heed to be smytten of in
the seat apostolyque / and the body to be cast in the river of Tyber.

Leo the fyfth was imprisoned of Christofer Leo the fyfthe.
/ and had the papacye withdrawn from him by maystrye and violence: but
Sergius the fourth thrust out Christofer and that right shortly / according to
the old proverb. Quade do / quade have. Here is a turmoylyng I trow.

John^ the.x. was sone to Sergius the John^ the tenthe.
fourth / both in flesh and spirit / and than ye may be bold he was no
little honest Mark the life of these that follow / by the end / for it is an
old proverb. If the end be good / all is good.
man. John^ came by the papacye as moo of his fellows did / by vsurpacyon and
violence / I will use no worse terms / and at the last, according to his life
dyed myserably in prison, his breath stopped with a quysshyon.

John^ the.xvij. came up by symonye / John^ the xvii.
by the help of Crescentius consul of Rome / and afterward (for no
goodness) had his eyes bored out of his heed / and the rest of his members al
to cut, hewed and mangled.

Damasus the second entered the poperyche Damasus the second
by power and violence / and by all possibility lived well / for he dyed
suddenly, without howsell or shryfte.

John^ the.xxj. was not unlearned / but John^ the xxi.
a very fool in manners / and dyed as folysshly. Upon a time (belyke when the
cups were full / for than be men most wysest) he prophesied that he should
live many years / but it was not long after, ere he dyed wretchedly, slain with
a chamber falling on his neck, which was but even new builded. And here ye
may se how true prophets they ben.

Whereto should I recyte the greuouse Innocent the fourth.
and intolerable exactions, taskes, and paymentes, wherewith pope Innocent the
fourth, both cruelly, wrongfully, and uncharitably, pylled and vexed the
Realm of England / for ye which he was sharply rebuked of Grostheed, bishop
of Lyncolne Bishop Grostheed.
at those days, in a lettre sent him from the same Grostheed / for the which
lettre, and for because the bishop would not admyt a neuewe of the same
Inuocentes, being but a boy, to a Canonrye than void in Lyncolne, he was
accyted to Rome / and there upon accursed / and the bishop appeled to the
Throne of the Trinity. After the bishop was deed, there appeared to the pope
in the night, one in a bysshoppes raiment / and smote the pope upon the lift
side, saying. Arise up wretch, and come to thy dome. The pope was found
deed in the morning / and his bed all swimming with blood.

Bonyface the.viij. of whom we spoke Bonyface the. vii^.
before, dyed thus. As he withstode the frensshe king / and enforced with all
his might and power to have deposed him, Guyllyam de Longaret, a wise man and
far casting / and other of Guyllyams friends, made them strong / and took
pope Bonyface, whom after long pynynge in prison, they set upon a wild
horse, without any brydell, turnynge his face toward the tail / and making
him run, and prycke so about, till at the last he lost his wind / and so
was siayne: but even in a manner (as I said) deed before with hunger / agreeable
unto the prophecye of Celestyne / as a fox thou entered / as a lion thou shalt
reygne / and as a dog thou shalt dye.

Johan the.xij. by all lykely hode came John^ the xi^.
of gentle blood / for he loved well dogs and hunting. And as for women, he
kept them but even openly. At the last as he was taking a little pastyme with
a man's wife, for the recreacyon of his spirytes / the devil killed him
suddenly, even in the doing of thacte.

Constantyne the second entered vngracyously Consta^tyne the second.
and lived ungraciously, to the great infamye and slander of all holy church,
and was at the last ungraciously served / both his eyes put out, and deposed
by the charity (as writers say) of good christen people for his ungracious life.

I find it a true saying, oh good reder, that who so regards his work
dilygently has little mind of other things. In good faith I was so besy
with these popes, that I had almost forgotten my self / and have nigh hand
made half a work instead of a prologue: but I pray the of thy curtesye to
pardon my forgetfulness, and than I will speak a word or twain of the
deposycion of the emperor Henry the fourth, with two or thremo, and so make an
end.

First to remember the most cruel, Henry the fourth / Emperor.
tyrannous, and pityfull handlyng of the exceeding good and virtuous prince
Henry the fourth, emperor of Rome and of Almayne, whose life and hystorye I
have hereafter translated: alas it would make any man's heart in the world to
melte. Oh good lord what man is that living, were he never so cruel or
unnatural, whose eyes would not braste out in weeping / to se so excellent a
prince, so valiant, and so virtuous to be so villaynously entreated, mocked,
driven from place to place, cast in prison, deposed, banysshed / and that even
of his natural son, lords, and subjects? The cause and doing whereof was
only and all together Hyldebrande, otherwise named pope Gregorye the seventh /
as but to plain (if it pleased god otherwise) hereafter it shall be seen in both
their lives following / and therefore I let it pass.

Than go to Innocent the third / and Otho.
se how by the authorite of Quodcuque ligaueris, he sets up and puts
down, and makes hauoke. And first of all he enhaunseth Otho the fourth, and
crowns him Emperor: but it was not long or great varyau^ce fell between
the pope and the emperor. Than mark how that as soon as Otho ones
displeases Otho is deposed.
Innosent / by and by he is accursed, and thereupon deposed / and Frederyke the
fourth is set up in his stead. But not long after comes Innocent the
fourth, and he deposes Frederyke / because he Frederyke is deposed.
began to withstand the pope, and would have taken no wrong at his hands as
other had done. This Frederyke was slain of his own son / by whose
encoragynge it is easy to conjecture.

was not the emperor Jews the Jews the mylde deposed.
mylde cast in prisone also and deposed of his own sons, by the counsel
of Gregory the fourth?

Did not pope zacharias at the request Hylderyke deposed.
of Pypyn, ruler of the french kings house, depose Hylderyke the french
king at those days / and made him a monk? It is a wonder they made him not a
monkas, or some other monster.

Suppose ye also but that king John^ King John^ of England handled like a ward.
of England was handled metely like a ward? which was feign to yield up his
crown to the pope, and make so shameful an oath of allegyaunce, to hold his
crown of him / after yt manner as I believe verily no true herted subject may
abide to here of, much less than to report it. Ye, and what was the cause of
the cruel handlynge of this good king? Forsothe none other but for that, that
he right gentilly demanded a certain so^me of money of the white monks, to
aid him in his wars and need against the yrisshe men / which monks
answered right obstynately (but clokynge their obstynate pride with the color
of obedience toward their religyon) that they durst not so do, without the
consent and license of the general and heed visytour of their religyon,
thabbot of Cisteaux in France. The king notwithstanding when he returned from
Irelande, compelled them as right was, for their proud and disdaynfull
stubburnnesse, to pay much more than he demanded before the setting
forwards of his voyage toward Irela^de.

An other cause was, for that that the king would not admytte one Stephan
Langton (a man of no small pride and few good virtues, as it apereth right
well by the chronicles) to the archbysshoprike of Caunterbury, whom the priour
and covent of the same had elect and chosen against the kings will, and sent
their election to the pope / which the pope confyrmed, and sacred him at a
city called Viterbi. If these be reasonable causes (oh good christen reder) to
enterdyte and accurse this noble realm of England, the king and his
counsel, with all the dukes, earls, barons, lords, and other his subjects
that favored him, I report me unto the? If these be reasonable and just
causes to pyll and poll this most honorable realm of England ever sens that
yearly of a thousand mark to be paid to the court of Rome as a trybute, as
the bishop of Rome pretends / with other incouenyentes expressed in the
cronycle of Fabyane, the seventh part and.xvj. leaf / Read Fabyane and the
chronicles of England.
and in ye chronicles of England the. lxxxiiij leaf and the.lxxxv. leaf, I
report me to the and to all the world. without questyon king John^ was a
good man, and a most virtuous king / but ungoodly handled and falsely dyffamed
by a malycyous sort of traitors of ye clergy after his death / and his life
and hystory shamfully enterlased with most abhomynable lies: wherefore I
co^ntende it syngulerly unto thy goodness to read it with discrecyon and
judgment. Here (good and favorable reder) I appeal unto thy very conscience,
and adjure ye in the behalf of god, and as thou wylt answer / for as much as
thou see here depaynted and set forth before thine eyes, the manners and
fassyons of the proud bysshoppes of Rome (which be such that it mere able to
make any clean and christened, and good english heart in the world to
abhor at them) that thou from hence forth be not so superstycious, so
insolent and folysshe to think it well done, and allowed of god what so ever
the rauenyng bishop of Rome shall do, without or beside ye word of god. Ye,
and I adjure the also in the same name and virtue that I did before, that thou
suffer not thyselfe to be led in blyndnesse, and dampened in hell with them that
held with the bishop of Rome, than named pope Innocent the third / against
their liege lord and sovereign king John^: but yt thou endeuoyre thy self to
know thy duty unto thy sovereign and lyege lord / and to resort unto such
sermons and books as shall teach the the same: unto whom thou owe such
obedyence, as to shede thy heart blood in his cause and commandment / ye
against an hole army of bishops and popes of Rome, if the case should so
require / as well as again an army of infydels and turks. I mean where the
bishop of Rome will take in hand to play the tyrau^t, as he did with good
king Johan / there I say thou art bound under the pain of dampnacion to
stryke. ye I affirm boldly that who so ever ones favored cursed Innocents
part at yt time, was dampened for ever in hell / unless he repented and were
sorry therefore or he dyed. That proves the elect vessel of god saint Paul^,
the.xiij. chapter to ye romans, saying: who so ever resysteth the power
(meaning ye temperall power only) resysteth the ordinance of god. Now is it
plain that who so ever resysteth the ordinance of god, co^mytteth dampnable
sin / and shall receive dampnacyon for his labor as saint Paul says /
onelesse he repent and be sorry therefore. And that ye aydours fautours,
favorers, and co^senters unto sin be as well worthy of everlasting
dampnacyon as the very doers of ye fact, is proved by thauthorite of saint
Paul, in the last end of the first chapter of the epistle to the romans, by
these words. The which (says saint Paul, meaning of the heathen gentyles
in general) all be it they knew the law natural of god, that all they
which committee such sins / as be adnombred in the same chapyter before) be
worthy of dampnacyon / yet not only they do ye same, but also consent unto
those yt do them: as who should say, not only ye doer but also the co^senter
unto sin, is worthy of everlasting damnacyon. Neither can any man pretend
ignorance before god / for it will not serve, as witnesses Christ him self in
the gospel / saying. If the blind led the blind Math.xv.
both shall fall in the dyche. He says not, that the one of them shall fall
in the dyche but both. Wherefore ones again I warn, advise, beseech hertely,
and adjure all mine own hertye and well-beloved countrymen of England, that
they permyt not themselves to be blinded with affection, with hypocrysye, or
with superstycyon. Blyndnes will not help / and therefore let it pass. If thou
will know the bishops power of Rome / otherwise called ye popes power / as
it is co^uenyent and sitting that thou do / resort unto the glass of truth,
and to the book named the determinacions of the universities / where it is
right excelle^tly and passing well declared and debated what the power of the
pope is / how far it extends / and what he may do. And to tell the my mind
shortly. Our metropolytane of Caunterburye, within the realm of England, is a
far better man than he / both by thautorite of scripture, the doctors of the
church, and the authorite of counsayles general. And as for the bishop of
Rome, otherwise called the pope that now is, all the world knows well
enough what he is: a bastard a symonyake, an heretyke, and a false usurper of
his dignyte. wherefore I can not marvel to much why my country men of
England, which had wont ever more to be cyrcumspecte and have wisdom in all
things, and fyerse of courage to defend their king and realm manfully /
should, seeing no cause why, but many and urgent causes to the contrary /
depend and lean to the usurped authorite of such a naughty and leude person.
what said I, authorite? ye tyranny: which because our most gracyous and
sovereign lyege lord the king, will permytte and suffer him no longer have his
usurped iurysdyction within this realm, and to carye away, exhauste, and
devour the gold, silver, and treasure of his poor subjects and co^mens, to
molest and trouble them in his court at Rome / and diverse ways to oppress
and use his tyranny over them by him self and his, as he many years heretofore
has been neglygently suffered to do. For this our cause (I say) it is yt he
bears so much malice unto our most benygne protector and defendour our
said souereygne lord ye king, our undoubted capital heed under god / and
enforseth therefore as much as lies in his froward and ungracious policy and
power, to bring his highness and his realm to his usurped obedyence / which
most manfully like a most vyctorious and christen king he does defend, not
only for him self, but for the tender love and pytie that he bears to the
weal of this his honorable realm and loving subjects, and the delyueraunce
of the same from seruage and thraldom. Here me thynkes I se even the hertes of
al true englysshmen leap in their bodies for ye love that they bear unto
their most gracious liege lord, thus shamfully and cruelly handled for their
sakes, and speak unto them selves after this manner. Shall we suffer our kings
most gracyous highness thus malyciously, cruelly, and frowardly to be
entreated and handled, mocked and deluded of a bastard, of a symonyake, of a
false usurper, and of an heretyke / and all for the love and favor that he
bears unto us his poor subjects / and for because his grace only myndeth
and tendreth our co^modite, weal, and profit? No forsothe, we will not suffer
his grace to receive such iniuryes and wrongs in any wise, so farforthe as it
shall lie in our power to the contrary / but we will agayue like true and
loving subjects, when so ever his noble grace shall so command us, ye but
even wynke upon us (to testify our true hertes and minds / that his most
noble grace does not love us in vain, and suffer so much iniuryes for our
sakes only for naught) draw out our swords like englissh men and true
subjects / and manfully fight in his graces quarrel, to spend the best blood
in our hertes to be revenged of such a false bloodsupper and Antychrist. Let us
well remember, note, and po^der what benefytes we have received of ye kings
most gracyous highness, by the space of.xxv. years / and what experye^ce we
have had of his procedynges, and how we have been defended from all outward
enemies, and what glorious and most victorious acts our said sovereign has
opteyned in ye said.xxv. years while he has been our king, and in what welthe
we have lived under him / besides the thing yt he now gothe about, as to
defend us from the theft, robbery, oppressyon and tyranny of the bishop of
Rome, that most myscheuous tyrant. Has not his grace ever ben our protector
and defendoure, our shield and buckler both in town and in field, against ye
theftes and robberyes of strong thieves and murderers? who could pass out of
his doors / ye who could abide at home in his own house vnrobbed or slain,
were not for the fear of the sword wherewith his highness most myghtyly has
ever defended us? whose wife could be saved from ra^ysshynge? whose daughter
and maid from deflorisshyng? who should defend us from the incursyons of
outward enemies, as of alyens? who should se us have any right in the law?
who should defend ye poor wydowe, the innocent, the fatherless and the
motherlesse? Finally if we had not a gracyous prince (as lauded be god, no
realm has none such) it were much more pleasure for us to be out of ye
world than to be in it, to be beestes that to be men / co^syderynge the mysery
wherein we should live, if the said bishop of Rome and his might obtain that
he and his most desire. The premysses therefore well consydred, why should we
not love him, favor him, and defend him with our lives and goods to the
vttermoste of our powers / as our lyege lord and sovereign, as our protector
and defendour / ye as a very father unto us, as he is without questyon? And
contrary, why should we in any wise love, favor, enclyne, or depend any
thing to that tyrannouse Antychrist of Rome, which would with all his heart
se his grace, his realm, and subjects also utterly not only ruyned, but also
brought in perpetual captyuyte and bondage / to the end that he with his
clyentes might have his dyuellysshe desire and lust accomplysshed? and all
this is for our sakes only. what profit have we by that foul romysshe
ratten, but pyllyng, pollyng, pykyng, robbyng, stealyng oppressyon,
bloodshedyng, and tyranny daily exercysed upon us by him and his? Does he not
enforce to distroy and extynct us as much as lies him? why should we be thus
blind? why should we be thus insensyble? Alas for pytie, let us ones be wise
and serve god truly and our king / and god shall love us, favor us, defend
us, and be with us / and than who shall be against us? Remember good reder what I
have said I beseech the hertyly in gods behalf, and as thou art a true
subject / and away with Antychrist of Rome.

Here (most gentle reder) all be it I instauntly required the a little before
as thou would answer before god to resort unto such books as may
perfytely instruct the in the knowledge of the power of the romysshe popet or
bishop, yet for because the matter is now in our handlynge also / and for as
much as I desire nothing more than that thou and all other my country men,
may clearly se ye plain truth, as consernynge what his power is in deed / and
by that to stycke and abide: I say and boldly affirm at few words, The
bishop of Romes power.
that the bishop of Rome has no more authorite than has any other bishop
in christendom given him by ye scripture. To prove that, it shall be necessary
to recyte ye place of Mathewe the.xvj. wherein all his hope and trust is. But
first thou shalt understand yt our savior Christ puts a certain
questyon unto his discyples, and demands of them what the fame and report
of the people was of him, and how they estymed him and took him in company
there as the apostels came / not for because that he was ignorant of the
peoples talking: for how can any thing be unknown to god? but to the end
and purpose that he would after, that demand of them their own faith and
believe / and have it known to all men, as it was before known unto him self
/ to signyfye that his servants, friends, and lovers which be taught
inwardly by ye spyrit of his father, have an higher knowledge, understanding,
and a sure believe and trust / where as they that be not instruct in their
souls by the same spyryte, have but a waueryng mind and opinyon, shaken with
every wind and puff of doctrine. The words of the scripture ben these. whom
(said Christ) do men talk that I am, that same son of man? And they
answered: Some say that thou art John^ Baptyst / other say that thou art
Helyas / other that thou art Jeremy, or one of the nombre of the prophets. He
said unto them. But what say you that I am? Than Simon Petre answeryng said:
Thou art Christ that same son of the living god. Here thou must understand
good reder, that likewise as Christ proponed his question not only unto Peter,
but unto all his apostels / even so they all and not only Peter, answered unto
Christ's questyon / all be it at the first sight a man would think the
contrary by the words of the scripture: but that answer of all them was made
in Peter, and by Peter, in the name of them all / as in worldly business ye
foreman of a quest answers and gives the verdyte for all his fellows. This
affyrmeth saint Augustyne upon this same place, by these words. Vnus respondit
promultis: Oue Augustyne.
answers (says he) for many. Item the holy man Bid, our own country Bid.
man: Petrus respondit vnus pro omnibus. Peter answers (says he) one for
all. Item Lyra: Peter (says Lyra) as Lyra.
though he had been principal of all, gave answer for him self and for the
other. And the gloss also called, Glosa interliniaris, says the same / and so
does the ordinary gloss. And the noble clerk Chrysostom Chrisostom.
in his.lv. homely, upon this same place of Mathewe / and upon the last
chapter of John^ in his.lxxxvij. homily, calls Peter the mouth of
thapostels / for that yt all they answered in him, and by his mouth, as by
their forman and spokesman, as men call it. And that he was so it apereth well
in the syxth chapyter of John^, where after a long sermon yt Christ had made
unto ye people, wherewith they were so sore offended yt they went murmuring away
and forsook his audye^ce / he said unto all his apostels atones: will ye go
also? Than answered Simon Peter. Sir, to whom should we go? Thou have ye words
of eternal life / and we believe and know that thou art Christ ye same son
of the living god. Mark here that he says not, I believe and know / but we
believe and know, as being the mouth and forman for them all. Of this it is
manifest both by scypture and doctors, that Peter answered for all his
fellows, and they all in him / and yt his cofessyon was their co^fessyon.
Forget not this good gentle reder, for you shalt receive no small fruit thereby
and light, as touching ye truth of yt that I affirm ye bishop of Rome to
have no more authorite than an other bishop. For this ones granted (as it can
not justly be denied, and as we have suffyciently proved) that all ye apostels
made answer unto Christ's demand, and confessed him to be the son of the
living god by the mouth of Peter / than must it needs follow of congruence,
that what so ever answer and promise for that confession so made, seems
only at the first lokynge to be yielded unto Peter as retrybucion and reward
of his christyan co^fessyon / must of necessite also be yielded unto the rest of
his fellows. For the cause (as says saint Augustyn) why Peter received such a
promise of Christ as he did, was his true and faithful confession. Now the
same cause of promise and reward being in them all, that was in Peter / why
should they not all than enjoy and obtain ye same gift, authorite, and
promise that Peter enjoyed and optayned? specially before so rightwyse a judge
which had called them al to one office of apostleshyp? Ye, that our reason is
both good and problable / and that all the apostels had like and egall
promise made unto them all / ye even the very same self promise yt Peter had
made unto him, and all at one time and place / we shall confyrme and stablysshe
by thautorite of doctors, and reason corroborate by scripture. Our first
doctor is the holy and worshypfull man Bid, which confyrmeth our foresaid
reason thus. Likewise (says this holy man) as the apostels generally demanded
of their believe, Peter answers one for all / even so that answer that Christ
made unto Peter, he made to them al in Peter. This gear is plain enough me
thinks. But let us se what Lyra says. And I say unto the (says Christ) that
thou art Peter, and so forth. where Lyra upon these words of Christ: And I
say unto the (puts to this gloss) for the and thy fellows. The same
affyrmeth Ludolphus in his book intytled, De vita Christi, even by the same
words: and so does the foresaid gloss interliniar or between the lines,
saying thus. Christ answers them all in Peter. And the ordynarye gloss says
thus. The answer is made to one for all, to signyfye that unity ought to be
observed among them all. Now this ones proved, as we se it is / and as it can
not be denied / but that what so ever promise of power was here made unto
Peter, was equally and at one time and place made unto all the rest of
thapostles? How can the bishop of Rome, that usurper, tyrant, and blood
supper, for shame (if he were not paste all shame) ones mouth it, that he
should have any authority above an other bishop, consydering al thapostles
had as much power promised unto them as had Peter, and all at one time, as I
said but even now? Yea that there was no superiority amongst the apostles,
appears in the.xv. chapter of the acts of the apostles, where when Peter by
the way of sentence and judgment, would have rydde the gentyles, that were
converted unto Christ, from the bondage of Moses law, and from all the
parts thereof, James took upon him to correct Peter's sentence, and adjudged
that for the weakness of the jews, to the end that dissencyon and strife
should have an end between the gentyles and them, adjudged (I say) that that
gentyles should abstain from eating of meats off^ed unto ydolles, from
fornycacyon, strangled, and blood / ye and discerned that so it should be,
saying. My sentence is (that is to say, I judge and ordeyne) that we trouble
not them of the gentyles, which be converted to god etc. And this ordinance
stood, and was a plain correccyon to Peter's sentence / so that all men may se
plainly, that James knowledged no superiorite in Peter, which he must have
done, if there had been any in Peter. Yea if there should be any prymateshyp or
superyorytye in any of Christ's discyples, me thinks it should be in Judas
and Silas, which in the same chapter following be called heed men or
superyours among the brethren, which yet can not be understand, as
concerning any power that they had more than their fellows, but for some other
syngler gift wherein they passed the rest. And yet in all scripture is there no
place that speaks so much for Peter. That Peter also had no more authorite
than any other of thapostels is easy to se in the xviij. of Mathewe, where they
received all as much, as high, and as great power as Peter had promised unto
him in the said.xvj. chapter, al though the words might be referred to Peter
alone / as we have justly fortyfyed before yt they were not. The words of
the.xviij. chapter ben these. Trewly I say unto you (says Christ to his
apostels) that what so ever ye shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven
/ and what so ever ye shall lose upon earth, shall be losed in heaven. who sees
not here in these words as much power contained as is in the.xvj. of Matthew,
where he says. what so ever thou byndest upon earth, shall be bound in heaven
/ and what so ever thou losest upon earth, shall be losed in heaven. And yet in
this.xvj. chapitre of Matthew, the power is but only promised. Whereunto some
of the papystes, obiecte well and wisely, that gods promise is his deed and
performau^ce, meaning that as soon as the promise was made, which is written
in the.xvj. of Mathewe, it was performed even by and by. I will make you a like
argument. Christ was promised unto Aoam, that he should come and redeem him
and all his posterity from thraldom. ergo by these wise papystes reasons,
Christ was borne even by and by. And it was promised in scripture, that a pure
virgyn and maid, should be the savior of ye world. ergo if god always
fulfill his promise immedyatly, Christ was conceived and borne upon our lady
before she was borne her self, thousands of years, long before the angel
saluted her, and went about inuysybly to teache the papists such subtle
arguments. No doubt but our papystes ben ever the best learned, and best
reasoned men / where there be no mo (...) they. But let us ymagyn that the
power contained in the.xvj. of Mathewe was promised than to Peter only / yet
makes it not for all that, that he had any superioryte or primatshyp over his
fellows / in so much as the contrary apereth in the xviij. of ye same
euangelyst, as it is before declared. Such arguyng is much like as though ye
kings grace (god save his highness) having twelve gentylmen standing before
him, and promising one of them by name hereafter to make him knight of the
Bathe, but appoyntynge no certain day / should happen afterward, according
to his promise, to doubbe him knight of the has / but with the other.xj. of
his fellows, all at one season and time. Now if this gentylman thus by the
kings grace promoted, would take upon him to be lord and master over his
fellows, because the diguyte was first promised unto him / I suppose verily yt
the rest would think high scorn thereof / and compte him not very wise, nor
yet take him so in d^^e. For all be it that the promsse were made unto him
first / yet they came unto it as soon as he / and had the same dignite and as
much given unto them as had he / and all at one time. And so likewise it
fares by the power and keys supposed of the papystes to be promised unto Peter
only, and before al other / although it be as true as yt the sea burns. But
admyt that it were of a truth / yet does it not follow immediately yt he had
any superiorite over them / for as much as every one of them received the same
self authoryte in the xviij. of Matthew / by these words. Truly I say unto you
(says Christ) yt what so ever ye shall bind in earth shall be bound in heaven /
and what so ever ye shall lose in earth shall be losed in heaven. So that the
most which they might prove if their supposycion were true, as it is not /
were yt Peter received tha^^orite of byndyng and losyng first, and or any of
the other received it: which natwitsta^dyng is untrue. And again that there was
no superiorite among the apostels, does ye holy apostle Paul prove the second
chapter to the Galathy^^s, where he says thus. As soon as James, Cephas, and
John^, which seemed to be the pyllers, perceived the grace which was given
unto me, they gave unto me and Bar nabas their hands / and so forth. All the
world may se by these words of Paul that James and Peter, which he calls
Cephas, and John^, were not in deed pyllers and heedes of the rest of
thapostles, but seemed so to be, and that to some men / for the vehemencye and
diligence peradventure that they showed above their fellows in setting forth
the word of god. Mark here also how he says not that only Peter seemed to be
ye pyller alone, but James and John^ seemed to be pyllers as well as he, and
were taken for as great men as Peter was, which could not have been, if his
power had excelled theirs. Neither does he say, that James, Peter and John^
were of any power, or pyllers in deed above ye rest / but only that they seemed
to be the pyllers. Wherefore it is plain that they were not so, but contrary,
of egall power and dignity with the other.ix. Y^ le here furthermore by the
authority of Paul, that James and John^ were as hyghly esteemed as Peter, but
never man yet said that James and John^ had any more authority, than Andrew,
Matthew, Thomas, and the rest, wherefore it concludes that Peter had no more
authority than all other of thapostles. And so it follows, that the pope has
no more authority than an other bishop. Which granted, it argues of
necessity, that he has no further to do, than within his own diocese,
which ought to extend no further than to the next bishops diocese adioynyng
to his. It argues again, that he can reserve no cases from an other bishop,
that he can not send any i^terdiction in to another bishops diocese / that he
can make no maryages / or give any dispensacyons in another bishops diocese.
etc. Finally it argues that he can do nothing in an other man's diocese, for
that that he has not the word of god to bear forth his act, oneles the
bishop of the same, for a more advantage, will consent unto his ^surped power
/ and wynke there at. Of this it is plain, that what so ever power the bishop
of Rome has put in execucion within this realm of England since the time
that he first crepte in to it / is and has been nothing else but strong
illusyon, vsurpacyon, and tyra^^ye / and every penny that he has had, plain
extorcyon, theft and robberye. To this I add, that all be it the words of
authorytye given unto all the apostles / and so consequently unto Peter, seem
very large and to enclude all manner of power in them, where Christ said. What
so ever Mathewe xviii.
ye shall bind in earth / shall be bound in heaven. etc. Yet I say that other
places of scripture declare / that it ought to be understand of the spirytuall
power only of byndynge and losing of sin, by prechynge the word of god,
and mynystrynge the sacraments. That the foresaid words include no power over
temporaltyes, or temporal rule / is euydent by the.xviij. chapter of Johan,
where Christ said unto Pylate. My kingdom is not of this world / which is as
much to say to any wise man: As I am no worldly king, prince, or ruler, nor
have any thing to do in such business, as concerning my manhood, and the
mynystracyon of my fathers word. Here would I feign learn how the bishop of
Rome came by his temporal power to depose kings and Emperors, seeing that
Christ denied such power before good witness. I am sure that the bishop of
Rome has not more authorytye than Christ had. If Christ had no temporal
kingdom, rule, nor power in this world / than dare I be bold to say, that
the popet of Rome has none. And for as much as there be but two manner of
condycyons or states in this world / that is to wit / either the condicyon
and state of a king or of a subject / it must needs follow that the bishop
of Rome, who would feign be called pope, is, nor can be of any other state and
condition than a subject / for as (...)he as he can be of no higher estate
that was Christ / which knowledged him self to be but a subject before
Pylate, saying. If my kingdom were of (...).xviii.
this world (that is to say, if I were a king in this world as I am but a
subject) than would my mynysters surely light, that I should not be delivered
unto ye jews / but now is not my kingdom from hence / as who should say, ye
contrary is true that I am but a subject, and therefore I may not fight and
resyst ye power and ordinance of god, but be obedyent thereunto as my father
has commanded. Ye and to signify yt as concerning his manhood and the
admynistracion of his fathers word, he and his mynisters what name so ever
they bear, must needs be subjects unto ye kings power / in the.xvij. of
Matthew he pays tribute for him and Peter, ye and in Peter for all other
thapostels and mynisters of ye clergy / whom Peter represented and fygured, to
teache, declare and be an ensample to all that ever should succeed him and his
apostels of their due obedience toward their princes. And this he did
covertly, signifyeng yt there should come in the latter days such false
prophets and Antychristes as would teach the contrary, and withdraw their
duty from their souereygnes. Here is it euydent (oh good reder) that the
bishop of Rome can be but a subject, nor is: but unto whom? Forsooth to
the emperor. Than note my mind in one thing. Every man knows that what so
ever subject makes insurrectyon against his liege lord and sovereign, must
needs be a traitor unto him and to god also. The fals^ ^ysshop of Rome yt now
is, otherwise called the pope, has done ye and daily does the same / ergo he
is a traitor to god and the emperor: ye if thou enserche thystories with good
dylygence, thou shalt find yt there have been very few other this.vij.
hundred years. If ye bishop of Rome be but the emperors subject / by what
authoryte may he think thou take upon him to do that thing that his own
liege lord and souereygne the emperor may not do, at the le^st by good
authorite and justice, as to depose and set up this king and that king at
his pleasure / which his lyege lord and souereygne the emperor him self can
not do. And than he being but a subject, how the dyuell comes it to pass
that he may do it? were it a mete thing that the archbysshoppe of York should
depose the emperor, or the king of Hungary? Now seeing yt every bishop has as
much authorite one as an other by ye law of god, as we have proved before /
why should not the archbysshop of york depose ye king of Hungary or such
another man, as well as the bishop of Rome that sometime was, named Iunocent
the third, in a manner deposed the most virtuous prince king Johan of
England / and brought him to that extremyte, that he must needs to save his
life and crown, and his realm from further inconuenyentes, being a king knele
down before a knave called Pandulph, the bishop of Romes legate, and yielded
up his crown to the said Pandulphe, as in to the hands of that foul monstre
and hoore of Babylone Innocent beforesayd / which crown the said Pandulph
received and kept five days in his hands.

My stomach abhors to declare any further of ye matter, therefore I beseech
the what so ever thou art good reder, and the kings true subjects, to seek
the rest thy self. In my conscience if that same matter were well pondred and
regarded with a true judgment and a true subjects heart, of all them that
may and do read it / with other most shamfull abhomynacions that have been
sithe that practysed by that babylonycall strompet of Rome and hers / as well
in all parties beyond the sees, as in our natyfe country and realm of
England: I doubt not that if all true englysshmen knew them perfytely, and
pondred them as they should do, but yt they would, ye and thereto might with
right good co^seyence detest, defye, bespytte, and abhor that same foul tode
of Rome, as they would and might the graunde dyuell and capytayne of hell
Lucifer prince of darkness.

Now to make an end of this matter, I have proved that the bishop of Rome
called pope by vsurpacyon, has no more authorite than an other bishop, and
that by scripture, doctors, and the papystes own gloses. And that furthermore
the power that he has, with all other bysshoppes is more spyrituall / and him
self but a subject with all his to the king and his laws, both moral and
iudyciall. And that have I dene by the authorite of Christ's own words unto
Pylate in the xviij. chapyter of Johan, where Christ says. Mykingdom is not
of this world, as who should say / I am no king or ruler of the world / and
than must he needs be a subject. Seeing than yt Christ was but a subject in
this world, as concerning his manhood / how can it be avoided but the bishop
of Rome must needs be a subject? If he be but a subject, how can he depose a
strange and alyen king, as the french king or such another the which thing
to do his liege lord and souereygne has none authorite? Ye what manner of
subject call ye that, that compels his own souereygne to kiss his fete,
and will set the crown upon his souereygnes heed with his fete and dasshe it
of again when he has done / ye and depose him thereto when so ever he list?
How agrees this with saint Paul's doctrine in the.xiij. to the Romans,
which says thus. Let every soul submytte him self unto the authorite of the
higher powers. By the higher powers he understands only the temperall power,
as the process of the text manyfestly declares / and excepteth neither
bishop of Rome, bishop of London, nor bishop of Durham / neither monks of
the charterhouse, nor freres of Grenewyche / neither father pie, nor father
crow / neither father goose, nor father gander / nor yet any such like. But
he says let every soul submyt him self, or be subject unto thautoryte of
the higher powers: where note that in saying every soul, he except (...). And
though as I said before he (...)th himself afterward co(...) the authorit^
of the king only; say^ng^ ^e bears not the sword for ^aught yet the
ap^stle Peter sets out Paul's meaning much clearly i^ his fyrst^ epistle
and second chapter, say^ng. S(...)ytte your selves unto all ^ane^ ordinance
of ^an, for the lords sa^^ / whether it be unto the king as (...) to the
chief he^d / either unto rulers, as unto them that are ^ente of him, for the
punysshment of y(...) doers / but for the la^d^ o^ the^ that d^well* For so is
the will of god^ye, and mark what high ^^ayse is given the king in
scripture. For he is the ^ynister of god, says saint Paul in the.xiij.
chapter to the romans. And Solomon also in the viij. chapter of his
proverbs / speaking in ^h^ person of gods wisdom says thus: ^y ^e kings
do reygne. S^ y^ not here how Solomon extolleth the (...) of a king /
affyrmynge that realms and kingdoms be^ governed, vpholden and defended by
the wisdom of god? and that their power, offices, laws, and ordynaunces, ben
the very divine power and ordynaunces of god? And in the second book and
twenteth chapyter of the Paralipo^e^on, it is written thus of worldly princes
and rulers. Ye do not exercise the judgment and law of man / but of god. For
as much than as the office and dignyte of kings and such heed rulers, ben
ordained by the high wisdom and prouydence of god / and for as much also as
his judgment and law, is not only man's law and judgment, but even the very
judgment and law of god / it follows very well according to the saying of
saint Paul: that who so ever resysteth the king and his ordinance / Paul
says who so ever / ^e^cepteth no man.
resysteth the power, ordinance, law and judgment of god / and shall
therefore (according to the mind of the same saint Paul) receive eternal
dampnacyon for his reward without amendment.

Here (gentle and indyfferent red^^) even as I ^ntende not to collect and add
in this one little corner, all the places of scripture which make, stablysshe,
and confyrme the divine authorite and power of kings, ye rather of god
himself / even so my mind was not utterly to ^^aue it all bare, naked,
untouched, and blind unto the / but to show yt some light knowledge and
understanding, in the obedyence due unto thy prince / and give the occasyon to
enserche and seek further for a more clerer perceyuaunce of the same. And thus
I leave speaking of the kings power, adding a reason or twain that we have
no need of the bishop of Rome to be a general heed of the church of god /
and that I prove thus. If we have any need of him either we must have need
unto his laws and correctyon, which is false / for as much as the king is
both suffycyent and able with his counsel to punysshe all manner of sin: or
else we have need unto his personal prechyng, which is false also and can not
be. Or else we have need to believe as he byleueth, which is false and untrue
also / for than we had need to be heretykes and traitors / as co^munly he is
him self. Or else we have need of his mighty power / which is as true as
that the moon has calued / when him self has no more power than has an
other bishop / as we have made clear before. Now if we need him i^ none of
these points / than it is easy to conjecture and to argue for a truth, that
he was never ordained of god, to be general and heed vicare of the church /
but has purchased that authority only by the sword / and does falsely
usurp it by tyranny. For god and nature creates nothing in vain. One thing
I know, that he has had much of our money, whereof whether he had any need or
none, let every man judge. Yes say the papystes / it is mete that there be one
that dare boldly tell Emperors, kings and princes their faults / as who
should say / that no man saving the puppet of Rome durst purely and syncerely
preche, teache, and write the holy word of god, wherein as in a most true
myrrour and glass, both kings, Emperors, and other, may behold and se ye
spots of their souls. But your meaning is (oh my fair papystes) that it is
mete and conuenyent, that there be such a tyrant and devil, as may be able
to lay a fair sword in the necks of princes, which they and their heirs
and successors shall never be able to recover, when so ever they shall do any
thing contrary to your appetites. But we taught by good experyence, are
compelled to tell you again, that it is both necessary and needful that
there be none such, and that we report us to good king John^, with other
both kings, Emperors, and dukes, whom your almighty god and father the
puppet of Rome, has full like a false traitor and tyrau^t deposed. Here I
leave your lord ye puppet as I found him for this ones, spekyng a word or
twain of some of his clientes, which cleuyng to the clyfte of his lordshyps
clensyng place, defend his godheed from the highest to the lowest, with the
word of god unwritten / so they call it.

Truth it is, that the word of god unwritten Of the word of god unwritten.
is of as great strength and efficacite as ye word of god written, I mean if
it be the very word of god in deed. And therefore when so ever any man will
usurp upon the (oh good reder) and fortyfye any matter, as in ye name and
authorite of ye word of god unwritten, do no more but deny the unwritten word
yt he allegeth, to be ye word of god, and put him to the proses of it / and
this be sure of, yt neither he, nor any of his shall ever be able to prove it.
It may fortune he will enforce to prove it thus. There be many things
necessary to be byleued, yt be not written in scripture / and this is one of
them. ergo this must be byleued of necessite. To ye mayor or the first part I
answer thus, that as concerning the necessite The first argument that the
word o^ of god written is suf(...)^yent.
of our salvation, it is false yt there lacks any thing in scripture written /
for it is written John^.. Sic enim deus dilexit mundu^, vt filiu^ suu^
vnigenitu^ daret, vt ois qui credit i^ eu^ no^ pereat, sed habeat vita^
aeterna^. God loved ye world so intyerly, yt he gave his only sone, to the end
that who so eue^ byleueth in him, should not peryshe / but have life
everlasting: and in ye same chapter. Qui credit filio, habet vita^ aeternam.
He that byleueth the sone, has life everlasting. And John^ the sixth. Qui
confidit mihi, habet vita^ aeterna^. He that trusts in me, has everlasting
life: and so forth in.vj. hondreth places mo. Now ben all articles necessary to
our believe in Christ, in ye scripture written, and they do save us, as is before
proved (because that who so byleueth in Christ, byleueth in ye father, and so
in the hole trinite) ergo ye scripture written does save us, and is suffycyent
to our salvation. And so is the mayor / that is to wit, that there be any
things necessary to ye salvation of our souls unwritten in scripture, proved
false. Mary otherwise to speak of necessary things, truth it is that there be
many things necessary to be byleued of co^gruence and good reason, that be not
in scripture / as to believe yt false harlottes and shrewes will never be true.
And yt poules steple can not ride.xl. miles upon a day, no though Lyncolne
mynstre were ye horse.

The mayor or first part of their argument aforsayd is proved untrue also, by
thautorite of saint Augustyn: Ad fratres Saint Augustyn in the book written to
the christen brethren / living in wilderness.
in heremo, sermon.xxviij. Satis enim nouit charitas vestra, quod tota
perfectio nostre vite, et edificationis, ex euangelio accipitur. Your charity
(says saint Augustyne) knows perfytly that all ye perfectyon of our life and
edifycacion, is taken out of the gospel. Now mine old popysshe papystes,
where is become your word of god unwritten necessary to be byleued to ye
salvation of our souls. Saint Augustyne says that all the perfectyon of our
life and edifycacion, is taken out of the gospel. If all be taken out of the
gospel, how is any thing unwritten? Ye, and he says not only all / but
adds there unto perfectyon and edifycacion, whereupon it follows yt your word
of god unwritten is of no perfection nor edificacion / and tha^ it is not
necessary to be byleued to the salvation of our souls. But pe^adue^ture ye
will use your old shamlesse fassyons, and say that he includes in this word
gospel, the gospel of god unwritten. Non sic impij, noc sic. Not so ye
wicked, not so / for he expounds himself of what gospel he means, in
his.xxxviij. sermon to the christen brethren living in wilderness. Legite
sacram scripturam (inquit ille) in qua quid tenendum et quid fugiendum sit,
plene inuenietis. Read ye holy scripture (says saint Augustyne in ye which ye
shall find at full, what is to be held and what to be avoided. How say ye
now, does not saint Augustyne command us to read holy scripture? but who can
read that that is not written / wherefore ye se that he speaks of the word of
god written / and he adds thereto, that we shall find in it at full, that is
to say to every wise man, suffyciently enough what is to be holden, and what
to be avoided. How like ye this word at full, which before he called all the
perfectyon and edifycacyon of our life? And yet we find not in scripture your
word of god unwritten. wherefore I conclude that it is not to be admytted and
held, for as much as all things that are to be holden, ben (as saint
Angustyne says) comprehended in the word of god written at full. And a
little after. Et quid tenendum, et quid vitandum est apertissime demonstrauit.
And it has showed us (says he, menyng of holy scripture) most clearly and
openly, what is to be held, and what to be refused. How say ye to these
terms, most clearly and openly? More over to come to holy scripture again /
saint Luke in ye first chap. of thactes, aproueth saint Augustynes words thus.
Superiore quide^ volumine diximus de omnibus Theophlie, que cepit Jesus The
second argument.
tum facere, tu^ docere. etc. In our first volume or book (says Luke) we have
written of al things o Theophilus, which Jesus both practiced and taught. etc.
How say ye now to theua^gelist Luke, he excepteth nothing yt Christ did or
taught, whereof he has not written: wherefore if ye will be so good not to be
discontent yt Christ did and taught al things necessary to our salvation /
than must ye needs confess yt they be expressed and written of Luke (though my
new old masters have not ye wit to espy them out) and than I put no doubt
but in the hole body of the scripture written they be set forth at full and
at large / and so as for your word of god unwritten, ye may lay it up to an
other year that there come some derthe of ye word of god written. But what
name should I have better for these noble diuynes, than to call them doctors
dreamers, or gospellers ymaginatyfe doctores imaginatiui.
/for all yt they prove is by dreams ymagynacions, and science ymagynatyue.

Paul the first chapter to the romans, The thyrbe argument.
says thus. Non enim me pudet euangelij Christi. Siquidem potentia est dei ad
salutem omni credenti. I am not asshamed of the gospel of Christ (says
Paul) For it is the power of god to save all that believe, trust, or stycke
surely thereunto. I marvel sore how our ymagynary fe doctors or gospellers
can avoid me this place of Paul. Paul reputeth the gospel of god to be of
such power and suffyciency, to save all that believe it: and than is the
scripture written suffycyent to our salvation / and nothing unwritten
pertaynyng to the same. Do we lack any of the gospel think you? than lack
we a piece of our salvation. Finally if our ymaginatyue euangelystes believe that
we lack any part of it, for because they can not tell how much that part
is, nor how little, but be uncertain thereof / it follows that they be
uncertain of their salvation / and would for that intent have us part takers
of their sorrows: for it is a pleasure to wretches to have some companyons of
their wrechydnesse. Solatium est miseris, sotios habuisse malorum.

Did not god also by ye mouth of Moses The fourth. Non addeti^ ad vbu^ / quod
loquor ^obis net auferetis ab eo. Deute. iui. ec.xvii.
command the children of Israel as follows? Thou shall not add any thing
to this word, nor take any thing from it. I beseech you my wise unwritten
gospellers, for what intent was that / but because their word written was
suffycient? Be we than in worse case than they were / or does not this
commandment stand yet in effect? Is it either judicial law or ceremonial
/ if it be neither, than it apertayneth to us as well as to them / and than go
play you with your vnnedefull unwritten word. How say ye now? has not John^
ye same sentence in ye last chaptre of thapocalypse? will ye never be wise.

Answer to this: why did the apostels The fyfth.
set their pens to ye book to write? was it not because the gospel of
Christ should not be forgoten? And why than did they (as ye say) leave it
vnsuffycient? May not the rest that ye say is unwritten be forgotten? Yes:
and is so much forgotten all ready, that ye can not tell what it is, nor how
much. By your tale a man might well accuse as well all as one of the apostels
/ both of vncharytablenesse, as of wylfull negligence and murdre of men's
souls, in leaving that unwritten wetyngly and for the nones, that is of
necessyte requysyte to the salvation of our souls / seeing it may be forgoten.
And yet the contrary is known to well, that they were both to good,
charytable, and dylygent / and loved the commandment of Christ to well, to
be taken tardye in any such fautes / wherefore all your bablyng is not worth a
button.

But what need us go about to prove The ^yet^.
the negatyfe, when it is suffycyent for our part, to deny there is any thing
necessary to our salvation unwritten in the scriptures: therefore (oh good reder
which art not learned) when so ever thou have any such reason made unto the,
demand of him that reasons with the, what he means by that same word,
necessary. If he answer, necessary to salvation: deny thou that any such
things lack in scripture written. If he mean of other necessaries, be not
afraid to grant it him. As though it be not written in scripture, that if
our fantastycal doctors were upon the spaynysshe sees in a ship without bottom,
they must needs be drowned / yet must thou by necessyte of reason believe it.
Unless their faith were better than was Peter's, when he went upon the sea /
or that god would show a a higher miracle than was done upon the holy maid of
Kent. And thus much The holy maid of Kent.
for the co^futacyon of their mayor. Now to the minor or second part of their
reason.

When they can not auowe the mayor or first part of their argument, than it is
impossible to make good the minor or second part / as when it can not be
proved, that there is any thing unwritten in scripture, necessary to our
salvation / how is it possible than to assygne or appoint any certain thing,
(as the fasting of lent, or any other thing) and say this is one of them?
for I must first prove that there be some such things unwritten, ere I can
say, this or that is one of them. As in example. If a man would prove that
there be some good and honest unwritten gospellers, and could not make it good,
if he were put to his probacyon / how the devil than were it possible for him,
to assygne and point out some certain man of that sect, and say, such a man
is one of those honest and good men? And by my truth I think it were as great
maystry to prove that there be any good and virtuous people of that sect, as
to prove that Christ was borne before our lady, I take no mo to be of that
sect, but such as defend this arronyous opinion in the pulpet, or by
writing, or obstynate disputacyon.

Now when neither the mayor nor the minor can be proved, where shall we find
the conclusyon? God knows, for I can not tell.

Yet to prove what our ymagynatyfe doctors can do, let us for good company
grant that there be some things unwritten necessary to the salvation of our
souls / shall it follow therefore, that those same unwritten verytyes, which
some of them assign to be the word of god unwritten, be so in deed? I wonder
in what figure this same argument stands, whether in Bocardo, or in Newe^ate.
Such manner of arguing is much like, as if one of these unwritten prophets,
going to the feldes to shote, and lacking both braser and shotynge glove,
would prove that he neded his wives night cap, and argue thus. By god I have
need of diverse things which I have not, if I should shoot well. Mary that is
truth might an other of ye company say. Now if this wise man would conclude
upon the others grant, and say / ergo it is my wives nyghtcappe / might not an
ungracious fellow standing by say / ergo it is an halter / or ergo thou will
never be wise? yes in good faith: except he would make a braser or a shotynge
glove of his wives nyghtcappe. Semblably when our doctors say: there be many
things unwritten in scripture necessary to our salvation to be byleued. ergo
this or that is one of them / yet that same this or that follows not of
necessyte, no more than the good wives nyghtcappe does / so that if thou se
cause why thou may as well say / ergo it is the good wives nyghtcappe, or
deny it, and put him to the probacyon of it: and of this I dare make the
warrantyse, that neither he nor all the friends he has shall ever be able to
make it good.

But the best sport of all is, that our unwritten eua^gelystes be driven by
their own confession, to forsake the word of god written, as the thing that
is not able to bear them out in their trouble, and (...) ^ory (...).
to seek this sorye shyfte of the word of god unwritten, and that of necessyte
as they say. Of what necessyte every man knows. Trewly because they be not
able to prove the bishop of Romes power and tyranny, with other erronyous
artycles, by scripture written / but grant well and wisely that the word of
god stands not on their part, and must therefore make their refuge to the
word inuisyble that flies about in the air, and no man can tell what it is
nor where to find it. Be not these sore fellows to fight in a man's quarrel,
that castyng their best weapons from them, run home to their wives and say
they be driven to fly for fault of weapon / and desire a podynge in the stead
of a sword? God send every good man in a just cause, somewhat more wyser
counsel than he were like to have of such men, which even at the first
choppe / ye and without any study to, confess they be but beggars and have no
ware to fell. Is not a man's money well bestowed upon such merchauntes as
cry creke even at the. fyrsts brunte? These be they that will beat^ down all
the world with then gonne shot. But if other men had been driven to such
shameful shyftes by them good lord what exclamacio^s would they have made.
And as for the perpetual virgynite of our lady / no man douteth of it that I
know. But in the mean time I desire my masters the papystes, with the
proctours of bycherly buggersters to tell me as they will abide by, whether
they believe ye perpetual virgynne of our lady to be comprehended in scripture
written or no? all be it I know that in some places they have said nay all
ready. But as for yt I will take no hold of it but give them for this ones the
priuylege of cornisshmen, that is to tell their tales twyse, for at the first
tellyng it may fortune they were not well advised, or peradventure the men's
wits were rauysshed, or (as the common saying is) breched. Neither is it
good manner to take a man at the worste.

An other cauellacyon have they, and that This cauelacion took the patriarche
of unthrifts out of doctor dronkarde.
is this. How know ye say they which is the true word of god? Whereunto I
answer, that as concerning our outward knowledge, thapostles and prophets
have left their minds thereof behind them in writing, by the which we may
discern the true word of god from dreams and fantasyes. Well say they again.
But how be ye sure that thapostles and prophets did write that same word ye
ye red^? as who should say, it is possible yt ye may be deceived, and that ye
bible which ye have and look upon, may be falsely intytled, and be none of
thapostles and prophets doings. Whereunto I make answer, yt as concerning the
outward knowledge, we have as much and good assurau^ce that it is ye very
self same word yt Christ, his apostles, and ye prophets taught: as that same
sort, which ye call ye church / yt is to say, the priests, monks ^^eres,
chano^s, abbots, bishops. etc. and have herd Christ, thapostles, and the
prophets teache and preche as often as ever did they / and seen the^ as often
as ever did they. Wherefore as concerning ye outward title and knowledge, as I
said before, we be so well assured thereof as they ben, and receive no knowledge
of the^, no more tha^ they receive of us. Neither have they any better know
lege in this behalf, than we have. Than proceed our wise dreamyng doctors
further / and affirm yt we of the te^poraltie have none other knowledge and
assurau^ce of ye true word of god, but because ye church, yt is the clergy
as they mean, being assured which is ye true word, and which not, by ye
instruction and techyng of ye holy ghost, does certify and tell us by ye same
spirit, which is that same true word of god. It is an old said saw (good
reder) yt a man shall soon ^ceyue a thief by his own tale. These old bottell
brethren be so subtyl, yt they wot not in ye world what they say. I ^myse
you they ben excedyng connyng in wrastlyng by ye arms / but when they come to
the collers, they ben choked up forthwt, as the devil would / and cast in their
own trip. Let us mark well their words, and se what they have won by their
own tale and confession. If ye holy ghost (as they confess, and as there is
no doubt) eustructeth the church and teaches her to discern the true word
of god, from false dremes and fantasyes / than is it as false as ever god
almighty was true or is, that we of the temperaltye have no other knowledge or
assurau^ce which is the true word of god, but by the spirytualty, for as
much as we by ye redemptyon that is in Christ Jesus be of the same church,
that is enstructe, taught, and made perfyte in all verytees or truths. For
look how the holy ghost enfourmeth and teaches all the hole holy catholyke
church of god / even so he inspyreth and teaches every true and living
membre of the same, in all veritees and truths necessary to their salvation.
But truth it is that the papysticall spyritualtye, with the doctor of ye
unwritten word, be not of the church of god / ergo they be not enstruct by the
holy ghost: and consequently know not ye true word of god. wherefore of good
co^gruence and reason y^ and by their own reason, they must bylene (...), when
we say unto them, this is ye true word of god, and not we them. For yt they be
none of ye church approves saint Paul in the.viij. chapitre to ye Romans,
saying But if any man have not ye spiryt of Christ, that man is none of his.
The papistical spirituality, with ye prophet of little verait, have not this
spirit of Christ. ergo they be none of his sort, by ye witness of his
servant Paul. Yea how can they for shame be so bold to say yt they have his
spirit, when they be al utterly void of ye fontes aseribed and appropriate to
them yt have the spirit? Oneles they could make good, and fortify these
little pretty ones yt I shall adno^bre to be the fruits of Christ's spirit, as
ambicion, pride, lordlynesse, envy, malice, disdeyn, preuy and open murdre,
oppressyon, tyranny, sleuthe, ease, glotony, with all manner of lechery,
brennynge, drownynge, hangyng men i^ their own gyrdels, sects scismes,
division, debate, co^tencio^, and strife with Symo^ magus and Judas, and ye
people of Sodom and Gomorre, with hawks, horse, hoores, knaves, thieves, and all
yt naught is, and whether these be the known and manifest fruits of ye
papistycall kingdom, the heed, father, and god whereof is Antychrist of Rome /
and his attorney the great god of Cateway, ye father of unwritten veritees / I
report me to all ye world. And now ye se what our unwritten eua^gelistes have
won by their own tale, and to what point and conclusion they be brought by
their undoubted veritees: Forsooth yt they be neither sure which is the word of
god, nor yet be none of his church / and that for because they be not endued
with his spiryt, as their fruytes do well declare. But ye very intent, purpose,
and policy of the authors of the foresaid unwritten word was undoubtedly,
herafter when they should have seen time conuenyent / to have denied all holy
scripture written, both tholde testament and the new to be the word of god.
This is in no wise to be doubted. And of this dyuellisshe drifte and purpose,
they put forth this questyon to the blind people, saying. How know ye yt the
bible which ye have daily in your hands and which ye read, is ye true word
of god, but by us? Or else to what other intent should they moan such questyons,
but yt they minded purposely to bring me in wa^hope and doubt of yt thing
wherein they never douted before? Oh good lord, why do ye suffer these
wretches thine enemies so long to reygne, to rule, to devour, to murdre, to
s^^e and kill both the body and soul of thy poor creatures? Discende good
lord discende, and revenge the blood of ye innocent, with the slau^drous
blasphemy of thy holy name. Thou have here proved unto the (good christen
reder) that the bishop of Rome, otherwise unjustly called pope, may err /
and how yt by the means of that same foul monstre and bloodsupper, and by
his clientes, this realm of England has been grievously vexed, troubled,
pylled, polled, shorn, shaven and scraped even to ye very hard bones and
mary: and not only this realm, but other also / the heedes and rulers whereof
as before is declared, have been of the same gargle faced Antichrist with his
ministers, shamfully handled, vexed, imprisoned and deposed. And this has be^^
done without thautorite either of godd^ law or man's, by very power and tyranny,
him self being but a subject, and of no power without his own dyocese /
which ought to extend no further than the dyocese of the next bishop. It is
proved also by the authorite of scripture, that all men ought to be obedyent to
ye kings power, of what co^dycion or state so ever they be / and that under ye
pain of everlasting fire. whereto I have annexed that the word of god written
is suffycient to ye salvation of our souls / and that the unwritten word is
but a dream and fantasye. And now prepare thyselfe to the life of Gregory the
seventh sometime bishop of Rome / of al tyrants monsters, and unfaithful
mamalukes that ever was the most: wherein thou shall se such mischefe,
abhomynacion, ^etestacion, execrable manners, pride, tyranny, craft, subtyltie,
ambytion, symony, poysonyng, necromancy, setting up, puttyng down, preventing
and supplantyng as has never ben seen in no one man's life yt ever was written
or read. And that not of Gregory alone, but of many other mo such monsters
bishops of Rome, contained in the same life of his. Finally (most gentle and
indifferent reder) by yt time that thou have perused it / I dare be bold to
affirm that thou would for no good worldly but that thou had seen it.
And if thou find not my words true blame me hereafter, as it shall seem good
unto the. And to ye end that thou may give ye more credence to the truth of
the history, thou shall understand yt it was written in latyne (as I told the
before) by one of ye most famous and virtuous cardynals that than lived called
Beno. Thou do lust and long peradventure to se it / be of good comfort,
for with all the speed that may be possible, it shall be imprinted. And thus in
ye mean while fare as well as I would my self.

The fawtes in the pryntynge.
Folio. 2. pagina. 2. linea. 21. endued. read enduced. Folio. 7. pagina prima.
linea. 24. virtue. read / vertitie. Folio. 9. pagina. 2. linea 20. it with.
read / it of with. Folio. 15. pagina. 2. linea. 17. mere. read / were. Folio.
30. pagina. 2. linea. 10. more. read. mere. Folio. 34. pagina prima-linea. 10.
(...). read / proves. Folio. 36. pagina. 2. linea sec^da. not s^c. read / non
si^.
Imprynted by wynkyn de word / for John^ Byddell, otherwise Salisbury.


