MOSES and AARON OR THE AFFINITY OF Civil and Ecclesiasticke power.

A SERMON INTENDED for the Parliament held at Oxon, August. 7. 1625.

But by reason of the sudden and unhappy dissolution, then, not preached, but
since upon occasion, was; at St. MARY'S in Oxford, the 26. of February. 1625.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO MY MVCH DESERVING FRIEND AND BROTHER, FRANCIS GODOLPHIN, Esquire, This.
MY DEAR SIR;
Whilst others declaime (too justly) against the dull charities of the times,
and the coldness of affection in their Allies, and blood, I cannot but
magnify their worth, in you, where I have met a virtue, scarce exampled by a
second, friendship in a brother. I thought it a high injustice to smoother such
a miracle, and therefore have here set it upon record; that, as the age may
blush at her other prodigies, so glory here, that she has (at length) brought
forth one who has not lost either his Nature to his alliance, or piety to his
Country. A goodness seldom paralelled in these days of ours, these
degenerate days of ours, when we may find a more natural correspondence, a
liuelier heat of affection, amongst those of savage and barbarous condition,
than in the bosom of our own Tribe and Nation. But I may not tax, when I am
to salute, it is out of the road of gratulation; this is intended so, A mere
declaration of my thankfulness for all those your noble Offices of a real
brotherhood, which though I have not power (as yet) to satisfy, I shall have
ever will to acknowledge, and in that loyalty I persist,

Your most respectfully engaged, HVM: SYDENHAM.

Moses and Aaron OR The affinity of Civil and Ecclesiasticke power.
EXODUS 4.12. Go, and I will be in thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall
say.


HOw strangely God compasses what he proiects for his, by the hands of an
obscure Agent? Cap. 3. v. 9.10.
Israel has been long enough under the groans of Egypt, it shall be now
vnyoakt from that heavy servitude; and this must be done by no trodden means,
or ordinary instrument, Cap. 3.8.
But one that Israel and Egypt too shall stand amazed at to see in such a power
of substitution, A shepherd. Moses a feeding his fathers flock, not far
from Horeb, the mounraine of the Lord, Cap. 3.1. Cap. 3.4.
when suddenly a voice does at once astonish and inuit him, Moses, Moses. 'T
should seem the affairs were both of necessity and dispatch, when the person
to be employed was thus pressed by a double summons: Cap. 4.18.
what shall he do now? His flock must be left with Iethro in Midian, and he
shall to Court, there to ransom an engaged and captived Nation, from the
shackles of a Tyrant; Cap. 2.17.
A simple design for one seasoned in the course conditions of an Hebrew and a
Midianite: Men known more by the largeness of their folds, than any eminence
for matters of state, most of them being heardsmen, or shepherds. But see how
God will extract wonders out of improbabilities, and miracles out of both:
Moses shall first see one, Cap. 3.2. Cap. 3.3.
and then, do many. Behold an Angel of the Lord in a flaming fire in a bush,
the bush burned (says the Text) and the Bush was not consumed. A vision as
strange as the project he is now set upon, and does not so much take, as
stagger him. That it burned and consumed not, ranishes his eyes only, how it
should burn and not consume, his intellectualls; So that he is now doubly
entranced, in the sense, and in the thought. But there is more of mystery
inuol'd here than the Prophet yet dreams of or discouers. God in his affairs
requires both heat, and constancy: men of cold and languishing resolution are
not fit subjects for his imploiments, but those which can withstand the shocke
of many a fiery trial; they whose zeal can burn cheerfully in the services
of their God and not consume. Moses, therefore shall now to Pharaoh, with as
many terrors as messages. Cap. 5. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Ten times he must bid the Tyrant let Israel go: every Iniunction shall find
a repulse, every repulse, a plague, and every plague, a wonder. Somewhat a
harsh embassy to a King, and cannot be welcomed but with a storm, whose
disposition is as impatient of rebuke, as not inured to it. Those ears which
have been sleekt hitherto with the supple dialect of the Court, (that oil of
Sycophants and temporizers) will not be roug'ht now with the course phrase of a
reproof, much less, of menacing. There Is no dallying with the eye of a cock
atrice; I am sure none, with the paw of a Lion; Ruin sits on the brow of
offended Sovereignty, each look sparkles indignation, and that indignation,
death. Moses is now startled at the employment, Cap. 3.11. Cap. 4.10.
and begins both to expostulate and repine. -- Who am I that I should go unto
Pharaoh? I am not eloquent, but of slow speech and of a slow tongue --? Good
Lord! In a Prophet what a piece of modesty with distrust? will God employ any
whom he will not accommodate? He has now thrice persuaded Moses to this great
undertaking. The other as often manifests his unwillingness by excuse, as if
he would either dispute Gods providence, or question his supply. We find
therefore this diffidence checked with a new insinuation of rectifying all
defects. Cap. 4.10.
-- Who has made man's mouth, or who makes the dumb or the deaf, or the
seeing, or the blind, have not I the Lord? Why should any further scruple or
doubt assail thee? I that am the God of the Hebrews will protect thee; let no
wauerings of Israel, or terrors of Egypt any way dismay thee: particular
infirmities in thine own person I will mould anew to perfection, or if those
vacillations and stutterings of the tongue yet dishearten thee, Cap. 14.14.
Lo Aaron the Levite is thy brother, I know that he can speak well, take him
with thee, and this rod too, wherewith thou shall do wonders as dreadful as
vnpattern'd. Deliver Pharaoh roundly my commands, if he will not vndeafe his
care upon their first Alarm, I will bore it with my thunder. Why stand thou
then any longer so divided? Go now, and I will be in thy mouth, and teach thee
what thou shall say --.

Moses, is dispatched now, has his commission sealed, each particle of his
message punctually delivered him, wherein (as in all saecular and subordinate
Embassies) we find A command, Division.
A direction, and a Promise. The command, Go; The Promise, I will be in thy
mouth; The Direction, teach thee what thou shall say. So he that is singled out
to any service of his God for the advantage of his Israel, must not give back
or waver, Go --. If a willing obedience second this command, God promises to
assist, I will be in thy mouth; if there, be not dash't at the slownesse or
vnprouidednesse of thy speech, I will teach thee what thou shall say. Once more
is there a retired worth, which desires to sit down to obscurity, and seems
unwilling to the public services of his God, hear thou not this
proficiscere from heaven? Go. But have thou once undertook them? be not
discouraged, here is an -- aperiam, too --. I will be in thy mouth; but am I
welcomed there with reverence, and awe? speak boldly then, for, Ego instruam,
I will teach thee what thou shall say --, Go then. But let us first clear the
passage. It Is not my intent to show you Moses here in the storms and troubles
of the Court and State, but of the Church. I may not be too busy with the
riddles and Labyrinth's of the two first; the times are both rough and touchie,
I will only show you a far off, how this Proteus and that Camelion vary both
their shape and color. Moses was indeed forty years a Courtier, and the
better part of his life a Statesman, yet he was a Priest too (and so I follow
him) if you dare take the authority of Saint Augustine, who though on his
second book on Exodus 10. quast. gives Moses barely Principatum, Aug. lib. 2.
in Exodus quaest. 10.
and Aaron ministerium, yet in his Commentaries on the 98 Psalm, he thus
interrogates, Si Moses Sacordos non erat, Aug. in Psalm. 98.
quid erat? numquid mayor Sacerdote? and the sweet singer of Israel, put's
Samuel among them that call upon Gods Name, and Moses and Aaron amongst the
Priests, Psalm. 99.6. -- I have now removed all rubs and obstacles, the way is
smooth and passable, what should then hinder Moses any longer, Go, --.

Command and obedience are the body and soul of humane society, the head and
foot of an established Empire, Pars 1.
Command sits as Sovereign and has three Scepters, by which it rules,
Authority, Courage, Sufficiency.

Obedience, as 'ewere the subject, and bears up it is allegiance with three
pillars, necessity, profit, willingness. Sometimes command grows impetuous
and rough, and then it is no more Soneraigntie but Tyranny --. Again,
Obedience, upon distaste, is apt to murmr, and grows mutinous, and so it is no
more a subject, but a Rebel; where they kiss mutually, there is both strength
and safety; but where they scold and jar, all grows to ruin and
combustion. And this holds not only in matters Civil, but in those more
sacred. Command from heaven presupposes in us an obedience no less of
necessity, than will, and in God, insallibilitie both of power, and
encouragement. Faintness of resolution, or excuse, in his high designements,
are but the Teltales of a perfunctory zeal, howeuer they pretend to
bashfulnesse, or humility. Ier. 1.
I cannot speak Lord, or, I am unworthy, were but course apologies of those
that used them, when God had either matter for their emploiment, or time; And
the Quis ego Domine? Romans 1. Exodus 3.
of Moses, here, finds so little of approbation, that it meets a check; the
Text will tell you in what heat and tumult, with an -- Accensus furor Iehonae
the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and it should seem, Cap. 4.4.
in such violence, that Abulensis, after much trauerse, Tossed. in cap. 4. Exodus
and dispute makes that tergiuersation of his little less than a mortal
sin, and some of the Hebrews have strangely punished it, with the loss of
Canaan, persuading us, the maine reason why he came not thither, was his
backwardness in obeying this -- proficiscere, Go. Perer. in Exodus
But that is a Thalmudicall and wild fancy, fitter for such giddy enrolements
than the ears of a learned throng. And as Moses may not but obey when God
lays his command on him, so he must not go without it. Matthew must be
called from his receipt of custom; Mat. 9 9. Gal. 1.5.
and he is not honored with a true Apostleship, who wants his -- vocatus sicut
Aaron. That of God to the Pseudo-prophets, was a fearful Irony, -- I sent
them not, Ier. 14.
but they ran --, voluntaries (it should seem) find here neither
countenance, nor entertain meant, but whom God has pressed and sealed to this
great warfare; yet the other, notwithstanding, in the field, and seasoned once
in battle, the retrait is more dangerous, than the adventure.

We find Esaias more active and forward than any of the Prophets, Esaias cap. 6.
and yet that spontaneousnesse not chid; who (as if he would anticipate the
care and choice of God in his own affairs) makes a hasty tender of his
service, Esaias cap. 5
with an -- Ecce ego, Esaias cap. 8
mitte me; yet, he had his former convulsions, and pangs too of fear, and
diffidence; Woe is me, Esaias cap. 5
for I am a man of polluted lips. But see how God hammers and works what he
intends to file, either in person, Esaias cap. 7
or by substitute? an Altar must be the Forge, and a Seraphin the workman, who
with his tongs ready, and his coal burning, shall both touch those iniquities,
and purge them, and then, and not till then, here am I, Lord, send me. As
therefore to stand still, when God sends out his proficiscere, argues a rustie
and sullen laziness, so to run when he sends not, arrogancy, and
presumption. That zeal is best qualified, which has the patience to expect
God's summons, and then the boldness to do his errand.

The Schooleman in his 2a. 2ae. 185. question, Aqui. 2a. 2ae. qu. 185. art. 1.
being to deal of religious persons, strains not the Myter from his
discourse, but moderates the quaere by dividing it, and thinks to take away
all scruple by making two, whether it be lawful to desire Ecclesiastical
honor (Episcopal he Epithites) or to refuse it being enjoined? Greg. de Val.
in loc. Aqui. did. 10. q. 3. par. 2.
Gregory de Valentia (his Amanuensis here) turns the perspectiue from the
object upon the Agent, viewing as well the party desiring as the thing
desired, where, though he descrie height of sufficiency in personal
endowments: Cap-A-Pe, in all points canonical. yet he allows not a bait for
his eager appetite to feed on; a disopinion'd vnder-valued man may not desire
it for the dignity, nor he that is fortunetroden for the revenue. Be the person
otherwise never so completely accommodated, yet the irregularity in his
appetite strangles his other eminencies, and so he is (at once) unworthy, and
incapable. Reason and conscience, will betroth Honors to desert, which yet
they divorce from the immodesty and heat of the desire; for, if
super-intendencie be in the appetite more than the office, it is presumption.
Aquinas does censur't so, a common practice of the Gentiles, reproou'd in the
Disciples; Aquinas vt sup.
Ye know their Princes love to dominere, Mat. 20. if the honor be superior,
it is ambition, and so merely pharisaicall, -- They love the uppermost rooms
at feasts, and chief seats at Synagogues, Matthew. 23. If the revenue, it allies
to covetousness, Matthew. 23.
and differs from the sin of Simon Magus thus, he proffered money for the
gifts, these covet the gifts for the money.

On the other side, to reject the Ephod wherewith authority would inuest thee,
checkes doubly the refuser, charity, humility. Charity seeks no more her own,
Aquin. and Greg. vt sup.
than her neighbors good; now the charity we owe unto our selves, prompts us
to search out -- Otium sanctum (as Augustine phrases it) a holy vacancie from
these public cures, but that to the Church binds us to undergo. -- Negotium
iustum, the imposition of any just employment, Aug. 19. de Civil. Dei cap. 19.
-- quam sarcinam si nullus imponit, intuendae vacandum est veritati, si autem
imponitur, sustinenda est propter charitatis necessitatem, the Father in his
19. de Civil. Dei. cap. 19. Again, humility tie's us in obedience to
Superiors, so that as often as we disobey them we do oppugneit, and this (in
respect of God) is not meekness, but pertinacy, -- Tunc ante Dei oculos vera
est humilitas, cum ad respuendum hoc quod vtiliter subire praecipitur, Magn
Gregor. 1. pa^s Past. cap. 6.
pertinax non est --, Gregory 1. part of his Pastorals 6. Chapter.

To avoid then all occasions of public service for the Church, under a
pretense of humility or reclusenesse, speaks (too broadly) the delinquent,
refractarie. Your Anchoret that digges his grave in speculation merely, and
your Moale that is eathed wholly in an affected solitariness, are not liable
so properly to obscurity, as death; such elaboratnes tends not to perfection,
but disease; and we find an Apoplexy, and sleep, no less on their endeauours
than in their name; all knowledge is dusted with them, and it is no more a
nurserie of virtues, but a Tomb. And (indeed) such Silkewormes spin themselves
into Flies, disanimate, heartlesse Flies, life neither for Church, nor
Commonwealth. The Laurel and honor of all secular designs is the execution,
and the happiness of those sacred ones is not entailed barely to the knowledge
of them, but to the fac and vines. And that, not at home only, in thy
particular intendments, but abroad also in thy services for the Church; so that
he that retraits at any Alarm or summons of his God, for the common affairs
of the Church, to hug and enjoy himself in his solitary ends, runs
himself on the shelues of a rough censure, that of the Father to his
Dracontius, Athan. in Epist. ad Drac. Episc. fugient. pars 2. editio vltima.
-- Vereor ne dum propter te fugis, propter alios sis in periculo apud Dominum.
To stand by, and give aim only, whilst others shoot, and thou thy self no
markman, proclaims thy laziness, if not thy impotency. What a nothing is thy
arm? thy bow? thy shaft? if not practiced, not bent, not drawn up? or if so
glorious a mark, the Church? why not leueld at? either she must be unworthy of
thy travel, or thine of her. If therefore this thy Mother implore thy aid (so
Augustine counsels his Eudoxius) on the one side, August. Epist. 81.
hand not with ambition; on the other, lean not to a lazy refusal, weigh not
thine own idleness with the necessities and greatness of her burdens, to
which (whiles she is in travel) if no good men will administer their help,
Certe quomodo nasecremini non inueniretis; God must then invent new ways for
our new birth: the Father in his 81. Epistle ad Edoxium.

You see then our Moses may not hastily thrust himself upon those weighty
designs without authority and commission from his God, and yet once summoned,
not recoile; but thus having his Congedeleere and warrant from above, we must
now account him in the place of God, God indeed, with a -- sicut -- the Text
tells us so, thrice tells us so, God to Aaron, God to Israel, God to Pharaoh.
Exodus 3.4, 5.
'Twere then too high a sacrilege to rob him of any title or prerogative,
which should wait on the greatness of such a person. Let Us give him (what all
ages have) Eminency of place, Office, their attendants, Honor, Revenue. I
shall dwell my hour with the two first, with the latter only, in Transitu, and
upon the by, they being inuolued in the two former. And that I may punctually
go on, I will touch first (where I should) with the Eminency -- Go. --

Which as it was sacred in the first instaulement, Eminen. 1. par.
so in the propagation most honorable to the times of Heathens. For Tertullian
(speaking of the magnificence and pomp which attended their superstitions)
tells us, Tert. de Coron. militis cap. 10.
that their doors, and Hoasts, and Altars, and dead, and (what glorifies all)
their Priests were crowned: in his Corona militis cap. 10. And the first crown
which the Romans used, was their spicea Corona, given as a religious ensign
in honor of their Priests, -- Honosque is, non nisi vita finitur, Plin. lib.
3. cap. 2.
and exules etiam, captosque comitatur -- says my Histostorian, naught but
death could terminate this honor, which was their companion both in exile, and
captinity. They wore the name of Aruales Sacerdotes, Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 1.
cap. 26.
first instituted by Romulus, and Acca Laurentia, his Nurse, who, of her twelve
Sons having lost one, he himself made up the number with that title. But
here is not all, -- Terminorum sacrorum, and finium, iurgijs terminandis
praeerant, and interueniebant, they were the peacemakers of the time, and sat
as Arbitrators in matters of contestation between man and man, Plin. vt sup.
as the great Naturalist in the 18. book of his History, 2. chapter. And who
fitter for such a moral office than the Priest? an honor which these worst of
times allow him, though with some turbulency, and indignation: Numb. 16.3.
Moses and Aaron, you take too much upon you, was the cry of a Jew once, so
it is now, who would manacle and confine them only to an Ecclesiasticke power,
and deuest them quite of any civil authority, though Moses here had both. But
'twas not without some show of mystery, that in the robes of Aaron (I instance
now in him, lest perchance they should cavil with his brother Moses) there was
a crown set upon the Myter, Exodus 29.6.
moralizing a possible conjunction at least of Minister and Magistrate in one
person. And Chytraeus has a patheticall observation from the Apostles (...) --
divide aright, 2 Timothy 2. Chyt. de ordin. minist. page 506.
that the Metaphor was first taken from the manner of cutting or dividing the
members of the host, Leuit. 7. where the fat and kidneies were burnt as a
sacrifice to God, but the breast and the shoulder were given to the Priests:
the Allegory carries with it both weight and majesty, here is a breast for
counsel, and a shoulder for supportation in matters of government. And no
doubt in times of old (even these of the Fathers) the Sacerdotall power, was at
a great height, in equal scale with that of their honor, Si Regum fulgori and
principum Diademati inserius est quam si plumbi metallum ad auri fulgorem
compares, Ambr. ibid.
which was so eminent, that Saint Ambrose ranks not the Myter with the Diadem,
but in a zealous Hyperbole (pardon the Epithet) preferres it, and makes this
comparatively to the other as a sparkle to a flame, or dull Lead to burnisht
Gold, in his de dignitate Sacerdotali cap. 2.

I may not follow the Father in his priestly Panegiricke, it is too high, and
borders too much on the discipline of the triple crown, such a crown as never
yet girt the temples of King or Priest, but of him that tramples on the neck
of both; let such insolence invade the right of Potentates, and spurn their
Crowns and Scepters in the dust, whilst we seat our Aaron at the beck of
Moses, but the people too at that of Aaron: Let the Priesthood do obeisance,
and kiss the feet of Sovereignty; but let not the Laity turn the heel, and
kick against the sacredness of Priesthood. S. Augustine upon these words of
God to Moses, -- Tu eris illi in ijs quae ad Deum. -- He shall be to thee in
stead of a mouth, Exodus 4.16.
and thou shall be to him in stead of God, seems entranced awhile, and
bringing them to the balance, and weighing precisely every scruple, cries out,
Aug. lib. 2. Exodus 10. quaest.
Magnum Sacramentum cuius figuram gerat, as if Moses were a medium between God
and Aaron, and Aaron between Moses and the people. The moral is plain,
Sovereignty stands between God and the Priesthood, and the Priesthood between
Sovereignty and the people. Howeuer the Ceremonies due to either heretofore, in
matters of Instaulement, stood not at such enmity as we can say they differed,
they were both anointed, and both crowned; and though the authority were
unequal in respect of place, yet not of employment, Ye are full of power by
the spirit of the Lord, Micah. 3.8. And Elisha could once tell the King, He
should know there was a Prophet in Israel, 2 King. 5.8. And in matters of
preservation God was as zealous for the safety of these as them, -- Touch not
mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.

But let not my zeal to the Priest dispriuiledge my alleagiance to my King. I
speak not this to set up Moses in competition with Pharaoh, or rival the
dignity of the Priesthood with that of Sovereignty; but to mind you in what
luster it sometimes shined, and how the times now conspire to cloud that glory.

The days have been, when the Laicke was ambitious, not only of the title of
a Priest, but the office: for Eusebius examples in many of them, who thrusting
upon Bishops of primitive times, Statim concionandi munus obierunt, in his lib.
6. cap. 15. And Tertullian (speaking of the insolences and taunts which the
Laity then put upon the Priesthood) tells us that they justified their malice
and injuries to the Priest, by usurping the name, or profaning rather, Te^t.
lib. de Monog. cap. 12.
-- Quum extollimur and inflamur aduersus clerum, tunc omnes Sacerdotes, quia
Sacerdotes nos Deo, and Patri fecit, quum ad peraequationem disciplinae
Sacerdotalis prouocamur, deponimus infulas, and pares sumus; in his book de
Monogamia, cap. 12.

It should seem then the office and name past honorably through all ages,
even those of Infidels, though the person were sometimes exposed to the
persecutions of the time, and suffered under the blasphemies of unchristian
tongues; but now the very title grows barbarous, and he thinks he has
wittily discountenanced the greatness of the calling, that can baffle the
professor with the name of Priest. But these, whilst they intend to wound,
they honor us, and we account them no scarres, but glories. Let such children
mock on the Prophet, the event (I believe) will prove as horrid as that of
old, will you tremble to hear it spoken? you may read it then, and look pale
too, in 2 King. 2.24.

May it please you now, Office 2.
turn your eyes from the dignity, and reflect upon the office. The office, a
task indeed, such a one as should rather provoke our endeauours, than
appetites. If any man desire the office of a Bishop (let us awhile leave the
word Priest, and fasten upon this, the authority may bear it out the better)
desires a good work, 1 Timothy 3.1. 1 Timothy 3.1. Lib. 19. Ciuit. Dei cap. 19.
Quia nomen operis est, non honoris (as Augustine glosses it) it is a name of
work, not honor; a work no less fearful, than laborious, no where better
figured than by Moses, here, to Pharaoh, repriuing Israel from Egypt, from
which it is scarce any way differenced, but in the difficulty, and therein it
exceeds the type; difficulty worthy the trauells of the best, were not those
labors shouldered and thrust on by vainglory. Greg. de Val. in 2a. 2ae.
disp. 10. q. 3. part. 2.
Istaec cathedra cupientem se, and audacter expetente^, non requirit, sed
ornatum, sed eruditum --. So Valentia upon Aquine. -- This chair of Moses is
no seat of ambition, but desert, it hates either an intruder, or pursuer; He
that gains it by covetousness, or bold desire, does not possess, but invade
it, and it is not so much his by right of inheritance, as usurpation.

These honors sawne only upon humble worths, men clad and harnessed with
double eminency, of life, of learning, those whose virtues have advanced them
above the ordinary level and pitch of popularity. Yet to these neither without
this proficiscere -- to Moses, Go. Clemens in his first Epistle, will persuade
you: it is the conclusion of Saint Peter. Augustine goes farther, Lib. 19. de
Ciuit. Dei, cap. 19.
-- Locus superior sine quo populus regi non potest, etsi administretur vt
decet, tamen indecenter appetitur --. Suppose the man worthy of this place of
Eminency, and comes home in matters of administration, yet he is to blame in
those of appetite, Greg. de Val. vt supra.
for the desire lays open his unworthiness, and the Schoolman will not
flatter him, but concludes it plainly for a mortal sin. And if we may
guess at the child by the patent, it best countenanceth leuity, or arogance,
never read to be the proper seeds of any virtue. Notwithstanding this desire
(sometimes) comes not within the compass of presumption, if the work be the
object of our appetite, and not the honor, or, if the honor, not the reuenew,
Part. 1. Pastor. cap. 8.
-- Appetere calsitudinem Episcopalem, non est semper praesumptio, sed appetere
Episcopatum, ratione celsitudinis. appetit enim celsitudinem, supra dignitatem
-- Gregory will have it so. Howeuer, if it please you to glance on my former
quotation from the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.1.
'twill not so much whet your appetite, as gravel it; for first Beza limits
the desire, If any man desire? Beza in licum.
and it is not meant -- de ambitu -- of the appetite, or ambition to get the Sea, but de animo, of the earnest desire to benefit the Church, or admit the
words will carry that interpretation, yet the commendation which is annexed
truces with the work, not the desire, -- Bonum opus desider at --, not -- been
desiderat --, though it be good what he desires, yet he does not well to
desire it. Men unworthy of what they sue for, only because they sue for it.
And this in Primitive times has occasioned in many no less a modesty than
unwillingness in those sacred undertakings, when the Fathers, with a kind of
reluctancie and fear, were towed on to these high employments. Nay some,
whether through majesty of the place, or roughness of the times, or guilt of
their own weakness, have panted and breathed short in their desires to this
great enterprise, and at length exchanged the honor for an exile. Greg. Naz in
praesat. Apol. Athan. in epist. ad Dracont. Epist. fug. vt Gloss. in prim.
Euan. Marc.
Nazianzen flies into Pontus; Dracontius, into the skirts of Alexandria: and it
is tradition'd me by Aquinas. (and he quotes Saint Jerome for it) that Saint
Mark cut off his thumb, Vt Sacerdotio reprobus haberetur -- They are the
Schoolemans own words in his 2a. 2ae. quaest. 185. Artic. 1. But 'twill not be
amiss here to take Saint Ambrose -- quamnis notandum -- with us; that these
things were done in the Churches great extremities, when he that was -- primus
in presbyterio, Part. 2. past. c. 3.
was -- primus in Martyrio. 'Twould require the temper of a brave resolution,
and a better zeal, to desire this Bonum opus, when 'twas made the touchstone
and furnace of men's faith and constancy, not only in leading others to the
stake, but their own suffering where they were to be a voluntary Holocaust, and
sacrifice to the Church, there to remain a monument of their Religion, and
others tyranny. It Is true, Histories have furnished us with examples of some
which have renounced an Empire, and (which is strange) a Popedom; Dioclesian
did one, and Celestinus, the other. The times (we may suppose) were blustering,
and the revenues thin at Rome, when the honor of the chair, was at once not
desired and scorned. No project now vnsifted, no stratagem vndig'd for; no
reach of policy vnfathom'd for the compassing of that great See, though by
synister, though by devilish attempt, nay, that is the chief engine by which
it works. Tiberius could once tell a Prince of the Celts, that Rome had a sword
for her conquest, not an Apothecaries shop; now they are both too little;
Sword, and poison, and massacre, and Pistol, and knife, and powder, for the
purchase (or at least the strengthening) of the triple crown.

And I would Machiauell had rendeuouz'd only in Iesuited Territories, and not
knocked at the gates of Protestant Dominions; it is to be feared he has Factors
nearer home, those which not only know the backdoores to the Staff, and
Myter, but are acquainted with the lock, which if they cannot force or pick
by the finger of policy or greatness, they turn with that golden key which
at once opens a way to a purchased honor, and a ruin.

Ambition whither will thou? nay, where will thou not? to the pinnacle of the
Temple for the glory of the world, though thou tumble for it to thy eternal
ruin.

The Greek Philosopher will beg of the gods, that he may behold the Sun so
near, as to comprehend the form, Eudoxus.
beauty, greatness of it, and afterward he cares not if he burn, as if
there were no such Martyrdom, as what Ambition fires. Occidar modo imperet --,
Tacit. Annals.
was the resolution of Agrippina for her Nero; but lo, how the event crowns
the vnsatiatenesse of her desires? He gains the kingdom, and first dig'd out
those bowels which had fostered him, and then that heart which was the throne
of such an aspiring thought; cruelty shall I call it, or justice, when the
vaineglory of the mother was penanc'd with the unnaturalness of the son. Thus
lofty minds (furnished with a strong hope of the success of their designs)
have embark't themselves into great actions, and proposing humane ends, as
scales to their high thoughts, have bin wafted into strange promotions, but
after they have (a while) spangl'd in that their firmament of honor, they
become falling stars, and so the success proves as inglorious as the
enterprise was bold, and desperate. We have seldom met with any eminency that
was sudden and permanent: Those which in their dawne of Fortune break so
gloriously, meet with a storm at noone, or else a cloud at night. The Sun
that rises in a gray and sullen morn, sets clearest; and indeed ambition is
too hasty, and is hurried violently to the end it aims at without
cautelousnesse and circumspection to the mean; but humility has a calm and
temperate pace, and stoopes it along in a gentle posture, yet at length
attaines her mark, but slowly, as if it went unwilling to honor, and slighted
those proffers which others sue for. I envy Scipio Africanus, and Marcus
Portius (you know whose it is, Traianus to Plutarch) more for contempt of
offices. than the victories they have won, because a conqueror for the most
part is in Fortunes power, but the contempt of offices lived in prudence. Will
you hear the paraphrase? Tacitus giue's it, Sapientibus cupido gloriae
nouissima. exuitur --. Wisemen are so little in the drift of honor that they
loath the sent, it is the vanity, they last put off, and there was a time when
a modest refusal of them, was no by-way to them; for this shadow once
followed, flies, but fled, Chrysostom. Hom. 35. in Matthew.
follows -- primatus fugientem desiderat, desideratum borret, says the
Father. It Is a trick of primacie to fawn where it is not croocht too, but
look coy where it is over courted, like some weather-cocks which in a constant
and churlish wind beak fairly toward us, but in a wanton blast, turn tail.

Hence it is that in matters of authority, and pre-eminence, pride has for
the most part the foil, humility the conquest, that stoopes basely to the
title, or the profit, and looses either, This in a modest distance keeps a
loofe, till worth inuit it, and at length gains both; so that it is in ways
of promotion, as in some waterworks, where one Engine raises it to make it
fall more violently, another beats it down that it might mount higher. 1 Pet.
5.6.
The advice then of S. Peter comes seasonably here, -- Humble your selves under
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. The words are not
without their strength of emphasis, here is an -- humiliamini -- erown'd with
an -- vt exaltet, humble your selves, that he may exalt, as if humility were
so necessary a disposition to preferment, that without it God might not exalt.
But soft, Impostor; Thou which iugleft both with God and with the times, I call
not that bumility which is typ'd in the downfall of the look, or the affected
crindge and posture of the body; but the knee of the inward man, which the
Wiseman of old called the character of an holy soul, leading noble hearts
slowly to the feasts of friends, but speedily to their succor in calamities;
So that true meekness is retinu'd with a double worth, charity, resolution;
Plato in Timaeo.
And the Philosopher will tell you, it is Avertue belongs to the courageous part
of the soul, seated between two base extremes, Pusillanimity, Arrogance, No
Buffone, and yet no Bafler, supporting sometimes injuries, not our of
cowardice, but Patience, allaying all tumults and instigations of the soul to
revenge or choler, not exposed to any violence of passion, but as temperate in
disposition, as settled; no wave in her design, nor tempest in her thought; she
is all calm, not a wind so rough as to move a storm either in her mind or
action. But there is a squint-eiea humility, which casts one way, and points
another; the look is dejected, still groueling toward the earth, and with
such a dress of mortification, as if it desired no more of it, than would
serve it for a grave; when the thought measures out a Diocese, or labors on
some greater project, which gained the countenance is cheered, the body
droopes not, and he can now safely icst it with that old Abbot, Quaerebam prius
claues monasterij,
Quibus inuentis, nunc rectus incedo.


And this subtle Nauigator never steeres as be sets his compass; the look
(happily) poines you to a formal meekness, but the thought still coasts upon
Ambition; yet this gluttonous desire seldom anchors any where, but goes on
still with a full sail, till 't'ath compassed the cape it is bound for, Sen^ca.
-- Habet boc vitium omnis ambitio, non respicit, The thirst of Eminency is
headstrong, and runs with a loose bridle. It Is to see much below satietie, that
it still desires, nay it is hungry even in surfeit, and is sharpened with the
fruition of that it covered; so that the birth of this title is but the
conception of another, one honor rooms not the greatness of his thought, our
Aaron is not contented with an Ephod, the rod of Moses, would do well too;
Authority is slighted, discipline fallen, and corruption crept strangely into
the times, but

-- O fortunatam me consule, Iuuers. Sat. 1.
Romam. What should a merciful worth do with a Consulship? it is a place for
thunder, not clemency, one that can strike dead exorbitancie with the furrows
of the brow, and quell all vice with the tempest of a look, one that can both
vnsheath the sword of authority, and brandish it, if not to reformation, yet
to ruin; Thus he would make government the stale both of his pride and
Tyranny, his proiects are loftily-cruell, so are his actions too, yet still in
a hot sent of promotion, which (if they want a trumpet for others commendation)
shall borrow one from his own, and so at once applaud his designs, and
justify them. And indeed this titillation and itch of honor, if it once find
in the bosom of the receiver a fair admittance, does smoothly insinuate and
cheat upon the powers of Reason. But when it is thoroughly seated and enthroned
there, it is no more a guest but a Tyrant, and leaves the possessor, not a
master, but a captive, and in this case, I know not whether Saint Augustine
will pity his Aurelius, or excuse him, Aug. Eoist. 64. ad Aurel.
-- Ersi cuiquam facile sit gloriam non cupere dum negatur, difficile est ea
non delectari cum offertur -- in his 64 Epistle. Howener the Father seems
there to plead only for the delight in glories offered, not in the unjust
prosecution of those denied. But our humble-arrogant walks not to his temple
of honor by that of virtue, but invasion; and of some of his colleagues, the
Fathers complained of old, Qui nequaquam diuinitus vocati, Greg. part. 1. past.
cap. 2.
sed sua cupiditate accensi, culmen regiminr. rapiunt potius, quam assequuntur
It Is Saint Gregory's line, and a strong one too, such a one as the Prophet once
lash't Judah with, Hos. 8.4.
Ho. 8.4. They have set up a King but not by me, they would make a Ruler, I
knew it not. Mat. 23.
Would you have a more punctual character, that of the Pharisees is most
apposite: They love greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi,
Rabbi, Matthew. 23.7. Devout crnelty, Religious arrogance (the Father will make
it out) Ob pietatem miseri, ob splendorem infalices, Greg. Naz. in praefat.
Apol. edit. lat.
in his Apology first Oration 44. page

But I have followed Moses too long as a Magistrate, I must now a while as a
Priest, and (what I exchanged him for) a Bishop. I shall not travel far,
c're I descry them both in a full careere, not far from the road I left the
Magistrate, Ambition, but in a more covert, and untrodden way; a way, howeuer
doubly obnoxious to the passenger, because unwarrantable, because forbidden; no
authority for his progress, no Letters patents from heaven, no proficiscere
from his God, Go, yet he ruunes, runs without command, nay against it,
trebly against it, against that, non dominantes in clerum --, feed, 1 Pet. 5.3.
Iam. 3.1.
But not as Lords over Gods heritage, but ensamples, and against that nolite
magistrs, be not masters, knowing you shall receive the greater condemnation;
nay against the direct prohibition of Christ to his Disciples, Matthew 20.27.
-- Will there be any great among you --, (...), let him be your servant. It Is
high time then this bladder were a little pricked, and this impostume launc'd.
The body of the Church desire's it, cries for it, she is sick, sick even unto
death, yet no Physician in Israel will administer, will? durst not; We are
grown so emasculate, and palsie-strooken, in ways of reprehension, the times
so censorious, and in a lust of novelty, that this mount of God which was wont
to send out lightnings and thunder to the Israelites below, is now grown a
terror to the Moses that shall climb it. And whereas the Pulpit has been
formerly our Tribunal to judge and sentence the lapses and deprauations of the
people, they have made at length a bar for our own arraignement, and their
doom or mercy passes on us, as we shall please, or not please, but the verdict
runs much to the fancy of the censurer, which is commonly as barbarous and
wild, as he that gives it. Discourses (and I am sorry I cannot call them
Sermons) are so sleeke, and wooing for applause, the ears of the times so coy,
and picked for accuratenesse, that to be plain or home, entitles the speaker to
rudeness or stoicisme, each offered annotation is a barbarism, and every
reproof a libell. The hewing down of a glorious vice, or the whipping of a
sin in scarler, Praemunires him that does it, and he grows a tributary and
slave to the frowns and dishonours of the time, Iuuen. Sat. 1.
-- Vnde illa priorum -- scribendi quodcunque animo flagrante liberet --
Simplieitas? 'T should seem Antiquity had a privilege of venting any thing
that proceeded from the simplicity and truth of an honest breast; But the
thoughts of aftertimes were choked with a -- non andeo dicere --, sincerity
was turned bankrupt, and truth an exile, plaine-dealing, pertinacie, and zeal,
madness. But what, shall Moses here be tongue-tyed, shall he stutter in the
Messages of his God? -- Quid refert dictis ignoscat Mutius annon? Iu. ibid.
Pusillanimity and deiectednesse of spirit in the employment of thy Maker, is
the basest degree of cowardice; for my part, I have set up my resolution with
that of S. Bernard: Ad Fulc. Epist. 2.
Quid me loqui pudeat, quod illis non puduit facere? si pudeat audire quod
impudenter egerunt, non pudeat emendare quod libenter non audiant. Let me tell
howeuer this child of vainglory, that no touch of malecontentednesse, or
spirit of inuection puts me on the justice of these complaints; But that which
the devout Abbot calls, patient anger, humble indignation -- even that charity
wherewith he carechiz'd his ambitious pupil, -- Quae tibi condolet, quamuis
non dolenti quae tibs miseretur, licet non miserabils, and inde magis dolet,
Bern. ad Fule: epist. 2.
quod cum sis dolendus, non doles, and inde magis miseretur, quod cum miser
sis, miserabilis non es, vult tetuum scire dolorem, vt iam non habeas vnde
dolere, vnlt te tuam scire miseriam, vt incipias miser non esse, in his 2
Epistle, Ad Fulconem --.

I never yet envied the prosperity of any, I have sometimes wond'red at their
ways of advancement, and now have trac't them, and find a double staire by
which they ascend, zeal, policy, -- (please you to translate the terms, you
may, they will bear the christning) Faction, Simony --, one of the chief
means to gain preferment, is, to cry down the way to it. And he that will
have three livings, must first preach violently against two. Non-residency must
be a capital and indispensable crimes. Pluralities, damned, till they be
either offered, or possessed, when the fish is caught, what makes the net here
then? away with it; the question is stated on to'ther side. A double Benesice
is but one living, and that swallowed with as little reluctation, as 'twas but
now thundered against, with all the bitterness that the power of virulence
could suggest; all is well now, the conscience is at peace, and (what is
strange) the tongue too. Ere long, Non-residency hangs not in the teeth, but
that is easily put off, for the honor of Nicodemus, -- To be a great Master in
Israel, -- Si violandum sit ius, regnandi causa violandum, Sueton.
-- what matter's it for justice so we gain an Empire? or for equity so we may
insult? The application needs no skrew, 'twill come home of it is own accord to
the murmurings of the guilty bosom; In the mean time it much staggers me, to
see the reconcilement of two virtuous friends with a base adversary? a Saint in
the countenance, an Angel in the tongue, with an Hypocrite at the heart.

Thus (beloved) upon easy enquiry we may as well descrie an equivocation in
the look, as in the word, and he that can art it handsomely in ways of
dissimulation, has not so much two tongues, as two faces; one looks toward
the world, where demureness lays on her paint and color, and this oftentimes
deludes, shamefully deludes; the other toward heaven, and that is but coursely
daubed in respect of it, for the eye of the Almighty cannot be dazell'd, that
will descrie her furrows and deformities, and at length give her a reward
answerable to the desert, her portion with the Hypocrite, and there I leave it.

This fruitless and pernicious branch pruned, and lopt off, the other buds, no
less dangerous than that, and yet more flourishing, it sprouts now to such a
breadth and height, that it has almost ouershadowed the body of the Church,
insomuch, that the Fowls of the air lodge in the branches thereof. No Vulture
or Raven (emblemes of rapine and greediness) though they devour and hauock it
(so they have a trick of merchandising) but nests and perches there; nay
scarce an Owl or Buzzard (now the metaphors of dullness and simplicity) but
hoots and revels there. Times more than calamitous, when the inheritance and
patrimony of the Church shall be thus leas'd out to avarice and folly, when
those her honors which she entailes upon desert, shall be heaped upon a golden
ignorant, who rudely treades on those sacred prerogatives, without any
warranted prosiciscere from God or man. We find Moses trembling here, though
encouraged both by the persuasion and command of the Almighty, -- Et infirmus
quisque vt honoris onus suscipiat, anhelat, Greg. par. 1. past. cap. 7.
and qui ad casum valde vrgetur ex proprijs, humeru^ libenter opprimenau^
ponderibus submittit alienis --. It Is Gregory's complaint in the 1. part of his
Pastoral, chapter 7.

Strange monument of weakness. he that reeles under his own burden, stoopes
to be oppressed with the weight of others, and lot how he tumbles to a mortal
sin (The Schoolmen does style it so) directly opposite to a pair of
virtues, justice, charity; unjust, that the revenues due to worth should be
pack't upon bulcklesse and unable persons, Greg. de Val. in 2a. 2ae. Aqul.
did. 10. q. 3 punc. 2.
and uncharitable for him to undertake the guidance and pasturing of a flock
who was never trained up in the conditions of a shepherd. Neither is he an
enemy only of a double virtue, but a companion of two such sins which seem
to brave, and dare the Almighty to revenge on the prophaner, Intrusion,
perjury; first, in rushing on the profession not legitimately called, then in
purchasing her honors. Yet there are which can say with the Disciple -- Master
we have left all and followed thee -- our birthright for the Church; left did
I say? sold it, exchanged the possessions of our Fathers (their vineyard) to
purchase thine; and in stead of that penny which thou give in liew of a Crown
and recompense to thy labourer, we have given thousands to be possessed one, and
so, thou not hiring us, we have, it. But hear S. Bernard schooling his
Eugenius, and do not so much blush as tremble, -- Quis mihi det, Bern epist.
238. ad Euge.
antequam moriar videre ecclesiam Dei sicut in diebus antiquis quando Apostoli
laxabant retia in capturam, non auri, sed animarum! quam cupio te illius haer:
ditare vocem cuius adeptus es sedem? Pecunia tua tecum in perditionem --. O vox
tonitrui! The Abbot goes on devoutly in the 238. Epistle ad Eugenium.

If that Father be too calm and modest in his reproof, and cannot rouse blood
in the cheeks of the delinquent: S. Ambrose shall startle it, or else scare
you with the vision of Simon Magus, or Gehazi, -- Qui non timentes illud Petri,
Amb. de dign. sacerd. cap. 5.
aut Elizei, Sacerdotalem defamant honorem, sanctique Episcopatus gratiam
pecunijs coemerunt, in his de dignitate Sacerdotali cap. 5.

And indeed, in ways of sufficiency and worth, it is the -- si nil attuleris --
damp's the preferment; The age can instance, in some languishing and weak in
their intellectuals, men without sap or kernel, who (having their storehouse
well fraught with that white and red earth) have stumbled on the glories of the
time, as if fortune would make them happy in despite of virtue; when others of
Christ's followers (were truly his Disciples) are sent abroad with their -- ite
and praedicate -- barefooted, without bag or scrip, but their Commission large
-- Omni creaturae -- the wide world is their place of residence, no particular
roof to shelter them, or place of retiredness to lay their head in. Nay some
that have served a triple Apprentiship to Arts and Sciences, and spent in these
our Athens the strength of their time and patrimony, men thoroughly ballac'd
for those high designs, well kern'd both in years and judgment, lie
mouldring for non-employment, and dashed for slownesse or promotion; when others
of cheap and thin abilities, men without growth or bud of knowledge, have met
with the honors of advancement, and trample on those dejected bookewormes
which dissolve themselves into industry for the service of their Church, yet
meet neither with her pomp, nor her revenue; nay, some that have wasted their
Lamp, are burnt their Taper to an inch of years, have spent those fortunes in
the travails of Divinity, which would largely have accommodated them for more
secular courses, and enforced to retire themselves to the solitariness of some
ten-pound Cure, and so spin out he has suffered strangely in the consures of
the world) somewhat windy, and tempestuous, but such as had authority only
from the tongue, not the heart, and as soon ore-blowne, as occasioned, naught
else but a green leaf in a flame, cracked, sparkled, and so out. His rule of
friendship the best, not popular, but choice, and there too, where it found
truth, no gloss; there vnshooke, noblyconstant, his, both in his heart, and in
his purse; not in his purse, (as Seneca writes of Sicilius, where naught could
be extracted but an hundred upon a hundred) or as your Hackney Mynt-men for the
most part do, ten upon the same number, but that trebled, many times, for
nothing, as the clemency of some vnpersecuting scroles can testify. His
contribution, and benevolence in way of alms, rather powered out, than given,
as if poverty had been the object of his profuseness, not of his relief; yet
that without froth of ostentation, without reference to merit, on the grounds
of a true charity. His Religion (wherein the world thought he had wau'd and
tottered) upon his accounts to God, and his inlargements and declarations to
his friends, on his deathbed, fast to the Church of England; which, (though in
the last act) was beleager'd by some emasculate suggestions, yet, blessed be
the circumspection of a careful Son, it stood vnbatter'd, and in that
loialty, and strength, he penitently gave up his soul into the hands of his
Redeemer.

And now he is gone, let his imperfections follow, and the memory of them rot,
and moulder with his body; he had many, some preualent; and (good Lord) which
of us have not in a large proportion! But they are our earthy and dusty, and
as^y part, so they were his; let them then be buried with him; shouell them
into his grave; earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust; let them spring
no more, to the soyling and dishonor of his name, or our own
uncharitableness, but let his ashes rest in peace; for he is now -- Gone to
his long home, and the mourners have walked for him about the streets.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. Amen.
FINIS.

