A SHORT SVRVEY OF THE KINGDOM of Sweden CONTAINING A BRIEF DEScription of
all the Provinces of this whole Dominion.

As also the riches of this Kingdom, the antiquity, nature, and manners of
this Nation.

Together with the Government of this Realm, Might and Power of this great
King, as well by Sea as by Land, his great Officers, his Customs, and Revenues
of the Crown.

A Catalogue of many of the Kings of SWEDEN, of those especially who have
reigned these last five hundredth years, with some of their most memorable Acts
and Deeds, with their Alliance, and Issue, or Offspring,

Something also more particularly concerning that Illustrious invincible Great
GVSTAVUS ADOLPHUS the 2. and some of his most Memorable Acts since his coming
to the Crown, as well before, as since his entering into Germany, until this
present year 1632.

LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark and are to ^^ sold at the Bl^^ Bible in
Green Arbo^, 1632.

The Contents or principal heads handled in this whole Discourse.
1 OF the division of all these Northern Countries, and antiquity of the
kingdom of Sweden, together with the large extent of this dominion, and the
commodities this kingdom affords. 2 A more particular survey of the kingdom
of Sweden, with a shore description of the particular parts or Provinces
thereof, and the benefit they yield to the king and subject. 3 Of the nature,
manners, and customs of the Swedish or Suetians, and into how many ranks or
degrees the people are divided, where the Clergy is also comprehended. 4 Of
the politic and civil government of the kingdom of Sweden. Of their five
great Colleges, or courts of Justice, and some others also. Of the chief
great officers of the kingdom. Of the might and power of the king of Sweden,
both by sea and land: of his horse and foot forces, and great store of brass
ordnance. Of the great number of warre-ships and other ships for service, and
the great number of marrriners wherewith this kingdom is for all occasions
furnished. 6 Of customs and tributes, or subsi, dies ordinary and
extraordinary belonging to the king of Sweden. 7 A catalogue of some kings of
Sweden, together with some of their most memorable acts. 8 A more particular
survey of the last kings of this country, of these last 500. years, wi^h some
other principal acts, alliance, issue, or offspring. 9 Of great Gustavus
Adolphus this present king now reigning, with his most memorable Acts, both
before and after his entering into Germany.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN.
I.
Our modern Geographers call all those Northern countries of Europe declining
toward the North; the Northern world. Division of the Northern world.
This whole country (say they) is divided into two parts, Scania, and Dania,
Scandia, or Scandinania, by Pliny, called an Island of unknown greatness, hems
in and begirts about all the northermost part of Europe. This is a large and
vast Region, extending it self from the 55. to the 72. degree of northerly
latitude, above 1000. English miles, and from the 25. to the 65. degree of
longitude, or 2400 of our miles. On the south side, it borders on Germany and
Denmark; on the North and West, on the Ocean Sea, and on the East on Russia.
The parts of this country lying nearest to the South, where the Pole is not
elevated above 60 degrees is indifferent temperat; the Region lying betwixt the
60. degree and the arctick circle, are not so temperate, howbeit, the
intemperature of the air is well regulated with the fertility of the soil, in
such places especially as are not covered over with woods, or rocks, in the
south and eastern parts principally. But the extreme, or most notthern parts,
lying betwixt the arctick circle, and the pole arctick, enjoy neither a
temporate air, nor yet a fruitful soil, and since, by reason of the faint
heat of the Sun, corn could not there well ripen, therefore the wise Creator
of all things has furnished these countries with great variety of wild beasts
and diverse rivers, lakes and gulfes furnished with variety of wholesome fishes,
for the sustaining of the inhabitants lives. It would seem that this Scandia
was in former times far more populous, then it is at this time, witness these
frequent transmigrations, and, as it were, inundations of the Scanzian people
into other remote regions of the world; when as partly by reason of the
multitude, and natural fecundity or fruitfulnes of that people, partly by
reason of dearth of corn, and partly by their inclination to war and avoiding
idleness, like Bees they sought out new hives for themselves and their children,
and those great heaps of stones, even at this day in the most deserts and
woods to be seen, and in former times, no doubt gathered together to cleanse
the high ways, do undoubtedly evidence unto us, that in former times all those
places have bin peopled, and therefore not without great reason, did the
ancient writers call this country, a shop of people: Officinam gentiu^
populoru^ que vaginam, and from hence have we not only the Normans, Suevians,
Vandals, and diverse other nations: but the Westorgoths, and Ostrogoths, also
who after many peregrinations, through many Provinces and Kingdoms, whom they
wearied out with their wars, at length they settled themselves in Spain, where
even at this day they bear rule.

This Scandia, or Sca^dinavia, Antiquity of the kingdom of Sweden.
comprehends under it 2 northern kingdoms, Sweden and Norway. The kingdom of
Sweden, as witness the Scanzian histories, is more ancient then any of the
others, from whose Kings has the ancient families of the Kings of Denmark and
Norway, are desceneded for Dan first King of Denmark, from whence this country
was called Dania, or Danmarchia was the son of Humelus the 16 King of Sweden,
and the Norvegians, in their Chronicle, before ever they come to their own,
reckon up 25 Kings of Sweden, of whom is descended Hwithen, by the mother
descended of one Soluon, a certain Prince of Norway succeeded him in his
dominion, and haviuing not a little enlarged the same, left it to his lawful
heirs and successros, from whom Haraldus Harsagher, being lineally descended
in the fourth degree, having vanquished and expelled all the other petty Kings,
did there first of all establish an absolute Monarchy, as witnesses the
ancient Chronicle of Norway, written by Master John Martinus Slangerupensis,
and published in Denmark, Anno. 1595.

Of this kingdom of Sweden, I purpose now to say some thing, as I find it
written in the Swed^sh History, howbeit, as briefly as I can: and speaking of
the country, I shall say something of the several Provinces and Territories
belonging to this Crown, the commodities and riches they yield, both to King
and Subject; as also concerning the politic government, together with diverse
customs of this country. In the next place, something shall be said of the
might and power of this great King, both by Sea and Land, his chief Officers
of State, etc. and then come we to the Kings of that country, both ancient
and of latter times, with some of their chief acts, and the latter Kings
alliances. In the last place is something more particularly said concerning
this great Gustavus Adolphus now reigning, and his chief acts, both before and
since his expedition into Germany, briefly handled.

The King of Sweden, or Swethland, call it as you list, although until now of
late years, not so much taken notice of in these parts of the world as many
other Princes and Potentates; yet may it well appear that he is no mean
Prince, nor of small power. His chief country, and from which he takes his
chief denomination, is called by some Suconia, Suconia.
and the people from thence Sucones: as also, and with us most frequently
Suevia, Suevia.
and the people Swevi; now there is in high Germany, another country founding
somewhat like it, called Suevia, the people Suevi, and in high Dutch, Swaben,
bordering on Bavaria, being a colonie in former times come out of this country
of Sweden, of whom my purpose is not here to speak. This potent King then has
under his dominion, not only this country of Sweden, properly so called, but
also Gothland, Flintland, and a great part of Lapland, besides some Territories
in the dominion of the great Duke or Knez of Russia, or Muscovia, as hereafter
shall appear. This country is a very fruitful soil, a land flowing with
milk and honey, and yielding corn in great abundance; besides the great
abundance of mettalls dug out of the bowels of the earth, and the
excellency of the pastures of this land, may from hence appear, that some
country people of Holland, removing their habitation into Sweden, affimed that
they made as much butter of 60. measures of milk there, as they did in Holland
of a hundred the like measures. This pleasant country is replenished with
innumerable lakes, furnished with most dainty fishes; and out of these same
lakes do run and issue out many pleasant and profitable rivers. This country is
in the South parts more plain and even; but toward the North and West more
mountainous, not without great store of woods, very useful for the fining of
those metals, in so great abundance dug out of many of those mountains.
The maritane parts not of Swethland onley, but of Finland also, are for the
most part environed with high and steep rocky hills and Islands, many of them
being scarce covered with green grass, and this is the cause why it is so
hard and difficult a matter for strangers, without some skillful Pilot of the
natural inhabitans, to sail near their shore, and strangers at their first
approaching wonder that such a country should afford the inhabitants means to
sustain life, until such time, as they are better acquainted with the inner
parts of the country; and this land has likewise commerce with the I Will of
Britain Denmark, Norway, Poland, Russia, and such other Notherne Regions
beyond the 50 or 51 degrees of Northerly latitude, that it brings forth none
of that noble liquor of the grape, which is notwithstanding in great abundance
brought from other countries, and besides, they are well furnished with good
ale and beer for their ordinary drink.

2.
Division of the kingdom of Sweden
The Kingdom of Sweden is divided into Sweden, Gothland, Finland, Ingria and
Esthionia. Sweden, or Swethland, called Suecia, or Sucovia, into Sucovia,
properly so called, and the Northlands, Nordlandias. Of Sucovia, properly so
called, Sucovia, and the parts thereof.
are these parts or Provinces following. Vplandia, Vestmania, Dalecharlia
Nevira and Suedermania. This country Vplandia Vplandia.
has most commonly bin graced with the pre-eminence above the rest, and where
the King has most commonly kept his Court. Conmodities of this country.
This country is very well furnished with plenty of very good corn, the which
is liberally imparted to these daily diggers of mettalls upon the mountains.
Mines in this country. Division of Vplandia.
It is not destitute of good mines of iron, and leed especially, and in some
places, of silver also, although not very much. It is again divided into three
folk-lands (as they call them) that is; shires, or Provinces of three people;
and these again sub-divided into smaller parts, much answerable to our
division of hundred, and which name they also attribute unto them. Of all the
cities and towns, not only of this, but of all the other Provinces of the
Swedish dominions, Stackholme Stockholme.
is the chief, and where the King most commonly makes his abode and residence,
seated in an Island among the waters, as Venice, for the which cause it had this
name imposed. By means of the lake Melenus it has brought from the inland al
manner of grain, butter, cheese, and such other commodies useful for the life
of man, as also copper, iron, and other metals; and again, by the same way
sends them back such commodities as are brought from remote regions: and by the
sea it is supplied with wine, oil, salt, etc. It is much of the same degree of
northerly latitude with the city Aberden in the north of Scotland, it being
seated in the South part of Sweden, to wit, betwixt the 58. and 59. degree.
Next unto it, is Vpsalia, Vpsalia.
sometime the royal seat of the adjacent northern parts: for there was kept the
Kings Court, the supreme court of justice, and there was also the Archbishops
sea with a fair cathedral Church, the which only of all the rest, continues
yet until this day. There there is also a famous University, of the which more
hereafter. This City is seated, as it were, in the very center of this rich
Province, on the bank of the River Sala. Besides these, there are yet in this
Province some others of good note, howbeit, inferior to the former, to wit,
Enecopia, Sigrundia, Oregrundia.

The next Province of Sneonia, is Vestmania, Vestmania.
in fertility nothing inferior to Vplandia, but in mettalls far exceeding
the same: for in it is a very rich silver mine, called Salbergh; as for good
iron and steel, there is there also great abundance, Rich Mines.
where mines of copper, lead and brimstone are not also wanting. The chief
City thereof is called Grosia, and commonly Westeras, adorned with a Bishops
sea, and a cathedral Church, where is also a saire stately castle to be seen,
and here may one see great store of copper and lead brought from the hills of
that country: There are yet besides this, the Towns Arbogia and Koping
abounding with the same mettalls, but iron especially.

The Province of Dalecharlia, Dalecharlia.
although it be not inferior to the former in the abundance of mettalls and
mineralls, yet in the abundance of good copper dug out of these deep vaults
and cavernes, to the no small amazement of such as are not acquainted with such
sights; it does far exceed any other; and besides copper, the same mine
yields yet great store of brimstone, alum and copperas. And the water which
is drawn from thence, A profitable water.
changes iron into good copper, with the loss of the fourth part, if the
weight of the iron be in small pieces; and the third part only, if the pieces
be great and thick. This country yields also good store of grain; howbeit,
scarce sufficient to furnish those laborious painful pioners, there being
there such a number of them maintained at work.

Next unto it, is Nericia, Nericia.
where although there be a silver mine, yet yielding but small benefit, is
therefore neglected. The mines of brimstone yield also store of alum and
copperas. It would seem, that all the inhabitants of this country, are borne
natural Smiths: for they send abroad into all the neighboring countries all
manner of iron implements. They have but one city, called Orebregia.

The last is Sudermannia, Sudermannia.
which is neither destitute of mettalls, nor yet of good store of iron,
especially the parts adjoining to the great lake Melerus. The chief city of
this country is Nycopia, Nycopia.
a famous port for traficke, and withal adorned with a fair castle, where the
Duke of this country most commonly had his abode. Next is Strengosia Strengosa.
an Episcopal Sea, with a Cathedral Church, graced with the dead corpse of
Charles the 9. of that name, and father to the most famous and victorious King,
great Gustavus now reigning. There are yet some other Towns belonging to this
teritory, to wit, Tolga, Torsilia, and Trosa, Telga, Torsilia, Trosa.
all very rich and commodious for traffic and commerce.

The other part of Sweden, is properly called by the name of Northland.
Northland.
Of this Northland, there are two Provinces, Gestricia and Helsingia.
Gestricia, Gestricia.
had corn enough to supply the inhabitants wanrs, and besides, is well
furnished with iron mines: It has in it one very good City, called Gervalia,
Gerralia.
seated by the Seaside, as well for exportation, as importation of all manner
of commodities, and about half a days journey from the coper mines. By
ancient records, it appears that this Helsingia in former times, Helsingia,
sometimes a kingdom.
was a general name, comprehending the rest of the Northern Provinces; and the
Scanzian Histories do testify, that this same country in former times, was
graced with the Title of a kingdom, and was governed by Kings, until such time
as Iugellus, King of Vpsalia, and father to Olavus Tretelias, King of
Vermelandia, at his coronation burnt to ashes, Helsingians, an ancient people.
the last Helsingian King, with some other more, whose kingdom he after
incorporated to that of Vpsalia. Many other things concerning the antiquity and
valor of this Nation, for brevity, I purposely let pass. Among all the
Swedish people, these are most remarkable for their great hospitality; and
besides, Affectionate to learning.
they are so affectionate to learning, that although public Schools for good
literature, be but rare among them, yet are private persons, who have attained
to any learning, so forward to instruct their neighbors, that it is a hard
mattter to find one going at plough, but he can read. The inhabitants of this
country, are either Helsingians, properly so called, or Laplanders. Of the
Helsingians, then the Provinces, or these: Helsingia properly so called,
Medelpadia, Angermania, and Bothnia.

This Hesingia, properly so called, Helsingia properly so called.
was formerly caled Sundhede and Nordslegh. The soil of this country is
fruitful enough, and the inhabitants much addicted to grazing of cattle, and
many of them are very industrious in making of linen cloth, and not unskilful
in many other manual trades, some being also addicted to fishing. It
contains one good city, Hudinswaldia, Hudinswaldia.
whose inhabitants transport into other countries great store of butter,
tallow, hides and skins, pitch and rozen, masts for ships, clap-boord and the
like.

Medelpadia Medelpadia.
is much of the same nature and quality with Helsingia, but that it is somewhat
narrow and fuller of woods. It is furnished with 2 good rivers, well stored
with exceeding good fish, as Salmons especially, and it is supposed, that in
former times, the Helsingian Kings kept their Court in this Country.

Angermannia, Angermannia.
although it be full of high and steep rocks, yet are the valleys so
fruitful, that if but once in ten years compassed, Fertility of the soil.
they bring forth every year exceeding good corn, if the unseasonablnesse of
the weather, do not sometimes frustrate the husband-mans expectation. It is,
as it were, divided into two arms, the one more southerly, running toward the
West; the other toward the Sea, and further to the North. It is watered with
one fair river, abounding with diverse sorts of good fishes, Salmons
especially: there is in it also one fair city.

Bothnia.
Bothnia is not so hilly as this Angermannia, and yet by reason of the sandy
soil, and the coldness of the climat, the country is not so fruitful as the
former, which defect, notwithstanding, is well supplied with the abundance of
other commodities. It is very well watered with diverse great rivers, abounding
with very good fish, Salmons, especially: It has in it no city, howbeit, every
Parish is, as it were, a town of traffic and commerce; for in summer they
provide store of corn, and such other commodities, as their neighbor
Laplanders want, which they buy of such as traffic into their country, which
commodities in the winter they carry into Lapland, where all rivers and rivers
and lakes are hard frozen; and bring again back from thence great abundance of
rich furs, fishes dried and hardened with the frost, and many the like
commodities.

Lappi^onia, or Lappic.
Next follows Lapponia, or Lappia, called commonly Lapland, and the inhabitants
Lappones, Laplanders. This is the northermost Province belonging to this potent
Prince, a large and vast country, but has neither corne-fields, cities nor
towns. The country is full of hills, woods, rivers, lakes and pooles; and in
many places very good pastures. The people are ingenious enough and civil,
living most by hunting and fishing: Their manner of life.
They live like unto the Tartars, traveling in great troops together, with
their cattle, and settle about some river or lake, where there is good pasture
for their cattle, and when that is all eaten up, Their innocence.
remove to another place. Adultery and murder is scarce heard of among that
people, nor yet any theft, and merchants traveling that way, ordinarily leave
their wares, covered only with some old cloth to keep off the snow, and after
diverse days, at their return, never miss any of their goods. Their apparel
Their apparel.
is made of skins of beasts and woollen cloth brought to them from other
countries; as for linen cloth they have none; but to sew their clothes, they
make thread of the nerves or sinews of beasts, dried, beaten, and dressed like
flax, Strange thread.
with the which they both sew their garments, and cover the same also with
tin, as we do with silver and so adorn their garments therewith, as we do
with silver and gold lace. In former times, they were much addicted to sorcery
and witchcraft, howbeit, that is now well reformed. Their tents.
In stead of houses they use tents made of the bark of birch sowed together.
Their tents.
In the winter time, they meet togther at certain places, and fail not,
where both these aforementioned merchants, find them to traffic with the
Kings customers, The meetings
to demand their tribute, and the Churchmen were wont to come to catechize
them, and to baptize their children, etc. But Charles the 9. and father to this
famous and great Gustavus, now reigning, built in several places of this
country certain chappells, and churches for the exercise of Religion.

Nature of the people.
This people is ninble, active, and very good soldiers, which if envy it self
should deny, yet that memorable battle fought near Leipzig will witness to the
worlds end: Good soldiers Diamonds, Topazes, and Amethists* among them.
some of the hills of this country yield precious stones, viz. Diamonds,
Topazes, and Amethists.

At this day, these Laplanders are subject to 3. Kings, of Sweden, Denmark, and
the great Duke of Russia. The greatest, and the best part of this country, viz.
all the South, and mediterranian part, belongs to the King of Sweden, a very
huge vast country, extending from the 69. to the 71. degree of northerly
latitude, being above 400. miles in length and above 360. in breadth.

Division of this country.
This country is divided into 5. several territories, or jurisdictions, called
Lapmarchia, to wit, Vmalapmarck, Pitalapmarck, Tornlapmarck, and Kimilapmarck,
whose inhabitants pay tribute to none but to the King rf Sweden. To Norway, now
under the danish King, belongs that tract running along the seacoast, called
Finmarchia, and the inhabitants Siofuni, or maritime inhabitants, living upon
fish only. The rest belongs to the Russian Prince, from the castle of Vardhus
to the mouth of the milbrie sea, in the Swedish tongue called Trennes: in the
Laplanders language Prihinienni; and in the Russian speech Tarchanavolech even
at this day.

Now next after the country of Sweden follows in order Gothia, Gothia.
or Gothland; as if one should say, a good land, being also subect to the
Crown of Sweden, and divided from the same by a great wood only. This is the
ancient country, and natural soil of so many warlike people, which in former
ages have made their names famous to future generations, which honor many
other nations would willingly assume unto themselves, the which subject, for
brevities sake, I must here pass.

This country is divided into two parts, Division of this country.
East and West Gothland. To West Gothland belong these Provinces following
Vestrogothia, Dalia and Vermelandia, unto which some join Hallandia.

Vestrogothia, Vestrgothia.
as it is somewhat inferior to the most fruitful parts of Sweden, in regard
of corn; so does it again in good pastures for cattle exceed them; wherein
consists their chief riches, as the others in their tillage, and increase of
corn. It is also watered with many rivers, yielding great store of fish,
besides diverse Cities and Towns. The Cities Cities.
are Gotheburgum, a great and rich staple for traffic; Slara an Episcopal
Sea, Mariesladum, and Lidecopia. The towns Towns.
thereof Fabropia, Sbredni, Hin, Bogesurd, Beretta, and Lindosia the old.

Dalia.
Dalia, is a mountainous country in most places; has many fishie rivers and
lakes, and pasture for cattle in no small abundance, in so much, that there
are far greater oxen found in that country, then in other places.

Vermelandia.
Vermelandia, among all the Gothish Provinces best inhabited, and colonies
first carried thither by Olaus Trekelius. It is a hilly and wood-land country,
yet not unfurnished, of iron mines, and one of copper reasonable rich, but
lately found aut. In it is one city called Carolostadium, Carolostadium.
built by Charles the 9. in a place before called Tingualla, Hallandia, a
little country adjoining thereto, because belonging to the King of Denmark, I
there of set purpose pass by.

The Provinces of East- Gothland, are Ostrogothia, Smalandia, and Oelandia,
with which in former times, were also reckoned Gotlandia, Scania, and
Blockingia Ostrogothia, Ostrogothia.
is for the most part a plain champian country, and so fruitful, that it
exceeds many other Provinces of Sweden, and by some thought, Fertility of the
soil.
not to equal only, but even to exceed Vpland it self, the principal
Province of the whole Swedish dominion. It is exceeding pleasant, and very well
furnished with many fishie rivers, abundance of wild beasts and wild foul; and
finally, whatsoever is useful for man's sustnance, except wine and salt. Neither
is it unfurnished of mines in the mountanous parts of Godegard, Hellestaberg,
and Vangaberg. In it is seated the City Vadstenan, adorned with a fair castle,
and an Abbey dedicate to Saint Brigeta. There is besides it, Scheningia,
sometimes of great fame and note, but now reduced to the form of a Town,
Laenicopia, an Episcopal Sea, Norcopia, and Sudercopia, two famous staples, or
Towns for traffic.

Smalandia, Smalandia.
a large country, above 300. miles in compass, and is, for the most part, full
of great woods, and yet for good pastures, nothing inferior to many of the
neighbor countries, Good pastures.
insomuch that they send many very great fed cattle into Denmark, which are
from thence yearly in great abundance sent into all high Germany and the
lowcountries. In it are also great store of great rivers and lakes, well stored
with abundance of excellent good fish. Mines of copper and steel.
In that part called Tinstia there are copper mines newly found out. In Taberg
there are good steel mines: and besides, out of their lakes, they gather a
certain rude matter, which with very small labor is made very good iron. This
country is divided into diverse parts, the principal whereof, are Ticherad,
Verandia, Tinstia, Division of this country.
as also Finberdia and Mantingia, famous for the Longobards expedition. Cities
for the largeness of the country it has not many; the chief are Calmarnia,
Ievec^pias Vexio an Episcopal Sea, Elresio, and Vestervile.

Olandia Olandia.
is a rich and fruitful Island, abounding in many rich commodities. But because
this Island, as likewise Hallandia and Bleckingia are at this present under the
obedience of the Danish King, Occasion of wars betwixt the two neighboring
Princes..
I will here pass by it. And yet shall it not be out of purpose to take notice
that these Islands have been the cause of great quarrels and controversies
betwixt these two neighboring Princes, Sweden and Denmark: and no less
cotnrouersie has it caused among Writers, some pretending a right, some a long
prescription of time to corroborate the Title of their Prince, whose right they
took upon them to maintain.

Finlandia.
Next in order follows Finland, which some think so to be called in comparison
of Sweden, as though it did in fruitfulness far exceed it, who are foulely
deceived: Why so called.
for it is more probable that it was first called Fiendland, by reason of the
great hostility those Finlanders exercised against this nation, so long as they
were commanded by a King of their own. This country abounds in corn,
pastures, fish, and foul; and finally, in such things as are most necessary
for the life of man: this people is very laborious and able to endure hardship.
Nature of this people.
Of old they were esteemed the mildest among all those Scanzian people,
howbeit, at this day, they be somewhat harsher, and their valor in war was
well witnessed in this last memorable battle, fought near Leipsig in Misnia.
They have a peculiar language of their own, in the which are some
singularities to be observed; namely, that some letters they cannot pronounce:
as B, D, G, Singularities in their languagess.
and that they want the letter F, neither have they any word beginning with two
consonants, and therefore when they pronounce any such word, in other
languages, they leave out such letters: and for this cause, if they be not sent
abroad while they are yet young, they can never learn to pronounce foreign
languages, and thus for gratus, they pronounce ratus, for spes, pes: for
Dominus, tominus: for bonus, ponus, etc. And this is the reason, why the
Nobles, Merchants, and others of ability, send their youth to be instructed in
the Swedish tongue, by which means they are afterward fitted for the learning
of any other. Again, in their language, they observe no genders, having one
only articles, se, which they attribute to both sexes, and to all genders.
Some others for brevity, I here willingly pass by. These Finlanders in former
times, When, and by whom first subdued.
had Kings of their own nation, great wars with the Swedish, until such
time as being by Ericus King of Sweden, subdued in the year 1130. they were
also forced to embrace the Christian faith. Now this King subdued not the whole
country, but afterward Birgerus Ieri subdued Tavastia, and again Turgillus
subdued Runts, or Carelia, and about the year 1193. the better to keep them
in obedience, and withal to inhibit the incursions of the Russians, he built
the castle Viburg.

Finland is dived into the South, North, Caiania, Savolaxia, Tavastia, Nylandia
and Carlia: The Northern part is divided from the Southern by the river
Amarokei, Division of the country.
running hard by the Episcopal sea Abo. In the Western part thereof, is that
old castle Gusto, now ruinated; in the East part the castle Raseberg, Cities,
towns and castles.
together with the jurisdiction thereto belonging. The Northern part thereof
extends it self toward the Bothnicke gulf, Northward; comprehending the one
and the other Salagundia, Vienio, and Maseo. In it is a famous river called
Cumo-elffe, abounding with Salmons, and many other dainty fishes, and near the
Episcopal City, Biornebegh, falling into the Sea. Betwixt this city and Abo,
are the towns Raumo, Nystadh, and Nadhandill, where was of old, that famous
Monastery, called the valley of grace.

Caiania, Caiania.
called also the Eastern Bothnia, is furnished with many goodly fishie rivers.
It has lately built there in the towns Towns.
Vla and Vasa; as also the castles Caianoburgum and Vloburgum.

Sauolaxia Savolaxia.
abounds with goodly lakes and rivers, and almost all of them disburden
themselves by the river Vox, into that great lake, Ladoga. This lake Togetha,
together with these rivers among all the rest of this Scanzian country, do
only breed the seacalfe, Lake-Ladoga.
called Phoca, and Vitulus Marinus. They are likewise furnished with abundance
of other good fishes, Sea-calfe.
and among others great Iackes and Pikes, which are from th^nce, being first
dried with the frost, in great abundance transported to Viburgum. In it is also
a very fair strong castle, built in the year, Nystat.
1475. by one Ericus Axelson, Master of the Kings household, and by him called
Saint Olanus castle.

Tavastia is a mediterranean country, Tavastia. Nystat or New Castle.
and in it that famous and renowned lake Peiende. The strong castle of Tavastia
was built by Borgerus Ieri, to curb and keep under these Tavastians by him:
newly conquered, and subjugated under the Crown of Sweden, having withal
compelled them to embrace the Christian religion. In the North parts of this
country, the inhabitants fish out of the bottomes of their lakes a certain
rude matter, which, Iron made of water.
with small labor and pains, and as little charges, they make veny good iron,
and very serviceable for man's use.

Nylandia, not that it was so called, as though in former times it had been
without any inhabitants, Nylandi.
but by reason that those who do now inhabit the same, in comparison of
other, were but newly come thither, for the Helsingians and other people of
Sweden, sent thither their colonies. The country is fruitful enough, and well
furnished with store of fish, foul and wild beasts for hunting. It has in it
two towns, Towns.
Borgo, and Hefingfors.

Carelia is a large and vast Region, and seems that the old inhabitants lived
most by their sheep and cattle: for Curia in their language, signifies
sheep or cattle. So long as the Finlanders had a King of their own nation
over them, all this country of Carelia belonged to Finland: but since the
Swedish did so much by war annoy the inhabitants, that by little and little,
they brought many of the Provinces of that country, to become tributary to
them; the Russians much suspecting the power arising of so potent a
neighboring Prince, thought in time to anticipate his enemies, designs: for
the which cause, this Russian Prince by force of arms, made himself Master of
this whole country. And this same country was for many years after the common
theater of war betwixt those two potent Princes of Sweden and Russia, and
that for a long tract of time, with various and doubtful event, sometimes the
one, and sometimes again the other party prevailing, until such time as
Magnus, surnamed Smek, King of Sweden, and George, Duke of Novegardia divided
it equally betwixt them, setting and appointing their limits and bounds in
Systerbecke. Now how it came wholly within these few years under the crown of
Sweden, shall hereafer in its proper place appear. In this Carelia is that
strong city Wiburg, VViburg,
a famous staple or mart town for merchants, exceeding well fortified with
strong walls, and deep large motes round about, and a strong castle in the
same. This same City have the Russians often (but in vain) besieged with
100000. armed men. Rexholmia, Rexholmia.
by the Swedish corruptly so called, and by the Russians, Carologored, or the
fort or fortress of Carelia is seated very strongly in two little Islands, at
the mouth of the river Wexen, in the one of which is seated the city, and in
the other the castle. The soil is very fruitful, especially such places as
adjoyne next unto the great lake Ladesco Ozera: but 15. or 20. miles further
from the lake, it is so marshie and fenny, that the mountainous and hilly parts
thereof will only bear corn, for the which cause the inhabitants there live
most upon fish and wild beasts, and this aforementioned lake is one of the
greatest of all Europe, Greatest lake of all Europe.
as being above 190. miles in length, and about 80. in breadth, and of this
lake, about the fifth part only belongs to the Russian Prince, and all the
rest to the Crown of Sweden. In this great lake, besides the great abundance
of Salmons and other fishes, there is there caught a little fish also little
bigger then a hering, and in their language called Ladog (no where else in all
Russia, but there to be found) from whence this lake takes the denomination. In
the country of Rexholme, A peculiar fish. Rubies.
are some rubies found.

Next Carelia, follows both in the order of nature and situation the country
called Ingria, Ingria.
which was but lately annexed to the Crown of Sweden. The soil is very
fruitful in the which are many rivers full of good wholesome fish. Besides, in
that country is great store of wild foul and wild beasts of several kinds;
and among these they hunt most that wild beast in Latin called Alce, Alce,
Elgh, or Elent.
in the Swedish language, Elgh, and in high Dutch Elent. These beasts twice a
year in great troops pass over the river Nieva: for in the spring, they
pass in great number out of Russia into Carelia; and in harvest again return
the same way into Russia. This country has in it many strong forts and
castles, which have hitherto been accounted the keys of the Russian kingdom,
and no other in all his dominious with them to be compared. Notteburg Notteburg.
is the chiefest and strongest hold of all the rest, and therefore held
impregnable, howbeit, at length taken in by the victorious King now reigning,
as hereafter shall appear. In the same counry, are also Capurio, Courio,
Iamag^rod.
Iamarod, Castles not only strong by nature, but very well furnished also by
the art of man.

The last of all the Provinces belonging to this Crown and Kingdom of Sweden,
is called Esthonia, being a part of that vast country, called Livonia, and
has not been under the Swedish government above 60 and odd years, and by
this means came first under that jurisdiction. Esthonia. How it came first
under the Swedish. Crown.
Certain Nobles who took upon them to propogate the Christian religion being
sent for into Livonia, forgetting the errand they came about, gave themselves
wholly over to carnal lust, and gluttony, and drunkenness; and withal
keeping the inhabitants in such a base and slavish subjection, that they seemed
rather to command over beasts then men. And for this cause, God the auenger of
all wrongs, and punisher of all wickedness stirred up Basilius the tyrant of
Muscovia to suppress their insolency and punish their pride, who subdued a
great part of Livonia, destroying all in their way that made resistance, with
fire and sword. These poor Livonians now perceiving themselves put to such a
strait, implored the aid of the Emperor Charles the 5. keeping then a diet,
or general meeting of the whole estates of the Empire at Ausbourg 1551. this
country then being a member of the Empire. The Emperor then, distracted with
other wars, not being able to send them any succor, wished them to seek for
succor and and aid of the king of Sweden and other neighboring Princes. The
Revalians therefore, and the Oselians demand aid of the king of Denmark,
(Revalia being heretofore built by Vald^^^arius, a King of Denmark, and from
him received their privileges howbeit to no end And therefore fi^ding no
sudden succor against so mighty and potent a P^in^e, they were constrained to
implore aid of Ericus 14, king of Sweden, and therefore in the year 1561,
freely submitted themselves under his obedience; which petition of theirs
notwithstanding his father Gustavus had in his life time denied: and therefore
some are of opinion that this king Ericus brought upon himself and successors
a great deal of trouble. His son John was as well successor to this quarrel
as to the kingdom, and took from the Russian many of his strong holds.
Provinces of this countroy
The Provinces of this country of Esthionia are, Revalia toward the North,
seated near unto the Finnicke gulf: vizia in which are these places,
Rosenburgh, Tolsburgh, and Borholme, Alentakia, where is that famous merchant
staple, Naruia and Nystot; Iervia, where is Wittensleyn and Lais: and Vickia,
where are Hapsal, Lebal and Lode. And to this Esthionia belong these Islands
also: Dagho, Orinso, Nuko, VVrango, Odensholme, Nargo, Vlfso, and the one and
other Nogho; the inhabitants of which places, as also of Osilea, and most of
the maritime parts of the continent speak the Swedish l^n^uage. In this great
country of Livonia besides the Swedish, F^ve several languages in Livonia.
there are yet four other several languages spoken: the German or high Dutch,
used by the Nobles and better sort: in the North-parts toward the Finnicke
gulf the Estthionian or Finnicke: in the mediterranean parts the Livonians,
being now almost quite worn out: and finally in the South parts thereof they
use the Letticke speech, or of the country of Lettow, which the people Eureles
likewise use, the which is as it were a hodge-podge of many several languages
mingled together. And these languages differ not only in dialects, but wholly
and totally one from another. This whole country of Livonia, Commodities of
the country.
and consequently this Esthionia abound with all such things as are necessary
for the life of man, and are usually to be found in these Northern climats.
And so much shall suffice shortly to have said concerning the description of
the country of Sweden, and Provinces subject to the Swedish dish crown.

CHAP. III. Of the nature, manners, and customs of the Suecians or Swedish,
and into how many ranks or degrees all these people are divided.
THis people is reasonable witty and understanding, Nature of the inhabitan^s.
and that not only for learning and understanding of any mechanical trade,
but even for the learning of the arts and sciences, as also any outlandish
tongues whatsoever. For such as are of any eminent rank and degree, or
competent means, content not themselves with their Latin tongue and knowledge
of the liberal arts* but give themselves also very much to the learning of the
Germane or high Dutch and French tongues. In former times their manners and
conditions were very plain and homely, and although now somewhat declining
from former simplicity, yet are they far from that height of luxury and
pride, whereunto many other nations are now so much addicted. Not so vicious as
many other Nations.

Apparel of this people. Their buildings.


The apparel of the vulgar sort is but mean; but the Gentilitie are now
somewhat given to follow outlandish fashions, and to emulate their equals.
Private men's houses as well in towns as the country, are for the most part,
built low and of wood, and that both for warmth, and for avoiding the dint of
great winds. In Stooke-holme notwithstanding, and some other walled Cities and
towns, most of their buildings, are either of brick or freestone. Woods here
very frequent
The country commonly yields plenty of good corn, and might yield more, if
some of those vast unprofitable woods were cut down, howbeit there is there
seldom felt any scarcity of corn, unless sometimes the year prove very
unseasonable, which in hotter climats comes also sometimes to pass: Bread of
the bark of trees
and in such a case the countrey-people are sometimes forced to make bread of
the bark of the fur and pine-trees, which they esteem very wholesome,
agreeing well with their stomachs, and free from any malign quality. Fish and
flesh is here very plentiful, howbeit neither in great request fresh, but
either salted up, or dried in the sun or smoke. They are also well stored
with venison, as also with wild foul, such especially as are accounted the
daintiest.

The conjugal bed is among them kept undefiled and inviolable. Adultery there
unknown.
Their maids are not there married without consent of parents or guardians:
neither yet is it lawful for any man to betroth, or marry such a maid without
the presence of 4 witnesses, two of the part of the bridegroom, and as many on
the brides side, a penalty of forty marks to be imposed upon the party
that infringes this decree. Manner of their marriage and betrothing.
When a maid is thus betrothed, the guardian may not object any thing to
hinder the marriage, except it be very lawful, and by the laws of the land
determined to be such; if he shall chance to do otherwise, the bridegroom may
lawfully break open the doors, and carry her away by force if he cannot
otherwise: and if there should by this means, either death or wounds ensue, no
punishment shall be inflicted for wounds, or death of the resisting party. But
if the other party that is about to recover his spoues, be either wounded or
killed, the punishment of such a resisting person shall be doubled, and the
woman shall be esteemed lawfully rescued, and not ravished and taken by force.
Again, these be the words of the lawmakers Whosoever departs from his wife,
and makes a contract and agreement to cohabite with another woman, the other
wife to him before lawfully married being yet alive, and this be, by sufficient
witnesses, legally prooved, they shall both lose their lives the man being
beheaded, and the woman stoned to death.

When as either man or woman dies, leaving children behind him, Manner of
succeeding in inheritances.
whether sons or daughters, they shall succeed in the inheritance, the son
shall have two, and the daughter one part for her share: and the nephew shall
have the like share as a son, and the niece as a daughter, whether their
children live or dye; but withal all the fifth degree is here excluded from
succession.

If the heir be absent.
If any person dye, whose next heir is without the Realm, if the heir return
within a year and a night, with sufficient proof that he is lawful heir to
the deceased party, he shall as lawful heir succeed to the party deceased.
But if he come not within a year and a night, the king shall be his heir,
whether the goods be moveable or unmovable: and this is commonly called
Dana-arf. Dana arf.
If the goods given to any, be not moveable, let him receive them again that
gave them.

If the heir be unknown
If any native of the country dye, and the heir be known, the inheritance
shall be kept for the right heir: but if it be not known who is the right
heir, and no word be sent from him, or else some other assurance where he is,
or that he come not within a year and a day; then the Kings exchequer shall
receive the one half of his estate, and the other half was formerly to be
employed for praying for his soul; but since the reformation of Religion
converted, to other charitable uses.

This people, not only of late, but even of old has been much commended for
their great hospitality in entertaining strangers; Their hospitality.
the which as it is common to all these Northern people, so is it most
conspicuous in the Swedish nation, it being esteemed there a heinous indignity
to deny entertainment to strangers and travelers, there being among them
certain particular constitutions concerning this same particular. Robberies
seldo^e heard of among this people.
Besides, they are of that sincerity of life and conversation, and so far from
wronging others, that this has caused no small admiration to strangers and
travelers passing that way; which may in this appear, that although there be
very great forests found in that country, yet seldom any robberies by the
high ways are amongst them heard of.

In ancient times both the Swedish and the Goths had their own proper letters
and language, Gothish letters abolished
howbeit their letters have been by the first founders of Christianity in
these parts quite abolished, and Latin letters put in their places. And of
this some render this reason; that among these people were many books full of
their ancient heathenish superstition, which superstition of theirs they
thought would hardly be quite rooted out, unless as well their letters, as
books written with those letters were utterly abolished. But by this means it
is to be supposed, that we are likewise deprived of many ancient acts and
antiquities not unworthy the knowing, which are by this means buried in
eternal oblivion. And of this prerogative beyond all other people of Europe
(the Grecians excepted) does this nation brag, that they never borrowed their
letters of any other nation. And it is thought that if their letters and books
had until this time continued, they might have contested for antiquity with
the most famous histories, either Greek or Latin. And therefore above all
other nations the Goths were most admired for their opinion concerning the
immortality of the soul: concerning which opinion, although there be left no
ancient records; yea and if there were no testimony of strangers to witness
the same; yet may this by many monuments even until this day remaining,
plainly appear, the which are written upon great grave-stones in this same
ancient character of Rumcke letters, as the author speaks, for in them were
commonly added toward the latter end of the inscription, these words, (...)

The Swedish much addicted to the high Dutch speech
That is, God help the soul of such a one. But as it has fared with many
other ancient nations that in continuance of time they have altered their
ancient language; so has this nation tasted likewise of the same alteration
and change. For by reason of their commerce and traffic with their neighbors
the high Dutch, they have also borrowed much of their language, and mingled it
with their own, as may, by many arguments appear; and the better sort addict
themselves to learn this language in perfection. The like has also befallen
many other nations of the Christian world. The Italian what is it else but a
bastard, Italian language.
composed of that pure elegant Latin spoken in Tullies time, and the rude
languages of these barbarous nations, Goths, Vandals, and Longaburds, like an
inundation in the declining of the Roman Empire, overflowing all Italy. The
Spanish.
What the Spanish tongue but the same Latin mingled with the ancient Gothish,
and some others? And the modern French French.
tongue so idolized of every one is but the ancient Gauls (the ancient
inhabitants of that country) lan-language enterlarded with many Latin words.
Now that this people is a great lover of learning and letters, may from hence
appear, Goths lovers of learning.
that even at this day the very country people and shepherds, have engraven
upon their great staves and shepherds crooks all the principal matters set
down in our ordinary almanacks in their ancient Gothicke letters: by which
means they are able to understand the change and other times of the moon,
bissextile or leap year, the golden number, dominicall letters, and the like,
concerning this subject.

The subjects of all the dominion of Sweden, Six ranks or degrees of the
Swedish nation.
are divided into six ranks or degrees, differing in eminency and dignity
each one from the other: the Princes of the blood, the Nobles, and Gentry, the
ecclesiastical estate, soldiers or martial men, the merchants and
husbandmen, or laborers of the ground.

The Princes of the blood Princes of the bloods
are commonly the Kings sons or brothers. The Kings eldest son does now,
according to the custom, usually succeed, and the others are called Dukes, and
livings answerable to their birth and greatness assigned them. The daughters
have portions assigned them, yet not out of the Kings treasure, but of the
subjects purses. And although the Kingdom be now become hereditary, yet do
the Kings always swear to maintain religion according to the Augustane
confession.

The Nobility Their titles were not hereditary.
The Nobility is divided into Earls, Barons, Knights, Squires, and ordinary
Gentry. The Earls were of old called Ieri, and were by their Kings created, as
likewise Dukes, called Hertzogh for their singular valor and worth; but none of
those titles were hereditary or descended to posterity. And by reason those
great men had often in rebellion opposed themselves against their natural
Kings, therefore for diverse years these titles were quite omitted, until such
time as Ericus 14. Wh^^ made hereditary.
in imitation of other Kings and Potentates introduced again these titles of
Earls and Barons, and made them hereditary to posterity. As for Knights they
ever were, as now they are also, made for their worth and proof upon the
atchieving of some noble exploits, and descend not to posterity, unless they
succeed in their predecessors virtues and valor. As for the other Gen^^y, the
chiefest of them are those we commonly call Squires, and of old were called
aff-wapu. Out of these ranks of Nobility above mentioned are elected and
chosen the supreme ministers and officers of judicature and other great
employments of the Kingdom; and for this cause have great maintenance allowed
them.

As for the clergy and state ecclesiastical, The clergy or persons
ecclesiastical
it is composed of these persons following: first is the Archbishop of Vpsalia,
together with seven other Bishops; and besides these, there are yet four
superintendents, who although in name they differ from the former, yet in
nature and function little or nothing; and this last is most commonly the
highest title among the Protestant Churches beyond the seas, as well Lutherans
or others. So these Bishops and superintendents were adjoined the Canons,
Prebends, etc. and under them Ministers and Preachers of every Parish. Bishops
lived like Princes in Sweden.
The Bishops in former times were possessors of many strong holds and Castles,
and great livings, and were exceeding rich, by reason whereof they were able to
live like great Princes (as at this day in Germany and other places is to be
seen) by this means they became so haughty, and insolent, that sometimes they
waged war with their own natural Princes, sometimes expelling them out of
their kingdom. For this cause Gustavus the 1. of that name, lest the like
should befall himself or his successors, assembled the whole estates of his
kingdom to take counsel against the Bishops then making preparation for an
open rebellion; and by their advice and consent annexed unto the Crown their
lands and possessions, together with all their strong holds and Castles,
reserving for these ecclesiastical persons some part as well of the tithes as
other revenues, to be for them a fit and competent maintenance. In former times
these Bishops had place among the chief Senators and counselors of the
kingdom, and the Archbishop of Vpsalia, and sometimes also the Bishop of
Lincopia assumed unto themselves the title of Primate of the whole Kingdom;
for the which cause in those days this dignity was by great Nobles sued for:
but since this Kingdom made profession of the reformed Religion, the clergy
of highest title meddle only with Church-affaires; and now men's sons of the
meanest degree and birth, merchants or husbandmens are admitted unto such
functions. And yet this privilege they still enjoy, that in every parliament
they have a voice as well as any of the Nobility or others.

The military forces.
Next follow the military forces as well horse as foot, which notwithstanding
consist not of foreign mercenary forces: For the foot forces are culled and
picked out from among the choicest youth of the kingdom, The trained ^ands,
whereof consist the foot forces,
by decimation, or taking every tenth man. After they are once enrolled, they
are not only freed from all subsidies, impositions, or other payments
whatsoever, but have also a yearly stipend allowed them of the king, who
causes certain commanders for this same purpose appointed (being first
furnished with all manner of weapons) for certain years to train them up at
home, in the mean time enuring them to endure all manner of hardship, and such
toil and labor as souldieours are wonted in war to endure; while in the mean
time the old bands (if need so require) be employed in foreign expeditions.
And thus it comes to pass, that although the King carry never so great an
army out of the country against a foreign enemy, yet is the kingdom never
left unfurnished of sufficient defense, ready to serve upon all occasions, and
by this means there is the less use of mercenary soldiers, unless upon
urgent and extraordinary occasion, as now in this great and memorable
expedition against the Austrian house, and the whole Catholic league. It need
not therefore seem strange, that this great King has even in our memories
waged war alone and the same time against all his three potent neighbors, the
king of Poland, of Denmark, and the great Prince or Duke of Russia. For
whenever his forces are either wearied or worn out, he is able presently to
exchange with a new supply, who being already inured t^ hardship and military
labor and toil, are able t^ undergo any difficulty whatsoever.

Their horse-forces are raised both from among the Gentry and the common
people. The horse-forces, and how raised.
The Nobles according to the greatness of their Lordships and lands maintain
many horsemen for the defense of the country: and besides these, the commons
of every Province possessing rich Manors or Farms, to free themselves from all
tributes and taxes maintain according to their means, certain horsemen under
the command of the Captain of that place where he lives.

The fifth degree, rank or order is of merchants Merchants.
inhabiting cities and towns. These both bring in, and carry out of the
kingdom diverse merchandizable commodities, bought first of the natural
inhabitants, from whence they gather no small gain. Now these cities and
merchant staples have among them certain peculiar municipal laws and
constitutions, derived from the law of the most ancient city Biria, the which
about 600. years ago was the seat Royal where the King kept his Court, Certain
laws and constitutions have been appointed for traffic and commerce.
and the chief staple of of the whole kingdom. Each of these cities and
towns enjoys also certain particular privileges, and very laudable
constitutions, by which it was ordained and determined after what manner the
mediterranean cities should traffic and trade with the inhabitants and
maritime, to the end that each place might be an indifferent sharer in the
gain: and besides, this laudable constitution was also enacted, that the
benefit, gain, or rising of one City should not prove the ruin of another.
But these laudable laws and wholesome constitutions by reason of so many wars
and broils wherewith this kingdom has so often been troubled, have been by
the governors of this kingdom now for a long time neglected; and by this
means many disorders are by little and little crept into their traffic and
commerce. And therefore this illustrious and victorious king Gustavus Adolphus
now reigning, to testify and make known his love and fatherly affection to
his country, in restoring and repairing the ruins and breaches of the
commonwealth, among many other things, did again as it were, revive, and put
life into those now almost dead laws, and enlarge the same; the which if
afterward they shall be duly observed, no doubt but these cities will soon
again return to their former splendour and dignity.

The last rank and degree among this people, is that of husbandman, Husbandmen.
the which although lowest in degree, yet not of least use and necessity, as
being the very ground and foundation of all the rest, and who furnish all the
others, both with food and raiment. Freeholders.
And of these there are yet two sorts: the first are freeholders, having their
lands and possessions hereditary, and out of the which they use to pay
something yearly to the king, the which payment is seldom raised to any
higher rate; and withal, this privilege has been granted them of old, that
if they be able to furnish themselves with a good horse and complete armor,
being able to serve the king in his wars, so long as they, or yet any of
their sons serve in this kind, their Manours or Farms are freed from any
manner of payments to the king; and this is the reason why many from their very
cradle, as it were, apply themselves to military affairs; by which means also
the number of the kings horsemen is wonderfully increased. Among these are also
to be ranked such as work in mines Workers in the Mines.
in the mountainous and hilly places of the kingdom, who thereby purchase to
themselves no small gain, and are for the most part very rich. The rest of
these country people are Farmers, Farmers.
who, although besides the set rents they pay their landlords, they perform
likewise diverse services; yet by reason of the great benefit and commodity they
make by fishing, fowling, and of wood of the forests, they reap no small
commodity, whereby they are enabled to live in very good fashion recording to
their own rank and degree. For this is to be understood, that this whole
kingdom abounds with lakes and rivers, full of very wholesome fishes;
besides the abundance of woods, which partly in regard of their number, and
partly by reason of the remoteness, yield oftentimes but small benefit to the
owners: and for the same reason no where are fish and foul, as also hares
cheaper then in this kingdom. It is likewise to be observed, that in all
Parliaments, the country people, They have a voice in Parliament.
this last and sixth rank I mean, have a voice as well as any of the others.
And thus it comes to pass, that the meanest or lowest degree is not
neglected, nor no well deserving subject hindered to climb to as high a pitch
of honor, as his virtues can attain unto.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Politic and civil government of the Kingdom of Sweden.
IN ancient times each Province of this kingdom had it is several laws and
constitutions, whereof, as it is supposed, there were diverse authors, whose
names, by reason of the long tract of time, are now for the most part buried in
oblivion.

And the Vestrogothian laws are so ancient, that it is apparent they were made
at such times as the Goths departed out of this kingdom, Antiquities of the
Vestrogothian laws
or at least shortly after: for there is mention made of the Goths inhabiting
Greece and Thracia: to wit, that none of them should enjoy or possess any of
their ancient possessions in their own country, unless they would return
and dwell there. And it is apparent that they dwelt there before the times of
Alexander the great, who, as he affirmed, were to be shunned and taken heed
of. Besides, even before the incarnation of our Lord and Savior, they were
such a terror to the Romans, that they were by them much hindered from
enlarging their dominion beyond the Danubius. Now these laws do for the most
part agree with the laws of the Visigoths, set down by Isidorus, although they
be far shorter; for the which cause it is not unlike that these same laws of
Isidrus were at the first collected out of the constitutions of the
Vestrogoths, and after, as the titles testify enlarged by the kings of the
Visigoths of Spain. Out of all these Provincial laws and other constitutions
of this kingdom, did the Bishops and Senators thereof above 270 years ago
compile this general law, very agreeable to the law of nature, and not much
differing from the civil law, but that by this controverted cases are far
speedilier ended. But before we speak any thing concerning their laws, we
will premit some generalities. In this kingdom therefore there are several
principal colleges or societies, The whole government of this kingdom
comprehended in certain societies or colleges.
which comprehend the whole government of the same.

The first of these is called the College of Justice, 1 College or society
of Justice.
in the wihch are three degrees or ranks: the supreme, the middle most, and
lowest of all. In this supreme or highest rank or order, are the noble
Senators of the kingdom: in the next are such as they call Lagman; and in
Latin Nomophylaces, as if we should say; Recorders or Registers. In the third
rank or order are the Judges of particular cities or towns, being men of good
esteem, and of honest life and conversation, and not unskilful in the laws
of the land. In this supreme court are judged causes of the whole kingdom, as
well criminal as civil; and to this supreme court, the subject may from any
inferior Court of the kingdom appeal, whereas they determine and judge
whether the inferior court has judged right or no; and from this court there
is no appeal, unless it be to the king himself, in whose power it is either
to qualify the punishment, or to remit the offense. Under this suprame court
are immediately subjected and subordinate two others, that of criminal causes,
and that of the court or chamber.

The next to this college is the college of war, wherein are handled all
Martial or Military affairs, and is called the Court marshall or martial. 2
College or society is that of war, or court Marshall.
To this court belongs the Council of War. wherein are all military matters
deliberated and discussed: and over this court presides the great Marshall of
the kingdom. His office is, when the king cannot be present in his own
person, as general to command over the whole army.

This great officer has with him joined diverse other associates and colleagues,
amongst whom is chiefly he whom they call Riick-scirs Siigmeister, as much to
say, as master of the Ordnance. Besides, there is also a field marshall, and
under him many other commanders, both of the horse and foot forces.

The third college or court is that of the Chancerie; 3 College, the court of
the Chancery
in which are handled all manner of causes both civil and ecclesiastical. In
this Court presides the Lord Chancellor of the kingdom, The Lord Chancellours
office.
who has the chief charge of the broad seal, receives and reads all
letters sent to the king, and dispatcheth answers. Besides, in the counsel he
propounds such heads as they are to consult about: and withal he has the
charge of setting down and publishing all Proclamations; all decrees and acts
of Parliament. He is also Judge of al private complaints and appeals from
inferior courts to the King: and finally, he has the oversight of all the
Secretaries, Clerks, Religious persons, and ecclesiastical ceremonies; and
all controversies and negotiations with foreign Princes, war, peace, and truce
receiving messages from foreign Ambassadors, and dispatching their answers.
This great officer has joined with him for associates or colleagues, a
Vice Chancellor: and diverse counselors of the Chancerie, besides the kings
Secretaries, with diverse others.

The fourth College or Court is that of the Admiraltie, 4 College, the
Admiral court.
over which is the great Lord Admiral; whose office is to oversee the Navy
royal, and to see that it be in a readiness, with all things thereto
belonging, against the time of need. He has under him a Vice Admiral, besides
Captains and Commanders of every ship. To his court belong all causes
concerning trespasses against constitutions made for the preservation of the
Navy-royal, and many other things concerning maritime affairs.

The fifth and last is the Exchequer, 5 College is the Exchequer.
or, as the French call it, the chamber of accounts, where are received all the
revenues belonging to the crown, tributes, customs, subsidies, etc. Over this
Court presides the Lord Treasurer of the kingdom, who has also joined with
him in commission two others of the Nobility; and to this court belong also a
number of clerks, who are chosen out of the inferior rank of people. He has
also under his custody the royal ensigns of the kingdom, the apple, the
crown, the scepter, and the sword. He pays also all the kings army, and so
does he all the kings servants their wages, In a word he takes all, and pays
all, being accomptable to no body, but to the king himself.

Amongst all the great officers of the kingdom, the Lord Marshall is accounted
the chief, The Lord Marshals office.
being master of the kings household, and administrator or orderer of the great
counsel; who by the kings authority, has power to assemble the whole States
of the land, to command silence and attention, to give leave to speak in
Parliament, to welcome ofrreine Ambassadors, and to provide things necessary
for their entertainment. To his office also it belongs to remove out of the
counsel such as belong not thereunto, and to see the kings decrees, concerning
matters of defamation, and punishment of death duly put in execution. He
supplies also the place of the master of the ceremonies, and suppresseth all
tumults and disorders. To him belongs also the oversight of the kings
household and domestical servants, and to correct the offenders. And finally,
in all public meetings he bears the great staff before the king.

Next unto him in dignity is esteemed the great Lord Constable, the field
Marshall, the great Sewer, the Lord Chamberlain, etc.

Particular division of he Provinces into smaller parts.
Moreover, this whole kingdom is not only divided into several Provinces,
Duchies, and Counties, but besides each Province is again subdivided into
certain territories or jurisdictions, commonly called Haradh, of the which,
some contain more, and some fewer parishes. Each Province again has its
governor or lieutenant called Landz-herren, Several Judges.
or State-haller; and each territory or jurisdiction has a Judge called
Leensman; and besides, each parish has a Judge called Nembdarius, or
Nembdemannus. Now all these are distinct offices, and subordinate one to
another, and so may the plantife appeal from one inferior court, to a next
superior in due order and form.

The supreme governor or magistrate of the Province is called Legifer, The
supreme Judge Legifer
as it were a lawgiver and judge, and are esteemed in dignity next unto the
king, as being his judges and uice-gerents. Now as many as are the Provinces,
as many are there of these supreme judges: to eleven, under whom are again
above 300. Vicounties, or particular jurisdictions; not unlike the courts of
Parliament of France, and the multitude of presidiall courts. But the
difference is, that these supreme Judges visit every year a great part of
their Province, until all their Provinces be visited, and when they have
traveled the round, they return again where they first began (which the
French Parliaments do not) much after the manner of the Judges circuits in
this kingdom. And as this course is very convenient for the remedying of the
public diseases of the kingdom; so is it also some ease to the subject, these
judges demanding the tribute and taxes by turns, and not all at once, of such
territories and parishes as they visit, that so the people be not all burdened
at one and the same time.

It is yet further to be observed, that by the ancient customs and
constitutions of this kingdom, besides all these aforementioned courts, there
was yet one general court commanded to be kept in four eminent places of the
kingdom once or twice a year, for determining and finishing some cases, which
by the other Judges had not been, or could not so well be decided. And this
they call Iudicium Pratoriale, Iudicium praetoriale.
which was a meeting of many Judges together, where controversies were duly
and strictly examined, and sentence according to equity pronounced. This court
was by Charles the ninth, father to this now reigning king Gustavus Adolphus
ordained to be kept twice a year, once in Vpsalia, in winter at the time of a
great fair then kept; and the other about Saint Peter's day in summer. The
Judges were without fail to appear at the place appointed in proper person
six weeks after the publication of such a meeting. Now whatsoever was in this
pretoriall court determined betwixt party and party, was to stand firm and
inviolable for ever without appeal to any other court whatsoever.

The Ral or Court Royal.
And because the king will be sure, that justice be duly executed in all his
dominions, therefore besides all these former courts, there is yet another
great and solemn court sometimes kept, called the court Royal or Ral; whereas
either the king in proper person, or else a deputy or special commissioner
hears all the grievances betwixt party and party: and this is a court of
reformation, wherein some things which in other courts have not been so well
ordered, are here reformed and amended. And this court I take to be much like
that solemn court sometimes kept in the kingdom of Scotland, Justice heir of
Scotland.
called the Justice air, wherein very small offenses were severely punished.
Now the king is six weeks before the time of sitting to intimate the fame to
his subjects. And within 14 days after, whosoever has a complaint against
any, he must cause summon his adversary to appear at the day and place
appointed by the kings letters, to that purpose to be read in the first Plac
it or Court; or where there is none kept, then at the next Parish Church. Now
if any upon this summons shall refuse to appear, the king or his vicegerent,
shall notwithstanding his nonappearance, (unless very just cause may be
showed) proceed to sentence against him.

Now as concerning their particular laws, statutes, and ordinances, the times
and turns of their meetings in Courrts of Justice, the manner of choosing
their Judges, their oaths, and what by them to be observed, as being too long
and tedious for this short tractate, I willingly pass by. But if any be
desirous to know their particular statute laws, he may have recourse to their
history, and such as have of set purpose collected and set them down in order.
I proceed now to speak of the might and power of this great king, and then by
what means it is maintained.

CHAP. V. Of the might and power of the King of Sweden, as well by Sea as by
land.
ANd first for his sea forces, Sea forces
it is certain that the king of Sweden (besides his galleys and small ships,
Number of ships.
whereof in those seas he possesses no small number) has been many years
ago furnished with fifty brave war-ships, upon all occasions ready for
service; and many of them furnished with 60. 70. or 80. great pieces of brass
Ordnance; and now questionless he is furnished with a far greater number.
Neither yet is it any hard matter for him to make up the number of 6000 sail
within his dominions, Number of Mariners and sailers.
not of rowers and ordinary watermen I mean, but even of expert sailers,
pilots, masters of ships, masters mates, etc. For all that tract about the sea
coast of Finland, being at least 40, miles in length, together with the coast
of the Redeucke sea twice as long, besides a number of Islands afford the
inhabitants daily means of no small commerce and traffiking by sea; by which
means the mariners may easily become both bold and expert. Besides, their
maintenance is not very chargeable to the king: for the most of their pay is in
fish, flesh, butter and cheese, ryce and barley, such commodities as many of his
countries yield him for tribute. These ships in time of peace use to be
distributed into diverse parts of the kingdom. The greatest commonly ly in
Stockholme haven, which Port is so fenced against all winds, that there they
may safely ride against all winds without any anchors: besides, that there they
are also free from any hostile invasion, there being no access thither for any
ships but by 24. miles sailing, and that by a number of dangerous rocks. The
rest of those ships are dispersed into diverse other harbors, especially those
of Finland, that so they may be always in a readiness, if peradventure the
Russian should make any sudden stir. Some of them again are bestowed in such
ports and haven towns whereas they may inhibite the importation of such
commodities out of high Germany, as might tend to the ruin of the kingdom:
and therefore the kings majesty suffers no ship to come from thence, unless
they have first a pass granted them, subscribed with his majesty's own hand;
the which the Merchants of Lubeck often purchase at a round rate. And to
conclude, this king is very powerful by sea.

And no less powerful is he also by land: His land forces.
for he is able in a short space from among his own subjects to raise a great
army of foot, who by reason of their frequent conflicts sometimes with the
Dane, sometimes with the Russian, but especially with the Polonian, have
purchased unto themselves no small experience in military affair, having
infinitely improved the valor and prowess derived unto them by their
ancestors.

This king may in a fortnights space call out twelve legions of well
experienced soldiers, (reckoning three thousand to a legion) and may carry
them whither he list out of the kingdom, yea if it were even to the very
Indians, neither yet is he unfurnished of choice, able, and skillful horsemen
as well in Sweden as in Finland, both these countries being well furnished with
exceeding good horses; the which how far in bulk of body inferior to those
of high Germany, and other nations, The horses not big in bulk.
so far perhaps do they again surpass them in bounty. And in truth they
are very stout, and in consideration of their low stature, exceeding strong,
being accustomed to hard labor, and easily undergoing any travel or toil,
and withal contented with any food.

This king hireth commonly his horsemen.
The lowness of their stature has been the sole cause that heretofore this
king has most commonly hired his horsemen out of high Germany, when he was to
wage war against any potent enemy. Now how great forces both of horse, and
foot, this mighty Prince is able to bring into the field, may not only by his
late war against the Polonian, but by this late and last expedition into
Germany, undertaken for the freeing of many distressed Princes and people from
the tyranny of the Austrian house, and restoring them again to their ancient
inheritances, easily be evidenced and witnessed unto us. After ages no doubt
will stand amazed at the multitude of his valiant acts, with so great celerity,
valor, and magnanimity achieved in so short a time, who may well with that
great conqueror Julius Caesar, say, veni, vidi, vici; and grateful posterity
will eternize his name so long as sun and moon shall endure, and bless the
time that so pious and prosperous a Prince was borne to the Christian world.
Many things were some years ago related to the Pope by his Nuncio concerning
the multitude and distribution of the military forces of this kingdom;
concerning their pay also, military discipline, etc. all which, although since
that time much improoued, yet for the present I let pass, and proceed to other
matters.

CHAP. VI. Of customs and tribute belonging to the king of Sweden.
NOw to maintain all this great charge of war and other expenses, there must
be some means whereby it may be effected. Customs threefold.
For this purpose therefore there are certain tributes and customs yearly
paid into the kings coffers: and these are of three sorts. Customs arising
from his mines.
The first sort of tribute is that which is raised of his mines; out of the
which not only are dug iron, copper and lead in great abundance, but even
silver also, of the which are coined the Swedish dollors, for finenesse of
metal inferior to no other silver whatsoever. Now some of these Mines are
dug at the kings own cost and charges, and some at the cost of private
persons.

Of the first the king has the whole benefit, and of the latter but the tenth
part, as of other commodities.

Of two copper Mines only, at this time the king receives a very great
benefit; and besides, by reason of this abundance of brass and copper, it
comes to pass that he is so well able to furnish himself with brass
Ordnance; and that not for his Castles and Forts only, but for his Ships also;
Great number of brass Ordnance.
the sum whereof is no less then 8000. at the least: and in the Castle of
Stockeholme alone, there are at least 400. great pieces of brass Ordnance and
more might yet be made if there were any need. And if the country people did
not oftentimes conceal some mines newly found out, the profit which would arise
out of these mines would amount to a far greater sum. Customs and revenues
arising from the fruits of the earth.


The next way by which the kings revenues are increased, is from the fruits of
the earth, and his customs as well by sea as by land: for the king has the
tithes of all manner of grain, wheat, rye, barley, etc. as also of butter and
cheese of beasts, hides, fish, and the like; the certainty of which revenues
although it be not to us assuredly known; yet no question arises it to no
small sum, and as is credible, to little less then 9 or 10. millions say
their writers: but this must be understood of their own coin and account, not
of Sterline money.

Now concerning his customs, Customs of all manner of merchandise.
the king receives custom of all wares transported out of the kingdom, or
imported into the same. And that there be no want of good silver coin within
the kingdom, this order has been for many years ago established; to wit,
that for every hundredth dollors worth of merchandise transported out of the
kingdom, they shall pay into the custom house ten silver dollors in kind,
or else ten ounces of silver; for the which they receive in present pay the
worth in other small copper coin of Swedish money current within the kingdom.

And for every hundredth dollors worth of wares so transported out of the
kingdom, the merchant is tied to bring into the kingdom again the worth of
90. dollors of such wares as are useful for the kingdom; and for these 90.
dollors worth of wares, they are to pay into the custom house ten dollors,
or ten ounces of silver, or else the worth thereof in other money. And
whosoever shall fail in any of the premises, for the first fault he shall
pay 20 Swedish marks; Customs of furs and rich skins.
and the next time all his wares shall be confiscate.

As for the revenue and custom of rich skins and furs, it is sometimes more,
and sometimes less, according to the intensenesse and remissness of the cold,
and the abundance of snow. For the greater is the snow, the greater number of
these wild beasts are taken. Out of the country of Lapland the Northermost of
all his Provinces the king receives a great number of these skins or rich furs.
And to the end he be not couzned, he sends thither every year an officer,
being a clerk, who so narrowly inquireth into the number of these beasts so
killed, that very hardly can he be deceived.

These rich furs the king disposes of among his kindred and friends: and
sometimes also he exchangeth them with merchants, for other wares wherewith
they furnish his Court.

The third sort of revenue consists in voluntary or arbitrary contributions,
The third sort of custom or revenue, arbitrary or voluntary contributions.
answerable to our subsidies and fifteenes in this kingdom. For whenever the
king is to undertake a war offensive or defensive, he calls a Parliament,
wherein he acquainteth the subject with his purpose, and what charges it is like
to arise unto: and then the States of the kingdom agree upon a certain sum
answerable to the business to be undertaken.

But the Nobles and chief Gentry, and their tenants are for the most part
freed from these impositions, unless upon very urgent and important occasions.
But if there be an extreme necessity, and there be not otherwise sufficient
supply, then their vassals and tenants are tied to pay half of the tax or
subsidy, as well as those who are immediately subject to the king himself.

Besides all this, the subject is tied to contribute to the marriage of the
kings daughters, whose dowry has been hitherto 100000. dollors, near upon
40000. pound sterling money, besides plate and other mooveables; unto the which
nevertheless the king may add at his pleasure as he sees occasion.

And whenever the king permits any of his Court deserving subjects to any
preferment, he commonly assigns him a certain number of country people who
are esteemed as his vassalls and subjects, and are to do him homage, and pay
him tribute and certain duties.

CHAP. VII. Of the Kings of this country of Sweden, with some of their chief
and memorable Acts.
MOst of the Northern nations have time out of mind had their Kings by
election: as the Dane, Swedish, Polonian and Bohemian. The kings of Sweden have
been until of late years elective. And although it was a matter of no small
difficulty among barbarous nations, where Mars was more honored then Minerva,
and good literature (the means to eternize heroical worth) scarce heard of in
these remote regions, to find out any thing concerning their kings worth the
writing; yet have we the names of diverse kings of that nation recorded of old;
howbeit a constant and continued succession without any interruption we cannot
read of.

1 In the first place then they tell us that Magog 1 King Magog
son to Iaphet, Noah's son, the founder of the Scythian nation in Europe,
having passed over the Venedicke gulf into Gothland (by the Latins afterward
called by the name of Scythia) reigned over those people called Get. Others,
and that of the more learned ascribe rather the original of the Goths to Gomer
Iaphets eldest son, and make those two nations Goths and Get, different and
distinct nations.

2 Unto Magog, as they write, succeeded Swennus, 2 Swennus.
from whom the nation took the name.

3 Gethar. 3 Gethar,


4 Vbbo, 4 Vbbo.
who as they write, builded Vpsalia before Abraham was borne. And from that
time until our Lord and Savior they reckon up 35. kings, and distinguish them
all by their several names; and many of those, for their sanctity of life,
and conspicuous and eminent virtues, were by the rude rimes of those days
highly commended. And besides these, diverse other kings are yet recorded to
have reigned over those, who under the command of one Berico, for fear of
intestine war, fled their own country, and among those mention is made of
one king of the Getes in order.

22 Colison by name, to whom Augustus Caesar betroathed his daughter Iulia;
about the which time also Antonius demanded his daughter in marriage, as may
clearly appear by Suetonius in the life of Augustus. Moreover, about the time
of our Savior reigned Ericus the third, surnamed Diserius, who for his worth
and merit attained to this government. To this Ericus 40 Ericus the 3.
succeeded to the government of the Swedish nation,

41 Godrichus 41 Goodrichus
his son; and next to him

42 Haldanus; 42 Haldanus
during the reign of this king, lived that monster of strength, for the same
cause called Starcherus, who is said at singular combats to have killed that
great champion Ham, which afterward gave denomination to that famous City
Hamburg. After those is a long catalogue of their kings recorded, but nothing
concerning their acts worth the reading recorded, that nation then standing
more upon the point of valor and honor, then upon penning of them for
posterity.

But far more fortunate have they been in their foreign expeditions and
transmigrations, when as like a great deluge and inundation they overflowed a
great part of the world under the names of Ostrogoths, and Westrogoths, and
under the commandment of Theodoricus, Attalariake, Iotila, Ataulphus, etc.
whose martial and heroical exploits the Romans highly advancing, and lest they
should conceal their own worth, have pub^ished to all posterity.

Under Biorno 100 Biorno.
their 100 homebred king, Jews son to Charles the great, swaying the
scepter of the Western Empire this, nation of Sweden first received the
Christian faith, Sanctus Augerius a monk of Gorbey much furthering then this
so worthy a work, Author est Ludolphus de Bebenburg in libro de zelo
religionis Christianae.

CHAP. VIII.
124 ERicus Sanctus 124 Ericus Sanctus 4.
or the holy, after whom the posterity of Suercherus and Ericus by turns with
much contention, as the one or the other grew strongest usurped the government.
This pious Prince, notwithstanding his great agnitie and piety, and pains
taken in an expedition to convert the Finlanders to the faith, had but a
slender reward, being bulled by a conspiracy of some of his Nobility, Henry
King of Denmark, and Magnus his son being the ringleaders of this faction,
An. 1160.

125 Charles 125 Charles 7.
son to Stercherus, having reigned two years during the reign of Ericus
over the Ostrogoths (who in the election of a king dissenting from the Swedish
had chosen one of their own) and afterward for the space of 8. years, very
religiously and virtuously over both kingdoms, but being now hated by reason
of his friendship with the Dane, was at length by Canutus son to S. Ericus,
(being by some persuaded that this Charles with the help of the Dane had
contrived his fathers death) killed in in the Island of Visnuga 1168.

126 Canutus 129 Canutus.
son to S. Ericus, having done penance for killing king Charles, and being by
the discreet counsel of the Bishop of Lunden, diverted from assailing the
Dane, dies 1192.

127 Stercherus 117 Stercherus
son to Charles, a martial man, wise and eloquent, itching for revenge on
the posterity of Canutus, having altered his former nature, and gathered great
forces out of Denmark, was at length with his whole army utterly overthrown,
and again in another bloody battle himself killed 1210.

128 Ericus 128 Ericus. 3.
son to Canutus having escaped Stercherus his hands, reigned very
prosperously for the space of 7. years, the which 7 years histories mention
to have been exceeding fruitful; but in the eight year with the death of their
king, this fruitfulnes was also finished 1216.

129 John 129 John 1.
son to Stercherus, a very pious young man, of exceeding great hopes, dyed
notwithstanding within three years after 1222.

130 Ericus Balbus 130 Ericus Balbus
son to the nephew of S. Ericus. Against him conspires his kinsman
Folchingus, expelling him out of his kingdom, but within a short space the
tide turning, he being killed, he left Ericus the peaceable possession of the
kingdom; after this he converts his forces against the Tavastians, sending
against them the Prince of the Ostrogoths, a man of very eminent virtues; whom
after he had subdued and converted, he dies 1150.

131 Valdemarus, by means of a valiant soldier Iuanus Blaa, during his
fathers absence, was elected king. The father being returned from this
expedition against the Tavastians, alleged, that the crown was rather due to
himself then to his son: but being terrified by the stout answer of this
brave soldier (who affirmed that he could shake a king of Sweden out of his
ierkin, if as Birgerus alleged, there should want one to succeed) he was
contented to be his sons governor, wherein he discharged himself very
worthily.

But by the fathers death, 131 Valdemarus
this young king being now left to himself, by the persuasion of his wife
being a Dane, he deals very harshly with his own brothers, until at length
he was taken prisoner by his brother Magnus, being therein borne out by the
Swedish themselves, and was also shortly after by the Peers of the kingdom
deprived of the kingdom of Gothland, which his brothers kindness had hitherto
suffered him to enjoy.

132 Magnus Ladolos 132 Magnus Ladolos 1.
in the year 1276. succeeded his brother: Valdemarus, by the Danes means
notwithstanding not ceasing still to molest him, yet after a once or twice
dissembled reconciliation, at length by the captivity of Valdemarus the
controversy was composed. He much wronged himself in setting strangers, the
Danes especially, over the affairs of the kingdom: for at a friendly feast
(as he supposed) the Danes, not regarding sacred hospitality, took him
prisoner.

And besides, he drew upon himself the implacable hatred of the whole Swedish
nation, but principally of the family of Folchingus, against whom he bare a
great grudge: and therefore having cunningly under the color of friendship
invited them to a feast, he murdered those of chief note, and almost
extinguished the whole race of Folchingus. But toward the latter end of his
life, he much reformed his former carriage, giving himself wholly to Gods
worship and service, dyed in the I Will of Visingia, having left his son to
succeed him, and Turgillus Canuti to be his governor and guide.

133 Birgerus 133 Birgerus.
son to Magnus, a dishonor both to himself, and the whole Swedish nation,
the ruin and overthrow of his own brethren (a prodigious and unnatural part)
the beginning of his reign having promised better proceedings, after the
rejecting of Turgillus, his cruel nature began to discover it self. For
having at first accused his brethren of treason, he afterward by force of
arms assaulted them, by whom being first taken prisoner, after a counterfeit
reconciliation, having invited them to a feast, he lays violent hands on them,
thrusts them into a dungeon there to dye of famine; and lest there should be
any hope of succor, throws the key into a deep river running hard by. The
which barbarous and inhumane cruelty, being odious both to the Swedish and
Gothish nation, they took arms and expelled him out of the kingdom, who
together with his wife, died miserably in Denmark.

134 Magnus Smech, 134. Magnus Smech. 2
son to Ericus slain by his brother Birgerus, in the year 1319. succeeded
in the government, who no whit terrified by his Uncles example, trod still in
the same footsteps; in so much that for his contempt of religion, prodigious
lust and barbarous cruelty, he was called a robber or spoyler (Predo) which was
the elogie he purchased to himself, making a show that he would admit of his
son Ericus for a consort in his government, secretly subornes one to kill
him; which being prevented, yet his own mother Blanca a French woman poisons
him.

Being taken prisoner by Haguinus the second king of Norway, but presently
again let go, he flies into Denmark, and causing intercept his sons spouse
Duchess of Holstein, by force obtrudes upon him Margaret the Danes daughter:
and in the mean time while he is a providing great forces against his
subjects, he thunders out proscription against them.

135 But in the mean time Albert of Meckelburg, 135. Albert of Meckleburge.
nephew to Magnus by his sister, is by the proscribed Nobles elected king, and
shortly after at Stockeholme confirmed. Being now settled in the throne royal
he proffers agreement to Magnus, who refusing the same, and being all for
war, was at length taken prisoner, and so kept close for the space of whole
seven years, until he was by his son Haguinus released. After this, being
returned from a Parliament held at Wismare, he began to contemn and despise
his subjects, of whom, in requital, he was as little regarded, whom now they
could not endure. He was shortly after entangled in war against Queen
Margaret, to whose side some did incline, wherein he was taken prisoner, and
detained captive whole seven years, and at length forced to release his
subjects of their oath of fidelity.

236 Margaret the Dane, ^36 Margaret the Dane.
and wife to Haguin king of Norway, was now in the year 1395 Queen of three
kingdoms: a woman indeed of a high and magnanimous spirit, if she had bent
her will the right way, and virtuous design had been the utmost end she aimed
at. But she, making no more account of any oath she had sworn (whereunto
notwithstanding she was very forward) then of childrens sport, with insatiable
covetousness spoiling all, and delivering up the Castles and strong holds of
the kingdom into the hands of strangers, being extremely hated of the Swedish,
fled into Denmark, after she had by terrors and threatenings obtained the
kingdom for one Ericus, her own sisters son, a young man about twenty four
years of age. When she was admonished that she should not commit the custody
of the forts and castles of the kingdom into strangers hands, it was her
answer, keep you well your evidences, and I will have a care to keep your
castles. She dyed and was buried at Flensburg, An. 1412.

137 Ericus Duke of Pomerania 137 Ericus Duke of Pomerania 7.
did too much relish of the persidious practices of his aunt, keeping no
covenant, vexing the Nobility with with war, spoiling and impoverishing his
subjects at home, and marring all commerce abroad, was therefore opposed by
Eugelberius of a Noble and Princely family; and he by Danish treachery being
supplanted, Carolus Canuti took upon him the government of the Realm. Having
fled into Denmark, and at length odious also to the Dane, sometimes
attempting, and sometimes again despairing of his return in his kingdom
(which not withstanding upon keeping of covenant was still ready to receive
him) at length in his return he took in Gothland, whereby he might the more
easily rob all the ships sailing toward the North. But being at length by
Carolus Canuti besieged, and now not daring trust the Danes, he fled into his
own country of Pomerania, and there spent the rest of his days in peace and
quietness, Anno 1487.

138 Christopherus, Prince Palatine of Rhene, and Duke of Bavaria, 138
Christopherus Prince of Palatine of R^e^^ and Duke of Bavaria.
and sisters son to Ericus, against whom by the Danes means he was enticed
to come; and yet not without great doubting and deliberation, and the Danes
great commendation would the Peers give their assent to his election.

The fair sunshine of the beginning of this Princes reign were eft soon
by the Swedish supplanting one another overclo uded. He had once a conflict
with the English, wherein he had the better; and afterward laboring to take
in Lubecke, and being disappointed of his purpose, he suffered shipwreck on
the Swedish shore, after which he lost all hope of taking in these towns of
the Vandals. For his lust and other wickedness the land was punished with
pestilence and famine: and afterward having by sea lost his great treasures he
had with him carried out of the country, at length in Denmark he dyed
childlesse 1448.

139 Carolus Canuti, 139 Carolus Canuti.
after this nation had been some years without a king, was by the Peers of
the land now loathing a foreign yoke, crowned king 1458. After he was come to
the crown, he subdued Norway; and being afterward invaded and assaulted by
the Dane, he damnifies him exceedingly. By reason of the insolency and
misdemeanour of his governors and officers, and by the instigation of the
Archbishop of Vpsalia, especially, the people of the land rebelled, and rose up
in arms against him; and in the mean time that he went to Dantzick for
succor from the king of Poland, they bring in and crown Christiernus king of
Denmark. But in the mean time Catillus Bishop of Lincopia, and nephew to the
Archbishop, of a Prelate now becomes a man of war, and gathering together
what forces he was able, expells out of the kingdom both Christierne (who kept
no covenant, nor yet performed any promise) and all his favorers and
adherents: and at length in a memorable battle fought upon the ice, overthrowes
Christierne, and puts his whole army to rout. After this the Bishop calls the
king home out of Prussia, who being now returned, and having again recovered
the peoples love and good will, and grown now wiser to his cost, he places
over them such officers as might give them better content. At length graced and
adorned with as many worthy virtues as days and years in reigning, dies in
1470.

After this Charles some reckon Christierne for 140. John his son 141. and
Christierne John's son 142. although others are of opinion they were titular
kings only, and rather intruders then true kings, and therefore the next shall
be,

140 Steno Sture, 140. Steno Sture. 1
sisters son to the aforesaid Charles, not only repelled Christierne and his
army, now approached near unto the walls of Stockeholme, but put both himself
and his whole army to flight, and kept him from invading the country any more.

He subdued also afterward the same kings soon John, by means of some
disagreement betwixt him and Swanto by the help of the Russians and some
factious people brought in and crowned. At length bringing back the captive
Queen to her husband John, being then in Smalandia, having sickned at a feast,
dyed the 30. year of his reign. A great magnanimous and virtuous Prince, but
yet in this, as it were, exceeding himself, in that he refused the diadem
royal being offered.

141 Suanto, 141 Suanto.
Prince of the Ostrogoths, and a counselor of the kingdom was elected king of
the Suetians. Having made a confederacy with those of Lubecke, he made war
against Christerne the second, son to John (whom many, (for the hatred they
bare to the son,) did earnestly desire) against whom while as he is making
great preparation, he dies 1512, and of his reign the 8. He was a virtuous
Prince, liberal, mild, intermingled with a grateful severitie.

142 Steno Sture, 142 Sbeno Sture 2
younger son of Suanto succeeded in the government. This Prince by his
prudence escaped the lying in wait of Christerne king of Denmark, having sent
to the private conference whereunto he was solicited, Gaddus and Gustavus
Ericson. Afterward stoutly and valiantly opposing Christerne, now come into
the field with a very great army, and himself valiantly fighting, was at
length shot through with a gunne.

He being now dead, and the Swedish dispersed and scattered, Christerne, by the
Nobles of the Danish faction was crowned king; having at a banquet the very day
of his coronation, killed all the Nobility by him suspected to be of the
contrary faction. But by reason of his extraordinary cruelty, the same month
he came, was again expelled the kingdom.

Now before we proceed to the orderly succession of the ensuing kings,
Something concerning the title the kings of Denmark pretend to the crown and
kingdom of Sweden.
something may be said concerning the king of Denmark, and the original of
the claim he lays to the crown of Sweden. Christierne the 1. of that name
(of whom something has been said already, the whole royal race of Denmark
being now quite extinguished, of an Earl of Oldenburg, by the consent of the
Peers of the kingdom, was elected king, and installed in the throne Royal,
and that chiefly by the commendation of Adolphus of Holsasia his mothers
brother, and afterward there arising some broils and tumults in the kingdom
of Sweden, the factious of the kingdom, of whom was chief Johannes Benedictus
Archbishop of Vpsalia, having before rejected their natural king Carolus
Canutus: and is the pretended right the Dane claims to the kingdom of Sweden.

After his decease John his son for the space of thirty two years continued
king of Denmark. He was in like manner by the factious Goths elected king of
Sweden, after they had rejected Steno the elder, who had succeeded his mothers
brother Charles: but was in a short space after by Swanto (being the means of
Henningus Gaddus Bishop of Lincopia, by the consent of the States of the land
elected in the room of Steno, again driven out, and in many conflicts being
still put to the worse, at length fled into Denmark.

This Suanto shortly after dying, the Peers of the kingdom after great
altercation (the Danish faction willing to set against him Ericus Trollus) the
memory of paternall worth and virtue prevailing, made choice of Steno Sture,
the younger son of the aforesaid Suanto. Two years after the death of Suanto
Christierne the second, succeeded in the kingdom of Denmark, Christierne the
2 invades the country of Sweden.
the greatest scourge that ever befell the kingdom of Sweden, who presently
resolves to prosecute the pretended right, his father and grandfather had to
this crown,

Steno their new elected king seeing himself now, as he thought, settled in the
peaceable possession of the kingdom, giving too much ear to flatterers (often
too frequent in Princes Courts) and by their evil counsel seduced, committed
many gross and foul faults in his government; by which means there following
an alienation of the minds of the Nobility, he lost likewise at length the love
of many of the commons also.

The Dane who left no wind unsailed to bring his purpose to pass, thinking it
now good fishing in a muddy water, took eftsoone hold of this opportunity, and
gathering together a great army, he begirt Stockeholme round about: but Steno
likewise with a great army opposing him, raised the siege.

The wind in the mean time being contrary for his return into Denmark, for
the space of three months he was put to an extreme great strait for want of
provision for his army. Steno, who used all possible means to win his love
and savor, with all means of necessary provision for his country into
Denmark, supplied his present necessity, granting him free leave to return
without any trouble or molestation. But this so great a courtesy and kindness
was but ill re^uited. For four years after, A great ingratitude.
having about some matters of great importance, as he pretended, desired
private conference with Steno, he had almost yielded to go aboard the enemies
ship.

Being then thus prevented, he wished Steno to send him some men of note as
Ambassadors to confer with him: and having sent Gaddus and Gustavus son to
Eric^^, and after king, against his oath and promise, carries them both captive
into Denmark.

This was but the beginning of the next years Tragedy.

Having then the next year gathered together a far greater army then the
former, he invaded the country of the Vestrogoths, and the battle being fought
upon the ice, Steno being shot through the thigh with a gunne, dies shortly
after of this wound, upon which followed the dissipation and dispersing of the
Swedish army. Immediately sfter was Christierne by the Danish faction, in the
principal city Stockeholme elected and crowned king: having also after a
solemn manner sworn the confirmation of all their privileges, and promised
immunitie and pardon for whatsoever was past.

But the same day (fearing lest afterward in his absence the sons of Steno
might by the contrary faction be elected) having first commanded the gates of
the City to be shut up, and invited to a feast the chief of all the Nobility
of the contrary faction, in the fight of all the people, now trembling and
quaking for fear, slew 94. of them, leaving their dead bodies in the great
Court before the town hall for the space of three days for a terror to the
people. The dead body of Steno was by the tyrants command taken out of the
grave, Extreme barbarous cruelty.
and (as some write) after he had like a dog torn it with his teeth,
commanded to burn is to ashes with the others lately killed. The inhabitants
were also by the rude soldiers, without any regard of sex or age cruelly
killed and murdered, and young children being hung up, their heads were cut off
from their shoulders. The City was rifled and spoiled by the soldiers, and no
manner of outrage and insolency omitted. After his departure from thence as
some write) he went into a monastery, More then ^haunce ^^eltie.
where he was entertained after the best manner the Monks were able: but after
service, being Candlemasse day, he commanded to take the Abbot and all his
Monks, tying them hand and foot, and threw them into a deep river running by:
the Abbot having by some means untyed himself was swimming a shore; which
being by him perceived, he caused to follow him with a boat and kill him.

Having thus committed many outrages and insolences, the people of the land
being much therewith distasted, took courage, and about some 30000. in arms
pursued him, now fleeing and marching more by night then by day, until at
length he came into Denmark. Boing now so embrued in blood, he could not
refrain from cruelty even against his own kindred, he was at length
assaulted by Frederick Prince of Holstein, ane those of Lubecke, and his
conscience now affrighting him, with his wife Isabella the Emperors sister and
his children, flees into Zeland, which was the third year after the massacre
of Stockeholme. 1523

CHAP. IX.
143 Gustavus Erickson 1.
124 GVstavus 1. called Erickson, or son of Ericus, after long imprisonment*
escaping out of prison, fled speedily out of Denmark, and was at length by the
general consent of the States now surviuing, accepted for king of the Realm;
being thereunto well furthered by those of the City of Lubecke, which supplied
him with store of money.

This noble and praiseworthy Prince lived and reigned very peaceably with the
love and good liking of his subjects the whole space of 38. years, and dyed in
1560.

The most memorable of his acts (and was it not memorable indeed? Reformation
of religion in the kingdom of Sweden An. 6560
) was that he banished out of his whole kingdom and dominions the
superstitious worship of the Church of Rome, and through his whole dominions
caused them to profess the reformed religion, according to the confession of
Ausbourg or Augustane confession. And because we account the Danes usurpation
to have been no right possession, therefore according to Historians we make
him to follow in order 143. immediately after Steno, whose daughter some say he
married, howbeit if he so did, we read of no issue he had by her. The first
wife therefore by whom he had any issue, was Katharine daughter to Magnus, Duke
of Saxony, and by her he had 1. Ericus who succeeded him in his government. His
second wife was Margaret, daughter to a noble knight Abraham Loholu, governor
of Vestrogothia, whom he married An. 1536. who bare unto him these children
following. 1 John afterward king of Sweden. 2 Katharine, married to the Earl
of East-Freezland 1559. and bare to him Enno, Gustavus, John and Christopher,
Earls of East Friezland. 3 Cecilie, married to Christopher Marquess of Bad^n
1564. to whom she bare Edward called the Fortunate, Christopher, Constans and
Philip. 4 Maguus, Duke of Ostrogothia, and dyed 1595. 5 Steno, and dyed a
child. 6 Anna, married to George John, Count Palatine of Rhene, and Duke of
Bavaria 1564. to whom she bare George, Gustavus, John, Ruphel, Anna, Margaret,
and Vrsula, married to the Duke of Wirtenberg. 7 Charles, who presently dyed. 8
Sophia, married to Magnus Duke of Saxony 1568. and bare to him Gustavus Duke
of Saxony, who dyed at Holmin 1597, 9 Elizabeth, married to Christopher, Duke
of Meckelburg, who had by her one only daughter, called Margaret, and married
to the Megapolitane Duke. 10 Charles, Duke of Sudermania, etc.


This fruitful Queen dyed in the year 1551.

After her decease he married again Katharine daugther to Gustavus Olaus,
Baron of Torpa, 1552. but had by her no children.

144 Ericus 144 Ericus 8.
succeeded his father Gustavus, and was crowned in Stockeholme 1561. This king
for a certain time waged war against the Danes and city of Lubecke, and drew
upon himself the hatred and evil will of all his neighbors: and as though
this had yet been but a small matter, he irritated his own people, whom he
exceedingly discontented.

His brother John who had married Katharine, sister to Sigismund, king of
Polands widow, did altogether mislike his brothers turbulent courses and
enterprises; who in his return from Revalia into Livonia, left with the
Polonian king his kins man a great sum of money, for the which this being put
into his hands as a pledge, certain castles and commanderies in the country
of Livonia.

This fact his brother (otherwise very suspicious) interpreted in the worst
sense, as though his brother had been combined and joined in league with the
Dane and Polonian, and for this cause with his whole forces assaults his
brother, takes himself, wife, and whole family prisoners in a town of
Finland, called Ako, brings them all with him to Stockeholme, where having
first openly accused him, he cast him into prison, where he continued for the
space of four whole years: besides, that he put to death many of his familiar
friends and acquaintance. But at the four years end the case is quite
altered, his brother finding a means to free himself out of prison, takes his
brother captive, and makes him drink of the same cup he had before made him
begin, with keeping him in close prison during his whole life time 1568.

145 Ericus thus justly thrust out of his throne, 145 John 2.
his brother was with the unanimous, free and general consent of the whole
State elected king in his brothers turn.

During his reign he had also great war with but especially with the Dane, the
Muscovite or Russian. He was born 1537. and crowned 1569: He married first
Katharine daughter to Sigismund, king of Poland, by whom he had, 1. Sigismund,
now king of Poland. 2. Anne.


After this Queens decease, he married one Gunila, daughter to one Axelurs
Bielke de Hereseter, a noble Knight and governor of Ostrogothia, whom he
married 1585. and by whom he had

1 John, who in the year 1612. married Mary Elizabeth, daughter to Charles the
9. King of Sweden. 2 Charles, borne 1550 first Duke of Sudermania, Neriva and
Vermelandia, and afterward also elected king of Sweden.
This king John constantly maintained the same religion of the Augustane
confession, which his father had formerly professed; although underhand he
suffered his son Sigismund by his mother Katharine to be educated in the
Romish religion, which cost him no less then the loss of his kingdom of
Sweden, as hereafter shall appear.

And the better to secure his subjects of his constant perseverance in the
religion he professed, he gave them his brother Charles, Duke of Finland (whom
he loved dearly) for a pledge or pawn, that no innovation should therein be
attempted, whom he also appointed by his last will and testament, during his
sons absence, to be governor of the whole kingdom. This king dyed in the
year 1592 19. of November.

146 Sigismundus.
246 Sigismundus, son to the aforesaid John, being before during his fathers
life time in 1590 been designed and appointed king of Poland (being during his
fathers life time, elected king of Poland, where he also lived and reigned at
the time of his fathers death) was in the year 1599 crowned king of Sweden,
and the very day of the Epiphanie was appointed for this purpose. Now there was
in the kings company one Franciscus mala spina, Bishop of Vrlia in Italy, the
Popes Nuncio, whom the king and his followers much desired to perform the
solemn rites of the Coronation: and this Prelate was of opinion, that if the
States of Sweden had once given way to this beginning, the Romish religion
might more easily afterward be again introduced. But against this with might
and maine did Adamus Andracanus, then Archbishop of Vpsalia oppose, affirming,
that it was flat against the laws and constitutions of the kingdom that any
other but the Archbishop of Vpsalia should set the diadem royal upon his
head: and besides, that he must now swear to maintain that religion now
professed within the kingdom of Sweden, according to the Augustane confession,
exhibited to Charles the fifth Emperor, professed by his grandfather Gustavus,
and his own father John the 3. and by a late synod holden at Vpsalia, by the
whole States of the kingdom confirmed; and that he shall not assign or grant
any Church or Churches in any town of Sweden to any other religion then that
of the Augustane confession. And further, that during the time of his abode in
Sweden, he should be contented with the service performed within the private
chapel of his own palace. Against this did oppose the peers and Nobles of
poland that accompanied the king: howbeit the peers of Sweden were resolute in
their purpose, insomuch that some days were thus spent in alteration. At
length about mid January, seeing no remedy, it was agreed that the bishop of
Vpsalia should perform such rites as belonged to the coronation, which was
accordingly performed.

The oath of Sigismund.
Ericus Sparce also Chancellor of the kingdom, administered unto the king his
solemn oath; he reciprocally answering him, and promising first, that he would
maintain justice and truth within his kingdom, and that he would punish and
suppress all injustice and lying, that he would do justice to all the Swedish
nation, as well rich as poor, and that according to the laws and statutes of
the kingdom, he should govern the same, and that by the counsel and consent
of his brother Prince Charles, and the senate or counsel of the kingdom, that
he shall consult with the natural inhabitants of the kingdom, and not with
strangers: that he shall bring no strangers within the realm; that he shall
commit the castles and forts of the kingdom, and the deserts of Vpsalia to
none but the natives of the country; that he shall impose no new tribute or
tax upon the subject, unless in case of great necessity for the defense of
the kingdom, in fear of any intestine commotion or sedition: when the kings
son or daughter is to be married, when the king is to make any solemn
perambulation through his whole kingdom, or something for the reparation of the
deserts of Vpsalia shall be required.

Moreover, that he should confirm all privileges and immunities heretofore
granted to the Peers of the land, the whole people and the clergy thereof,
and that by all means possible, he should procure peace and tranquillity to
all his subjects; adding lastly this clause to the oath, So God be good to my
soul and body as I from my heart swear to observe all the premises.

After this was a solemn assembly of the whole States of the kingdom, or a
Parliament called at Stockeholme, wherein was consulted of the government of
the kingdom, during the kings absence, and diverse good and wholesome laws
enacted.

In the month of July next after the king departed again into Poland.

But some few years after, Abdication of king Sigismund.
he was by the same States again abdicated and quite rejected from ever
having any right or interest in the government of the kingdom of Sweden, and
was in a Parliament holden at Stockeholme 1590. confirmed.

And again, in another Parliament holden at Lincopia 1600. as well he himself
as all his issue and offspring are for ever excluded from the succession to
the kingdom of Sweden. The reasons were diverse, but especially for sending an
army of strangers into the country, quite contrary to his oath and promise;
the which, if their plot had taken effect, might have overthrown the whole
State, besides the ruin of religion. There were diverse other causes published
in print, as the story mentions, the which I have not as yet seen. But withal
in the abdication of this king, this cond^tion was inserted* that if within
six months after the finishing of the last Parliament holden at Lincopia,
this king Sigismund would send over into Sweden his son V^sladislaus, to be
governed and ruled by his Uncle prince Charles, and to be educ^ted in the
relligion then professed in the kingdom of Sweden; that as soon as he were
come to years capable of government, they would receive and acknowledge him
for ever afterward for their lawful king and governor: the which motion not
being entertained, nor yet any answer within this space returned, their former
decree of abdication of him and his seed was there solemnly ratified and
confirmed.

Sigismund married first Anna daughter to Charles, Archduke of Austria, by whom
he had, 1. Anna Maria. 2. Katharine. 3. Vladistaus, designed for King of
Polonia. 4. Christopher, cut out of his mothers womb, and shortly after, both
he and his mother dyed.


Sigismund thus solemnly rejected, and put besides the Crown and Kingdom of
Sweden, his brother John next unto him, according to the ordinary course and
custom should have succeeded: but by reason he was suspected to be too much
addicted to his elder brother, king of Poland, and therefore assigning him
large and ample means suitable to his birth and parentage, they made choice of
the youngest brother Charles to take upon him the government of the kingdom,
who notwithstanding would not for a good while accept of the regale title.

Charles therefore at length, 147 Charles 9.
at the earnest solicitation of the whole estates took the government upon
him, borne in 1550. and at first, Duke of Sudermania, Nericia, and Verulandia,
and after three years government without the regale title, at length in the
year 1607. accepted of the same.

This noble and worthy Prince swore to the maintenance of religion, and the
laws and constitutions of the kingdom, as has been lately declared, all
which he did accordingly perform. The Peer of the kingdom, for his worth
and valor, and many good offices he had performed for the peace and
preservation of the State, were not only contented this dignity should be
conferred upon himself, but consented also that the fame should be confirmed
to his heirs and successors for ever, which failing then was the same to
return to his elder brother John, and his heirs male.

It was also agreed upon, that by reason of diverse inconveniences arising from
this root that sometimes the kings of Sweden have accepted of another kingdom,
and by that means often residing in another country; it was therefore
likewise enacted and agreed upon, that no hereditary Prince, and heir apparent
to the crown of Sweden, An act against the accepting of a foreign kingdom,
unless he refine himself in Sweden. His wars against Denmark and Russia.
shall henceforth accept of any foreign kingdom, unless he resolve
nevertheless to live and continue in the same kingdom of Sweden.

This noble king after he came to the Crown, waged war with the king of
Denmark, and at one and the same time with the Russian also. For Iuan
Wasilieuitz Suski, with many of the Peers being in his chief City Mosco very
straightly besieged by the Polonians, he sent for aid and succor to this
Charles king of Sweden; there being then great danger, not of the loss of the
king and his Nobles only, but even of the utter overthrow and ruin of his
whole dominion.

This Prince therefore sent with great expedition under the command of Iairus
de la Guard, Earl of Leccho, and Arch-marshall of the kingdom of Sweden, a
great army, wherewith he raised the siege, overthrew the enemies forces, and
set at liberty this distressed Prince, and all his Peers.

The aforenamed Suski making show of a grateful acknowledgement of so great a
kindness received, not only promised, but also sealed some deeds, whereby he
freely gave unto this king Charles, and to his heirs and successors kings of
Sweden for ever, certain territories and lordships, together with the towns,
castles, and forts thereunto belonging. But the performance was not answerable
to promise: for this unthankful persidious Prince sent secretly to the
captain of one of his castles, wishing him with some forces to intercept those
deeds, together with the money agreed upon for the soldiers pay. King Charles,
by such an injury irritated (and blame him not) raises again new forces,
invades the country (the Polonian having now likewise seized upon Mosco the
chief City) he takes in Rexholme, and possesses himself of a great part of
the country round about. But while he is now in the midst of his good
success, behold cruel A^opus suddenly cuts the thread of his life, end so by
this means, together with his hereditarie dominions leaves likewise this war
to be finished by his son Gustavus Adolphus, at this time king of Sweden,
whereof more hereafter.

He dyed of a great sickness in a war against Denmark: An. 1611. October. 30.

His first wife was Mary daughter to Jews Elector, and Count Palatine of
Rhene, whom he married, An. 1579, and had by her, 1 Margaret Elizabeth, and
died at the age of 5. years. 2 Elizabeth Sabina, who dyed also young. 3 Jews,
who died instantly after his birth. 4 Katharine, borne in 1584. and in 1614.
married to the illustrous Prince John Casimir, Prince Palatine of Rhene, and
Duke of Bavaria. 5. Gustavus, who dyed a child. 6. Mary, who dyed also young.


This virtuous Queen dyed of her self in the year 1580.

His second wife was Christina, daughter to Adolphus, Duke also of Holsatia,
who bare to him 1 Christina, who lived not long. 2 Gustavus Adolphus, the
illustrious and victorious king of Sweden, and born in anno 1594 December. 9. 3.
Mary Elizabeth 1596. who in the year 1612. was married to John, an hereditary
Prince of the kingdom, and Duke of Ostrogothia. 4. Charles Philippe, a
hereditary Prince, and Duke of Sudermania, Nericia, and Vermelandia 1601.


He dyed in Livonia unmarried.

CHAP. X. Of the Noble, Illustrious, and invincible Prince, great Gustavus
Adolphus, the 2. King of Sweden, Goths, and Vandals, etc. and some of his Acts
before his entering into Germany.
148 GVstavus Adolphus 148 Gustavus Adolphus 2.
borne the ninth of December. 1594. as said is, being but of a tender age for the
swaying of the scepter royal, his father dying in 1611. he being then but 17.
years of age, was crowned in 1617. Considering then his young years, and
laying them in one scale, and the weight of affairs lying on his shoulders in
the other, we may most justly wonder and admire at Gods might and power in
making him a sit instrument to effect such matters, as I doubt not but
after-ages shall admire the same. In the year 1620. he married Mary Elinor,
sister to the illustrious Prince George William, Marquis of Brandenburg, one of
the Princes Electors of the sacred Empire, who although she bare him some
children, yet lived they not long. In the year 1624. she bare him a daughter.

1. Christina, but dyed the same year.

The next year after she bare him again another daughter, called also

2. Christina, yet living, and in the year 1627 she was in a Parliament then
holden at Stockeholme, declared nere apparent to the crown of Sweden. It has
been a little before related how his father Charles the ninth of that name
died, during his war with Denmark, and withal has been showed, how at the
same time the same Prince had hot war with the Prince of Russia: by which may
easily appear into what a labyrinth of troubles was this young king at his
first coming to the crown involved. In both these wars he carried his
affairs so well, that through the help of Almighty God he has procured
himself ever since a firm and inviolable peace with that great Prince. His
war with the king of Denmark.
He had with the Dane diverse conflicts, yet always demeaned himself so
worthily that he came off with great honor and credit; so that at length that
great king seeing he had to meddle with his match, was willing to acco^odate
his Martial thoughts, to entertain a treaty of peace: and so these two great
Princes of mortal enemies, became loving and kind friends, and have since
confirmed a strait league of amity and friendship. As for the Russian Prince,
he had with him yet some greater difficulty to undergo, there resting some
strong, and almost impregnable places to be taken, and the evidences concerning
such territories, as the Russian had, for good consideration, assigned his
father, to be recovered. And although my purpose be not particularly to
enlarge my self upon all the several occurrences of this war; yet are there
in the same, some things to be observed, not unworthy the r^^ders
consideration, whereof I will give but a touch.

After his fathers decease then, His war with the Russian Prince.
having settled the affairs of his kingdom at home, although he had to deal
with so patent an enemy as the king of Denmark, as has been said already;
yet did he not neglect this war against the Russian; and for this purpose
prepared a great army to prosecute that which his father had left unfinished.
Now it is to be understood that these forts and places he took in from the
Russian Prince, are the strongest holds, (...) it were, the very keys of all
the Russian dominion. That country is corruptly called Reaholme, The country
of Carelia corruptly called Reaholme taken in.
from a strong City and Castle seated in two little Islands in the mouth of the
river Woxen, in the one of which the Castle, and in the other the City is
seated; although the right name of this country among Historians be known by
the name Carelia. But among all these strong holds and castles, none is to be
compared with the strong fort. Notreburg, The invincible force of Notrebugh.
which has therefore hitherto ever been holden invincible, until now of late
experience has taught us the contrary. It is built in a little Island in the
mouth of the swift river Nerva, and by reason of the breadth of the river could
not be battered with ordnance. This strong castle therefore being of so great
importance, was never unfurnished. But the great God of heaven, who according
to his good will and pleasure, disposes of all these sublunary things, and
infatuates the wisdom of the wise, delivered this invincible fort into the
hands of an invincible Prince: a presage, no doubt, of his future, great and
glorious victories. But the manner is yet more admirable: for within the
soldiers were not unfurnished of sufficient food, and the enemies force (as
said is) they needed not much to fear; The strange manner of taking in the
Castle of Notreburg.
but within their mouths and throats there grew so many great warts, that
although they had food sufficient, yet could they not feed on the same, nor yet
swallow down any sustenance, for the which cause they were forced to surrender
this strong fort into his majesty's hands. And so he that made the walls of
Jericho at the sound of a rams horn to fall down, to make a way for his
own people of Israel to enter this City, found out this way to take in this
invincible fort. And whosoever sees not the same providence accompanying and
prospering him in this so great a war now undertaken against the whole power
of the Austrian house and the Catholic league, I think is more then
pur-blind. There is in that same country another strong Castle Iuanogorod, The
taking in of the strong fort Iuanogorod.
seated on the top of a high rock, in an Isthmus, or narrow plain, a great
part thereof being environed with this swift river. And although on the west
side, as it looks toward the river it might be batered; yet both that way,
as likewise both the south and north parts were well defended by this river;
and on the east there was a low valley, dug by natures own industry, where
the people had the^r habitation, the country about being plain and level, and
so high that the ordnance could touch only the tops of the turrets, and go no
lower. Neither yet was there any undermining by reason of that soil which was
altogether rockie. This fort notwithstanding, together with the former 2. and
many more were by this same king taken in the year 1617, in so much that this
great Prince was then put in no small fear of loosing all or the greater part
of his dominion, whereof there was then no small danger. Wherefore the great
Knezor or Duke, Michael Feodoronitz, son to the former perfidious Iuani
Vasilienitz Suski, earnestly suing for peace, it was at length by the mediation
of king James of famous memory effected, and in the year 1618. fully finished
and agreed upon. And thus were those aforementioned towns and forts, and
diverse others belonging to this Carelia Ruthenica, or country of Rexholme,
together with all the deeds and evidences thereunto pertaining, resigned over
and delivered into the hands of this king, and for ever annexed unto the Crown
of Sweden; and all other places during this war taken from the Russian,
again to him restored; as in the articles of agreement in 18. more at length
is to be seen. Neither was this king then past 21. years of age, when he had
brought to a happy end two so great and important wars. Now after this happy
and peaceable conclusion, having established peace in all his Provinces, he gave
not himself over to his lustful pleasures (as is often too customary with
young Princes) nor to drown himself with sinful delights; but gave
himself wholly to beautify and adorn this peaceable kingdom, whereof she
was now fully possessed: which could no better be effected, then by nonfirming
the ancient good and wholesome laws and constitutions of the kingdom, adding
some others as occasion required. Confirmation of the ancient laws concerning
traffic and commerce betwixt the sea towns.
And therefore, as was already touched, he not only reinforced the former
laws and constitutions concerning traffic and commerce betwixt the sea
towns, but added also diverse others, tending to that same purpose; together
with many other things, whereon for brevity I may not now insist.

But that he might leave a perpetual memorial to the Christian world, that he
was as well a favourer of Minerva as of Mars, he has left thereof a
sufficient proof to all after ages. During the reign of Ericus Balbus, the
then Archbishop of Vpsalia, Iezlerus instituted and founded in the same City a
college of 4 professors; and afterward the number of professors being
increased, together with an addition of far greater means, it was in the year
1476. by Pope Sixtus the 4. erected into the form of an University, and
adorned with the like privileges, as that of Bononia. This University by
injury of time and devouring wars being much endammaged, and having lost
much of it is ancient splendor and beauty, was again by the late deceased
Charles the 9. as it were, out of her ashes not only restored to former
dignity and splendour, but a good increase also added to her former beauty. And
this same invincible king now living, to testify to posterity the love he
bears to learning, The University of Vpsalia is by him much enriched and
adorned.
has so increased both the number of learned professors and their maintenance,
that now it may well be compared with many of the best Universities of Europe;
and lest it should at any time hereafter by reason of the want or uncertainty
of means come to ruin or decay, did in the year 1624. out of his own
revenues settle upon the same very great and large means, and confirmed the
same in most large and ample manner, and made the possession of these lands and
rents, as sure and firm as the best Noblemans of the kingdom.

This Prince, after he had lived a few years in peace, was again entangled in
a new war with his Uncle Sigismund king of Polonia, in the which he took
from him many strong towns and forts of no small importance, His war with his
Uncle, Sigismund king of Poland.
without any loss to himself (for he made war in his enemies country) both
in the kingdom of Poland, it self, in the Duchy of Lithuania, and in the
rich country of Prussia; so that if this king had continued as he began, and
affairs of a higher nature and strain had not invited him another way,
notwithstanding the aid the Emperor his brother in law sent him, he had,
perhaps, ere now been deprived of a great part, if not of all his great
dominion. The which by him wisely, and in time foreseen, he earnestly sued
both to our gracious kings majesty now living, and to the king of France to
mediate a fair agreement betwixt him and his nephew; the which was accordingly
performed the 29. of September. 1629. a truce and cessation of arms being for
six years after ensuing there agreed upon: by virtue of which agreement the
king of Sweden restored again to his Uncle many places by him taken in the
kingdom of Poland, and Duchy of Lithuania; howbeit he reteineth still many
good towns and castles in the country of Prussia. The particular articles of
their agreement for avoiding tediousness of set purpose I here pass by; and
who so is desirous to see the same, may have recourse to the histories.

The entering of the invincible king of Sweden, great Gustavus Adolphus into
Germany with a great Army, Anno 1630. with a touch of some principal
exploits by him since that time achieved and brought to pass.
RAdolphus, Earl of Halsburg, being in the year 1274. crowned Emperor at
Aquisgranum or Aix, laid the first foundation of the greatness of the Austrian
house. This Prince then besides that with many great lordships, partly by force
and violence, and partly by purchase he much increased his hereditary
dominions; the country of Austria also by want of a lawful successor fell
into this Emperors hands to dispose of; which he eftsoone conferred upon his
son Albertus. Into this Austria then were incorporated all these other
dominions. Radolphus being dead, Adolphus Earl of Nassau was elected Emperor,
and afterward by the aforesaid Albertus killed, who got himself afterward
chosen Emperor. This Prince likewise spared no pains, but improoved his
utmost power and means for the increasing of this already grounded greatness.
And this made him so eager an enemy to the Helvetian liberty, laboring by all
means, direct or indirect, to hook in whatsoever he could compass to make
his sons great, and to advance the now rising Austrian house; yea, so eager was
he in prosecuting his purpose, that he spared not the very monasteries and
religious houses, but either bought out right what might thus be purchased, or
else procured himself and his sons to be made patrons and protectors of such
ecclesiastical places, a fair way for future possession. But the unjust
murder of his predecessor, being by his own brothers son revenged (who killed
this ambitious Albert) and all his covetousness and ambition now laid in the
dust; Albert killed.
the Princes of this Austrian house, as they had now and then their turns in
this supreme authority, so were they not wanting to themselves and successors,
but as time and opportunity were offered, went on in their predecessors
footsteps. At length, after the death of Sigismund the Emperor in the year
1438. another Albert of this Austrian house, Another Albert Emperor.
and son in law to the aforesaid Sigismund was elected Emperor; the which
his successors (having now yet once again gotten the ball before them) have
kept close unto themselves almost for the space of 200 years, even until this
very day; having also afterward added to their former greatness the kingdom
of Hungaria, Wonderful greatness of the house of Austria.
Bohemia, with the appurtenances thereof, Silesia, Moravia, the one and other
Lusatia* and become also at several times, Lords and masters of Stiria,
Carinthin, and Sirolis; and by marriage afterward gotten in the 17. Provinces.
At length Charles the fifth (as though this house had not yet bin great enough)
brought for his share the kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, together with all
the kingdoms and dominions thereupon depending: as namely the kingdom of
Naples, Sicilie, and Duchy of Milan; besides the West Indies, and all the
riches of that Western world, with some thing in the East Indies also. All
this notwithstanding, this great Monarch, according to his plus ultra, not
contented with all these dominions; Charles the 5. attempted the overthrow of
true religion, together with the Germane liberty.
aimed yet further at the subversion and overthrow both of true religion, and
the liberty of Germany, and began to act such a tragedy in high Germany, as his
son Philip afterward attempted in the low countries: for the which cause to
have Pope Leo the 10. for his friend, as he had before anathematized Luther, so
this Emperor to act his part, proscribes him. This plot for a while succeeded
according to his wishes, insomuch that John Frederick, Prince elector, and the
Landgrave of Hessen Protectors and maintainers of the true reformed religion
preached by Luther, and the Germane liberty were in open field overthrown their
forces dispersed, and they themselves taken prisoners. But at length, Maurice,
Duke of Saxony the Emperors General, and newly possessed, not only of his
kinsmans lands and possessions, but of his electorate dignity also, contrary to
the Emperors expectation, turning his power against himself, forces him, not
only to a restitution of the captives, but likewise to a settled peace and
liberty of religion within the whole Germane countries: and so it did here
plainly appear how God brought light out of darkness.

The Jesuits, the incendiaries of the Christian world, envying the peace and
prosperity of the same, as in other parts, so in this country of Germany have
they labored to overthrow and subvert both the State of the true reformed
Church and commonwealth. And although they have been a long time proiecting
such a plot, yet could it not so conveniently be brought about until such time
as Frederick primus, Palatine Elector, having accepted of the Bohemian Crown,
being freely and lawfully thereunto elected, this viperous generation, being of
a martial breed, failed not to lay hold on such an offered opportunity; and
therefore cease not to incense and stir up the Emperor Ferdinand the 2. (of
himself sensible enough of any thing that might but in show derogate from the
dignity of the Austrian house) to prosecute that which before had been
proiected. And thus was this Noble Prince deprived not only of his kingdom of
Bohemia, but of all his hereditary dominions and electorate dignity. And
whereas many ignorant of the Jesuits far fetched secret stratagems, did
verily believe that now they were attained to the utmost end they aimed at, it
appeared far otherwise. For now the fire that so long lay covered under the
ashes breaks forth, and sets upon a sudden all these flourishing Provinces of
Germany on fire: and the visard now remooved their purpose, was made manifest
to the blindest eyesight; to wit, the total ruin and overthrow of the true
religion in many, yea in most places of Germany professed, the reducing of them
again to the Romish superstition, and utter overthrow of the liberties of the
Roman Empire: whose designs whosoever, in defense of Gods cause and liberties
of their own country, did any way oppose, have been in most barbarous manner
prosecuted and persecuted with fire and sword, and many forced to forsake their
ancient inheritances to save their lives and keep a good conscience, in still
professing that religion wherein they had heretofore been brought up. Others
again more pusillanimous and loath to loose all for Christ, yet besides, a
shameful and persidious abiuration of that truth which before they had
professed, were yet notwithstanding forced to yield to such slavish and servile
conditions, as the insolency of a victorious enemy was pleased to impose upon
them.

When this tyranny had now at least, for the space of ten years been after
a rigid manner prosecuted, it pleased Almighty God of his infinite goodness,
all other means now failing, in pity and compassion to his poor afflicted
Church, now destitute of the least appearance of any humane help, to raise up
means of deliverance, where, I am sure, it was least expected, even that
illustrious and victorious king of Sweden, Captain of the Lords host.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of the Swethens, Goths, and Vandals, arrived in Pomer,
in February, An. 1630. and landed near unto the Isles of Rugen, and Vsdome, at
a little village, called Pennemund, with no more at the first, then 6000
soldiers. Himself coming on shore, falls down, and powers out this unto
God, O Lord, thou that rulest over the Heavens, the earth, and the vast sea, I
cannot sufficiently give thee thanks, that thou have preserved me so graciously
in this perilous journey; O Lord I render thanks unto thee, and give praise
unto thee, from the very bottom of my heart, beseeching thee, seeing thou
know, that this voyage, my purpose and intent tends not to my own, but
only to thy glory and honor, and for the comfort and help of thy afflicted
Church, that if now the time, and appointed hour be come, Assist me further
with thy grace and blessing, and grant me a prosperous wind, and good weather,
that I may behold the rest of my Army with a joyful eye, which I have left
behind me picked up, out of diverse nations, to the end that with them, I may
advance forward thy holy work. Amen.

The Kings Officers and Council, stepping on land after him, and hearing such
a zealous prayer, coming from him in this manner, could not forbear weeping,
which the King perceiving, said unto them, Weep not my friends, but pray
fervently, from the bottom of your hearts, the more ye pray, the more victory
God will give you, for earnest prayer is more then the gaining of half a
battle. It seems, since that time, that the Kings prayer has auailed much
with God, and how mightily the Lord has been with him, in taking in many
countries, cities, and towns, in overthrowing the Emperors invincible Army,
and that of the Catholic League, and the mighty increasing of his Army, since
his first landing. Other particulars may give satisfaction to the Reader; to
God the only author, and giver of them, be given immortal praise. Amen.

FINIS

