THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER.

The Third Part.

WHEREIN, OVT OF THE TRVEST and choysest Informations, are the famous Actions
of that Warlike Prince Historically led along; from the Norimberg Leaguer, unto
the day of his death, at the Victory of Lutzen. With the Election of the young
Queen of Sweden: and the Diet of Heilbrun.

The times and places of every Action, being so sufficiently observed and
described; that the Reader may find both Truth and Reason in it.

Unto which is added The Fourth Part.

WHEREIN, The chiefest of those Military Actions of other Swedish Generals,
be related: wherein the King himself, was not personally with the Army.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1633.

To the Favorable and Judicious Readers.
THat my Dedication inscribes it self to the Favorable Readers, before to the
Judicious; is not so much out of Complement, as Conscience: he that is guilty
to himself of being less Judicious, has the more need his Readers should be
Favorable. And yet (thanks to your fair acceptance for it) I have hitherto
received no such discouragement from the most Judicious, that I need complain
they were less Favorable. For your honest pleasures (Gentlemen) and in
thankfulness to your courtesies; have I undertaken this my last labor.

I have done all, with as much diligence, as a Scholar (morally) might do:
yea with importunacy of diligence, have I solicited such Gentlemen; as I knew
to have been in action, and that could teach me any thing. And something more
then a common diligence, have I used in it. The Italian Painter has 3. degrees
of Comparison, in the preferring of his Pieces. If he says it is but done con
diligenza, with diligence; it is no great commendation of his pains, for he
means no more then an ordinary diligence. His second degree of praising it, is
con studio, with study: and by that would he tell you, that his brain and
hand; have a little more labored, both upon the designing and the coloring.
But if he adds con amore, that he did it with a love and an affection; to the
Piece or Party; oh! it is di Madonna, then: and the Italian himself is at the
highest of his expression.

I have (as little as might be, and especially in the Kings Story) trusted to
no written Relations; unless received from a known hand, or confirmed by
personal eye, or eare-witnesses. No, I have not singly relied, so much as upon
that diligent amasser of the Dutch Currantoes, the Gallobelgicus, and the Arma
Suecica; le Soldat Suedois, I mean by it: upon whose single credit, I have no
where written any thing; excepting in those slighter encounters about
Norimberg. And yet even there, had I been in the same box, with him, and
before him; the High Dutch Relations. I commend, (as much as any man) the
queyntnesse of his language; and the neatness of his conceits, many times:
which are the relishes of a French wittynesse in him. His best pieces, are the
Abridgements of the lives of the two Kings. Diverse of the conceits, therefore,
of the first of these; have I made some use of, in my Character of the King of
Sweden. The Second, have I wholly taken into my Character of the King of
Bohemia: and I had diverse reasons for it. It Is finely done; I was glad to see a
Frenchman give that good King, his due; and it was safer for me to Translate
that, then to invent a new one. Beyond this, would I by this Essay of
Translating; try Masteries with the French Language: I confess my self to be
but a bungling smatterer, at it; and yet thus far dare I be deposed, That had
a queynt pen the doing of it, the French it self should not be able to
transcend our English, in the happiness of expressions.

For the truth of those Relations, wherein I differ from that French Author; I
report me to those that have read both, and have been personally present in
the Actions. And thus much (because we differ) had I reason to say in mine own
defense; and to prevent, withal, the abusing of my Countrymen, should he
happen to be translated into English. Mine own ambition is not, that this
Piece of mine should be exempt from censuring, or to be taken for above the
true value of it: nor do I profess my self to be other the^ (like an
Architect) the disposer of other men's Materials, at my best value. I am Author
of nothing, here, but of the mistakings; and even of those, though I strongly
be suspicious: yet am I, (no way) conscious. Knowingly, I have committed
nothing against Truth; nor traduced peevishly, the honor of any person. I
could tell no more then I knew, nor would not: sure, I cannot have written all;
but what I have, is near about the matter.

In writing of this Story, those two objections of the Turks, against the
likelihood of all Histories; may appear to be well satisfied. A Story-Writer
(say those Barbarians) In the time, dares not; and After the time, cannot,
write truly. For the first of these: the distance of the place secures me,
against the fear of writing too truly of the present. My self, (not since
these wars) was never near enough to the persons or places of action; to be
either bribed or skared by them. And as for the Authors, whom chiefly I have
consulted; though they were sometimes Gentlemen of the Army; yet have they now
put themselves beyond the fear or hope, of pleasing or displeasing: because
out of the service and dependancy. And as for the second objection, that's well
taken away, too; for though my Story be written after the time of doing, yet
not beyond the memory of it.

And thus, in this Island, have I done with this foreign Story; as in some
Houses of pleasure, I have seen done with the Landtskip of a Country: where
the Hills and Woods, and Houses, have by Perspective and Art Optic, been so
brought through a small hole; that they have in little been reflected upon a
Paper, or polisht Stone, in a Study or a Dyning-roome. And I have used the same
Art Perspective: the Landtskip of these Swedish Wars, have been out of
Germany brought home into my Study, which my Paper here reflects off again. In
little, I mean, and as I could; and though not in their just magnitude; yet
something toward their proportions.

If I have made my Readers wait, a while, in expectancy of my Relations: I
hope they will please to allow of this answer, for a satisfaction. That I only
said, till false rumors might be contradicted; true reports, brought home to
me, by men present; and the passions of people a little over, which might
either make them harder of belief, or over-credulous. My office (so has God
disposed of it) has been, not that of an Historiographer alone, but of a
Herald also: one, that having served a Prince, first in denouncing of his
Wars, and then in celebrating of his Triumphs; performs his last duties to
him, at his Funerals. So have my Three Books been. My First Part proclaimed,
the King of Swedens coming into the Field, and the Causes for it. My Second
Part marshalled him along, all in Victories and in Glories: and my unlucky
Third, here waits upon him, in his Obsequies. The end of the King of Sweden,
has silenced his Intelligencer: it cannot be expected, that a Logician should
proceed in his Argument; after that the Adversary has taken away the Subject
of his Question. I have done with Novelties, now; and I henceforth desire my
Readers to discharge me.

Errata.
Page 27. line 1. For always not, Read always work not. In the same leaf,
line 16. for elinquent, read delinquent. Page 48. lines 26, and 27. for
Craisham, read Crailsham: and for Master of the Army, read Master of the
Household. Page 61. line last save one, for April, read October. Page 68. line
1. for 21. read 12. Page 71. for 12000. Horse and 6500. Foot: read, 12000.
Foot and 6500. Horse. Page 101. line 28. for October 21. read October 12.
Page 106. line 20. for October 21. read October 22. Page 127. line 33. (in
some Copies) for Francis Charles, read Francis Albert. Page 191. line 17. for
imaginaned read imagined. Page 193. line 28. for behold, read beholden. Page
195. for think skales, read think the skales.

THE SWEDISH Intelligencer.
The Third Part.
From the time of the KINGS encamping before NORIMBERG, until the day of his
death at the Battle of LVTZEN.
HOw noble a Master of his word (even to the uttermost possiblity of
performance) the King of Sweden still was; The Story fetched a little higher,
then the end of the last Part.
may (if we wanted the assurance of other examples) abundantly enough appear
by his present carriage, alone, toward the fair City of Norimberg.

His Highness the Duke of Bauaria having been shouldred out of his own
Country, and taken his retreat into the Upper Palatinate; (as in the latter
end of our Second Part we have told you) the King, out of a desire to fight
with him, before he should be joined with Wallenstein; had even thither, also
pursued him. And but little missed he, of lighting on him. For having advanced
by Norimberg unto Namely that Swabach, which in North-East of Norimberg, 20
English miles, near the head of the river Swabach. The King missing but little
of surprising the Duke of Bavaria,
Swabach: he left the Army 3. leagues further, and above Sultzbach; going
himself with his whole Horse, 4. pieces of Cannon; and Sir John Hepburne, (as
himself pleased to tell me) with 2000. Musketeers, to seek out and to
surprise Bavaria. A general guess he now had, whereabouts the Duke should be
enquartered; though by reason of his being still in motion, he could have no
exact certainty. Going, therefore, on the left hand of Amberg; he comes to a
little Town thereby, lately forsaken by the Duke. That night, lay He within 4.
English miles of the Bavarian: which had he surely known, he had without
doubt, cut him all in pieces. But the Duke, that evening, having better
intelligence where the King was; then the King had, where the Duke was: rose
with all speed and hastened toward Egra, to conioyne with Wallenstein: both of
them presently returning again upon the King. This caused His Majesty, to
turn back from them: retires back again;
he being too weak, at that time, (by 3. parts) to meet them in Campagnia.

And now remembers he his Royal word, passed heretofore unto the Norimbergers.
Their town, being mighty in power and example; had, at first, committed it
self unto his devotion: and he, again, in the word of a King, had assured it
of the uttermost of his protection. To disengage himself, of this promise: he
in November before, was once advancing from about Franckford, with his whole
Army, to have levied Tillyes siege from before it: and now again engages he
himself, to be by Wallenstein besieged with it. Thus is he becomne, a full
capital pledge for it; whilst he adventures to stand bound, and encampes
about Norimberg.
body and goods for it. Round about this Town, we in our Second Part left him
encamped: and there, he for 16. weeks after stayed: for that Towns sake alone,
submitting himself unto such multitudes of inconveniences, and so many
varieties of great dangers; as his victorious proceedings had not hitherto
been confronted withal: all which, a far meaner experience then a King of
Swedens could not but foresee, now ready like a tempest to come flowing in upon
him.

His Highness the Duke of Bavaria, had taken sore regrett at this Norimberg;
and, for its entertaining the King of Sweden; had his General Tilly offered to
beleager it. And had this Duke been strong enough, he would, perchance, have
been content, with an indifferent occasion to have quarreled it: for besides
the addition of so strong a Pass, and able jurisdiction, unto his already
devoured Upper Palatinate; His reasons for it.
it had been an Inlett, withal, to his progress into the Marquisates of They
write themselves Burgraves of Norimberg.
Onspach and Payreit, belonging unto 2. Princes of the House of Brandenburg;
and by Onspach, into Franconia. The Imperial Generalissimo, besides, had now
threatened to write it up in red letters in his Almanac; to make a Martyr of
it; and to change Norimberg, into Magdenburg: he had vowed the City to the
flames, and the riches of it, for a prey unto his soldiers. This danger, was
the Town now in; the more need, therefore, for the King to keep his word with
it.

And yet was it a mixed action, too: there were other concurring causes, for the
Kings sitting down about Norimberg, besides the bare keeping of his promise
with it. These were some of the prevailing reasons, that drew the King thither.

First, should he have left it unto the fury of the enemy, Norimberg, among the
rest, would quickly have fallen off from him, and have saved its own stake
with the Emperor.

Secondly, This Town of Norimberg, was a Pass of mighty importance: not
only, by the advantage of its situation, which was its neighborhood unto a
many smaller Principalities (all in League with it) but a very considerable
State likewise of its self it is, for the largeness of its own Jurisdiction.
The soil, indeed, is but woody and sandy: but the Lordship of it, is (much
what) sixteen English miles square, with about twenty good Towes, and six or
seven skore villages in it. Norimberg, therefore, was worth the looking after.

London.

And these three, together with the honor of keeping his word; were the chief
of the reasons for the Kings encamping about Norimberg. Had he more intended
the advancement of his other victories, then the safety of this Town; he might
then have marched up into the Bishop of Bambergs Country; and have expected
Wallenstein in these quarters: and so by laying the seat of the wars, in
that Bishopric, have abundantly been revenged of that Prince; for the
breach of his former promises. Again, the Kings Army was now but small: for
though it had the reputation of 20000 men, by the ensign; yet surely (so weak
were the Companies, that the forces of the Town excepted) they could not
muster above 15500 real marching men, to be reckoned by the Poll. Had,
therefore, the chief of his care been, to have first reenforced his Legions;
and then to have returned upon the enemy: he should (in all probability) have
retired beyond Norimberg, toward the bancks of the River Maine in Franconia.
Thereabouts, was the whole Country at his devotion; and hither, might the
several Armies which he had now sent for; with less danger, and more speed,
have marched up to him. But either of these, had he now done; then, doubtless,
would Walenstein so strongly have entrencht himself before Norimberg in the
mean time, that there would have been no remoouing of him.

Several Chieftaines with their Armies, The King sends for his several Armies
to come to him.
had the King now abroad, upon their employments. Duke William of Saxon-Weymar,
was toward the River Weser about Westphalia. The Landtgraue of Hessen, about
Paderborn, and the Bishoppricke of Cullen: The Rex-Chancellor Oxenstiern, about
Mentz; and Duke Bernard with the General Banier, in Bauaria. All these Armies,
he had at his first encamping, commanded with all speed to come and join with
him: which whilst they are about to do; we shall entertain our Readers with
the chiefest of those military discourses, descriptions, and rencounters: which
passed betwixt the two Armies about Norimberg.

Begin we with the Kings Leaguer, and the description of it, as also of the
strength he had to lay in it. He had, at his first sitting down, six Brigades
of foot forces: three whereof were commanded by Grave Neeles; and the other
three, by Sir John Hepburn; which came to betwixt seven and 8000, The Kings
strength,
and no more. About that strength, were his Horse: not full 8000 complete, and
yet fast upon it. The Right wing of these horse, was commanded by Lieftenant
General Strieff, and the left-wing, by Leiftenant General Goldstein. His
Artillery, consisted of twenty Pieces of battery; and thirty Fielding Pieces,
of three and six pound ball. The King, so soon as ever he had taken the
resolution of retyring to Norimberg: had sent before hand to the Town, to have
his Leaguer provided for him about the City. Himself with his Army, staid two
days in the Mountains, whilst his Quarters might be something toward a
readiness: so that at his first coming, he found the Trenches half wrought
by the Burgers. They were found too little, when the King came to lodge his
Army in them: for which cause, his Majesty in person rode round about the Town
to lay out the ground for enlarging of the Quarters: with the description of
his Leaguer.
which contained 35000 Rods of ground, within the uttermost line of
Circumuallation. And for my understanding of this strength and Leaguer; are the
thanks due unto the Noble and valiant Sir John Hepburne.

The fashion of the City of Norimberg, enclines, mostly, to a circle; and yet
something to an ovall figure. The small river Pegnitz, runs in at the East,
and out at the West of it. It has many fair Suburbs; and in them, was the
Kings Leaguer: it embracing both Town and Suburbs, round about, within the
compass of its protection. I begin to describe the Fortifications upon the
East side, by the river, and the Suburb of Weert. Hence, all about the hill of
the Jews, unto St. John's; was it taken up with diverse Bastions, and
Retrenchments: all these, being guarded by their Flanckers, and other ordinary
Defenses. On the other side of the water, was the Pent encompassed about with
another Fort or Bastion: which being well Flanckered with a Curtain: was also
joined unto a Fort new builded in the Suburb called Gastenhoff: and that well
defended likewise with diverse Halfe-Moones and Horn-works. The Suburb called
Steinbuhel toward Scheinaw; was strongly entrenched likewise; guarded besides
with two other Forts, joining one upon another. Toward the wood of Rotenbach,
was there a Fort-royall erected: and another toward Gleishammer, upon the way
that leads toward Altorff. Diverse Batteryes were erected here and there,
between: which were plentifully furnished with the Kings own Ordnance; and
others out of the Town Magazine. The Works were strongest, upon the South
side; for that the King suspected the enemy likelyest to encampe there: and
upon the East side, toward the Upper Palatinate; for fear the Imperialists
should have had the courage to have fallen on upon the nearest side to them, at
their first coming. The Moate or Graff round about all, was, generally twelve
foot wide, and eight deep: and about the Head-works, eighteen foot wide, and
twelve deep. The King of Bohemia's Quarter in the Leaguer, was at Weiershaus,
(a house of one Weier, a Burger) on the South side of the City, and in the way
toward Newmarckt. Eight thousand soldiers labored daily upon the
Fortifications: the Works being not yet fully perfected, at Walensteins first
coming: so that the King looked presently to have been assaulted. But our
Generalissimo, in the point of fighting, deceived the expectations both of his
friends, and of his enemies.

And this is something toward the description of the Kings Leaguer. And here
was his Majesty now resolved to abide that shocke and tempest of war; which
from the whole power of the League and house of Austria; he had last spring
expected should at Mentz have fallen upon him. At Mentz, therefore, did he last
year make those so large Fortifications and Bridges; which Page 51 of our
Second Part you shall find described. There had he taken in the hills about
the Town; not so much to make the City stronger (which plainly, he did not)
but to have a Camping-place for the lodging of such an Army; as might bear the
brunt of the whole power of the Empire.

Do we now as much for their Highnesses the Dukes of Fridland and Bavaria. The
Army was much about the same number that we have before set you down, Page 233
of our Second Part. For in the end of this July, that they encampt in;
Walenstein himself sent a List of his whole Forces, unto his Imperial Majesty
at Vienna. In it, were 191 Cornets of Horse besides Crabats and Dragooners:
with 149 Foot Companies. The Horse, at 125 to a Cornett (which is the usual
proportion) amount to about 20000: And so many Dutch Horse he had indeed. His
Foot, at 300 complete, The Forces of Walenstein and Bavaria.
to a company for half of them (for so Walsteins List, was) and the rest, as
strong as the Captains could make them; amount to 40000: and so many marching
men they had effective: (it is the word of the forenamed Gentleman) who accounted
themselves 80000. The Crabats were full 5000 men, who gave out themselves to be
8000. And this was their whole strength (and with the least too) 40000 Foot,
and 25000 Horse: in all 65000. fighting men: who either for their own credits,
were apt to believe it, or for policy and terror helped to give it out, That
they were 128000.

And their great Officers.
These were Walensteins great Officers. In his Camp was Gallas, (an Italian of
Friuli, and a brave Gentleman) Lieftenant-Generall; and he gave out the orders.
In the Duke of Bavariaes Camp, had Altringer the same office: who yet was to
be directed and controlled by Walenstein; the Duke of Bavaria himself (many
times) knowing nothing, till the command was to be executed. Major-Generall of
the Horse unto Walenstein, was Colonel Holck; a Holsteyner, as I take it. His
Generall-Major of the Foot, was the Colonel Sparre, a little black Gentleman,
and a Pomerlander. The valiant Baron of Cronenberg (as I take it) was
Generall-Major of the Horse unto Bavaria, but who was of his Foot, I know not:
Cratz was not now in the Leaguer; for he was yet busy against Banier, in
Bavaria: and he afterwerwards offered to hinder him, when he came toward
Norimberg. But this I have but by hearsay. Other great Commanders, which had
severally entrenched Quarters, in the Leaguer, were Count Maximilian Walstein,
and Count Bernard Walenstein; Kinsmen, I suppose, unto the Generalissimo. The
Baron of Schemberg, and Colonel Picolomini, an Italian Gentleman: with Mittscha
and Gratzij, Colonells General of the Crabats and Hungarians, in their
Quarter. Walenstein at his first coming, sat down a night or two about
Schwabach, until his Quarters could be made ready for him: which done, then
went he and sat down in his Leaguer.

The whole Imperial Leaguer, was at first divided into 8. several Quarters:
if the Figure cut in Copper be true, which I have seen printed, with a High
Dutch description, to it. The distance of his Quarters from the Kings, The
Imperial Leaguer, and the 8. several Quarters of it, described.
was about 4. miles English. Their first and Head-Quarter, (which was far the
largest) was by Metzendorff, upon the North-West of the river Pegnitz, betwixt
the Highways unto Wurtsburg and Bamberg. This was almost like an Ovall: and
the river Rednitz, ran close by it upon the Northern border. The second
Quarter, was by Scheurglung, between the way to Wurtsburg (which parted it
from Walensteins) and the river Pegnitz: close upon the Western bank of it.
Here Piccolomini commanded.. The third Quarter, was by Mueggenhoff; at a good
distance from the Southern bank of the river, and from Piccolominies Quarter:
with 2. Royal Forts between, and their Batteries. Here was Count Maximilian
Walenstein lodged. The fourth was on the South side of the Kings Leaguer, by
Hoffen: and there lay Baron Cronenberg. The fifth was on the same side toward
the right hand, by Saint Leonards: which was called Baron Altringers. Betwixt
these two went the Highway to Reychelsdorff. The sixth, was by Pultmull, on
the East side of Norimberg and beyond the river, on the Northern bank, a
great distance from Altringers, with a very great Fort, between the way to
Schwabach and the Pegnitz. And here, Count Bernard Walenstein commanded. The
seventh, was by Prentzengart; betwixt the Highways that lead to Amberg, and
to Culmbach: on the North-East of Norimberg: This was the Hungarian and the
Crabats Quarter: whose chiefes were Isolani, Mittscha and Gratzij. The 8. and
last Quarter, was by Rehenberg; between the ways to Culmbach and Bamberg,
upon the North of the City; and near unto the Head-Quarter. This was the Count
of Schombergs. Betwixt each of these, was there Works and Forts, one or two;
according to the distance.

This mighty Leaguer, was vaste, rather then accurate: Walenstein, surely, was
defective in this point of military excellency, he is none of the best
Spademen; nor had he any good Enginiers about him. Seven of these 8. Quarters,
were but slight ones; a little earth cast up, and barricadoed with Wagons,
trees and other encumberments. Nor were they close behind: as if out of a
military bravery, they would have the King know, they trusted more to their
strengths, then to their trenches. Nor did these 7. Quarters hold long; but
only till they heard of Oxenstierns coming: against which time, the Head
Quarter was enlarged and fortified: and all the forces of the rest, drawn into
it. That we now describe. The Avenues or Passages of this great Leaguer, in and
out, through the Retrenchments, had Barricadoes right before them, made with
Truncks and mighty boughs of Trees, among: with broken Wagons, Turne-pikes,
Gabions, or Cannon-baskets, pieces of old Cask filld up with earth and stones;
and many such other rude devises, to block up the way withal: especially
against Horse, and sudden Camisadoes. The place for some of his Quarters, was a
natural Fortification; hilly, woody, and bushye: and especially by the hill
and old Castle of Altendorp; made famous on Saint Bartholmewes day following,
by a most notable conflict for it. All the bridges over the 2. little rivers,
had he caused to be broken down: at Katzwang, namely, Reychelsdorff, Stain,
Waykerhoff, and Furt; that so, no body might, on the sudden come at him. Diverse
villages were within these Quarters, the Duke of Bavaria being lodged in one of
them: yea and Walenstein himself, though he had his day Pavilion in the open
field, for the most part, and when it was fair weather; yet was his lodging
(when he pleased) within a house. And this was fittest both for his diseases
and humors: he is shrewdly troubled with the Gowte, Walensteins diseases.
so that he goes softly, and is led sometimes. Some other crazynesses, is he
likewise troubled with, for which the cold earth is not so kindly. He loves to
keep a State, fit for the dignity of his place: and that affects priuacy and
retyrednesse.

The Sovereignty (I must not express it in a lower style) over the Militia;
was absolutely, at the Duke of Fridlands disposure: Walensteins
for so much he took upon him, as Imperial Generalissimo. Authority,
He was Fellow in Arms, and no General, over the Duke of Bavaria: for that
his Army, was independent; and he, as a Prince of the Empire by himself, had
levied it at his own charges. Yet did Walenstein command all; and that with a
Switch (as it were:) his Orders being given out with an Imperious Eloquence,
which is Breefenesse. His pleasure (so much is due to a General) must not
only be uncontrolleable, but undisputable: and he is a most sudden and severe
Iusticier, Severity,
(when he pleases) for his military discipline. Hang the beast, (that's his
word) that obeyes not with a servile celerity. and Bounty.
He is a bountifull-handed man, where he finds deserving: and these two things,
Rewards and Punishments (and enough of both) are the Secrets of his Discipline;
these are the chief laws that kept his Camp in exceeding good order, all the
time of this Leaguer; and himself well beloved of his soldiers. There was no
great good heartinesse of affection, (some will say) betwixt the 2. Dukes: and
if Bavaria, at any time, interposed his counsel; Walenstein would take no more
of it, then should serve his turn: good advice, perchance, being now and then
discountenanced, for the Giver.

The Camp being fortified, the Generalissimo gave this general order unto his
soldiers, that they should make more use of their trenches, then of their
weapons: That they should not, but with special leave, go out upon commanded
Partees, and that very strongly: That they should not, but upon command,
straggle abroad after forage or adventures: but continue to make good the
Posts, they were commanded to, till they were relieved. That they should, for
the most part, contain themselves upon the defensive within their Quarters:
and when they were in commanded Partees sent abroad, they should then hinder
the Swedes from getting forage. He had taken a very excellent order, for the
victualling of his Army; for sure, the Duke of Fridlands Masterpiece, is to be
a good Provisioner: His provisions for his Army, what.
and he has a singular good Catering-wit of his own. Above all, had he taken
good care for his Provant-breade, which is half the standing diet of a
soldier: and they will do well enough, where bread is good, and plentiful.
That which most incommodated him, was, That navigable river, he had none, for
the service of his Leaguer. The river Rednitz though it ran from his Camp,
into the Bishopric of Bamberg (a friends country) yet it being both narrow,
and shallow, and against the stream too; whence, and how, fetched.
it was no way capable of any great carriages. His trust for the bringing of
his victuals, therefore, must be by Convoyes over land: which were far more
casual, and more chargeable. He had laid all the country for provisions.
Diverse troops of his Cavallery, were sent unto all the next greater towns and
Passages, then at his devotion: which were there to hold their Quarters. As to
Cronach, namely, and Forcheim, in the Bishopric of Bamberg: Willsburg Castle,
and Weissenburg, an Imperial town by it, in the Bishopric of Aichstet. Some
of his Forces had been left beyond Norimberg in the Upper Palatinate, to
secure that, and Bohemia: and others were already advanced beyond it, to the
towns upon the river Aisch, in Franconia. The Crabats roaved up and down,
from Forcheim, almost, unto Wurtsburg: yea he had made sure work of it, even
as far as the town of Regenspurg in Bavaria: and had blockt up all the
chief Posts and Passes, betwixt these towns and Norimberg. From all these
(and from Regenspurg especially, whether it was sent him along the Danuby, from
Vienna) was his Camp served with provisions, and the Kings Leaguer thereby cut
off, from all necessaries: Every day were strong commanded Horse-Partees sent
abroad, to lie upon several Posts and Passages of advantage, to intercept the
Kings Foragers. This was commonly the Crabats business: who lay up and down,
4. 6. 8. or 10. miles from the Kings Leaguer. With these had the Swedish
Partees their most encounters; but for brevities sake I must not insist upon
every skirmish.

All this, was done by Walenstein, with Judgment, and like a General: and
this was all the force he used to constreine the King, to dislodge from before
Norimberg, and to abandon it up to his mercy. Walensteins purpose, in encamping
by the King.
Other force, he attempted none. He saw the Kings Works and Retrenchments, to
be made so strong, that it would prove a desperate piece of service, for
whosoever should undertake to assault them. And Walenstein boldly gave it out,
That it sorted not with the Service of His Imperial Majesty to have the new
Army hazarded, upon a Battle or Invasion: That there had been too much
attempted that way, before; and That he would show the King of Sweden another
kind of Warre-faring. And thus much indeed, was by some prisoners of great
note, confessed unto the King, afterward: namely, that the Imperial
Generalissimo had this plot upon him. To draw the War out into a length; and
to awayte the favor of opportunity: hoping, at last, to serve himself so
well, upon the Kings necessities; that, either, they should so constreine him;
or his friends so persuade with him; that he should, if not offer, yet not
deny, to hearken; unto a good Treaty. This if it took well, then should the
advantage, in the conclusion of the Peace, make him a fair saver for his
patience; preserve Him a gallant Army, to be otherwhere employed for His
Imperial Majesty: and gain, finally, a most ample reputation unto the name of
Walenstein; as one that had only known, how to handle the King of Sweden.

This was Walensteins Rest up, and he was resolved to act no part but of
Fabius: he had the King in a coope, or in a toil already, and there (for a
while) he meant to keep him, and Norimberg. Something, indeed, his Army did,
at their very first coming into those Quarters: Walensteins first attempts,
but they were not any attempts upon the Kings Trenches; but some outrydings
and Cavalcadoes only, upon the Jews of Furt, and Burgers of Farenbach, whom
his men plundered. Some other foraging voyages they also made upon the Boores
barnes and houses; in the smaller towns of the neighbor Marquisate of
Onspach; (commonly called The Lower Marquisate) and into the Jurisdiction of
the Norimbergers. upon the country abroad.
The poor town of Swabach (8 or 9 English miles from Norimberg) now falling
into the Lordly displeasure of the Generalissimo, (for that it had slain 50 of
his men, in the taking of it) was by him destinated unto an universal
destruction. The execution was stayed, by the Duke of Bavaria's intercession;
(which was granted, as the first motion he had made to him) and the punishment
commuted to a ransom: as a surety for which moneys, the chief Magistrate was
carried away prisoner.

Diverse able troops, were by our Generalissimo (at his very first setting
down) dispatched further into the Marquisate of Onspach, and the Dukedom of
Franconia. Near Onspach, was the Town and Castle of Liechtenaw within the
Jurisdiction of the Norimbergers, pressed, but not taken yet, by the
Walsteiners. Three of their Regiments attempted an Aenslaught upon the
Imperial City of Winshaim upon the river Aisch, 30 English miles to the West
of Norimberg: and 24 to the Northwest of Onspach. But this design of theirs
being discovered and defeated by the Swedish garrison, and the Burgers; the
Imperialists gate a shrewd brush here, left many of their fellows behind them,
and carried off the best part of 1000 more, wounded with them into Swabach.
They rambled up and down as far as Vffenhaim also, eight miles more to the
Westward. Kitzingen, and Swinfort both, were in some dread of them: but that
the river Mayn was a good Barricadoe betwixt them and the present danger. All
that country likewise, which you see bounded with that mighty compass of the
river Main, to the Northward; even from Bamberg, unto this Kitzingen, was
daily ouer-run and brought under contribution by their Horse-Partees. On the
Northern side of the Main also, those Crabats that had their Quarters in and
about Bamberg, did at pleasure roave up and down the country, even unto the
very walls of Wurtsburg. Due South of Norimberg, moreover, even as far as
the Bishopric of Aichstet, for above 30 English miles together, was all at
their devotion; and did daily furnish the Imperial Leaguer with provisions.
The Crabats (who are the ranke-ryders, and common harryers of the Imperial
Army) had by this time plundered Hippolstein, a pretty Town betwixt Norimberg
and Aichstet. Having lodged there awhile, they set it on fire at parting:
barbarously enough laughing at the poor men's miseries, That they never used to
pay their Hosts, in other money. The Towns of Carelsberg and Rostall on the
West of Norimberg, were also so served: None faring so well, as those that
worst used them; and that had the courage to let fly their Ordnance amongst
them. And thus far was our Generalissimo, absolute Master of the Field:
excepting those good Towns only, which had Swedish garrisons in them. All
this was done by the middle of July, 1632. and now turn we back again unto
Norimberg.

We told you before, of the good order taken by Walenstein, for the victualing
of his Army: which for all his care, must be contented with the entertainment
of the Wars, and with many an Italian dinner. The Generalissimo's ordinary
diet, was six dishes a meal, and two bottles of wine to it, as long as it
lasted. The Kings table, perchance, was nothing better served; as relying
wholly upon the Magazine of Norimberg. Hence (as I find it from several hands
assured,) was his Camp furnished with 8000 pound of bread (80000 some name)
daily. The Norimbergers wanted Milles, rather then come: which the enemy had
burnt down. Both parties were feign to Steward their provisions, as thriftily
as they could: Walenstein, that he might have enough to starve the King
withal: and the King, to be able to hold out, till his sureties, those other
Armies which he had now sent for should be comne up to bail him. That which
most necessitated both the Armies, was want of straw and Horse-meate: for
which, whiles both sides sent out a foraging, there fell out many a shrewd
bickering between them: one side carrying away oftentimes, what the others had
before mowed. Walenstein kept his Army all this while, under very good
discipline; nor durst he leave them any more at large, unto the liberty of
that former licentiousness which in other Wars, they had been let loose
unto. He very well knew, how near he now was, unto a King of Sweden: who
still, as any of the Imperialists durst venture abroad a Boot-haling; had ever
some Partee or other, upon the the powles of them. And in the same manner were
the Swedes also served: both sides taking their turns, according to advantage.
The first War that Walenstein now made with the King, was a contention of
courtesy: for the man (certainly) is a gallant spirited personage, and full of
nobleness. He first of all, and without ransom,) sent him home his well
esteemed Colonel Dubatell: whom, (as in the latter end of our Second Part we
told you) he had lately taken prisoner about Newmarckt. With him, sent he the
King this complement: That he had no other ambition, Walenstein courts the King
of Sweden.
then once to see his Majesty, in good terms with the Emperor his Master; and
himself to have the honor, to be the Instrument of it. About a three weeks
after, the same courtesy did he again unto Ritmaister Reyschel; whom as he
was seeking his adventure abroad, the Crabats had taken prisoner. His ransom
did Walenstein first pay unto the takers; and then entertaining him in fair
manner at his own Table: frank and free sent him home, after dinner, with
this message, only, unto the King his Master. That he esteemed his Majesty for
the best Captain of the World: and that he would abundantly rest himself
contented, if he could not by force vanquish him; yet that he might be the
means to bring him to a good Treaty with the Emperor. This being told the
King as he after sat at table, He smiling said, That he was ready to do
Walstein reason at all times; The Kings answer.
and for that he showed himself so honest a man, He had no cause to wish his
Person any ill: the thing that he above all desired, being, that they two might
have a crash together, upon a fair campagnia.

Walenstein sends succor into Bavaria;
The Imperial Generalissimo purposing to contract himself into his great
Leaguer: sends out, first of all, some of his Forces into other Countries. Some
Bavarians (and I have heard that there were 1^000 of them, though I believe not
so many) were sent back into their own Dukedom.

and Holck, into Misnia.
About the 20th of July, was Holck, Generall-Major of the Horse, sent with 6000
Horse, and 4000 Musketeers, toward the Duke of Saxonyes country. His sending
out of these Forces, was; first, to give the rest more room at home, who else
should have layne more pent and pestered in their Quarters. Secondly, to ease
himself of the charges of pay and victuals: they abroad, and why.
being to live (as they could) upon the Country. His sending out of the
Bavarians, was to hinder Baniers joining with the King: Cratz, with them, first
way-laying him about Weissenburg, and then afterward with the help of
Leopolds forces, recovering Landsperg, Schonga, Fuessen and Munchen in Bavaria.
As for Holck, he also was sent to hinder the joining of Duke William of
Saxon-Weymar, with the King: and if he should come too late for that purpose,
then was he to fall into the Duke of Saxons Voitland and Misnia: where, after
Duke Williams coming away, he should find the less resistance.

Said it is, Bavaria moves Walenstein, to beat the Kings Quarter.
that the Duke of Bavaria should now be earnest with the Generalissimo, to give
on upon the King in his trenches, and to venture the beating of him out, before
his reliefes should be comne up to him. To this motion, the same Relation makes
Walenstein return this answer, That his Army was new, as yet; and if they
should be beaten, then were all Germany and Italy were endangered: Walensteins
answer.
but if Bavaria please to fall on first, he would second him with all his
forces.

About the end of July did the Duke of Bavaria send an Express unto the Count
of Pappenheim, to invite him, rather to come with his forces from the Weser,
and to make in diversion in Duringen, or upon the Duke of Saxony, Bavaria
invites Pappenheim.
then to go to serve the Arch-Duthesse. These letters being written in
Ciphers, the Packet was intercepted about Altemburg in Misnia upon the seventh
of August, the Postilion was carried prisoner into Salfriet, and the letters
sent unto the King of Sweden. This had the Court of Vienna likewise desired
from the Count of Pappenheim: who being absolute of himself in Misnia, was
looth to come too near a Generalissimo: and was now going to relieve Mastricht.

The King, toward the 20. of July, hearing of a Convoye of Walensteins, that
was to come out of the hither parts of Austria, toward his Leaguer: sends out
Colonel Wippenhorst, with a Partee of 800. Horse, and as many Dragooners; to
cut off that Convoye. With these 1600. did Wippenhorst light upon 800. wagons
laden with ammunition, and with Gunnes especially: which he destroyed.

About the 27. of July, a Partee of Swedish Horse, took one Captain Darmis
prisoner, amongst other Free-booters. He being examined by the King upon his
oath, confessed that Walensteins great Magazine of victuals was at Freyenstat:
which was the place appointed for whatsoever came from Ratisbone, The King
learning out Walensteins Magazine.
and the Upper Palatinate, until it were sent for to the Leaguer; which,
within 3. or 4. days, a strong Convoye was about to go for. The advantage of
this opportunity, the king thought worth the taking: resolving with the first
to send either to bring away the provisions, or to destroy that which was to
feed his enemies.

This town, is in the Upper Palatinate; 5. Dutch miles, or 20. English, to the
South of Norimberg, and 2. Dutch leagues from Newmarckt. The situation of it,
is in a Morasse, upon the side of a small namelesse river, and betwixt it and
Schwartzach. Sends Dubatell toward it,
The Leader that the King made choice of to do the feate, was Colonel
Dubatell: whom Walenstein had lately taken prisoner, and again released; as we
before told you, The Colonel knew the Country thereabouts, perfectly well:
for it was not far from thence, that he was taken prisoner. The troops
appointed to go with him, I find to be 14. Cornets of Horse, some troops of
Dragooners, and 2. Wagons laden with Petards, Storming or Skaling ladders, etc.
With these, comes he unto Karnbergh first; 2. Dutch miles from Freyenstat. His
season and march he so proportioned, as that he might be before the town he
went unto, before daylight, upon the Monday morning July 30. He did so: and
found most of the soldiers and townsmen, very securely sleeping: for who
would have suspected, that the King of Swedens smaller Army; being besieged as
it were, by two greater; durst have presumed to send twenty miles off, to
surprise Freyenstat.

Dubatel, at his first coming before the Town; surprises some drowsy
Sentinells: and hangs 2. Petards upon the Sally-port. These not blowing open
the gate, as he expected; who taking the Town,
he fearing the noise of their going off, would send in the Alarm into the
Town; claps his skaling ladders to the naked and un-man'd walls; which he
mounts and enters. Other Petards being by this time put to work, had forced
open the gate; and made an easy passage that way, for the residue of the
Swedish. They thus gotten in, cut in pieces those few soldiers, which they
found either sleeping or unprovided, upon the next Courts of Guard, and
whosoever else, offered to make resistance. Having thus mastered all
opposition, they make toward the Towne-Hall; which was the Magazine or
Storehouse they came thither for. There were in it, at this present, 2000000.
pound weight of bread; great store of Meal, Corn, salt, and other provisions;
sufficient for 2. months victuals for Walensteins whole Army. For the
bringing of all this unto the Imperial Leaguer, were there 1000. Wagons
provided: many of them already pressed, and some laden, or, not yet unladen, upon
the Market place. Many hundred head both of small and great Cattle, were
likewise found about the town: which were to be driven alive unto the
Imperial Army, Of those provisions, the Swedish first of all choosing out so
much, as they thought themselves well able to carry away: set fire immediately
unto the Magazine. The town they first plunder, Spoils and brings away all
the provisions.
and then set fire to it in seven places at once. Diverse Ladies, Gentlewomen,
and Captains wives being at that time lodged within the town; these together
with their apparel and such like feminine Baggage, as were not sitting for a
soldiers wearing; did the Swedish, very honestly, Some Relations say, that
Dubatell destroyed al; for that he was not able to bring it away with him:
set to shift for themselves without the town. Twelve hundred Sheep and Oxen,
with 500. horses, they also driving away with them; put themselves the same day
homewards upon their march again: safely recovering to the Kings Quarters,
before the now following conflict.

Some of the Imperial soldiers (it seems) so soon as the Swedes were gotten
into the town; went Post with the news of it unto Walenstein. Which he
hearing of; immediately the same day dispatches the Sergeant-Major General of
his Foot; toward Freyenstat: either to save the residue; or to cut off
Dubatell in his coming home again. Sparre going out to cut off Dubatell in
his retreat;
It was Colonel Sparre that was now sent: the same man whom the King had taken
prisoner in April last, at Franckford upon the Oder: and who had been
exchanged for Colonel Kniphowsen, whom Tilly had taken prisoner at New
Brandenburg. Sparre was sent out with 8. Cornets of Horse, of Colcredo'es and
Gonzagaes Regiments, as I find specified. Twenty troops of Crabats had he also
with him: and 500. commanded Musketeers. And he (as I have heard it told) was
now going out toward Amberg, to find out a convenient Post or Quarter, where
to lodge 8. or 10000. men; to curb in the Swedish foragers into that Country.
He had a purpose, in his return, to have spoiled Altorff; where the
Norimbergers have an University.

With these Forces, Sparre the same Monday, advances toward Freyenstat. Some
of his people (as I guess) passed the river Schwartzach, about Schwartzpruck
town, over the bridge there: and some others of them (which I suppose to be
drawn out of other Quarters) passed the said river beyond or about Burgtan;
something more Easterly then their fellows.

The King of Sweden to prevent such a matter, and the better to secure the
retreat unto Dubatel; goes himself out the same day, before Dubatel was comne
home) with a selected Partee of some 2000. commanded men, toward the said
Freyenstat. The King passed the river Schwartzach at Wendlestain bridge, (as I
take it) betwixt which town and Burgtan, was the future meeting and conflict.
He being passed this bridge; Is encountered by the King,
sends (as the manner is) a Sergeant-Major with some Skowtes and Vant-curryers
before him, to discover whither the coast were clear, or whereabouts Partees
of the enemies now where. And defeated. But yet the King had some musketeers
that followed him, though perchance they had not all this while kept pace in
the march with him.
The Swedish falling foul of some of Sparrs troops, was charged and rowted by
them, and himself taken prisoner. He being brought unto Sparre, Where Is the
King, says he? At hand, answers the Major. What Forces brings he with him?
certain troops of Horse, quoth the other. Has he no Musketeers, says
Sparre? No, answers the Swede. Then certainly it is the King, said Sparre, and
he shall presently fall into my fingers.

The King having heard the pieces go off, in the former conflict: had doubled
his march upon it; and was comne so near by this time, that he met his own
men flying, and the Walsteiners giving chase unto them. The King riding up
(...) his men, with his drawn sword in his hand; returns their lost courages
into them, and them into the Battle. Not many charges passed betwixt the King
and the enemies Horse; but that the face of the skirmish began to be altered:
insomuch that the Imperial Horse and Crabats; were (to be brief) quite rowted
and defeated. The Horse of Gonzagaes Regiment, play the pultrons and ran
away: whereupon Gonzaga himself, (notwithstanding he be Cousin unto the
Empress) was at his coming to the Camp, cashiered by the Generalissimo: for
all that he cleared himself to have been forsaken by his Regiment, and to
have been the last man that stood to it. The 500. Musketeers making their
retreat into a small wood or groave, there at hand: held the King and his men
play, a great season. Very good use made they of the wood; which is far more
advantageous for shot, then either for Horse or Pikemen. But the Kings
Dragooners alighting with their Muskets, and his Horsemen round besetting the
said wood: discouraged by and by, and overthrew the Walsteiners. Sparre
himself was taken prisoner: 600. of his men, were slain upon the place: and
diverse more drowned and buried alive, in the river and moorish places, through
which they thought to have escaped.

Sparre, had now quitted his Horse, and hid himself in a bush in the said
thicket. Sparre taken prisoner.
Him, a Swedish common soldier thus light upon. The Swede perceiving a gallant
empty horse standing tied up thereby, with a goodly embroydered saddle upon his
back: judges him to belong to some brave Cavalier of the enemies, and goes out
to find him. He was told by a Horse-boy (a Walsteiner then taken and threatened)
that it was Sparres horse whom he presently directed the Swede unto. He had a
rich and massy gold chain about his neck; of which the soldier first
disrobing him, reached him a good rude brush over the shoulders with the stock
of his Musket, and so brought him prisoner to the King. Ha Monsieur Sparre
(says the King) I see you love me so well, that you cannot find in your heart
to be long away from me. Sparre being brought prisoner into Norimberg, was
feign to take Sperma C^ti, for the bruise that the rough soldier gave him.
With him, was his Lieftenant-Colonel Tertaky likewise taken; together with 4.
Captains, diverse Officers, and above 100. common soldiers. Three Corners were
then obtained, and a Ensigns: as for the rest, the Ancients had slipped them off
from their Flagge-stoves, The losses on both sides.
and then run away with thorn. The King rewarded each of those soldiers that
presented him the Colors, with 100. Dollars. The losses on the Kings side
where not many: but among them, was Colonel Ries slain, who belonged unto one
of the Dukes of Saxon-We^mar. ^oye, a Swedish Gentleman, lost there his life;
and Y^^cker Cr^^^^enstein, that waited upon the King in his Chamber. This done,
the King, the same night, returned toward his League: causing a most solemn
Thankesgiving to be made unto the God of Battles, for this double victory.

The Swedes after the taking of this Fr^ye^s^at, flow out as far as H^^mburg:
some 9. or 10. English miles to the East of Burg^an, where the last encounter
happened. This town, and the Castle to it, they now take in; by which help was
all the coast on that side indifferently well cleared: so that the Walstri^^^s
being defeated of their intended Quartering place in those parts; the Swedes
roave freely up and down, as far as Amberg.

Generall-Major Sparre, Sparres examination and confession.
being once again the Kings prisoner, was strictly and upon oath examined,
what he knew of his Generals purposes. He confessed, that they had no other
plot upon the King, then by famine to compel him to a treaty. After this
victory; there (for a while) passed nothing of moment, between the two Armies.
The pettier skirmishes between commanded Partees abroad, or the continued
night-alarmes upon one another Camps or Guards at home; I list not to stand
upon. The mortality in Town and Leaguers.
With the same silence would I have passed over, the diseases and fluxes both
of the Town and Leaguers: (notwithstanding that by midde August there dyed
1000. and 1400. a week of it) had not his Majesty the King of Bohemia, been
at this time troubled with it. The running away of men, on either side, I omit.
None are so well provided against this noisomeness: as the Crabats; who will
eat you whole handfulls of raw Onyons and Garlic, as familiarly as an
Italian wrings down sallets, or we apples: as if they meant to out-stincke the
carrion, and their own Quarters.
The many dead horses: which by this beginning of August, came to some
thousands, in both Leaguers: and which, (to the horrible noysomnesse of the
Quarters, where they lay unburied) daily more and more increased, (or
diminished rather) I would not have offended you with, but to show you how it
was possible, for these two great Armies to be reduced to such small numbers;
notwithstanding so few of them were in fight, killed.

Leaving these particulars; I shall (for want of other action) here impart an
Oration of the King of Swedens, on the first of August made unto the Officers
of his Army: then which Speech, I desire no other Character of the King of
Sweden, nor no other Interpreter of the Heroicke Justice, of his great
intentions. The occasion was this, A complaint of the Norimbergers unto his
Majesty, how that their lands and territories, had as ill been plundered and
destroyed, by those of the Kings own Army, as by the enemies. Calling
hereupon, the Officers, great and small, of his whole Army together, he with
the vivacity and passion of an Orator, (wherein he was excellent) as well as
with the authority of a King, uttered a most pathetick Oration before them; of
which no more but this Extract, has comne within my Intelligence.

Ye Lords and Gentlemen:

The Kings Oration against plunderers.
You, partly, are some of those numbers, that have showed themselves unfaithful
and disloyal to their own country; and who do help to ruin it. You, my
Generals, Leiftenant-Generals, and all you my inferior Officers; I have ever,
(as to your honors I here confess it) esteemed you for brave Cavaliers: and I
bear you witness, that upon all occasion of service offered, you have in
battle given me so sufficient a demonstration of your valors; as that I have
therewithal rested satisfied. But, when having you all here before me, I am
put in remembrance of your ravages, robberyes, and plunderings; and that you
your selves are guilty of these insolences, and companions besides, with them
that neither observe Discipline, nor do justice upon malefactors in these
kinds: my hair stands up on end, at the very horror of it. Let your selves
be Judges. Is it not a doleful and a lamentable case, yea most odious in the
sight of Almighty God; that one Christian, and of the same profession in
Religion, should pillage one another? one friend, nay one brother, ransacke,
spoil, ruin and undo one another? The very devils in hell, are more loving
and trusty one to another, then you Christians are, amongst those of your own
Country.

My heart almost fails me; yea and my very bowels yearne within me, as often
as I here it complained of, That the Swedish soldiers are more insolent, then
the enemies. But they are not the Swedes, they are the Germans, that commit
all these insolences. Had I known, that you Germans had been a people of
this temper; of a humor, that had borne no more natural affection to your own
native Country, and that you would have done no better service for it, nor
showed more fidelity toward it; I would never have saddled horse for your
sakes: much less have hazzarded mine own kingdom, my life and estate in your
behalfes; nor with mine own person, have adventured so many a brave and
valiant Gentleman, as I have done, for your well-fares. No, but since I now
perceive, that your selves by these your carriages, seem to affect and desire
it; I would rather have suffered you to remain in the case ye were in; even
plunged in that more then most miserable condition, of an eternal servitude
and slavery.

Let your own consciences be my witnesses, that I do not usually, deny any
of you, a reasonable motion: Yea my God knows besides, That I never intended
any other thing, then (by his blessed assistance) to restore every man to his
own, and his own to every man; and for the remainder, especially what I
should obtain either in Franconia or Bavaria, to distribute and part it among
the Nobility and Gentry of your nation, and to leave no man's good service
unrewarded. But this most accursed, divelish robbing and stealing of yours,
does I must needs confess, much abate my good purposes, and keep back these
my Christian intentions. Have you not so much judgment left, as to consider
what kind of fame and praise that is like to prove; which posterity shall
leave of you, in all future Histories? Remember withal, I beseech you, what a
clogge you hereby tie upon your own consciences: and what judgments and
punishments you draw down upon your persons, and posterities, Country and
Successors, by these acts of oppression and inhumanitie. Oh, that you cannot
consider with your selves, what a fearful account you are to yield up to God,
at that great and most dreadful Audite. And for mine own part; rather would I
have still remained in mine own kingdom, then have comne hither to behold
these insolences.

You will say, perchance, That you want moneys. But when I have the means to
satisfy both you and the whole Army; and you by pillaging, robbing, and
plundering, shall deprive me of these means: where, I beseech you, is the
fault, that you are not satisfied? What share have I at any time received, out
of all these your bootyes? Just nothing. I do protest before God, and it is
most true that I say, that I have not by all this War so much enriched my
self, as a pair of Boots come to: and I profess withal, that I would
rather ride without Boots, then any ways, or in the least degree, make my
self the richer, by the damage or undoing of these poor people. I will make
it appear to you, whosoever is desirous therein to be satisfied; That since
the coming out of mine own kingdom, at 32 several returns, I have had full
40 tons of gold, made over to me: all which, I have spent for your good, and
for the re-establishment of such Princes, as are united with me, in the same
truth of Religion. The eighth of this month, he gave his Army a months
means, out of the moneys then borrowed of the Norimbergers at six in the
hundred.
I might, I confess, have herein been silent; but the remembrance of that
great loss, which by the deaths of so many brave Worthies and Cavaliers,
(whose virtues, indeed, were beyond all estimation) I account my self to have
sustained, even constrained me to utter what I do: for, truly, I ever valewed
them, beyond all my riches. And you for your parts; what have you contributed
toward all these Wars? This is all, that henceforth I shall desire at your
hands, That you spoil not others of their goods, but leave every man unto his
own possessions. The choler and manhood that you have, skore it (a Gods name)
upon the fronts of your enemies; but distaine not the honor of a soldier, by
insulting upon unarmed innocents. Live upon your means, like soldiers, and
not upon pilfering, and spoiling, like high-way-robbers. This if you do not,
you shall ever be infamous, and I by such helpers, never become victorious.

Piously spoken, and like a King of Sweden; like Gustavus Adolphus, who had the
Religion of a Bishop, and the equity of a Lord Chief Justice in him. And this
Oration was said to be delivered with that sting and life, that it extracted
tears of compunction from these Military hearers: even from men of that
profession, who had rather bleed then weep, and do it oftener. But for that,
though words may moove compassion, yet they always work not reformation; this
Speech was seconded with a Proclamation; and that made more severe by a
Penalty: That his Majesty would from henceforth pardon no man, were he Earl,
General, Colonel; or of what degree and condition soever, that should in this
kind be again complained of. Adding withal, That if to avoid punishment any
of them all, or all together should conspire upon a mutiny, that he with his
Swedes and Finlanders would undertake so to rattle them, that the very shivers
of their staves should fly about the ears of them. This prohibition was no
sooner by sound of trumpet Proclaimed; but to show how severe he meant to be in
his executions; he causes a Leiftenant to be hanged, for committing some of
these aforesaid insolences. When also a Boore having complained of a soldier
for stealing his Cow from him, there was means made to save the delinquent;
My son, says the King to him, it is better that I should now punish thee,
then that the wrath of God, for thy misdeeds, and his Judgments, should fall
down upon me, and thee, and upon all of us here present.

The same day of this Oration, was a Quartermaster of Walensteins taken
prisoner: who had the List, about him, of all the Imperial Forces. By this
time was the Court of Vienna, Caesar well pleased with Walenstein.
very well pleased with the deportment of their Generalissimo. And he very well
deserved it: for he held the King straightly coopt up hitherto; and had first
found out the secret, That the way to beat the King of Sweden, was not to
fight with them. Boldly hereupon did they give it out, That the King of Sweden
was stark foundred, not able to lift up his leg from the place he stood on:
and had therefore demanded a Peace of the Emperor; and leave to retire
himself out of Germany: But his Imperial Majesty would now handle him in
another fashion. As for the King himself, he never desired any peace of the
Emperor: but (because I will not call it an invention) the rumor might arise,
perchance, from the King of Denmarks Ambassador: who in his Masters name (about
this time) made some overtures of a treaty unto his Imperial Majesty. Terms
of peace talked of.
The Articles hereof, being by an Express, sent unto Walenstein;
Major-Generall Sparre a little after this, desired leave of the King that he
might go into Walensteins Leaguer, to propound something, in his own name,
about a peace, and the exchange of certain prisoners. His motion came to
nothing. Walensteins self, certified nothing but honor of the King, unto
Vienna; wishing indeed, that there might be some accommodation by a treaty. The
better to draw the King on to a treaty, was his Queens Cousin, Christian
William Administrator of Magdenburg, used in the business, (together with the
Danish Ambassador:) whom the Emperor in April before, had again set at
liberty. The young Landtgrave of Darmstat still continued a strong solliciter
for a Peace; and especial to his Father in Law the Elector of Saxony. But
neither could they work it. Some other motions that way, were several times
projected; but the cunning was, so to bring about the terms, to give both
sides satisfaction.

The Story of the several Armies, now coming toward the King.
Leaving these Treaties in the air, into which they presently vanished: we will
turn our style toward action again. Omitting withal, those smaller
skirmishes, which daily fell out about the Leaguers: we will prepare our
Readers for greater matters. Those Armies which the King (as we told you) had
at Walensteins first coming, had sent for to come and be his Maine-prizers:
were by this drawing together about the river Main in Franconia. Turn we,
then, aside awhile, to fetch these Armies into action. The Generals of these
Armies were Oxenstiern, the two Dukes of Weymar, the Landtgrave of Hessen, and
Banier: of all whom severally.

Of Oxenstiern,
The Rex-Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern, having by the Arms of Gustavus Horn,
brought the action to a good pass in the Electorate of Triers, and with the
Bishop of Cullen: had the better leisure now, to go wait upon the King his
Master. About the 11. of July, set he out from Mentz: with about 8000. men (as
'twas given out) in his Army. To him does the Landtgrave William of Hessen with
3. Regiments, and Hessen:
first come, into Franconia. His way, was from the river of of Weser:
Pappenheim (his great adversary) being now going to Maestricht-ward. Hessen and
the Chancellor, who being joined,
both met at Wurtsburg: there expecting the coming of the other forces.

There whilst they are, they were not idle: the Imperialists being masters of
the smaller towns thereabouts, and going out upon daily Partees; gave them
occasion of exercise. About July 20. the Landtgrave of Hessen sending out a
Partee of 500. Horse; with as many musketeers: lighting upon 3. companies of
Walsteiners; kill 100. of them, took 2. Cornets, and 500. Prisoners, which
well helped to increase the Army. This was about Schweinfurt, in the
Landtgraves way toward Wurtsburg. About this time, the Imperialists of
Forcheim, made a Cavalcado out upon the Palace of the Counts of Cassel: which
they surprised and plundered, do something upon the Imperialists
to the worth of 200000. Florens. Good store of provisions being found therein,
the Walsteiners went home for some wagons, minding the next day, to go fetch
away this booty. By this, had the Chancellor heard of it: who sending out the
Palatine Birckenfelt to way-lay them: he with 3. troops of Dragooners charged
them so home, that they were feign to leave their Carriages to the Swedish: and
with the loss of 150. men and 30. prisoners, in several places.
to betake themselves into Forcheim. The Finnish Colonel Stallhanshe (who also
came up with the Chancellor) going along the Main with 4. Cornets to seek his
adventure: he betwixt Vffenhaim and Kitzingen; met also with a weak Partee of
Imperialists: that were convoying 100. Wagons lading of meal, toward
Walenstein. These he first rowting, and they flying toward Vffenhaim: the
Fins so hard pursued them, that they entered the town pell mell with them. Thus
was the town and the meale-carts, taken both together: for which exploite, who
can deny but the Fins very well deserve to eat white-bread.

About this 20. of July (Stilo veteri) was Duke William of Saxon-Weymar,
Lieftenant-Generall to his Majesty; comne up into Franconia. Duke William
Weymars Story.
This was his march, and Forces. How he and his brother Bernard, had been left
about Schwabland and Bavaria, at the Kings coming toward Norimberg: we leave
to be read in our Second Part. He making toward the Bodensee (called the Lake
of Constantz; so well settled the Switzers with the neighborhood of his Army;
that upon the King of Swedens letter to them (which see page 173. The King of
Sweden then had an Ambassador wtih the Switzers (Chevalier Rache they call
him:) with whom the Duke of Rohan joined his Majesty's mind, to the Switzers:
by which two, and Duke William; were these Cantons brought about, to the King
of Sweden The English and Scottish of my Lord Marquess of Hamiltons Army,
being reduced to 2. Regiments.
of our Second Part) they (both Catholics and Protestants) agreed together to
stop up their passages against the Spanish out of Italy; and to give no aides
unto the Emperor: notwithstanding the vehement solicitations of Chancellor
Wolmar; Ambassador with them for the Archduke Leopold. Duke William having
done this by the middle of June; was sent unto by the King of Sweden, to go
and take on the English and Scottish of my Lord Marquess of Hamiltons Army,
then about Halberstat. Something of whose Story, we demand leave here to impart
unto you.

Of their coming from Magdenburg unto Halberstat in Brunswick-land, we shall
anon tell you. Here, at Halberstat they lay, upon their own money, until
about Low-Sunday, the 8. of our April: at which time, by order from the King of
Sweden, they were reduced unto 2. Regiments. The first was of the English; over
whom was Sir William Bellendine (a Scottish Gentleman) made Colonel, and
Captain Terret Lieftenant-Colonell; They had order to enquarter at
Blanckenburg in the little County of Regenstein, due South of Halberstat. Of
the Scottish Regiment, was Sir Alexander Hamilton made Colonel: who was sent
to lie at Warningeroda, in the same County, within 2. Dutch miles of the
English. are taken on by Duke William Weymar.
Here lay they both Regiments, until they were drawn out by order from Duke
William, to go with him to dis-engage the King from before Norimberg. To meet
with Duke William, they first by a South-Easterly march, go through the County
of Mansfeld unto Hall: where they peec't in with 2. Regiments of Foot more;
the Blue Regiment, whereof Rosse is Colonel: and the Green Regiment, led by
Colonel Wardure. With these, came 4. Foote-Companies of Colonel Mitzvall
Governor of Rain in Bavaria: and a Regiment of Horse, commanded by Colonel
Wedels. The way of their march to him, first.
Thence go they to Lutzen in Misnia where the Battle was after fought) and so
to Zeitz; where they first found Duke William; with some few troops of Horse
and Foot, which were, indeed, but some odd Squadrons of his own guards.
Thence go they to Altemburg, where they stayed two or three days, being well
entertained by the Duke of Altemburg. Thence go they something back again to
Grea, on the River Elster, where they tarryed two days more: and thence to
Greventall, on the edge of the Duringer-waldt. Crossing the said great Forest,
at first to the Southward, they then turn to Hilperhausen; a town of the Duke
of Saxon-Coburgs on the other side of the wood, And with him to the Chancellor
Oxenstiern, afterward.
in Franconia. In the field hereabouts, the Army quartered some 8. or 10.
days: the Duke of Saxon-Coburg sending them some barrels of powdered Venison.
Hither came there another Regiment of Duke Williams: levied among the Boores,
his own subjects. But these Boores were sent back, all but 400. which were
joined in a Brigade with Colonel Hindersons Dragooners, that were then a
raising. Hither also came 5. Regiments from the Elector of Saxony. Two, of
Horse, over both which the Baron of Hoffkirch was Major-Generall: one of them
being his own, and the other the Prince of Anhalts. The other three, were
Foote-Regiments: 2. of their Colonels being Vitzdumb and Potlitz: whose
Lieftenant Bosen had the Regiment after him. Duke Williams whole strength
These made up Duke Williams 6. Brigates of Foot; complete numbers. The first
Brigade was made up of the 2. Regiments of our nation: 8. Dutch companies being
put to them: that is, 4. of Mitzvalls, and 4. of Steinbocks. This Brigade was
commanded, by one Colonel one day; and by to'ther, another day. The second and
third Brigades, were the Blew and Green, before mentioned. The fourth was of
the new levied Boores of Duke Williams: and the fifth and sixth were of the
Elector of Saxonyes: 600 Musketeers being put to them. Besides all these,
there was a Squadron of almost 600 men, which went for a weak Regiment. These
altogether, might make up some 8000 strong. Of Horse forces, had he first his
own Regiment; secondly, General Baniers Regiment, commanded by Isler, that
was his Leiftenant-Colonel: which two Regiments made up some twenty Cornets;
besides two companies of Dragooners; belonging to Grimes and Lather, two
Scottish Captains. The Dragooners ride like Horsemen: but they fight on foot.
From Hilperhausen, went the Army to Kunigshoven: and thence to Schweinfurt upon
the Main; where the Duke entrenched. Hence was a Partee of 500 Musketeers,
sent to plunder a little town, some half a-dayes march from Schweinfurt:
whence they returned with good Booty.

Here stayed the Army some 10 or 14 days: and the Chancellor Oxenstiern and the
Landgrave of Hessen, being now about Wurtsburg: All this Relation of Duke
Williams, received I from Leiftenant-Colonell Terret, Captain Feilding, and
Captain Leg, then present in the Action.
the two Armies about August 10th, moved one toward another, and met about
Kitzing upon the Main, due East of Wurtsburg: altogether encamping on the
Eastern side of the river, next unto Norimberg. Thence after four or five
days, go they Southerly toward Winshaim on the river Aisch; midway betwixt
which Kitzing and Winshaim, marching by General Baniers and Duke Bernard of
Saxon Weymars Quarters: whose forces joined with them at Winshaim. And their
march out of Bavaria; turn we back again to bring up, until this their
joining with the other Armies.

The King at his last coming out of Bavaria, left the General Banier with an
Army about Auspurg: whose business was, to observe the Bavarians, and to keep
the new Conquest in as good order, as the enemies would let him. The two
Brothers of Saxon-Weymar, (William and Bernard,) were left with an Army on the
out side of Bavaria; about Memmingen in Schwabland: who with Sir Patrick
Ruthven, were to look to Ossa, the Leopoldish, and the Imperialists in that
Circle: those, namely, already in the country betwixt the Lech, the Danubye
and the Bodensee: The Story of Duke Bernard, and Banier since the Kings coming
out of Bavaria.
or which were in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg or Alsatia; who were still Masters
of that corner of Germany. Their chief Leaders were Ossa (both General and
Commissary, for those parts) Eggon Count of Furstenberg, and Hannibal Count of
Hohen-Ems: which two, having no Army, nor Military Commission from the Emperor
(that I hear of) did but labor by raising the Boores (their Tenants and
neighbors) to keep their own Lands quiet: Hohen-Ems, his; at the South end of
the Bodensee; and Furstenberg, his; The rest of the Actions of this corner,
shall be spoken off in Gustavus Horns Story.
beyond the Bodensee and the Schwartz-waldt betwixt Wirtemberg-land and
Alsatia, toward the Rhine-streame. In Alsatia, the Emperors two Generals were
William (called) Marquess of Baden, and the Count of Monte Cuculi: of all
which we shall speak in their order.

That Duke Bernard after the taking of the Town of The Maps write Isne or Ine,
and Isnau.
Isnau among the mountains toward the Bodensee; had also taken the Count of
Hohen-Ems prisoner in his own Castle by Bregentz and the Bodensee: we have
partly told you Page 172 of our Second Part. This done, while Sir Patrick
Ruthven and Colonel Schavalitzi were employed on the Wirtemberger side of Vlm
and the Danubye; the Imperialists (as Page 179 we there told you) were busy
about Ehingen. To that town (his brother William being now gone to take on the
Scottish and English) turns Duke Bernard. Duke Bernard takes Ehingen.
Saturday, June 23, came he before the Ports: those breaks he open with a
Petard; and by sound of trumpet after his entry, commanding the townsmen to
avoid the slaughter by taking them to their Houses: he puts 150 soldiers to
the sword: who had before surprised the Swedish Officers. Whilst Duke Bernard
was thus in action about the Danuby; the Leopoldish forces, were as busy about
the Lech; sixty English miles to the South-East of this Ehingen. There, about
the 20th of June, reprise they Fuessen first, and Schonga afterward: the
Townsmen befriending them. Thence advance they more Northernly toward
Ansburg; infesting all places about Landsperg: where the Citizens also admit
them. They by night surprise the Cloister of Munsgrett; and there put a troop
of Swedish Horse to the sword, making the Captain prisoner.

The Bavaria Major-Generall For Altringer was now Bavariaes Felt-Marshall.
Cratz, in the beginning of July, recovers Munchen again: and the fifth of the
same month by the invitation of the Townes-men, are some troops of his
admitted into Friedberg, within five English miles of Ausburg. General Banier
had, till now, been employed toward Tirole, June 16, he went from Ausburg,
with four Regiments, and twenty Pieces of Canon. Then besieged he Winegarten:
which was taken on Sunday July 8th: before which, himself in person was upon
occasion of Cratz his coming so near Ausburg; sent for back again. His Army
upon the taking of Winegarten; made those of the Imperial Towns of Wangen and
Ravensperg, flee into Bregentz. Lindaw on the Bodensee, was sorely now
frighted. and the Army should have gone further to stop up the passages in the
Alps of Tirole: to keep the Italian Aids out of Germany. The particulars of
all which, I for brevitie here omit. He being now returned to Ausburg, hearing
of this perfidiousnesse of the Friedbergers, sends the very next day, (Friday
July the sixth) to reprise the Town again. The gates are blown open; and the
Bavarians cut in pieces: just as they had done to seventy Swedish in the Town,
which were laid there, as the Safe-guards of it. And to make the Townes-mens
false-heartednesse, an example to the rest: the Swedish putting the women and
children out of the town, burnt it quite down to ashes.

By this time is Duke Bernard returned from Ehingen, against these people of
the Archduke Leopolds. Coming near Landsperg, the Citizens, fearing to be
served like those of Friedberg; meet and present their Keys unto the Duke; on
their knees begging their lives of him. The same do they of Schonga: the
Leopoldish still voyding the country before his coming. They still retiring
up the Lechs side, Duke Bernards defeating of the Leopoldish Forces:
to Rosshaupten; there the Dukes men were too quick for them: for lighting
there-abouts upon two troops of Dragooners, and one of Carabines; the
Weymarish killed some thirty of them, and rowted the rest into Fuessen. and
recovering of towns from them, upon the Lech.
At the heels of them, the Duke now follows; and his summons to the Town
being refused; he presently carries it by Petards and Scaladoes. Here were 1500
men of Altringers old Regiment, in garrison: 300 of which being in the heat of
slaughter, cut off; the rest flung down their Arms, and gave up their names
to serve under the Dukes Ensigns. Here was Altringers brother in law taken,
with the Lord of Diederickstein, and other Officers. Here the Duke passing over
the Lech; surprises three Forts betwixt the Towns of Ernberg in the mountains
and Reutte upon the river Lech: into which, the Duke having put good garrisons;
returns his Army over the Lech again, and advances toward Donawert.

This was about the 24 of July: by which time there had a new command comne to
Banier and him, to hasten toward Norimberg. The State they left Bavaria in.
And they were by this time at indifferent good leisure. Now had Banier
recovered Munchen, and chased Cratz out of the Country: and now too, had Duke
Bernard well cleared the Lech of the Leopoldish: So that leaving the country
well garrisoned, and Sir Patrick Ruthven to guard the rest; they now begin to
draw together toward Donawert; and so to march into the Bishopric of
Aichstet; and by that into Franconia.

In the beginning of our August, the two Generals put themselves upon their
march: going first unto Weissenburg; 20. English miles North of Donawert. Cratz
knew his old Quarter: and hereabouts, and at Wiltsburg Castle (hard by
Weissenburg) offered he to make some opposition. But this came to so little,
Either for not doing enough here, or in Bavaria; did this Cratz (I hear) fall
into Walensteins displeasure: for which he was (as I have heard) imprisoned.
This is sure, that after this time, I have read of nothing done by Cratz but by
Fugger, Altringer, and Monte Cuculi.
that other writings make no mention of it. Now were Banier and Duke Bernard,
within 30. English miles of Norimberg: had they gone (I mean) the nearest way
to it. But this they durst not venture: for besides that they were not strong
enough, to have marched through the country, every where infested with the
Walsteiners; they had been far to weak, too have passed by his great
leaguer. Here, therefore, they begin to alter their course of marching; so that
turning faces about to the left, they make toward the other Swedish Armies in
Franconia. The way they took, was along the Forest in which Guntzenhausen
stands. Thence advancing to the Northward, they come to Rotenburg; and so by
Kregling, to Rotingen: their Army August the 14. meeting with the Chancellors
and the rest, besides Vffenhaim; as we have before told you.

With Baniers Army, came there a noble young Gentleman of our Nation, Master
William Harvey only son to the Lord Harvey; who now upon his return from a
three years travel, in Jerusalem, Constantinople, Italy, etc. meeting with
the Armies: had a generous ambition to see the action at Norimberg: where he
heard so famous a King to be engaged.

Monday August the 13. did Oxenstierns Army pass Kitzing bridge, They join
with Oxenstiern
and that night, peect it with Duke William. August 14. came Duke Bernard and
Banier to them. August 15. they went but 2. English miles: whence the next day
to Neustat on the Aisch. The Walsteiners that had before taken up all the Posts
and Passages of this country, retired still before them, toward their
Generalissimo. August 17. The Swedish encamped not far from Hertzog-Aurach:
which the K. for their commodity, had the other day made himself master of. There
may be an error of a day or twoes time, in the Iournalls of these Armies: which
every Reader would not have observed. But I will deceive them, no further then
I my self am deceived.
Aug. 18. they advance to Bruck, 10. miles North of Norimberg: where the small
river Aurach, falls into the Rednitz. On the Western side of which river, (the
town standing on the East) the Armies entrench for 2. or 3. days: building up
Batteries and Redoubts, in this neerenesse of the enemy. Hither, came the King
himself, and overviewed the Army, as it was drawn up into Battaglia, which
he found to be 26000. marching men, all fresh and lusty. They were 12. Brigades
of Foot, besides commanded Musketeers: but of the Horse I have no certainty.
The Imperialists having here broken down the bridge, the King causes it to be
repaired: over which, August the 20. in the evening, the Army marched:
entrenching the same night before Bruck. Now were 3. Regiments sent over to
take up the passage at Furt: which were the English, the Blue, and the Green
Regiments: who there entrenching themselves; Major-Generall Kniphausen came to
command over them.

A solemn day of prayer being had in the Swedish Leaguer, for the happy
joining, and good success of the Armies: the King quitting his Trenches about
Norimberg, came the 21. Altogether joining with the King, before Walensteins
Trenches.
of August, to meet the Chancellors Army; they likewise advancing to meet
him: joined both Armies together, about 12. or one a clock the self same
Tuesday. All then being drawn up into Battaglia, before the enemies Trenches;
stood there all that day, to make a Brave upon him.

And thus have I concluded this long digression, for bringing up of all the
Kings forces to him: which if the Readers censure, for too long an interuption
from the Kings Story; I must, in stead of answering, crave a fair pardon of
them. And yet to say something toward a Reason. Besides that it had been
pity to have lost all their Stories: I knew not on the sudden, how to drop all
these Armies, out of the clouds into the Kings Leaguer; nor how, bluntly, and
all at once; to shoot them in an Engine, as far as Norimberg: and therefore
have I brought them, fair and softly, upon their feet all the way, out of
their several Stations.

Now was the King resolved, to bring the whole cause, to a day of hearing: and
that as loud, as the Cannons could roar it. He was now full 36000. men in
field; though not all then in Battaglia. The King of Bohemia, (by this time
well recovered of his Leaguer-sicknesse) was in the field with him: The fight
described August 21.
both the Kings being desirous to tempt the enemy out of his Camp, into fair
Campagnia; fully purposed, if that offer were refused, to set upon him in his
Trenches. And so might they if they pleased: Walenstein would not budge a
foot, out of his Quarters. On the Norimberg side of his Trenches, therefore,
the King casts up three great Batteries; and from thence played incessantly into
Walensteins, Quarters: he thundering as furiously upon them again. The Swedish
Musketeers going nearer the Trenches; were with small shot answered from them
again: but neither small nor great shot, did much harm upon one another;
saving only that General Banier, going too near to view a work; received a
Musket bullet in the left arm above the elbow, where it was left sticking.

The next day, the King caused some greater pieces of Ordnance to be mounted
upon his Batteries: some of which, shot 21. August 22.
pound ball, and some 42. Walenstein answering with some, that shot 48. These
roared upon one another for a great time together: but the Kings plainly, did
little spoil upon the enemies. The Walsteiners wisely withdrew themselves, out
the beat and raking of the Swedish Ordnance: which were (after the making of
700. shot) perceived, to do more execution on the earth and trees, then upon
the enemies. Now was it with perspective glasses to be discerned, from off the
Kings Batteries; that there was scarce a Walsteiner to be seen stirring: For
this reason: the King causes his Ordnance to be dismounted: not willing to
smoke away so much powder in squibs; nor to do no more then plowe up the
ground, with the grazing of so many bullets, of that weight and height; merely
shot off at an empty random, Yet one shot let me not omit, because the King
made it. The King (as it is written) spying in the morning, with his perspectiue
from one of his Batteries, a gallant Cavalier mounted and prancing before his
Companies: that surely (says the King) should be either Walenstein or
Altringer; and have at him. Causing therefore a piece to be traversed and bent
full upon him; the King took his level, and bade give fire to it. Up into the
air flew the Cavalier, horse and man: but it proved to be but a Colonel.

The King having dismounted his own Cannon, and given order to have the
Norimbergers drawn out into the Trenches about the Town; he that day and the
next, passes the most part of his Army over the river Rednitz, a little above
Furt, before named. His purpose in it was, to possess himself of a certain
hill thereby: by advantage whereof he hoped assuredly either to batter out, or
beat out, the enemy from his Quarters. This done, the 24. of our August (being
Saint Bartholomewes day) was resolved upon for the general onset. The same 23.
of August, fell there out a skirmish on the further side of the Rednitz,
betwixt the Crabats and the Kings people: at which, whilst, amongst other
Gentlemen Master William Harvey (before named) was desirous to be present; he
was most unfortunately drowned, in passing over the river. A Gentleman he was,
who might one day have merited a place in our own Chronicles; for few young
Sparks were there among the Nobility of any Nation; either finelier made up,
more gentilely bred, or more completely improued. Nor is this more then a
moderate Laudative of him; for so say they, that could judge him: very great
therefore is the loss of such a Son, to his honorable Parents; but greater
will be the want of such as he, to his Native Country.

Walenstein perceiving the Kings intention, he the better to assure his Cannon
and Ammunition; retired himself into the Forest called Altemberg: which
belongs unto the Marquess of Onspach. Here could he make use, likewise, of a
certain old Fortress; which had been a Lodge, (or some such like thing) in
the younger days of it. Here, likewise, did he very strongly entrench
himself; and barricadoed up all the ways, by cutting down the trees round
about him. The hill was high, and very steep: craggie withal, and bushie; so
that it was an impossible thing (almost) to be taken from an enemy, that had
any courage to dispute it. The Duke of Bavariaes Quarters (as it happened) were
at that time nearest to the King and the danger: and among his men, the Canon
bullets mostly lighted.

The great fight August 24.
Bartholmew day being comne; the work was begun with Prayers; for the happy
success of it. So the King of Sweden still used: nor thought he himself
either armed or valiant; till he had prayed. That morning, about nine a clock;
was there a certain Footman or Lackey of Altringers, brought prisoner to the
King: who, (as by pregnant circumstances was afterward collected) had been
purposely exposed by the enemy, to be taken prisoner by us. This slye fellow
very confidently informed the King; How that the most part of Walensteins
Horse, had already forsaken their Quarters, and were about to run quite away
from the leaguer. The King indeed, from this higher ground, saw the Army in
motion: but it was not to run away from their Colors, but with all speed to
possess themselves of the little mountain and old Castle, and another Fort
upon it: which it had been easy otherwise for the King to have taken, and
from thence to have beaten Bavaria, first, and then Walenstein, out of their
Leaguers.

The King by and by perceiving their intention, and again observing the great
advantage of the place: resolved, (which some think he had not, until this
news of Altringers Footman) that notwithstanding the enemy had prevented him
in it; and had now made the action more desperate: yet that it must immediately
be set upon. Putting his Army, therefore, into Battaglia, (as well as the place
would give leave) the King himself led on the Vant-guard of the left Wing:
Duke William of Saxon-Weymar had the honor of the Battle, to cloase up the
Kings right hand: and Duke Bernard, with the Landtgrave of Hessen, brought up
the Reere. Some of these troops, were sent to fall on upon that ruinous old
Castle of Altemberg, on the hill aforesaid. The other part, were still left at
the bottom of the Hill, and upon the sides of it: to lie in ambush amongst the
trees and bushes there, to keep off the Aides and Seconds of the enemy; and to
shroud themselves withal, from the fury of the enemies Canon. This place also
served for a Retreat unto their fellows, should they chance to be overlayed:
the men, besides, being there near at hand, to be sent for upon occasion. The
place, indeed, was naturally fit for such a purpose: for it was a hollow
over-hanging in the hills side; where they lay in Covert from any offense of the
enemy. The order of the Assault was to this purpose: Every Colonel and
Commander was assigned to his Post; 500. men were ordered to fall on: which
were every two hours relieved, with fresh Seconds. These were commanded
Musketeers all; drawn out of the several Brigades: and the Colors staid
with the rest, below the mountain.

And now began the conflict, for the winning and defending of that old Castle;
which proved a medlye of 10. hours long, on both sides. Many a brave
Gentleman, here lost his life; many a Cavalier was here wounded: and not a few
taken prisoners. The King led on his men, with his sword drawn in his hand:
and the Swedish, as if to show the enemy how little they dreaded any thing,
that they could do unto them; and how much they despised danger: exposed
themselves all naked unto the enemies shot; having not so much as any one
Trench or Earth cast up, to shelter them. In this equipage, run they close
unto the enemies Works and Batteries: stoutly and manfully, fall they on upon
them: and with the courage of undaunted spirits, do they rush into the danger.
But the Imperialists as full of resolution, made a most stout resistance unto
the Swedish. For having the advantage, both of the higher ground, of their own
Trenches and Batteries already before hand there cast up: and having the walls
of the old Castle to retreat unto, and to shelter their fresh supplies in:
they maintained it with extremity of confidence. The natural high standing of
the place, gave them all the advantages, that the providence of an enemy could
have forethought of. Thence directed they their pieces with more aim and
certainty, thence fell the Partisans which they darted, with more weight upon
the Swedish: and behind their own Parapets they stood more then half covered
from those on the lower ground: so that more of the Swedish bullets, light upon
the Imperialists Brest-works then into their Breasts.

But notwithstanding all these inconveniences, the Swedish continued desperate,
and the Imperialists as obstinate. The Cannons and Muskets went off all day
long, incessantly: so that nothing was to be seen upon the Mountain, but
flame and smoke: and for the roaring of the Ordnance, the skrikes and
groanings of wounded and dying men, could hardly be discerned. All this was
performed with so much terror and fury, and on both sides maintained with so
much obstinacy; that (considering the disadvantages on the Swedish side) the
Battle of Prague or Leipsich, was not to be compared to it. Regiment attacked
Regiment, one Ensign continued flying against another: until the greater part
of the Foot on both sides, were thoroughly engaged in the medlye. The
Imperialists had 6000. men, then upon the Hill; for the guard of it, and of the
old Castle: those, still supplied from the Camp: and all, so fenced with a
Brest-worke behind which they stood to shoot down, that nothing but their
heads could be seen over it. Thus at length, the Swedes seeing no good to be
done upon it: were enforced to quit the danger; the most of them withdrawing
themselves, unto the foot of the Mountain. The Cannon continued their vollyes
above, still; and some Musketeers were there left, to maintain the skirmish.

In this attempt upon the hill, whereas the King and Duke Bernard had fallen on
upon several places of it: it chanced that Duke Bernards proved far the more
convenient: and that he had gotten the height of the enemies Camp, and could
see down into it. He sending the King word of it, the King dispatched back
Sir John Hepburn to him, to take, and bring a view of it. Whilst Duke Bernard
and Sir John Hepburn were at their view, there was a Ritt-master shot dead,
hard by them: which showed, that the place was not altogether so safe, as was
hoped. Sir John Hepburn having carried the King word, and that it was much the
better place; his Majesty himself came to see it. Which done, you have reason
(says he to Sir John) for what you say: but yet if I give on here, I must do
it with my gross of Foot; whereby I shall leave my Horse and my Cannon naked:
and the enemy, withal, may then choose where he will fight with me; either in
this or that place, or in both together, as he pleases. This passage, I learned
from the right valiant Knight, here mentioned: and that the presentnesse of the
Kings judgment, was approved in it. And this I add of my self; something to
control the rumor of it that ran over Germany, that if the King would but
have descended from his obstinacy, and thought it no dishonor to give over at
the the other Post, and to follow Duke Bernards counsel; that the action had
been ended, and the enemy dislodged.

Most of the Swedes being comne down to the plain (as is aforesaid) there
began another encounter. The enemies Curiassiers then issuing out upon the
Swedish Musketeers, did so much there overlay them; that they forced them to
give ground from them. Colonel Tortenson, and Colonel Erich-Hand; being to
maintain this Post; were both here taken; and the latter wounded, by the
Curiassiers; whilst they bravely endeavored to make their Musketeers to give
on again, upon the enemy. The valiant Baron of Cronenberg with his Regiment of
12. Cornets of Horse (esteemed the flower of the Army) at this time, falling
out, was rencountred by Colonel This Colonel Stolhanshe, (a Finlander by
nation) was sometimes servant unto Sir Patrick Ruthven: and he speaks
excellent good English.
Stolhanshe with 200. of his Finnish Horsemen: who so well entertained the
Cronbergers, that they put them to the rowte: yea and so far pursued them,
till they came under the command of the Shot from the enemies rampires and that
other troops of fresh Horse, sallyed out upon them. It was believed among the
Swedish, that Cronenberg was there mortally wounded: but besides, that I have
since read of him in other actions: he was seen by some Gentlemen of our own
Nation in the Imperial Leaguer, a day or two after.

It has by others been related to me, That whereas the Count of Erpach (a
Colonel of the Kings) was that day mortally wounded upon the place, and
carried off spoiled; the King meeting Sir John Hepburn in the Field; desired
him to make good the Count of Erpachs Post; which he performed.

The night beginning now to approach, must of necessity put an end to that
skirmish: and yet it appeared by the eagerness of the Swedish, that they had
not yet enough of it. Still they continued to ply their small and great shot,
and to offer to skale the mountain, and rampires of the enemies. The same
resolutenesse, was also maintained by the Imperialists: the defendants budging
not a foot from their Stations, and nothing behind hand with the Assaylants.
But that great Moderator and Stickler in all long encounters, (the Night) was
feign at last to decide the controversy. And so began both sides, to fall off
one from another, having lost their sights, rather then their courages. And
thus was there a true drawn Battle made of it: for the darkness being but a
blind Vmpire, could not see to which party, to assign the Victory. The Swedes,
indeed, lost their hopes; and the Imperialists kept their ground. The Swedish,
for all their magnanimous undertakings, could not drive the Imperialists to the
retreat; or beat up their Quarters: nor could they, much less, compel the
Kings forces to give it over. The Horse, (except, some few troops) could not
come to fight; the wood and hill not suffering them to encounter: which had
they done, needs must the business have had a further progress.

The whole night after, did those Musketeers that were left upon the hill,
continue to give fire upon those that defended the old Castle. It prooved a
very wet night: and the King lay in his Coach, under heavens open Canopy. There
was a fire made hard by him, upon the wet earth; (which the rain suffered not
well to burn) about which the Kings servants and officers took up soldiers
lodgings: Sir John Hepburn being also laid amongst them. The King by break of
day wakening, (and being very cold and wet) called unto his servants, to know
if there were any of his Officers of the Field amongst them. They told him none
but Sir John Hepburne; who was but a Voluntier at that present. Him, now, the
King desired to go to those Musketeers on the hill, and to view their
posture: and to see, withal, whither there might be any near place
discovered, where there might be Ordnance planted to batter upon the old
Castle. He going, found how these poor souls, lay all open to the enemies
shot, from the wast upwards; and that the Imperialists had two places of
Covert, one above another, for their shelter: that is to say, one above, upon
the hill; and another Parapett or Brest-worke, lower; whence they let fly upon
the Swedish. He there found, where by casting up a little earth, the Kings
people might approach within fifty paces of the Castle, and mount four pieces
of Canon to batter upon it.

Sir John Hepburn had order also at his going from the King, to go call Duke
Bernard to him; and in the mean time to command his troops. He coming from
his view, met Duke Bernard, and did his message to him: who told him, that he
should not need to go to his troops, for that he had left them with the Count
of Isenburg. The Duke also requested of Sir John, that whilst he went to the
King; he would do him the favor to go and bring his brother Duke William,
unto his Majesty. But Duke William was gone to the King before; so that when
Sir John Hepburn returned to the Coach; he perceived, that they with some great
personages, having been in counsel together, Whither it were best to retreat
or not? the Retreat had been agreed upon. Thus when Sir John Hepburn reported
to the King, how near to the Castle he might bring four Canons: I had rather
(says the King) there could have been a place found within 500 paces, then
within 50: which would be safer for my people. Hereupon was order given for the
retreat, and to draw off the Musketeers; who came running off presently. And
thus much of the passages of this morning, have I learned from the courtesy of
this Noble Warrior. The most of the rest had I out of a long Latin Letter,
written by the Baron The Letter was written unto his Brother Sir Benedict
Skute, then in London: who imparted it unto me. They are Sons unto the Lord
Skute, Governor of Livonia for the Crown of Sweden: three times Ambassador
into England.
of Dudroff, then present in the action: and from a High Dutch Relation,
written by an understanding Officer of the Army. And indeed it was high time
for the King to sound the retreat: and much better had it been, that a Charge
had never been sounded. It was almost an impossible thing, to get up that
mountain; and Sir John Hepburn (amongst others) freely advised the King the
day before, That the action was not faisible. And by this time it was made much
harder. The Imperialists against this morning, had brought on more great Pieces
upon their Batteries: which must sorely have disordered the Swedish, in their
advancing. The mountain, Castle, and Fort; were all by this time bettered
manned then the day before: and the Imperialists being extremely encouraged,
that the irresistible Swedish Armies, had not already overcomne them; were
sufficiently now provided to entertain them. But the King having attempted
thus much, chiefly to put a Brave upon Walenstein: began now to think of the
men's lives, that were to be cast away upon it. So that having experience by
this time, that the enemy being likely to dispute it, would certainly kill and
spoil him more men, then possibly he could do of theirs; thought it no great
wisdom, to consume too much time, where there was but small appearance of
getting overmuch honor.

Order is therefore given, to have the Ordnance taken off their Batteries, and
that the Musketeers, yet in action, as also those that had been laid in
ambush, below the hill: together with those Horse-troopes, which stood ready at
all assayes, to wait upon the motions of the enemy, should come away.

And this was the order of the Retreat. The Reere marched off, first of all: and
whilst they turn faces about to go homewards, the Van and Battle, stood
their ground, as ready to receive the enemy. The order of the Retreat.
When the Reere was comne to their place of Stand; they there made Halt, facing
about again to the enemy. Whilst they stood, the Battle marched: observing
in all points, the order and discipline of the Reere. When they make a Stand,
the Van advances: the Wing of Horse, before spoken of, at the same time moving
and flancking them. Three hundred Musketeers, with some Cornets of Horse; were
left behind to manne the Reere, and to make good the Retreat: in case the enemy
(which he did not) should have fallen out upon them. And in this goodly order
and equipage, (which was a very beautiful sight to behold) was the Retreat
made: all done in Battaglia, as if they had even then advanced into the Field,
to have charged the enemy. Soon was the Army in their new Quarters; which were
not far from the foresaid mountain.

For now was the King resolved, to entrench himself close unto the enemy;
choosing the place for his new Leaguer, The King encampeth hard by the
Imperialists.
near unto Furt, just without the Forest: yea so near unto Walensteins
trenches, that some one of his greater Pieces, would have ranged her bullet
even to the very Quarter. Early the next morning August 26. was the new Camp
begun to be fortified; that is, upon the open side of it: the backe-part
being sufficiently assured by the woods. And now might the Generalissimo (if he
pleased) have done as much for the King, as he had attempted upon his trenches.
These had been his advantages. His Leaguer was already fortified: but the
Kings Works not perfected, for some days after. He, out his higher ground,
might overlooke the Kings Quarters, and see every motion in it. The Kings Camp
was in a fair Campagnia, and therefore accessible: nor was there any thing in
the way, to have hindered the Imperialists; from falling into the Swedish
Leaguer.

Two or three days after the end of the great rencounter; were the prisoners
and dead, on both sides, ransomed and exchanged. Monsieur de la Grange the
French Ambassador, was sent from the King, into the enemies Leaguer: who
returned with many prisoners: telling his Majesty of many things likewise, unto
the hearing whereof but few were admitted. Major-Generall Sparre was not only
set at liberty by the King, but employed also by him unto Walenstein, with the
prisoners. He made likewise some general overtures of a peace, in which he had
desired of the King, that he might use his own liberty. In lieu of Major
Sparre, was Colonel Leonard Tortenson, General of the Kings Artillery, freely
set at liberty by the Generalissimo: and that with a great complement to the
King; as we have before told you. As for Colonel Erich-Hand (a Swede) he was
to stay in the Imperial Leaguer, till his wounds were cured. In the Bill of
the prisoners, that was sent from the Imperialists unto the King: were there
many names read, whose persons were no where to be found among the Captives:
The Prisoners,
by which they were given for dead.

In this former Action, were these men of account slain on the Kings side. The
Count of Erpach, who died of his wounds: dead,
Generall-Major Boethius, a brave man: and Lieftenant Colonel Scepter. Of Duke
Williams men, slain; Lieftenant-Colonel Mackin. Under the Landtgrave of
Hessen, slain, Rit-master Maurice of Malsburg, with Rit-master Craisham,
brother to the Marshall of his Majesty's Army. Of the English and Scottish,
diverse: whose names I have not.

and wounded on the Kings side.
Diverse other Captains, Lieftenants, Ensigns, and other inferior Officers,
there lost their lives; with 7. or 800. common soldiers: none of whose bodies,
fell into the hands of the enemies. There was found sticking in the body of one
of his Majesty's Guards, a bullet of three pound weight. Wounded on the Kings
side, the Counts of Eberstein, Cassel, and Thurne: with Erich-Hand, Rotstein
and Bourt; all Colonels: together with diverse other Captains, Rit-masters, and
other Officers. Of common soldiers, were there some 1500. which were brought
into the Hospitals of Norimberg.

On the Imperial side, lost, 3. Ensigns. Slain, the Lord James Fugger,
Colonel of 1000. Curiassiers, or Men at Arms. This Lord being deadly wounded
and brought prisoner into Norimberg; there expired. He being demanded what he
knew of Walensteins intentions; answered (as some report it) that he meant to
keep himself in the guard he then lay at, and to wage battle no otherwise
then in that posture. But some other report this way of his last words, That
calling for drink, he should say, it is no time to dissemble now; Walenstein
will assault you: Which said, he drank, and dyed. Said to be slain besides,
Colonel Aldobrandino, Colonel Dom Maria de Caraffa: with 5. Colonels more:
though some Gentlemen of our Nation, passing next day through the Camp;
affirmed that they spoke with some of them. These things must be known from
the prisoners, who being about 60. in number, perchance knew not all: the
Imperialists having wit enough to conceal their own losses. Those of the
Swedish side reported it from the prisoners, that there should have been
slain about 1000. Walsteiners: which (upon such disadvantages in the fight) I
think not to be likely. The Corpse of the dead Lord Fugger being sent into the
Imperial Leaguer; the soldiers that carried him, had 25 Dollars given them.

My Dutch Officer reports me a pretty story of a complement (or an allegiance,
rather) betwixt an humble bullet, and the K. namely, how that a piece of the
sole of his Majesty's boot, near unto the great toe of his right foot, was
carried away with a Shot. This bullet knew his duty: for a King should be
touched no higher: all are to stoop thither. Both he and the Swedish Lords
Letter agree, that the Imperial Generalissimo had his Horse that day shot dead
under him: whereas others (then in the action) bid me be confident; That
Walenstein all that day, stirred not so far out of his Pavilion. Sure it is,
that Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar had a horse slain under him: and that his
behavior all that fight, was beyond all expectation, valiant. Walenstein (it is
written) having false notice brought him in the heat of the fight, that the
old Castle was taken; answered with an oath, That he would not believe that
there was a God in Heaven, if that Castle could possibly be taken from him.
This the prisoners reported. And thus have I finished, this most memorable
conflict. Turn we to other actions of less moment, done near the Leaguer.

The King not able either to dislodge Walenstein, nor to bring him into
Campagnia: The King laboring to cut off Walsteins victuals,
cast about, in the next place, how to put another Brave upon him: the same
too, that Walenstein first put upon him, to defeat him (namely) of his
victuals. Having therefore learned by the prisoners, that the provisions for
the Imperial Leaguers, (since the burning of their Magazine of Fryenstat) were
either brought from Bavaria; sends out his Partees to Weissenburg,
or from Newmarckt in the Upper Palatinate: resolves now to way-lay their
convoyes, in both places. Toward Bavaria, is Colonel Sperruter sent: with
4000. or 5000. men, to lie in the wind about Weissenburg; and to have an eye
toward Nordlingen; both to the South-West of Weissenburg. The King having now
learned out, that there were a many Wagons of provision, and Newmarckt.
about Newmarckt in the Upper Palatinate, 20. miles from Norimberg:
thitherward, with all speed, dispatches he a strong Partee of 3000. Horse, for
the cutting off of this Convoy; which he had heard was presently to come into
the Imperial Leaguer. But the Swedish failed of their desire: Walenstein
having taken good order, to have his Convoy well assured. Himself (it is
reported) was gone out with some troops: which the Swedish Partee encountering
withal, missed but little of taking the Generalissimo himself prisoner.
Walenstein in danger to be taken.
His Page was taken, hard by him; who reported, how that his Lord himself, was
glad to retire into the wood. This report went over Germany: but yet I hold
Walenstein with the wisest, to adventure so great a part of the world, in his
own person.

Now were the wars, made altogether by commanded Partees: whose sending out,
was chiefly to get victuals and forage for themselves; and to defeat one
another of it. The Crabats were the only men, for such a purpose; they
acknowledge no 8th. Commandment: for stealing, is one of the great uses of
them, in the Army. These Crabats being lodged in a Castle, some 7. or 8. miles
from Norimberg: would familiarly latche you up, 2. or 300. Horses and Wagons in
a day; and yet play half of it. These fellows, punished the King shrewdly: nor
could his men be ever wary enough of them. They fly out as far as Altorff, a
town and University of the Norimbergers, 15. English miles East of the City.
Here light they upon the poor Scholars; and as well they might have robbed the
Spittle: Agricola, Nesler, Some Actions with the Crabats.
and Bruno, Professors there, they carried away: and put poor Genus and
Species, to their ransom.

A little after this, did the King employ Lieftenant-Colonell Cratzenstein with
some troops of Cavallery, to lay out for these mad Crabats. Cratzenstein had
advice brought him, that they were now out toward Newmarckt. Thitherward makes
he. Being comne as far as Pelling, within 3. English miles of Newmarckt; a
knave-Boore of the Town, (one of their Receivers) spurs Cut, and rides and
tells the Crabats of it: who having a gift (they need no Spell for the matter)
when they are like to be over-matcht, to make themselves invisible; played now
least in sight, and ran away toward Altorff. After goes Cratzenstein; but
thence were they gone also. Having in this town rested his people, a while; he
advances toward Castle; a town upon an hill with a rich Monastery at it,
upon the river Lauterach, 12. or 13. English miles East of Altorff. Here lights
he upon 2. reverend Jesuits, one of which, willing to save himself by getting
out at a window, missed some footing or stayer of the ladder (it seems) brake
his neck with the fall: and so, per saltum, took his Degrees backward: the
other Father (but of how many is a quaere) being carried to Norimberg: became a
ransom for the Professors of Altorff. Hard by Castle, but nearer to
Pfaffenhoven: is there pretty Castle, where a Cornet of Crabats were
enquartered. Cratzenstein now forcing the place, cuts most of the Crabats in
pieces; carried away their Lieftenant-Colonell with the Housekeeper of the
Castle, prisoners; setting diverse of the Kings soldiers at liberty; which the
Crabats there held in durance. This done, Cratzenstein returns to Norimberg,
with his booty and his prisoners.

All this succeeded well to him; the next encounter, he came not off with, so
fairly. Fleshed with this success, he would needs out again toward
Sultzbach, thirty English miles East of Norimberg. Encountering with no prize
in that desolatred country; to Hambach he goes, hard by Amberg, three or four
miles more to the Eastward. The foremost of his people, there fell into an
ambush of the Walsteiners: who not discovering themselves all at once, put the
Swedish in such hopes of being strong enough for them; that they engaged
themselves to buckle with them. Nor could they see their error, till it was too
late to recover it: for there lost they 80. of their fellows; and he was the
bravest man, that would run away to tell his Lieftenant-Colonel.

In other places at the same time, were the Foragers out on both sides. Diverse
skirmishes, among commanded Partees.
A Swedish Partee, ranging toward Newmarckt, chanced upon 2. Cornets of
Crabats of about 150. in the woody country betwixt Retenbacht and Feucht, 7.
or 8. miles South of Norimberg. Falling roundly to it; the Crabats lost the
odd 50. upon the place; and some of the rest were in their flight so knocked
down by the Boores of the Country (whom these arrant Powlterers, had made their
good friends) that but a few of them recovered to their garrison of Newmarckt.
The Crabats from out of the Leaguer about this time, stealing over the river of
Rednitz; cut the throats of some Swedish Sentinels, about Furt; cut in pieces
Captain Fuchs and his whole company, almost, which had the guard that night.
At Eybach, one Dutch League South of Norimberg, there fell out another
skirmish: where after the exchange of some bullets, and the death of 40. men on
both sides; the Swedish were feign to give it over: for that the Imperialists
retyring themselves, by degrees, toward their own Quarters, (then close at
hand) did but train the Swedish into the danger.

A day or two after, the King himself would needs abroad, to discover the
posture of the enemy: and it was much about the place of the last encounter.
The King had some choice Lads, along with him; some of which scowring the coast
before him, discoverd by and by, The King goes out upon a Partee.
a good Squadron of Imperial Hosemen. The King bade charge; and the
Walsteiners made at them again: so that there fell out some rude brushing
between them. At last, every man of the Swedish being as good as two, where
the King was one: the Walsteiners went by the worst of it; 150. men they left
upon the place, diverse prisoners they left behind them: and the rest ran away
as hastily toward their Leaguer, as if they did it to carry news, that they
had seen the King of Sweden.

A little after this, a strong Partee of Crabats, cut short some Swedish
Foragers; even as they had almost recovered to their Leaguer by Furt. Two
hundred horses and Wagons, they took from them, and made the Foragers glad to
go home, without that, which they had labored for. Thence go the Crabats to
Lauff, 2. leagues East of Norimberg: putting themselves there into ambush to
entrap some Swedish Convoyes. It chanced, that a good company of Wagons and
laden horses, passed by shortly after, from about Rotenberg; 4. miles to the
North of Lauff. The Crabats falling out upon the Booty, cut in pieces both the
Wagon-drivers, and their guards: and vouchsafing to turn Carters themselves,
they drive the Wagons toward Engelthal. It happened, that there were diverse
Bidets or Saddle-horses, of some of the Kings own Gentlemen, that went lier,
by; now sent for from grass, for that the King was about remoouing. The
Gentlemen hearing how likely they were to serve on foot; petitioned the King
for a special Partee to make out after these Crabats, that had unhorsed the^.
The King himself would needs do his Ge^tlemen the service, to go out with the
Partee: guessing at their haunt; the King advances toward the same Engelthall:
The King defeates some Crabates.
whereabouts (as luck was) then finding them; He kills 100. upon the place,
recovers all the Wagons with his men's Horses, and some other pillage besides,
which the Crabats had there hoarded up, into the bargain.

The King having an item, a little after this, of 20. Cornets Imperial Horse,
that purposed to go from Forcheim, to spoil Grefenberg, a town of the
Norimbergers, some 18. miles North of the City: goes with the King of Bohemia,
to have a course at these Imperialists. But they having notice of it, had no
desire to stay and kiss the 2. Kings hands; but recommended their safeties, to
their spurs; and escaped by good Horseman-ship.

The King presently upon this, had a design, to have put Duke Bernard, with a
good part of his, and Baniers Army into, and about the town of Liecthenaw,
(not far from Onspach) which belonged unto the Norimbergers. Walenstein, (as
we told you in the beginning) had offered before at the taking of this town;
but had been put besides it. It was kept by one Scheverlin, a Patricius or
City-Gentleman of Norimberg. His fear now fore-dooming, that because the King
had not been able to dislodge Walenstein, that therefore he was too weak for
him: Walenstein gets Liechtenaw.
delivers over his trust unto the enemies of his Country; when as no apparent,
but a suspected necessity, drew it from him. The loss of this town and Pass,
shrewdly defeated the Kings projects: helped to make him what Scheverlin had
suspected him; the unabler to remove Walenstein. For now, besides the
victuals found in the town; Walensteins other provisions out of those parts,
came the freelyer into his Leaguer: the most of which, the King might have cut
off, could he but have formed an Army thereabouts.

Other smaller bickerings between commanded Partees of both Armies, I
purposely omit: for that these petty particulars, do less concern a general
History. And now the King perceiving that all these slighter encounters, would
not do the great business; and that it now proved true, which had so often
been confessed to him: namely, that Walenstein most firmly was with himself
resolved, to tire him out with the expectation of a Battle; and that he would
upon no other terms accept of the encounter, then such as with extremity of
disadvantage, he should be enforced unto: judges it his best course, to leave
the sullen or temporising General, in the fastness of his Trenches; seeing he
would not be trained out unto a Field-Battell. For point of action and honor,
the King conceived himself to be beforehand with his adversary: seeing he had
so often bidden him base at his own gole; and that the Lyon-couchant would not
out of his Den, no further then he were rowsed. Careful, The Kings reasons
for his rising from about Norimberg.
besides this, of the State of the good City of Norimberg, his Majesty was:
which his late increased Army had overcharged; his sick men, and dead horses,
both pestered and infected. His own Army began a-pace likewise, to deminish:
he had lost (at least) 10. or 12000. horses, (I have heard more) the rest, for
want of forage being likely enough to follow. His men, withal, grew thinner
every day and thinner: for what with those that had been slain with the
sword, or dead of the flux and other diseases; and what with those that were
wounded, taken prisoners, or had run away; he missed full 10000. of his old
Army. His Quarters grew very nastie and noisome, with the multitudes of dead
horses, which lay where they fell, unburied. The rest of his Army, wanted
ayring and refreshing: no enemy being so terrible to brave spirits, or so
weakening to able bodies, as the long lying in one place, and the ordinary
diseases, of a Winter-Leaguer. Resolved likewise he was, to do as much for the
Imperialists, as they had done for him: to cut off, namely, their provisions
from them: and that part of it, especially, with which their Leaguer had been
served, out of the Bishopric of Aichstet. His Partees he resolved should fly
abroad, every where, for the same purpose: his Army he was minded to increase,
with new levies: and with them, to fall into some of the Emperors or
Catholicke-Leaguers lands; and so to force up Walenstein; by a diversion.

Some have disputed it with themselves, Whither the King should not have done
better for himself, to have risen long before this? so soon, namely, as he
was made able to get away, by the coming of the Chancellor to him with the
other Armies. Then surely, had he saved a great sort of men and horses; and
sooner had He gone, sooner must the Generalissimo have dislodged.

When the matter was put to be decided upon a Carpett, Whither it were best for
the King to rise or no? The chief hinderance of the resolution was, the Kings
care for the safety of the Norimbergers: who were indeed very fearful of
themselves, that so soon as He were gone, they should be besieged. But in that
care, the King was eased by his Major Kniphausen: who offered it upon the
forfeiture of his head, to keep the town with 4000 men, in despite of all
the enemies. How the King contented the Norimbergers, concerning his rising.
The King taking him at his word; sent him into the town to propose the
conditions unto the Magistrates, and to know what they would do in it. The
conditions were, That they should give Quarter and stipends, unto the
Soldiers, left for the guard of them: That they should take down the old
great Leaguer, and contract it; so as with 4000 men, it might be made
defensible. The Magistrates, though something fearful, at first; yet so well
did Kniphausens arguments content them, that they came out to treat with the
King about it. He told them, that they might safely rely upon Kniphausen; he
had, upon His knowledge, fought in a village: and he knew he would do much
more, in so well a fortified City. His Majesty, besides, told them, That he
would leave his Chancellor with them: whose person he would not adventure, but
upon a place that he put confidence in. As for besieging of their town, that
(he assured them) was not at all to be feared: the enemy, he knew, was too
wise, at that time of year to set him down before such a town; and
especially in the neerenesse of a royal Army, which had so often sought to
fight with him. These arguments, and the seal of the Kings royal word to
them; passed for security with the Burgers. And so the rising was concluded
upon; and 2 days before, order given for it: whereupon the sick and wounded
men were sent into Norimberg: where a many sick could not be relieved, but
starved in the streets.

The next day to this, was the 7th. of September; The 7. of September kept
Holy Day.
the famous Anniversary of the great victory of Leipsich: which was ordered to
be kept Festival by most solemn Thanksgiuings, both within the City and in
the Kings Leaguer.

The piety of the day being over-passed, and Generall-Major Kniphausen having
3000. men (in stead of 4000.) left with him for the defense of the Trenches and
Norimberg: Loebelfinger being the ancient Colonel of the City forces; and
Colonel Slammersdorff put into him: the King resolves upon dislodging. Before
his rising, I read that he sent out Duke Bernard, to take in Schwabach, 8.
miles South of Norimberg: both to give the Norimbergers a little more air, and
something withal, to trouble Walensteins Convoyes out of the Bishopric of
Aichstet. Some talk of Rot and Carlspurg, and other towns, then likewise
taken about Norimberg: but I cannot perceive, why the King should trouble
himself in taking in these small Strengths; seeing He most certainly
concluded, that Walenstein would not lie long after His going. This of Rot and
Schwabach I have but out of Le Soldat Suedois; whom singly, I credit not.

Saturday September 8th. the Kings Army dislodgeth. The King rises.
The King marched by, and almost round about, the Imperial Leagure, in fair
order of Battle: with Colors flying, Drums beating, and every way as if
they had been ready for the encounter. And Walenstein knew, as well as
themselves, what the Royalists were now about: this was the day, that he had
long looked for. So far therefore, was he from disturbing of them, that he
called in his own Guards and Sentinells; and still kept himself within his
Trenches. and arrives at Neustat.
That night, lay all the Kings Army at a small Dorp: and the next day September
9th. with safety arrived at Neustat upon the So called for distinctions sake:
for that there is another Neustat in this Franconia, upon the river Stray, hard
by Konigshoven.
Aisch in the Marquisate of Onspach, 20. English miles to the North-West of
Norimberg. Here lay the whole Army, September 13: on which, the King removes it
from Neustat, unto Winshaim, upon the same river of Aisch, 14. miles South of
Neustat.

About this time, came the Deputies of Franckford unto the King: of whom he now
borrowed a great sum of money. In security hereof, his Majesty then empawned
the Palace and Revenues, sometimes belonging unto the Master of the Dutch
Order: which (as we told you Page 20. of our Second Part) lie in and about
Mergentheim upon the river Tauber in Franconia. Hither also came the
Ambassadors of the Muskovite and Tartarians: to offer the King their assistance
to fall into Polonia: which he refused.

Here at Winshaim, the King getting notice, of Walensteins being gone toward
Forcheim upon the river Main; and of the Duke of Bavariaes keeping still with
him: he lays the plot how either to devide the 2 Armies, or how to divert the
seat of the wars, out of Franconia into Bavaria. For the King now judging by
their keeping together, that their plot was to see what He would do: he
resolved to begin first; and either to make a division, or a diversion. Two
designs he might suspect that Walenstein now had: either to fall upon the
towns of Franconia, which the King last year had conquered: or else to rush
into the Duke of Saxonyes country, which He well knew, that Walenstein had
vowed the spoiling of.

The King devides his Army.
For the prevention of both these, he resolves upon the deviding of his own
Army: some whereof he would leave with Duke Bernard in Franconia, to observe
Walenstein, and to guard the Mayn-streame from him: and with the other half,
himself resolved to march up into Bavaria. These Regiments, I am told, the
King took along with him. Horse Regiments. 1. Oem's Regiment: 2. Corviles. 3.
Stolhanshe's. 4. Steinbocks; 5. Tysenhausens: with some others that are in the
Figure of the Battle of Lutzen; and were not with Duke Bernard. These might
make some 3000. Horse: besides which, he had 300. of Steinbocks Dragooners: and
whilst part of them go toward Bavaria:
which Dragooners used now and then to ride with him, for the usual Guards of
his Body. Of Foote-Regiments, these waited on him. First, Count Neeles with the
Life-guards, 2. Carl Hearts Regiment. 3. Winckles. All these, came also back
with him: besides which, there likewise went up some others, whom the King left
in the Country, under the Palatine Christian of Birckenfelt: whose names I have
not. With Duke Bernard, he might leave about some 10. or 12000.

Those that He purposed for Bavaria; September 15. were sent Southward toward
Rotenburg: himself also purposing to have gone along with them. This thought
of His, was by a message from Norimberg, thus diverted. His Chancellor
Oxenstiern sending him news, of Gallas his besieging of Lauff with a Partee of
2000. men, and some 3. or 4. pieces of Ordnance: He resolves to relieve the
Town and coape with Gallas, if he would stay for him. Taking therefore 2000.
well mounted horse, and 1500. Musketeers along with him, (which were all
commanded men, Himself goes toward Norimberg.
and chosen out of the whole Army) he goes with these toward Norimberg. Being
comne near unto Furt, His Majesty was there met by Chancellor Oxenstiern, and
Major-Generall Kniphausen; who informd him, that Lauff was already taken, and
Gallas gone toward Voitland and Bohemia. The King, upon this news, Presently
turning back, to overtake his Army.
staying but one hour there, for the refreshing of his people; returned with
all diligence, back toward Onspach; and so onwards to the rest of his Army,
whom he overtooke at Dunkelspiel, in the way toward Donawert, and Bavaria.

At this Dunkelspiel, which is 6. leagues to the South of Rotenburg, did the
maine body of his Army arrive, Friday September 21. His next Stage was at
Nordlingen, 4. leagues further: where Tilly, last year, made his
Winter-Quarter. Hither came he upon Satterday September 22. The week before,
Some Switzers come to aid the King.
had 4000. or 5000. Switzers (12000 some name) passed by this way toward
Donawert, to be there conjoined to the Kings Army. They were led by Colonel
Wormbrunt: and their way was from Schaffhowsen and Dutling, and so along the
Danuby.

By this time had the Count de Monte Cuculi, with some of the Duke of Bavariaes
people, (whom he found in the country) and some few Florentines, (lately sent
in from their Master the great Duke of Tuskany, to the aid of the Bavarian)
laid siege to the town of Rain upon the Lech in Bavaria, near Donawert.
Colonel Mitzval, whom the King had left Governor there; made not such good
resistance, as was requisite. The town, though not excellently, yet was it
sufficiently fortified: Victuals and Ammunition, he wanted not: of men, he had
13. good Companies, Horse and Foot: which were hands enough to have made good
the place, for a longer time, against a far greater opposition. I read of no
breach yet made, but one threatened, and prepared for, is not unlikely. Some
write, that Mitzval was in the name of his Company, threatened by one of his
Ancients, that if he would not yield the town, they would: but they that say
so, Monte Cuculi takes Rain in Savaria.
cannot prove that Mitzval either punished Ancient or soldiers, for the
mutiny. Others affirm, that he had the consent of a Counsel of War, of all
the Officers of his garrison for it: which had it been true, then would not
the King have executed him for it. How-ever, September 25. did Mitzval conclude
upon rendering, the next day marching out with Bag and Baggage, and all good
conditions for a soldier, though not of one. The King took off his head for
it: and so would he have done of all the 8. Captains of his Regiment, but that
her Majesty the Queen of Sweden (who was comne all this expedition with her
Lord) by the potency of a sweet and gracious intercession, prevailed with the
King for a pardon for them.

The King now comne to Donawert, made all the have possible, to relieve his
town and garrison in it, from Monte-Cuculi: but was not able to do it on the
sudden, for that the town was on the contrary side of the Lech to him. And it
much concerned him: for that by the taking of this town, the Partees of Horse
that should be lodged in it, would mightily disturb the trading and other
intercourse, betwixt Ausburg and Norimberg. Preparing, therefore, to recover
it; he advances toward Oberendorff upon the Lech (hard by Rain) where there is
a house or Castle of the Fuggers: near which, there was a bridge over the
Lech, as Page 139 of our Second Part, we have told you.

This Castle, was guarded with 150 men: and for the breaking of the bridge on
that side next unto the King; were there some 250 Crabats now comne, These the
King coming upon after they had burnt the bridge, but before they could get to
Rain again (where they should have been taken over) he cuts the throats of
all the 250 Crabats, The King overthrowes 400 Crabats, etc.
together with the other 150, that were the guards of the Castle; and took
seven Ensigns from them. Hereupon fell he to repairing the bridge. About the
27th of September, was this done, and the Bridge-worke begun upon: which
(strange it is) that Monte-Cuculi did little or nothing in the hinderance of.
He was skared, perchance, and lays a Bridge, over the Lech.
by that wonderful passage over the same Lech, which the April before, the
King had made; and how dearly it had cost Tilly to oppose it. He was now also
taken off, by the distrust to his own strength; and made, I believe, the more
have to look to Ingolstatt and Regensburg; and to stay thereabouts for the
Duke of Bavariaes coming, which was within 8 or 10 days after.

The King being, the second time, passed over the Lech: in a misty morning (one
of the first days of April) comes before Rain; ere perchance he was
discovered. The fight of the town, and besieges Rain.
is low and plain: on one side, fenced with the river and morassy hollow
ground; not fit to be entrenched on. The other part, had the King, at his last
parting from Bavaria; given order unto Mitzvall to new fortify. This is the
East side of the town; and upon that, was the King feign to make his
Approaches. Four hundred men, had Monte-Cuculi left within it: who, either for
that Mitzvall had made the place heartlesse and unlucky; or for that the fame
and fortune of the King, were so irresistible in Bavaria, as that it were but
folly to stand out against him: they within two days, so soon as ever they
had felt but a few pieces of Battery: Rain yielded to the King.
send out to demand composition. But the King being angered for his Mitzvals
late disgrace; would afford no other terms unto the garrison, but for the
Horsemen to go out without either Horse or harness, and the Foot, like
footmen; without other Arms, then their swords only.

And thus was the town as easily recovered, as it had been lost: saving that
the defendants, this last time, had the honor to be overcome by the King of
Sweden. October the fifth, the King caused Mitzvall, by a Council of War to
be condemned; and the same day, in sight of the whole Army to be executed:
establishing another Governor within the town; who needed no other schooling
to look better to his Lesson; then to see his Predecessor ride the scaffold
before him. This was done at Neuburg, some ten or eleven miles Eastward upon
the Danuby: The King going as far as Newburg, to pur^ue Monte-Cuculi.
whither the King had by this fifth of October, retired with his Army. Thus
far was the King comne, to have pursued Monte-Cuculi; and (as 'twas believed)
to have besieged Ingolstat. But Monte-Cuculi finding himself too weak, was
with his flying Army of 500 Horse, and 4000 Foot, retired along the Danuby unto
Regenspurg. Some troops of Horse, had the King sent off after Monte-Cuculi;
and the country was full of noise, of the intended Seige of Ingolstat. Diverse
pieces of Ordnance, were for that purpose already sent for, out of Ausburg and
Donawert; the Kings Commissaries and Quarter Masters, were already gone before
that way-ward, to take up victuals and lodgings for the Army: Boats and other
materials, were providing at Neuburg to be sent down the Danuby toward
Ingolstat, to make Bridges. Provisions were also commanded to be ready at Vlm,
for the victualling of the Leaguer: and the garrison of Ingolstat, sorely of
late, wasted with the pestilence; every day expected another plague of wars,
to be coming toward them. Nor were these preparations, only whispered of:
but Art, perchance, made the rumor ring so much the louder, that Walenstein
might likewise hear of it. But he either did not, or would not listen to it:
nor could any noise from Bavaria, frighten him out of Saxony.

About these preparations, here at Neuburg, was the King, till the eighth of
October: and was the next day provided for, to have gone personally into
Ausburg. But this happiness of his Presence, the Ausburgers were defeated of:
the King, the same day, being gone with all speed back to Nordlingen.

The cause of this so sudden departure of his Majesty; was an express Packet
that night received from his Chancellor; that Walenstein having quit Franconia,
is diverted by the news of Walensteins falling into Voitland.
was now falling into Voitland, to undo the Duke of Saxony. The King,
therefore, knowing how earnestly the Elector had heretofore been pressed by
Ambassages; feared, perchance, least the power of a vowed enemy, might by
adding violence unto persuasion, shrewdly prevail to draw him off from the
party: and resolved to quit his former purposes for Bavaria; and to make have
with all speed, to deliver Saxony. And in this was the difference of tempers
and good dispositions betwixt the King and our Generalissimo, to be discovered.
The King was first in Bavaria, and yet would not the Duke of Fridland for his
friends sake, do more then lend him his Altringer; with his, and Coloredoes
Regiments; for the defense of his Country: but himself would not a foot out
of his pace and march, for him. But the King, for his friend, on the other
side; was not difficult to leave his former conquests in Bavaria, to the hazard
of the now returning Duke; and to adventure his life to save Saxony. And yet,
(to deal with the ingenuity of an Historian) there was something else in it
too; for that Walstein by falling into Misnia, put fair for it, to have cut
off the King, both from his friends in Mecklenburg, Brandenburg, and Pomerania;
and from his retreat out of Germany.

whereupon, leaving 12000 men in Bavaria, with the Palatine Birckenfelt,
The King, therefore, now leaving as many of those Switzers that were newly
comne to him; and of some new levied Forces, besides so many of those which
himself had lately brought up with him, as would make up those already in
Bavaria, 12000 men Horse and Foot, under the command of the Palatine Christian
of Birckenfelt, for the guard of Bavaria: himself with the rest, goes back
again toward Norimberg. Sir Patrick Ruthven Governor of Vlm, was now made
Sergeant-Major-Generall unto Birckenvelt; and Colonel Strieff, was constituted
Leiftenant General of the Horse to him. Ausburg, Rain, and Donawert, were left
well provided: and so took the King his last leave of Bavaria.

he returns with the rest toward Norimberg;
His Majesty now leaving 17 Cornets of Horse, and all his three Regiments of
Foot, to follow fairly after him: himself with a guard only of some Germane
Horse, and Steinbocks 300 Dragooners; made all the have he could, back again
unto Norimberg.

Whilst the King was upon his way to Norimberg, had the General Major
Kniphausen, besieged Lauff: which the King (we told you) before his going to
Bavaria; was on the way to have reskewed. Kniphausen had 1600 Foot, and 200
Norimbergers Horse, with two pieces of Ordnance, before the town; and two
days had he besieged it, before the Kings coming had been heard of.
Kinphausen besieges Lauff.
The third day, by a breach made with his two pieces, he took the town: the
garrison in it, retiring themselves into the Castle. Betwixt the town and the
Castle, was there a Bridge; which for have they could not stay to burn or
break: but had only torn up some of the ioyses and timbers, and so left it.
Kniphausens men making shift to pass this bridge, came to a little gate of the
Castle: which offering to force open; the garrison presently yielded up,
without any other conditions, Lauff taken.
then at mercy. The Governor (a Bohemian by nation, and but
Lieftenant-Captaine to a troop of Horse) remained prisoner; with some 80. or
100. more of his soldiers: all which were afterward carried prisoners unto
Norimberg.

Kniphausen now in possession of the Castle; 7. Bavarian Horsemen (not knowing
of it) came that night on the landside, to the back gate of the Castle, to
give notice of Colonel Munichs coming with 12. troops or 1000. Horse, and
300. Dragooners, to the relief of it: desiring to speak with the Governor,
and to advise him to hold out the Castle. The Swedish Sentinel that took
their message, had the wit to conceal the Castles being taken; and to go and
tell Kniphausen of it. Kniphausen presently sent the late Governor to these 7.
Horsemen: by some trick, or other, to get them into the Castle. The Governor
being afraid to be hanged, as his Predecessor the Norimbergers Governor had
been, when Gallas took the Castle: durst not but do his best to ingratiate
himself with Kniphausen; and did indeed entice 3. of the 7. into the Castle.
Kniphausen learning by these, of the Bavarian succors now coming to relieve
the place; had a plot also how to have gotten Colonel Munich himself into the
pitfall. This was his stratageme. A pretty Stratageme.
He causes some out of the Town, to give false fire, all the night, against
the Castle: and others out of the Castle, against them again; as if they had
been still in skirmish. It Was 10. a clock next morning, ere Munich came; by
which time having notice of the taking of the Castle, he did but show himself
before it: after an hour retyring himself back again. He being gone,
Kniphausen returned unto Norimberg.

The day of the taking of the Castle, (which was Friday October 21.) did the
King arrive at Norimberg: the very next day being desirous to go out upon a
Partee. His men were these 700. The King being returned to Norimberg,
commanded Horse, and 300. Dragooners, led by Colonel Steinbock (a Swede)
which had been his guards hitherto, out of Bavaria. The King now going out,
meets Kniphausen coming home: and of him he learned, which way Colonel Munich
was retired: which was first to Hersbruck, goes out upon a Partee:
and so toward Felden. The King thereupon commanded Kniphausen to turn back
again with him after the Bavarians: for (says He) I Will not go home again
without doing something. The Kings march, lay by Herschbruck, a good walled
town of the Norimbergers, which Gallas had also taken in. and leaving
Kniphausen to take in Herschpruck:
There the King left Kniphausen, with his own men and 2. pieces, to reprise
it; which he did, within an hour after the Kings going.

The King pursuing Munich by the tracke: light upon some of his people, as they
were resting themselves at Schlucten, and another village, hard by Felden. Many
of these were Crabats; whom the King had the killing of 300. upon the place;
with the taking of some 2. Cornets, and diverse prisoners. The King having
caused the villages they were enquartered in, to be first surrownded, and then
fired; had the knocking of them down, as they start out to have escaped. Some
Relations tell me of 600. Bavarians, that should be enquartered in a village
betwixt Altfelt and Eismansberg, a little East of Herschbruck, who should have
comne out of Reichelswang Castle: himself surprises and defeates Munich, in
his Quarters.
and were of those that should have relieved Lauff. And these (it is said) the
King at one a clock at night falling upon; cut off a great many, took 50.
prisoners of them; the rest saving themselves in Rotenberg. But I suppose both
these, to have bin but one action; for that the taking of 2. Colors is
mentioned in each of them: and then I am sure, the first first relation is the
truer; for that it was told me by a very understanding Gentleman, at the same
time with Kniphausen, (and very familiar with him) in the Actions both of
Norimberg, Lauff and Herschbruck. This done, the King October 15. betwit 5. and
6. in the evening, returned again into Norimberg.

And thus had the King once again cleared all the towns of the Jurisdiction
of the Norimbergers, So that having vnblockt Norimberg;
and unblockt the City: immediately resolves upon returning to the rest of his
Army in Franconia, and so through Duringen into Saxony. And for that himself
was likely to have more use of his forces against Walenstein, then any
employment the Norimbergers had for them: he takes with him those 3.
Foote-Regiments of Kniphausen, Gerstorff and Rosse; which at his first going to
Neustat he had sent unto the City for their safeguards. These Regiments, with
those other 3. that were following out of Bavaria; might make up some 6000.
complete: and about that number of Foot, had Duke Bernard in his Army. Both
together, might make up some 6500. Horse. And this was the Kings whole
strength, (and after the largest reckoning too) in the day of the great Battle
of Lutzen.

The King October 17. taking his last leave of the Norimbergers, goes himself
with Steinbocks old Convoy; to follow Duke Bernards Army: his own men, He goes
toward Duke Bernards Army.
both those that came out of Bavaria, and those that were now drawn out of
Norimberg; following as fast as they could, after. October 19, the King came to
Kitzing upon the Mayn; 40. English miles, to the North-West of Norimberg. Here
his Queen then was; who thence went toward Wurtsburg: whence after a few
days, She came unto Erfurt; being gotten thither, before the Kings coming.

And here having mentioned Duke Bernard and his Army: let us now go back a
little (in the mean time that the Kings own Army is upon their march, this
way-ward) to tell how he passed away the time, ever since the Kings going from
him into Bavaria.

The King (as we told yon) parted from him about September 15: whose charge to
Duke Bernard was, Duke Bernards Story, in the Kings absence.
To observe the motions of the Imperial Generalissimo; and well to guard the
Imperial town of Schwinfurt, with all the rest upon the Mayn-streame, from
him. For this purpose, had the King left him an Army of some 9000. or 10000
men: or at least, so many they were voyced for.

This young Duke, some days after the Kings going; remooues from Winshaim
first of all, unto Kitzing upon the Mayn: where he staid 6. or 7. days. That
is, toward the very end of September. Thence advances he to Wurtsburg; where
the Army staid 7. or 8. days, being enquartered in the Suburbs. Thence goes he
to a Dorp within half an hours going of Schweinfurt: where he was 3. or 4.
days more. About 9. or 10. a clock the last of these nights, the Army had
sudden order to remove to Schweinfurt, and quartered there under the very
walls of the town. The occasion of this remoovall was; for that the
Imperialists having some Horse Partees abroad, were likely enough to affront
this their open Quarter. Here staid Duke Bernard but one day: removing the next
toward Konigshoven, and enquartering short of it. Some fortnight before this
time, had Dubatell with his Dragooners, been sent into Coburg Castle: as in
Walensteins proceedings we shall after tell you. Page: 803.
The Soldat Suedois reports, that Duke Bernard before this time should have
defeated 40. troops of Crabats, under the command of Isolani their Colonel
General, and chiefest Commander of their Nation. But of this airy defeat;
those Gentlemen of our Nation, all this time with Duke Bernard knew nothing:
nor do I believe Duke Bernard to have then been strong enough in Horse, More
of Duke Bernard see in Walensteins Proceeding.
to have beaten Isolani, with 40. of his Cornets: which could not be less
then 3000. But to return.

From Konigshoven, went Duke Bernard unto Hilperhausen, and enquartered short
of it. And now might he do what he pleased in the country: for that Walenstein
was a week or 10. days since, gone quite out of Franconia into Vottland. From
Hilpershausen, go they unto Schleusing: Quartering by it: and hither came the
King to them. The King himself, I mean, attended on by Steinbock and his
Guards only; his Army being still behind, The King comes to Duke Bernard.
upon their march toward him. This was about October 21: so that in 14 days
he had marched from Bavaria into Duringen: and stayed three at Norimberg. The
next day, the King cashiered the English, and Scottish Regiments; and that by
reason of the extreme weakness of the Companies. These being thus made
Reformadoes, were ordered by the King to wait upon his own person: he
promising them good Quarters, and to prefer them. Thence went the King with
Duke Bernards Army, through the Duringer-Waldt the next day, unto Arnstat, 9.
English miles further, and in the County of Duringen. And here staid he 6.
days, that is till his other Army was October 27. comne up to him. That day,
went the Chancellor Oxenstiern back from the King toward Franckford; to order
things thereabouts, and in the Palatinate.

Simon and Iudes day, October 28. whilst the conjoined Army advanced before,
toward Erfurt, just 8. English miles North of Arnstat: the King staying behind
a while, wrote his last letters unto the King of Bohemia: which letters are in
the hands of many Gentleman. About an English mile without Erfurt, in a very
fair Campagnia; The King musters.
was the whole Army drawn up into Battaglia: the King taking a view of every
Brigade; and appointing their place and orders to each of them. Now were diverse
Regiments reduced into one Brigade, being too weak each of them, to have stood
by themselves against an enemy. His numbers.
The whole Army was found to be about 12000. Horse and 6500. Foot,
indifferent completely.

Hither the same afternoon, came 4. of the chief of Erfurt, to invite his
Majesty into their City: for thither was his Queen the same day arrived. The
King answered, that though he had much to say unto their Magistrates, yet knew
he not how his leisure would serve him to come among them. He that writes this,
was one of the 4. that now were the Kings enviters: who affirms, that the
Kings words were so gracious; that he could not without shedding of tears,
repeat them. Toward night the King came: a lighting from his Horse before
Duke William of Saxon-Weymars lodging: who having a long time layne there
sick, the King now went to give a visit unto. Lodges in Erfurt.
Returning thence, he went on horseback, to his own lodging: before which,
upon the Market place; he was received by his Queen and her Ladies. His
Majesty leading his Queen up the stairs into her own Chamber, returned
quickly into his own: where a great many of intercepted letters were presented
unto him. These having scarce perused, he was called out to Supper: Duke Ernest
of Saxon-Weymar being entertained with the King and Queen, That Duke Bernard
was not now there, we shall by and by tell you the reason.
at the same table. Scarcely half an hour, had the King been at the table;
but that he rose, and went to his own lodging.

Having spent a great part of the night in dispatches, giving order for
letters, and sending away of Posts: he rose again in the morning very early.
Having broken his fast and taken his last leave of his Queen; he then gave
audience to the City Magistrates, who there waited for it. To their Speech, did
the King himself return a long, and very pleasing answer: of which, these
were the last words. You know, that in humane affairs, there is no constancy;
and that for our sins sake, the wars, of all things else, are most
uncertain. Some mischance or other, may soon fall out, concerning my person:
which if God Almighty pleases so to have, let me earnestly now desire you to
continue faithful unto my dear Consort; The Kings speech to those of Erfurt.
do, as becomes honest and upright men; and so I heartily pray to God, to
bless and preserve you. Thus having said; leaving the hearers all in tears,
he took horse, and followed after his Army. And these passages of the Kings,
would I not omit; for that every word and action, so near his end; may well
deserve to be Chronicled.

The Count of Pappenheim some 2. days before this, had been hanckering
thereabouts, in his march from about the Weser toward Misnia: and certainly,
had not the King made this extremity of haste to Arnstat, Pappenheim would have
taken Erfurt. Word having been now brought the King, of his late being at
Butstet in this Duringen, 12. English miles to the North-East of Erfurt: Duke
Bernard sent out after Pappenheim.
the King had sent away Duke Bernard with 1000. Horse; to fall upon Pappenheims
Reere-guard. But Duke Bernard came too late: Pappenheim had already hastened
along through the County of Frieburg; there passed the river Sala; and conjoined
with Walenstein about Mersburg.

The Kings Army following after, Quartered the first night in a little Fleck or
Market town, 3. Dutch miles from Erfurt. The second day, it advanced much
about the same proportion: and the 3. The King comes to Naumburg.
day it arrived at Naumburg on the East bank of the river Sala, which parts
Duringen from Misnia. This was November the first 1632. Stylo veteri.

The King having had notice in the way, how that Felt-Marshall Lieftenant Holck
(for this new Title was devised for him, upon the coming of Felt-Marshall
Pappenheim, into the Generalissimo's Army) had demanded of the town of
Naumburg, the rest of that money which they had last year promised, (and not
fully paid) to the General Tilly, to be spared from being plundered: and that
Holck withal, had sent in 36. Musketeers to lie there, in the name of a
Safeguad for the Town. The King upon this intelligence, had dispatched Colonel
Brandistein away before hand, Brandistein sent by the King, to take Naumburg.
with a Partee of Musketeers to recover the Town again; for that his Majesty
now purposed, to make his Quarters at it. Brandistein the last of October,
(very early in the morning) presenting himself before the Othmars Port,
demands in the Kings name to have it opened to him. The Sentinels made him
answer, that they would inform the Magistrates first of it. But Brandistein
never purposing to stay their answer, claps a Petard to the Gate and breaks it
all to pieces. He was scarce well settled in the Town, but about 9 in the
forenoone, comes there a Squadron of 600. Imp. Horse, to have Quartered
themselves within the City: but hearing of the Swedish Harbingers being there
before them; they turned bridle again, and went to inform their
Generalissimo. The next day about noone, came the King himself into the Town:
his Army passing by the Bridge over the River Sala: which marching before the
Gate called Saint James's, their Quarters were laid out for them upon the
highways, that lead to Zeitz and Leipsich. The weather was very cold now; so
that the most of the Army, lay within the walls of the town: though every man
could not get a Billet, for good Quarter in it.

The Townes-men of Naumburg were not only glad, but secure; so soon as ever
they had the King of Sweden amonst them: even as confident, as if they had
seen their Tutelar Deity, or that their Angell-guardian had been comne to
their protection. This carnal confidence of an over-joyed people, the good
King having by reflection applied to himself: he became (clean contrary to
Herod's humor) the more humbled by it. And desiring, withal, to make the same
impression in the people, which he felt within himself; for that it had been
too uncivil to have chidden the men for their good wills to him; he thought
upon this handsome way of preaching it into them, in the presence of his own
Preacher. The second of November, therefore, calling his Chaplain of Honor,
Doctor Fabritius unto him; Mr. Doctor (says the King) Our affairs are in a
very towardly condition at this present; A most religious speech of the King of
Sweden.
every thing going on, as well as our hearts can desire. But I fear, I fear,
that because every man does so adore and honor me, even like a God, as it
were, that God Almighty will thoroughly punish me for it, at one time or other.
But my God knows, that I take no delight in it; nor am I desirous of it. Now
let be as pleases God: This I know, that seeing the Action is for his own
glory, that He in his own good time will bless it with a most prosperous
issue.

To see how holy men, can foredoome of their own ends! and that the words of
dying men very oftentimes have becomne Prophetical! What could King David have
said more? And now, whilst the King for some few days, gives rest unto his
Army, and prepares for the great day of Battle: let us (according to our
method, in our former Books) go back awhile, to fetch up his great
Adversaries Story: and that from the time of their late parting about
Norimberg; till we have brought them into the field together.

The Proceedings, Of the Imperial Generalissimo the Duke of Fridland. His
discamping, deviding of his Army; own Achievements; and his joining with
Holck, Gallas and Pappenheim. All Historically led along from his rising from
before Norimberg, until the day of the Battle of LVTZEN.
THose two great Antagonists of our times, his Majesty of Sweden, and his
Excellency the Duke of Fridland; were now becomne the publickest persons, of
our Christian World: scarcely was there any one man, of all the affectionates
to the Protestant Party, (that dealt for but 50. pounds a year) but the King
of Swedens proceedings, had some secret influence and activity, upon himself
and fortunes. For the Duke of Fridland; we first see, how much straining among
the Catholic Party there had been, to set him out; how many fears and hopes,
did still depend upon his conduct; and what a weakness and emptiness, there
was in the whole Empire besides; all the time that the strength of it was under
him, employed against the King of Sweden. Whilst all men were in expectation,
what the Norimberg Leaguers would come unto; that mighty and vaste body of the
Empire, grew feebler still and feebler, in all the other parts of it: which,
when Walenstein gat at large, was by the succors sent out of his Army, iollily
cherisht and nursed up again.

So feeble was the Empire at home, even in its own Austria; that it was
neither able to kill; nor so much as to shake off, its own vermin: (for no
better were they at Vienna esteemed) those These Boores rise not for Religion
(they were not Protestants, all) but by reason of the new taxations. And
therefore when they sent to the King of Sweden for Leaders, he refused them:
nobly scorning to conquer his enemy, by his Rebels.
mutinous Boores, I mean, which became troublesome in the Over, Ens and upon
the Danuby, in a popular Commotion. Every where abroad, had the Swedish Armies
the better; and the Imperial the worst of it. Horn was victorious in Triers
and Alsatia, and had thence frighted out Ossa and Monte Cuculi. Arnheim and
Dubalt, had utterly, almost, beaten down all opposition in Silesia: and would
have suddenly been at very good leisure, either to have converted their Arms
upon Bohemia; or to have sent home forces enough, to have thrown Holck out of
Misnia. There was little to do about Bavaria, till that Monte Cuculi had just
now broken in again. Cratz (falling into Walensteins displeasure, as I hear,)
was sent away prisoner to Vienna: and in his absence, Fugger did but shufflle
up and down, in those quarters. Duke Julius Administrator of Wirtemberg, The
State of the wars abroad, when the King and Walenstein parted.
and Sir Patricke Ruthven about Vlm and Overland; were still upon the getting
hand in the Circle of Schwaben: there being no maine Army in the field,
constantly, to oppose them thereabouts; but some few forces of the Archduke
Leopolds, and the Boores only. The Army under General Wrangle (with whom Sir
George Fleetwood is, with his English Regiment) had a quiet Quarter of it, in
Prussia: the Pole, (whom he was set but to observe) being busied now at home,
about the election of their own King; and in fear of the Muskovite from
abroad. The Swedish garrisons about Pomern and Mecklenburg; wanted work: and
the Spaniards and the Lorrayners, were as good, at this time, as quite outted,
all over Germany. Of all the Imperial Generals, was Pappenheim only able to
wagge: and he, indeed, made a scambling kind of war of it in the Lower
Saxony: whom yet the Court of Vienna had desired, to join with his
Generalissimo.

And this was the constitution of the Swedish Armies, when the King and the
Duke of Fridland, rose from about Norimberg: the Kings men, had either no
action at all, or every where (but in the lower Saxony) the better of it. The
same power (now) that had given them these advantages; would every day also
have increased them: and the Imperial Armies were brought to that pass; that
they were every day in danger to be beaten: after which it was likely to be a
long day, ere they would be re-enforced. This was one of the reasons, by which
the Duke of Fridland used to excuse himself, from fighting it out with the
King of Sweden: for (says he) if my Army be overthrown, Walensteines reason
for not fighting.
the Emperor my Master can hardly (at least not this year) bring another Army
into the Field: whereas the Swedish will quickly recreute their losses, by the
emptying of their garrisons. Just the answer of a Turkish Captive, unto the
Christians. The loss of an Army to the Grand Signior, my Master, is but like
the shaving of his beard, the bush will grow again: but it is like the lopping
off a limme, to the Christians, never to be recovered.

All this could hardly have been avoided on the Imperial party, could but the
King of Sweden have lain long enough by it, to have made Walenstein rise
first: who might not then have divided his Army, to relieve other places (which
thereupon must have suffered) but have kept all his power together, out of the
expectation to be foughten withal. But this, the Kings necessities before
spoken of, prevented.

The Duke of Fridlands late coming unto Norimberg, was to coope up the King of
Sweden: by which first act of his power, he seemed, at first hearing, What
Walenstein had done all this time upon the King,
to have gained this reputation unto his cause; That he had, at least, put the
King of Sweden to a Demurrer, if not utterly Nonsuited him. For this service,
was the Generalissimo (as he deserved) much courted and thanked from Vienna:
his discreet conduct in it, extraordinarily applauded by his Master: yea and
his authority (upon demand) by anew Imperial Commission, strangely now
augmented. The Kings necessities having brought him to it, That he must needs
rise first, or lie still and do nothing; Walenstein contented himself with
this honor, That he had put him to these necessities.

The King being first marched off; and Walenstein by his espialls assured, that
it was no plot in the King; no trick to wheel about, and to assail him in
another quarter; He rises:
but that he was already set down at Neustat, for the refreshing of his Army:
he, having no more to do here, resolves also to be rising. This motion was
much put forward by these and the like reasons.

First, Should he lie long, other places must suffer: and his reasons for it.
so that there was a present and a pressing necessity for him to relieve other
places, with some of his forces. The Generall-Adjutant Zinzindorff, is
therefore sent with 2. Regiments into Austria; to repress the Commotion of the
Boores, there. Gallas is with 4. Regiments, dispatched through the Upper
Palatinate into Voitland, to enable Holck to do the more mischief there, and
in Misnia: so to enforce the Duke of Saxony, to recall his Army out of Silesia.

Secondly, He perceived his mighty vaste Army, to waste away apace. Some
thousands had been slain; many dead, and run away; diverse spoiled, and made
unserviceable. The bloody Flux reigned mightily in his Leaguer: and the
soldiers great complaint was, of an extraordinary want, both of Physic and
of Surgerie.

Thirdly, His Horses, (the pride and strength of his Army, at his first
coming) began now to die apace: of which he had at least 14. or 15000.
starved, and yet I speak much within compass, of what I have heard. Their
Carrion was very noisome unto the Quarters: and yet had his men taken better
order, then the Kings people had, to carry away and bury them.

Fourthly, The Kings labor, he knew, to be one of these two: either to cut off
his victuals or provisions from him; or else to fall into some friends country.
If the King, now, should do the first, then could not he lie long: and if the
second, then would the King have gotten the start of him. The greatness of his
spirit being to be of the active, fore-hand; to make the King of Sweden follow
him; and not he to follow the King of Sweden.

Fifthly, The Town of Norimberg, though it had been part of his errand for
coming thither; yet besides that he should be likely to loose his labor, in
attacking a place so well-provided for resistance: he did not think it
Souldier-like done of him, to sit taking of one town, whilst his enemy should
be conquering of whole Countries. For Norimberg, therefore, he took order to
have it still blockt up; by Gallas taking of Lauff, and other towns and Passes
about it: and for the rest, he would try Masteries with the King of Sweden, who
should divert one another.

Sixthly and lastly, he might doubt, That when the King of Sweden should have
well ayred, refreshed and recreuted his Army: and have provided himself of new
Horses: that he were then likely enough to return a-fresh upon his Leaguer;
and then either put him to fight, or starve by it.

Which of the two Armies, could then have found the sharper swords, or the
fuller Bandeliers; must now have been left unto the trial: but the
Walsteiners, by having the stronger place of encamping, and the fuller
knap-sacks; prevented their being put unto that trial.

Wednesday, September 12th, was the day appointed for discamping. Repairing the
Bridge, therefore, over the river Rednitz a little North of Furt: he there
wafts over his whole Army: not half so great now, as when he first came to
Norimberg. Some writing tells me, that Walensteins remoovall was by night: but
in that (me thinks) his haughty spirit is much injuryed: he that upon a march,
forbids to have the Ports shut where he Quarters: would never, I suppose,
steal away by a dark lantern. And that it was not in the dark, was visible
enough at present: for the Soldiers not only set fire upon their Huts and
Quarters, at their rising; but upon the Country too. A hundred Dorps and
houses, were now dressed up in flame, in the Marquisate of Onspach, and the
Jurisdiction of the Norimbergers: as if to sacrifice to Mars or Bellona, with
this Hecatomb. Foul wars, or no wars, is a Maxim among some soldiers,
otherwise not cruelly minded: but Walenstein is not so well made up in this;
for that his haughtiness wants an alloy or temperature of pity, in it. The
Crabats, sure, had done nothing extraordinarily worthy of a triumph: and yet
could they not find in their hearts to leave the Country, without kindling of
100 Bonfires in it. Nor is this the first time, that Walenstein has done so:
but as if he this way affected, to be called the Thunderbolt of War; he nor
goes nor comes, scarcely, but in flames and flashing, and in this imitated
lightning.

All the time that the Imperial Army was marching by, the Swedish Forces in
and before Norimberg; stood cautelously upon their guards: and the Army being a
little past them, some troops of Horse (as usually in such cases they will
do) fell out of the town and Trenches, and exchanged a few bullets with their
Reere; though little or nothing to the purpose. I omit the Norimbergers rifling
of the forsaken Leaguer: where for want of Horses, the Imperialists had left an
incredible world of Military luggage behind them. This, as it showed how
excellently well provided, Walenstein had comne into the Field: so it was a
kind of Justice, to leave the Norimbergers something of good value behind them:
to pay themselves withal, for the courtesy and cost, they should bestow upon
the many maimed and sick soldiers; which were there found a starving and a
stinking. This is the guise and fortune of the wars: nor can these who have
been bred full tenderly have their mothers with them in the Leaguer, to look
to them. By these was the want discovered, which since the Kings going, was
increasing every day more then other: and the reasons given (which we have
before pointed at) for Walensteins discamping.

The deviding of the Imperial Army,
A little beyond the City; is the Imperial Army divided. Zinzindorff (as we
told you) is sent to Austria: and Generall-Major Gallas with part of the Army,
goes Eastward toward Lauff, of Gallas, we shall tell you altogether, by and by.
two leagues from Norimberg; which having taken, with some other towns, to
keep the Norimbergers blockt up: he marches by the corner of Bohemia, into
Misnia. The two Dukes of Fridland and Bavaria; turning faces about to the left;
come the first night unto Bruck, ten English miles to the North of Norimberg,
and six from Furt. Walensteins way,
The river of Rednitz, he still kept upon his left hand: which was a sure
barricado on that side against the King of Sweden. Walenstein in deviding his
Army, had this good consideration: that having sent away his two great
Officers, Holck before, and Gallas now: yet it was but to the place where he
meant to follow them; or could, if he were put to it, presently recall them.
His meaning was, to undo the Duke of Saxony: and thither had he sent these
two. Himself advanced now toward Duringen: and thither was it agreed that
Pappenheim, from the Weser, should come and join with him. This was
Walensteins happiness, that the place marckt out for his revenge, lay so
conveniently for him.

Numbers,
The numbers of his Army, were not above twelve thousand (besides nine or ten
thousand of the Duke of Bavariaes) Foot, or fifteen thousand complete
marching men, (at the most) and nine or ten thousand Horse: and so much had the
King intelligence of. The rest of his sixty thousand, had been killed, dead,
run away, sent other where, with Holck, Gallas, Zinzindorff and into Bavaria:
put into garrisons in the Upper Palatinate: or left behind, sick and maimed,
in the Quarters: for certainly, both Walenstein and the King, lost more for
either of their parts, at this lingering Leaguer; then the King and Tilly both,
at the great Battle of Leipsich. Walenstein at his first rising, had given
order for the sending before of some of his greater Ordnance, unto Forcheim:
for guarding whereof, he supposed a small Convoy would be sufficient. and
order of marching.
Some Swedish Horse-Partees (as it chanced) were at that time gone abroad into
the Bishopric of Bamberg: who being by the Boores discovered unto Walenstein;
caused him to countermand his own order, and to have his Ordnance, from
thence-forth, to march with the gross of his Army. Where the breadth of the
way would suffer him, there he advanced in Battaglia: the Dragooners with their
Muskets, Shovels, and Mattocks, (with which they still ride) were ever sent
before, to make good the Passes: and the Crabats, (being his nimblest Horse)
were still left behind, to bring up the Reere of the Army. And in the
souldierly wariness of this equipage, he marches unto Forcheim: for in the
neerenesse of an active enemy, it much concerned him to be thus wary.

The Army being come to Forcheim; was there in a friends Country, and in good
Quarter: and there I find Walenstein to have stayed about ten days or a
Fortnight. Here had he notice first given him, of the King of Swedens going
with half his Army toward Bavaria: and of Duke Bernards staying with the
other half, about the Main-streame. According to this intelligence, he now
disposes of his Forces. The Duke of Bavaria, being most startled at it; desires
to take leave of the Generalissimo, with his part of the Army: requesting that
Altringer with his Regiment and Coloredoes, might go along with him, for the
direction of the Militia. The Duke of Fridland grants it; and himself waiting
(as he called it) upon the Duke of Bavaria, as far as Bamberg: Bavaria parts
with Walenstein, to go homewards.
after a few days he takes leave of him, with much seeming courtesy and
solemnity. Courtiers enough, they were both of them: and both of them though
high-spirited Princes, yet so artfully commanding of their own carriages; that
though each of then were conscious, how much cause they had given one another
to dissemble: yet with studied words and faces, did they full masterly control
all that stomach and disrespect, by which they had thoroughly, heretofore,
enchafed one another. The Duke of Fridland seemed to have forgotten, that ever
Bavaria had procured him to be cashiered from his Generallship, in the Diete of
Ratisbone: and Bavaria gave the Generalissimo never a note in the Margent, how
often (since this Leaguer) he had been feign to wait, to get to speak with
him. They are fellows in Arms, from hence forward: they protested to serve
one another, in all good offices; and to second one another, upon all
occasions. One thing was noted between them, in this vieing of Complements:
That Walenstein was not so supple and active in his cringes, as old Bavaria.
But this, (what ever his great Spirit meant by it) he excused by his Gowte, and
other his unweildynesses. Leaving therefore, Bavaria to his march, homewards:
we will wholly apply our selves to our Title, which is Walensteins Proceedings.

Early, September 24. went the two Dukes with the greatest part of their Army,
and 48. Pieces, from Forcheim toward Bamberg: which is 16. miles to the North
of Forcheim; where the Main drinks up the Rednitz. September 27. He is still
in and about Bamberg, and those Quarters: so that his lingering thereabouts gave
a shrewd suspicion, of a meaning he might have to the Imperial City of
Schweinfurt, Walenstein suspected to have a mind at Schweinfurt;
which is seated upon the Northern bank of the Maine, some 25. English miles
to the West of Bamberg. Of this Schweinfurt, was the Swedish Colonel
Carl-Hart, Governor: who sending to Claus Hastfer, Governor of Konigshoven;
24. English miles to the North, and toward Duringen: did from him, about the
24. of September, receive some forces, for a strengthening. Much about the same
time, had Colonel Dubadell (who still has the command of a Regiment of
Dragooners) also marched in thither, with 13. of his Companies. Duke Bernard,
likewise, upon Duke Bernards making that way,
being by the King entrusted with this Schweinfurt; did presently upon this,
advance thitherward.

All this appearance of resistance, caused the Imperial Generalissimo (it is
believed) to alter his determination for Schweinfurt: and now wholly to convert
his Arms, alters his resolution:
against the Princes and Countries, of the 2. Electorate Families of Saxony and
Brandenburg.

Of this latter Family, was the neighbor Marquess of Bayreit; uncle to young
Onspach: whose Country for distinction from his Nephews, is called the Upper
Marquisate. This Prince, is also Marquess of Culmbach: and both these towns
with their Jurisdictions, Walenstein now purposes to have about with. From
about Bamberg, therefore, in the end of the month; sends he some forces unto
Bayreit, falling upon the Marquisates of Bayreit,
43. English miles Eastward. The town, they took without much opposition: the
Burgers, for their peaces sake, consenting to give him 10000. dollars down
upon the nail, and hostages for as many more. Kreutzetz, a pretty town of the
Marquesses, some 6. English miles to the South of Bayreit (for what offense, I
read not) is given for pillage unto the soldiers: who have leave given them,
to make up what pay the Generalissimo was behind hand with them, upon an
enemies Country.

Thence, goes the Army toward Culmbach town; and Culmbach.
the ordinary residence of the Marquess; 12. English miles to the North-West:
near which, the 2. original streams of the river Main (the Red and the
White) do in one bed make an alliance betwixt their Issues. This town being
far stronger then Bayreit, had put it self into a Posture of resistance.
When as September 21. it had by Walensteins letters been summoned in the
Emperors name, to be yielded to him. In this if they obeyed not, he threatened
fire and sword; to kill and burn all. Being put from Culmbach.
The City suspecting his friendship to be as pernicious to them, as his enmity;
sends him the denial. Hereupon his men now breaking into the country; to the
full, perform as much, as their Generalissimo had threatened. They sometimes
also are bold to come near the town, and to give it summons: but these being
answered by the Cannon, they finding themselves likely to get nothing here, but
leaden and iron dollars; hot sent them out of the mint: content themselves to
have burnt the Mills about the town, and to have plundered the villages, and
then to draw off their Army.

And now have at the House of Saxony: whose lands lie all the way from hence,
to the very Elb. From Culmbach, therefore, go they unto Coburg: 22. English
miles to the North-West of Culmbach: and so far due North of Bamberg. The
town and fair Castle here, belongs unto the Duke of Saxon-Coburg, uncle
unto the Dukes of Saxon-Weymar: and that was one of Walensteins quarrels to it.
A second was, for that the Duke of Saxon-Coburg, with the Marquess of
Culmbach, had the 7. of May before; conjoined their forces with the Swedish
Colonel Claus Hastfer: to make an Aenslaught upon the town of Cronach,
belonging unto the Bishop of Bamberg. This enterprise, though through the
cowardice of the Boores employed upon it, it had miscarried; yet had it given a
just occasion to an enemy, to be revenged of the affront-offerers. Walenstein,
hereupon, presenting his gross before the Town; found not the same opposition
here, which those of Culmbach had before made him. The town being thereupon
entered: thoroughly enough paid down, for the ransom of its own cowardice: and
affoorded pay enough unto the soldiers; considering their small pains in
taking of it. Here, were many a rich Pack and Bale of merchandise, made prize
of: which having been sent toward Leipsich Mart, by the Merchants of Ausburg,
He takes the towns of Coburg.
Norimberg, and other places; were just comne into this town, to be sent
onwards, a night or 2. before that Walenstein came before it. The Dukes Palace
within the Town, fell also to the soldiers ransacking: which the Duke, in the
fear of an old man, having with too much haste forsaken: had there also left
his household stuff, with a great part of his treasure. And this was done, in
the very beginning of our October.

The town being thus mastered, and laying siege to the Castle,
the Castle is next summoned: into which, a little before Walensteins coming;
Dubadell having gotten, from out of Schweinfurt: he now had the command of it.
This strong Castle, stands upon a Rock, without the town; but yet so near,
that it looks down into it. The noise of the Summons, is answered, by the
thunder of the Cannon: which being louder then the sound of the Trumpet; would
not let the offered conditions, to be hearkened unto. Walensteins Ordnance,
therefore, are set to reply upon Dubatells Cannon: the Generalissimo having a
great desire, to take Dubatell the second time; and Dubatell being as desirous
to let the Generalissimo understand, that it was a disadvantage which he had
before taken him upon. Walenstein (with much ado) having shot a breach (two
some say) in the lower part of the Castle wall; he about the 3. of October,
prepares all things to give a general assault upon it. Five hundred soldiers,
thereupon, being commanded into the dry Graff or Moate of the Castle; clap to
their scaling ladders, to storm it. A great Ravelin there was, which defended
the Sally-port of the Castle: and that, whilst they attacked; their fellows,
from the towns side, with continued vollyes of small and great shot,
entertained the besieged. Dubatell perceiving the intended Scaladoe; issues
with his Dragooners immediately out of the Castle; going down the hill toward
the skalers. Having with good diligence also, brought down some new pieces of
Ordnance unto a side-Worke which flanckered the Ravelin: he so skowers both it,
and the Moate at the same time: that a many of the assailants, now already
half way mounted; came fluttering down headlong into the Moate, and their
skaling ladders after them. is repulsed by Dubatell.
The Imperial Colonel that had the point in the assault, and ledd them on;
was there shot through the head; and dyed in a ditch among his fellows. A young
Lord or Cavalier, of Walensteins name and kin; I find to have been here
slain also. Some make him to be knocked down by the Boores of Voitland, a
little after this: but I rather consent to this writing, which gives him to be
killed here; for that I read his body to be with much solemnity, carried from
the Camp through Zroicka in Voitland, to be enterred in his own Lordship in
Bohemia; something before that Walenstein was gotten into Voitland. But this is
no great controversy.

Our Generalissimo perceiving the Castle to be strong, high situated, and
raises his own siege.
well provided, and the besieged resolved for defense; he gave no more on upon
it after this one repulse, had been given him. But this was not all the
reason, for the raising of his siege: Duke Bernard Weymar was by this time come
from Schweinfurt to Konigshoven, 17. miles due West of Coburg; and was thence
marched to Hilperhausen, upon the edge of the Duringer-Waldt, within 13. English
miles to the North-West of this Coburg. And he, (as Walenstein might suspect)
though not strong enough to encounter him in the open field, yet was he able
enough to disturb him at a siege. And this siege, above all the rest; for that
Duke Bernard is to be heir unto this Town and Dukedom of Coburg, after the
decease of One of these, is dead since: he namely that was then in possession,
when his town was besieged.
two of his old childlesse Uncles.

Now had our Generalissimo a purpose, to have advanced further to the
Northward, and to have pierced through, by the way of the Duringer-Waldt into
Duringen: where Pappenheim was to have joined with him. But this design was
now defeated, by Duke Bernards putting himself just before him: By Duke
Bernards good service.
which was a very great piece of service. By this means, was the Castle of
Coburg reskeued; and the whole little Country of Henneberg, in which it is
seated. Had Walenstein gone forward with his project: then had Hilperhausen,
Schleusing, Aischfelt, Ilmenaw, and Arnstat, been taken by him. Then had all
the Passes through the Duringer-Waldt, been blockt up by his people, which the
King of Sweden must by main force have again opened, before ever he could
have comne up to Walenstein. Then, in the mean time, would he and Pappenheim,
have recovered Erfurt: with the towns about it: made himself master, of the
whole Landgraviate of Duringen; have over-runne the lands of the Ducall, (and
sometimes Electorall) Family of Saxon-Weymar. Then had he, through that rich
Country, beaten out his way into the Elector of Saxonyes Misnia: have wintered
and enriched his Army in those Countries: and been ready with the first of the
next Spring, is Walensteins great project defeated.
to have fallen into Lusatia and Silesia. Then would he have made himself
master, of the river Elb: and so have cut off the King of Swedens retreat,
home again. Then would Walenstein have cleared his (titulary) Dukedom of
Mecklenburg: and hewn out himself a free passage, to his old Quarters in
Brandenburg and Pomerania; and again possessed himself, of the banks of the
Baltic Ocean. And thus handsomely had our Generalissimo contrived it: the
effecting of which project was worth the abandoning all the lower Saxony, by
the calling away of Pappenheim out of it: and in the highest degree concerned
the King of Sweden, to make such have out of Bavaria, to prevent it.

All the former part of this project, was now defeated by Duke Bernard: the
taking, namely, of the Landtgraviate of Duringen, with the Dukedom of Weymar:
as likewise the conioyning of Pappenheim, with his Generalissimo: which he
durst not after attempt to do, till he knew that Walenstein was fallen by
another way, into Misnia.

And thus was the Imperial General enforced, not to raise his siege only
from before the Castle of Coburg: but to quit likewise his intended march
through the rich, and (of late) un-plundered Country of Thuringia. Turning
faces about therefore, to the right; (his soldiers burning down Helberck,
Neustat, and other Dorps about Coburg) he marches directly by the town of
Cronach, into Voitland; He falls into Voitland.
which his own Holck and Gallas with their Armies, had of late so foully
harryed. It was a deep prepensed resolution in the Generalissimo, to pay the
Elector of Saxony, to the purpose: he was once in a quandary, when as he had
newly taken Prague; whether he should first fall into Saxony, or come against
the King Sweden. And had not the King been so near him, at that very time; in
such danger to have overthrown the Duke of Bavaria, first; and then, in his
absence, to have fallen into Bohemia: he would, (no doubt) have first gone
against the Elector of Saxony.

And now, at him he goes. The Elector of Saxonyes subjects, (the poor Boores
of Voitland) perceiving this second tempest now coming upon them; resolve with
themselves, that the best whood to bear off such foul weather, would be an
headpiece. In great and confused numbers, therefore, gathering themselves
together to be revenged: they with the best weapons, that a rusticall fury,
could put into their hands; first turn fear into despair, and that into
desperateness: which in stead of skill, order, and true valor; they made to
serve their turns against the invaders. Besetting the woods, therefore, and
the bye-waies; which the seeking for their lost Cowes, now and then, had
heretofore made them perfect at: they with as good a will as ever Boores gate
children; knocked down such rambling and plundering boote-halers, of the
Imperial Army; as they could singly light upon, and master. This is he that
rid away with my horse, cries one; down with him: that fellow stole my 2.
kyne, says a second; cut the throat of him: and he, carried away all my wives
ducks the other day, cries a third Boore; knock him down too. All the Quarter
they would give the soldiers, was to quarter those whom they had killed; and
to mangle those bodies, whom they had mawled: as if every blow they gave a
dying soldier, had killed them another enemy; because it (in part) satisfied
their revenge, by the acting of another cruelty. And here (says some
Relations) was the young Walenstein killed: of whom we before spoke, in the
action of Coburg. But the Walsteiners were even with the poor Boores for it; if
burnings, and rapes, and ravages, could cry quittance: for, Making foul work
there:
sure, the wars seemed not here to be made by enemies, but by furies.

The place of this Country of Voitland, is betwixt Duringen, Franconia, Misnia
and Bohemia: and the reason that Walenstein did now enter into it, was partly,
to bear all the country along before him; and partly, to lay the seat of the
wars in an enemies Country. And who can deny this, to have been souldierly
done of him? But that he had first commanded in Holck and Gallas into it; and
did now follow himself with fire and sword, in it: was not so much upon the
barbarism, or tyrannical delight in blood and cruelty; but out of the terror
of a military policy: that with the fear and horror to see his subjects so
used, and his reasons for it.
he might constrain the Duke of Saxony unto a sudden and disadvantageous
composition; with whom the courtships of repeated Ambassages from the Emperor,
had not heretofore prevailed. And who need suspect the constancy of the Duke of
Saxony, that chose rather to endure all this; then to break his League with
the Protestant Princes, and the King of Sweden?

Our Generalissimoes first Rendezvous in this Voitland, was at Plaun upon the
river Elster: down whose stream, at the distance of 60. English miles to the
Northward, Leipsich stands. To this Plaun did the Imperial Vantguard arrive,
upon Wednesday the 10th. of October: the rest of the Army going toward Weida,
on the same side of the Elster, 12. miles nearer unto Leipsich. To this Weida,
(after the Avantguard at Plaun had the second time plundered the poor people
thereabouts, as far as Zwicka) did the whole Army draw together; where he also
formed a new Leaguer: He forms a standing camp.
that so these several Partees and divisions, which were sent abroad to spoil
the country, and to bring in contributions; might have a standing Camp to
retreat unto.

Leaving, after this, the Duke of Fridland still encamped about Weida; let us
surveigh the other destroyed parts of the Duke of Saxonies Dominions: and see
what work Holck and Gallas had there, (singly and jointly,) since their
several sendings out from before Norimberg. And their Stories let us now fetch
up; that we may the more methodically bring them to their Generalissimo, and
to the siege of Leipsich.

The Story of Holcks actions, in the Duke of Saxonyes country.
And begin we with Holck, first; who (as we have in the beginning told you)
was about the 20th. of July, sent out with 6000. Horse and 4000. Musketeers,
into Misnia: the reasons whereof, we have there likewise given you. He
advancing to the edge of Voitland, within some few leagues of Egra and Bohemia;
seases the smaller handsome towns first of all: as Dobruberg, Hirsberg,
Lichtenberg, Sparnberg, and Hoff: all in this hilly and woody frontier. Next
makes he toward these upon the Elster; which rises hereabouts, a little to the
Southward. Olsnitz a fair town, a little more Easterly; is forced: and burnt
down to ashes for resisting. Plaun, a good town, about a league more
Northerly up the same river, is blocked up at the same instant with some Horse
troops: and diverse of the villages that belonged to it put on fire, because it
surrendered not at the first summons. The rest, I omit: not so much for
brevities sake, as for horror: not listing to relate the Barbarismes committed
by his Crabats: as if they had fallen in, not to make wars, but desolations;
or, as if they had believed, that a country was never thoroughly conquered, till
it were utterly destroyed.

Holck, being far, as yet, from the Electors Court at Dresden; He besieges
Zwicka:
and for that reason, finding the less opposition to control him: advances
boldly, and attacks Zwicka, the strongest piece in all that country, standing
about 14. or 16. miles to the North-East of Plaun aforesaid. About August 13th.
he first presents himself before the town: and demands it to be rendered. The
summons being denied, the place is surrounded by his Army. It being situated
in a hilly woody country; Holck found a natural Battery, or rising hill hard
by the Castle, upon which he caused 8. pieces of Cannon to be mounted. With
these, plays he hard upon the Castle, and the Castle as hard upon him again.
His carriage had been so good toward other places, since he came into the
land; that the men of Zwicka, as they despaired of his mercy; so were they by
that despair armed with a resolution, to surmount his cruelty.

The place was defended by Colonel Kalkstein; who had been sent in hither
with 6. troops of Horse, and some Foote-Companies: so soon as ever Holck was
heard of in Voitland. Holck seeing it likely to prove a long siege, sends in
his Trumpet to offer them a fair parlee. This being by Kalckstein refused: he
fearing to lie here so long, till the Elector should have raised the country
upon him: sends in his Trumpet the second time, with enlarged conditions. These
(I read) they were.

1. To alter nothing in their Religion. 2. To leave them in the allegiance of
their Elector, which is rendered upon conditions.
not tendering them an oath, to any other Prince. 3. To infringe none of the
privileges of their City: but to leave the keys and Government, still with
the Magistrates. 4. Not to spoil the lesser neighbor towns in their
Jurisdiction. 5. To give their garrison, souldierly and honorable conditions.
6. And not charge them with above 200. of his men, for a garrison.
Holck made most solemn protestations, faithfully to keep these Articles;
sending them in, good hostages for it: nor do I find, but that he afterward
kept his promise, well enough with them.

The Elector of Saxony being startled with these tidings; sets out his Ban and
Arrier-ban, to call all his Tenants, and and those that held upon him in any
Service: to arm for the defense of the Country. The Felt-Marshall Arnheim,
likewise, is with all diligence sent unto, to dispeede down such troops as he
could well spare, out of Silesia: Hereupon, is the Colonel Vitzdum sent down
with his Regiment, unto Dresden. This was about the 20th. of our August.

He plunders Aw,
Zwicka now at Holcks devotion; he next assaults Aw (or Augusta) where the
Elector had a house of pleasure. Here the soldiers found very rich Hangings,
and other furnitures of Court; which were never meant for the entertainment, of
such course people. Schopa, a town upon a river of that name, which runs
into the Mulda, is next fallen upon: 6. leagues to the East of Zwicka. Some
oppositions being here made, did something color over that steine of blood;
liberally here shed by the Conquerors.

and besieges Chemnitz:
Chemnitz, some 7. miles to the North of Schopa, held them more tacke: the
hilly and the woody situation, making the place something the stronger; and
the Townsmen the more confident. Desperate, I should have said: seeing to that
degree had Holcks usage driven all those towns, that had but any hopes of
resistance. Some tolerable conditions, Holck, offered unto them: which they
durst not so well trust unto, as unto their own strengths and resolutions.
They are besieged: and Holcks men took the pains (which here only, and at
Zwicka they had been put unto) to make use of the Spade, and to bring forward
their Approaches. Some country Boores being gotten in hither, for their
safeties, (enough to make up 10. Companies) armed with desire of revenge,
(especially for their Barnes, which the Imperialists had set fire upon) now
sallye out upon the Approaches. Shovells they had with them, which weapon, none
could use better: and with these, they labored to fling the earth again into
the lines and rolling Trenches, which the Imperial Pyoners were now a running.
But this being but the Boores Schollers-prize, and they having to do with
Masters of Defense, they were quickly beaten in again, under the favor of
their own Ordnance. which he is forced to give over.
The Townsmen kept their own, for all this: and would not (like Zwicka)
hearken unto terms of Treaty: so that the Imperialists were feign to levy
their own siege, and leave them to their liberty.

I can report nothing worthy of a History, in these actions. Plainly, there
was not extraordinary much good service done, worthy of a soldier: unless
this be of honorable report to him; that he made very foul wars of it. For
next, burns he Curbitz, Pesteritz, and Wilsdorp: this last, being within 4.
English miles of Dresden. Early in the morning (which proved misty) August 28.
did the Crabats make a Cavalcado to affront Dresden: where the Elector was then
resident. The City taking the Alarm at it, let fly some pieces of Ordnance
amongst them, whereupon they retired. At broad day light the Ports being
opened, some troops of Iagers and Stalburgs, were sent out after them. The
Horsemen of Colonel Stienau, having within a league of Dresden taken some of
the Crabats: they confessed the intention they had for firing of the Suburbs.
The night after, some of them burnt Oderen, upon the river Floe, 8. miles
South-West of Freiberg. Others at the same time did as much at Doblen, 16.
miles West of Dresden. By this it appears that their forces were divided, for
the doing of the more mischief: yea their prisoners avowed freely, that they
had order from their General to set fire upon Dresden, and the whole Country.

By this beginning of September is Colonel Vitzdumb arrived at Dresden from
out of Silesia: to whom diverse hundreds of the Country Gentlemen, By the Saxon
forces,
and some thousands of the Electors Tenants, and the undone Boores resorted: to
make up an Army. These being so soon as might be sent out to repress these
Boutefeu's: Holck was thereupon enforced to retire his people toward Zwicka
again; there to expect a re-enforcement by the coming down of Gallas to him.
In this expedition, did the Saxons light upon one of Holcks Quarter Masters;
with whom they found some writings, is Holck enforced to retire, toward the
Frontiers.
which made the Imperialists to be more hated in those parts: and more and more
averted the Elector, from listening to any Treaty. These Papers discovered no
good intententions in the Imperialists toward him: whatsoever name of peace
were pretended. He had also a list of Holcks and Gallasses whole forces, about
him: which I wish the Saxons had sent hither.

Vitzdumb and his men, having for the time, indifferently well cleared the
Country of these Scarre-fire Crabats and Imperialists, (now retired toward
Leutmaritz and Bohemia) the Elector, for easing of his purse licensed diverse of
these new forces. Diverse Swedes also, that came out of the garrisons of
Pomeren, Brandenburg, and Mecklenburg, were refused entertainment: the Elector
supposing the Fox had bin dead, because he lay and stirred not. But Holck, did
but stay for Gallas his coming in the end of September: whom (in this
quietness) go we a little back, to fetch from Norimberg into Misnia.

Gallas his Story
This Gallas was by his Generalissimo sent into the Upper Palatinate, September
13. the design being, first to do a service to the Duke of Bavaria, by
recovering and taking towns in that Country for him. Secondly, to keep
Norimberg still blockt up, by taking of the nearest of their towns: Thirdly,
when all was done, to conjoyne with Holck in Misnia. Gallas first of all, sets
him down before Lauff: a town of the Norimbergers upon the Pegnitz, 8. miles
East of them. Here had he not many above 2000. men and some 4. pieces of
Cannon. He took the town September 14th. in the night; after a days
opposition, or else had the King of Sweden the next day relieved it. Here
notwithstanding that he took it by agreement, yet caused he the Lieftenant
that was Governor, to be hanged. Hence goes Gallas still Eastward unto
Herspruck, 4. miles further: and took that also. Some of his, are about this
time sent 9. or 10. English miles more Northerly: where they take Felden, upon
the same Pegnitz. From Hershbruck, his Army advances due East, unto Sultzbach;
15. miles further. The chief of the Citizens here, did he send prisoners into
Amberg, 5. miles to the S. E. for that they had not paid in those 20000.
dollars, which at Walsteins coming that way, had bin imposed upon them.

The good town of Grefenberg, 11 miles North of Lauff, Having taken diverse
towns, in the Upper Palatinate.
making him some opposition; was taken, plundered, and burnt to ashes. Having
served other towns so; his whole Army crosses over to the North-East, and
comes to Weiden upon the river Nab; 10 or 12 miles from Sultzbach: going the
same way out of the Upper Palatinate, that Holck had done before him: saving
only that he goes nearer to Bohemia. His march now lies up the Nab to
Dirschenreyt; and so toward Wonsledel, Ruckenitz and Egra. Upon Friday
September. 21. he burns down Wonsledel: and the Sunday after, he did as much
for Ruckenitz: both being the Elector of Saxonyes towns, in the edge of
Voitland. The good town of Egra, on the edge of Bohemia; having by the Saxons
been recovered, He falls into Voitland.
since Walensteins sitting down at Norimberg: was also destinated to the same
destruction. But this, was by the Saxon Colonel Haxtel prevented: both by
sending in provisions, for the defense of the town; and by presenting Gallas
with some moneys, in the name of a contribution, for the diverting of his fury.

Thence advances Gallas, unto Hoff upon the river Sala, some 24 English miles
to the North-West of Egra. His way, he directed through the hills and woods, upon
those Frontiers: where the soldiers hoped, to light upon some of the Country
Gentlemen and Yeomen; who with their wives and families, were for fear fled in
thither.

To this Hoff, comes he, Monday September 24: and he had an Army of some 7 or
8000 fighting men; though he demanded bread and provisions of the Country, for
14000. Eight pieces of Ordnance with their furniture, drew he along: and now
takes he his way to Plaun, He goes to Plaun.
15 miles to the North-East of him. He had sent his Suttlers before him unto
Zwicka, 12 miles from Plaun, that they should by Wednesday night, provide and
send him in, Provant bread enough for 14000 people: and indeed the Drablers and
hangbyes of the Army, with the soldiers women and children that followed it;
might make up 14000. Those of Zwicka sending out some to treat with him;
pacify him with a Copy of the Articles, upon which his Forerunner Holck, had
compounded with them. Gallas answered honorably, That he would by no means
violate that agreement: but gave them to understand withal, that they had done
very well in so compounding, and that it were best for other towns to imitate
them: otherwise, there was nothing but fire and sword, to be expected from him.
However, he must have victuals for his soldiers.

Hereupon September 26th. He goes from Plaun, toward this Zwicka, as if he had
meant to have seen their Storehouses: but changing his mind (it seems) he
sent some 2 or 3000, Northward toward Altemburg: himself, with the greatest
part of the Army, going to the Northeastward, 32 or 33 English miles from Plaun
aforesaid, unto Chemnitz.

Those that marched toward Altemburg, took the little County of Werden along
with them in their way, a little North of Zwicka: which, together with the
other little Flecks or Market Towns, by the bank of the river Pleiss: they
use their pleasure with. Thence go they to Altemburg: the City and Residence
of the Duke of Saxon-Altemburg: with whom, they compound for 5000 Dollars. But
this would not prove a sufficient discharge against the Townes-mens being
plundered: seeing that two days after, when Gallas sent away for them: they
pillaged diverse houses both in the Town and Suburbs, at their parting. For now
had Gallas need of them, he had engaged himself to finish what Holck before
had given over in the plain field: He takes in Chemnitz;
and that was to take in Chemnitz. The Townes-men here, having enough of the
sufferings that Holck had before put them to: and fearing that if he came to
join with Gallas, they should never be able to withstand their own ruins:
they so soon as Gallas his men were comne up to him, upon the first of October
yield up their Town: and upon the same conditions, joins with Holck.
that Holck had before given to Zwicka. Thence goes Gallas toward Fridberg:
and there Holck pieces in with him.

Holck since his retyring to the Frontiers from the Saxons, having by this time
well recreuted his Army: upon confidence of that, and of Gallas coming;
returned into Misnia again, Holck falls again into Misnia.
still burning the country before him, wheresoever he found any discontent or
resistance. In the end of September, Holck having some 8000. men in his Army,
Holck and Gallas.
goes to give a second affront unto Dresden.

It was a very misty morning: under favor of which the Crabats and others were
gotten into the Suburbs. Being discovered more by the noise then sight; the
Ordnance are from the walls turned upon them: some withal sallying out amongst
them. Holck knowing of that, comes in withal diligence, hoping in the mist, to
beat the sallyers, and to enter the Ports pell mell together with them. But
Vitzdumbs Regiment, sallying out upon the 2d. Alarm; maintains the fight in
the pother, till the mist about noone cleared. Then could the Canoniers better
discern, where to direct their vollyes: Conioyning with Gallas,
so that Holck perceiving the Action not faiseable, draws off his men, and
gives it over. This being too tough a piece for him; his next project is, to
conioyne with Gallas: for which purpose, he now goes immediately toward
Frieberg.

This conjunction being affected, They take Frawenstein:
they October 3d. fall upon Frawenstein; a pretty town upon a hill, some 16.
English miles to the South of Dresden. Here finding some opposition, they carry
the town by Scaladoe; and put all (both soldiers and inhabitants) to the sword
for it. Here they now purposed to reside, with their Army: for that the town
was pretty and strongly situated. October 4th. they assault Friberg; a
handsome town upon the river Mulda, some 10. English miles to the West of
Frawenstein. Here is a beautiful Church and a Cloister: and in that, the
Tombs of diverse of the Elector of Saxonyes ^ncestors. The town was hard laid
at by the Imperialists; and Friberg.
and the Saxons showd them some little sport for it. But it was but for their
exercise; they being no way able to hold out a general assault, which was next
day threatened them: and a general destruction withal, if they yielded not.
Hereupon, October 5th. is the town given up: the defendants being able to
obtain no other conditions, then the saving of their lives; marching out with
no other weapons, but their swords only. Some writing tells me, that they had
soldiers conditions. Diverse of the richer Country people, having fled in
hither (as to a place of some indifferent security) the soldiers exacted from
them, and from the Townsmen, 40000. dollars contribution. The Elector of
Saxonye was feign, likewise, to come off with 80000. dollars more, to save the
Monuments of his Predecessors, from being ransackt and defaced. See what we
have written of Tillyes soldiers ryfling of the Marquess of Onspachs Toombs,
page: 115. of our Second Part.
It Is the fashion of diverse Germane Princes, to be buried in their Robes, and
with their Ensigns of Honor, and perchance, Jewels, all which would have
been booty, good enough, to these Rake-shames, that make no conscience of this
horrider kind of Sacrilege.

Near this Friberg, Holcks men taking, I know not what, high displeasure at a
certain Minister of the country, (a man of rare learning, as Gallobelgicus
calls him:) miserably, first of all, hewed him in pieces with their swords; and
then flung him to their dogs to be eaten. But they, out of a certain horror,
which overawed their Currishnesse and Canine appetite; The inhumane Barbarismes
of the Crabats.
would not so much as touch, or lick a drop of the blood of him: whereupon his
Friends, the next day, gathered up his pieces, and interred them. And lest this
should seem incredible, to the Readers; the Author of Le Soldat Suedois
avowes, That the Crabats showd themselves ingenious to invent new torments, for
the poor Inhabitants: and that it was frequent with them, for want of
Dogs-meate, to feed their curres with humane carneage. This if it may be true;
though the dogs were the Man-eaters, yet the Crabats, surely, were the
Canniballs.

Having done with Friberg, the 2. Imperial Majors, (after the taking of some
smaller towns) advance toward Meissen: which is the town that gives name to
the whole Country. The place of it, is upon the western bank of the river
Elb, some 18. English miles to the North of Friberg, and within 10. of Dresden.
They take Meissen.
Hither came they October 10th. where finding small resistance, they the same
day took possession of it.

Whilst this was a doing, the Saxon forces which were upon the Eastern side
of the Elb; make toward the new bridge, that the Imperialists had over the
river: which falling a-board with, they took in sunder, and carried with them,
or let the pieces drive down the stream from them. The Saxons cut off their
bridge from them.
The Imperialists flew in to the reskue of their bridge, but all with the
latest: for that the Saxons having begun with that end, which was next unto
the Imperialists; took away all means of their getting over to disturb them.
They let fly Cannons and Musket shot, freely enough among them: but for all
that, the Saxons went through with their business. By this exploit, were the
Imperialists staved off, from returning over the Elb any more, to the Eastward.

This caused them to turn all along upon the Western bank of it: deviding
their forces thereupon, Whereupon Holck turns toward Leipsich.
to do the more mischief. Some of Holcks men, upon Thursday October 11th. (as
if to be revenged for their bridge) plunder and burn Lumnitsch: 6. English
miles to the North-West of Meissen. Others of them, the same day, were flowne
out as far as Oschitz; as much further to the Northward: which, with other
villages in the way, they did but pillage.

October 21, they came to Wurtzen, upon the East side of the river Mulda: 10.
miles to the West of Oschitz, and half way betwixt it and Leipsich. Here they
encountered not with much trouble. The town pretended poverty, and that they
could not pay so many dollars, as the soldiers demanded for contribution. But
soldiers not using to be paid with excuses: carry away their richest Burgers
to their Army: as if the Captiving of their richest men, would have made the
rest the abler, or, that they could have coynd the Burgers, into Dutch dollars.

October 13. do 1800. Crabats fly out as far as Nieustat, and spoil that
country. Five hundred other Horse, offer as much at Salfeld: but the garrison
there, persuaded them to go home again: which yet they did not, till they set
fire upon the Suburbs. As much is by others done, to the lesser towns upon the
Elb: so that the Elector of Saxony was by this time made sensible what it was
to have angered Walenstein.

By this time had the Elector of Saxonyes forces, under Vitzdumb and Kalkstein;
pressed upon the Imperial Leaguer at Frawenburg, and made them to forsake it:
for Gallas was by order from his Generalissimo, now a going toward Bohemia;
upon the entreaty of Don Balthazar di Marradas, who commanded all in Bohemia:
Arnheim and Dubalt, had sorely, by this time, over-laid the Imperialists in the
lower Silesia; Gallas sent toward Silesia:
gotten Breslaw: and made their way open, either into Moravia, or Bohemia. But
of this, in its own division.

Again of Walenstein.
By this time was our great Duke of Fridland, comne into Voitland; whom we left
encamped at his Weida Leaguer. He (the more to anger the Elector of Saxony,
whom he hated) sent again some Partees toward Friberg: commanding either the
rifling, or the redeeming of the Electorall Monuments. Holcks agreement and
Safe-guards, being pleaded; Walensteins answer was, That he did not hold
himself concluded, by any bargain with his Lieftenants: so that the Elector
was compeld to satisfy him.

He goes toward Leipsich.
Holck being comne thus near Leipsich; now began the Duke of Fridland to
move from his Weida Leaguer, toward Leipsich also. His march was to Altemberg,
on the river Pleiss, about 24. English miles to the North of Weida where he
sat down; and cast up a royal Leaguer. Thence sends he some forces to Born,
along the same river: midway betwixt Altemburg and Leipsich; and about 12. or
13. English miles from either. Holck mooues toward him.
Thence go they unto Schonfeld; Holck at the same time, moved also toward
Leipsich.

The Leipsichers (to their terror) perceiving, which way these Cast of Falcons,
(the 2. Imperial Armies) made a Point: they, with all speed, Monday October
15. conveigh away the richest and lightest of their Merchandise, unto
Wittemberg; and so down the Elb, unto Magdenburg and Hamborow.

The next day, a Partee of Imperial Horse (some 60. in number) pillage the
very nearest villages unto Leipsich: as Gonnewitz, Heida, Steteritz, with
others. The chief of their expedition, was but a boote-haling voyage: for that
they rob even the market-women. Wednesday the 17th. betwixt 7. and 8. in the
morning, were there diverse troops of Imperial Horse, discovered at Vblessen,
near unto Damberg: which continued there in Battaglia, most part of the day
following. The City discharged some Ordnance at them: but they never offered to
come nearer.

The 18th. about noone; Walenstein summons Leipsich.
came there an Imperial Trumpet into Leipsich, with 2. letters in his hand:
one whereof was directed from the Duke of Fridland, to the Burgomaster: and the
other, unto the Governor, and the military Commanders. That to the Magistrates,
was to this purpose; That the Duke of Fridland his Excellency, did in fair
terms desire, and in the name of his Imperial Majesty advise them, to commit
themselves unto his mercy, as other Cities had done. That, moreover, they would
receive 200. of Colonel Hatzfelds Horsemen, into their Castle; and resign up
themselves wholly, unto the service and devotion of his Imperial Majesty. This
if they refused, then had his Excellency just cause, with his whole power to
come from Altemburg upon them; and to make their ruin an example, unto all the
Cities of the Empire.

The letter to the Military men, was, an invitation to them, to yield upon
fair terms: an offer of good Quarter, to as many as would march out quietly:
and of honorable conditions, both to Officers and Soldiers, (either on
horseback or on foot) as many as would take entertainment. The Military men
answered plainly, Their answer.
That they would not yield; and the Magistrates, shufflled off the business to
the soldiery: answering by the same Trumpet, that the Castle was a Fort, which
they had no command of: nor could they tell, how to get the soldiers out of
the City: and that having tendered his Excellencies letters to the Governor of
the Castle, he would not open them, because not by name directed to him. And
with these answers, the Trumpet returned toward the Leaguer.

That which made the Leipsichers so valorous, in their answers; was a hope they
had upon their Duke, partly: who was now going from Dresden unto Torgau upon
the Elb: there (as they hoped) to stay for Arnheims coming out of Silesia with
the Army. They had a confidence also, upon Duke Bernards coming to relieve
them, by the way of Duringen. But that hope, was quickly dashed by Pappenheims
falling into the said Duringen: who gat before hand with Duke Bernard: which
Duke had neither strength nor command to relieve them.

Friday October 19th. about noone; some Imperial horsemen, together with 80.
Musketeers; drew near unto the walls of the City; and about the burying place
(commonly called Gods-Aker) they made an orderly Court of guard: which they
held unto the evening. About 2. a clock, the former Trumpet came again into
the City. Being presently brought before the Magistrates: and delivering his
summons by word of mouth; he by word of mouth had his denial given him. His
message was. That his Excellency the Duke of Fridland, had not been used to be
put off with words; nor to send twice to one purpose: and therefore did now
advise them to give him a speedy satisfaction, by putting themselves under his
obedience: otherwise, they must not hereafter expect any mercy, but to be made
an example to all that continued in their obstinacy. The Cities answer was,
That they had no power to dispose of their Princes City, without their Princes
leave for it: and therefore desired his Excellency to rest satisfied with it.
By this time, a greater strength of Imperial Horse, presented themselves
before the City, to answer whom, did some Musketeers make a sally: the
Ordnance from the walls likewise playing very hard upon them. About 4. a clock,
diverse Imperial Cornets more, charging hard upon the Leipsich Musketeers,
beat them into the City.

Sunday October 21. by break of day, did the Imperial Armies begin to draw
round about the town: and to bring on their Ammunition, and all other
preparations for a siege. Then began the Walsteiners to break the ground,
and to bring forward their Approaches. Some Musketeers, were immediately also
lodged in one of the Suburbs. The Ordnance went off roundly from all parts of
the wall: whose peales continued until the evening. This day, were two other
Trumpets sent from the Leaguer into the surrownded City; who were brought into
the Statehouse before the Magistrates: to whom they in the afternoon delivered
their message. About this time, was there a short pawse or cessation from
shooting. These Trumpets being returned into the Leaguer; another was presently
dispatched toward the City: so willing was our Generalissimo to win a town
by parlyes, rather then by fighting. This Trumpet was not dispatched till
within evening. The report went, of his message, That the Duke of Fridland
vowed he would have the City, either by fair means, or by foul: and if they
would yield it willingly, they should have good Quarter: but in case they stood
it out; he protested deeply, that neither man, woman nor child, no nor so much
as a dog; should ever go alive out of the City. Walenstein was as likely to be
a man of his word, as any man (that I know) in the world, in Turkey or in
Christendom.

The Imperial Foot that were lodged in the Suburbs, let fly their vollyes
into the City: with which, though diverse were hurt, yet was there but one boy
slain outright, near unto the great College. About night, they began on
both sides to draw toward an agreement: and yet (as those of Leipsich write of
themselves) very doubtful it was whither or no they should ever come to an
accord; for that the townsmen were very resolute, and averse from yielding. It
being once dark, the Imperialists out of the Suburbs; heaved hand-Granadoes,
and other Wild-fires, into the City: which not only gave light, but fire also
in 2. places unto it. This was with much diligence, and little loss, quenched:
nor did Fireballs do much more hurt, then take off one soldiers right leg,
whereof next morning he died. The fight on both sides continuing, another
Imperial Trumpet presented himself before the Ports of the City: but the
small and great shot going off so incessantly, both from the walls and Castle;
it was hot staying for him there: that he again returned, without delivering
of his message. Presently was he sent back again: and this was the sum of
his errand. That his Excellency the Duke of Fridland, was contented to allow
them 6. hours more, to consider upon it: in which time if they resolved to
entertain parley, they should send him out their Deputies unto Schonfeld, where
they should be treated with.

By 6. a clock the next Monday morning October 21. Some of the University,
joined with others of the City Counsel and Magistrates; repair unto
Schonfeld: where after an hours deliberation, they on both sides came to
agreement for the rendering of the City. About noone, the Imperial forces,
with sound of Drum, and all gallantry, entered the City, presently possessing
themselves of the Petriner College. About 4. a clock the same day, did the
Felt-Marshall Holck, and many other Imperial Officers; ride also into the same
College: taking a diligent view all about it; how they might most conveniently
plant some pieces of Ordnance in it, to play thence upon the Castle. Hereupon
were 4. half Cannons brought into the City; and 3. Batteries were with
Horse-dung and boards upon them made up immediately, against the Castle. One,
was near the Peter's Tower, and the other 2. in the Petriner College
aforesaid. Upon each of these Batteries, they mounted one piece of Ordnance:
and with every one of them, they played all that whole night, upon the Castle.
Diverse Ensigns of Foot, kept their guards upon the Market place, in the mean
time: amongst whom, was there a goodly troop of Curiassiers (Horsemen in
complete harness) consisting of some 180.

The Commander of the Castle the same man (as I hear) that before delivered it
up to the General Tilly, the day before the last Battle of Leipsich, and
called Johannes Vopelius, hung out the defensive Banner from the top of the
Castle; and (as if he scorned to be twice taxed, with the shame of giving over
one Castle) he played very hard with his great Ordnance upon the Imperialists:
even from their first entering into the College; until broad day light upon
Tuesday morning. That day, being the 23d. the Imperialists having discharged
their Ordnance but 17. times in all; the bloody Flag was taken down from the
Castle; and a white Flag of truice put up in the room of it: to signify their
desire of a composition. Shooting is then given over: and hostages and Deputies
are sent one to another, to conclude upon the conditions: That evening were
they accorded: and to this purpose.

First, Leipsich Castle rendered.
That all those Citizens that were fled into the Castle, together with the
soldiers, should march out with bag and baggage; the Citizens taking passes
of the Generalissimo, to go whither they pleased: or otherwise to abide in the
City.

Secondly, That the garrison should march out with colors flying, matches
lighted, full arms, etc.

These marching forth of the Castle; 2. Companies of Imperialists, immediately
take possession of it. That very evening were the Burgers called together, and
commanded to bring their Arms to be laid up into the State-house. That night,
was the neighbor village of Eiteritch, by the Imperialists burnt down to the
ground: diverse houses also within Leipsich; those especially next unto the
Castle and river, were plundered. The next morning, were such like insolences
by sound of Drum, and upon pain of death forbidden: so that the soldiers
the next night committed no more such pillages.

The 24th. day, nothing of moment passed more within the City: excepting only
that the Magistrates and Burgers were called together to pay down 50000.
Rixe-dollars, for a present contribution, and were charged to discover what
goods they had of the Ausburgers or Norimbergers. The 3. or 4. next days, were
all the buildings and watch-houses about the Castle, pulled down or slighted.

Other things done by Walenstein, in the time of the siege of Leipsich.
In the mean time that the most of the Army, are at the siege of Leipsich: some
other Partees are sent out from the Imperial Leaguer at Altemburg, to reduce
or plunder the country. Some advance out, as far as Torgau upon the Elb, to
intercept that Pass, if they had been strong enough. But into that, had the
Elector of Saxony, put 6. Companies of Colonel Loesers Foot, 11. troops of
Colonel Taubens Horse, being also enquartered in the neighbor villages.

October 19th. other Imperial Partees made themselves Masters of Weissenfels
upon the river Sala, He takes Weissenfels,
due West of Leipsich: and of Mersburg, a little more to the Northward down
the same river, and upon the other side of it. This is an Appropriate
Bishopric, held by the Elector of Saxony: and here is a bridge over the Sala.
Now also did Holck make his demands for Tillyes arrier of money, due from
Naumburg; Mersburg and Naumburg.
and sent 36. Musketeers into the Town to be the safe-guards of it. From
Mersburg, go they with a strong Partee, unto Hall: still more Northerly down
the Sala. To this good town, the Imperialists made this proposition; That it
should furnish them with bread for 2000. men, but for 2. days only: and for
so long a time, admit their Generalissimo with his Retinue into their City, and
accommodate him. The Burgers obtaining respite till 6. a clock the next
morning; returned this answer: That whereas they had received letters from
Holck, that some of their Magistrates should appear before his Generalissimo
at the Leaguer of Altemburg: they could not, till they knew his pleasure,
furnish the demaundants with the bread desired of them.

Some few days after, is the Colonel Hatsfeld, (brother to the expulsed
Bishop of Wurtsburg) sent with 6. troops of Horse unto this Hall, to propose
these, (not propositions, now, but) commands, unto the Burgers.

First, That they should be well advised of the oath, which they had sometimes
taken unto the Emperor.

Secondly, That presently they should send, the bread before demanded.

Thirdly, That they should take in, and for 2. days maintain, the
Generalissimo, with those that he should bring with him.

Fourthly, That they should precisely send him word, how strong the garrison in
their Castle was, and how well provided.

The Burgers perceiving Walenstein to be in good earnest; Is admitted into Hall
town.
open their ports, immediately, unto the Imperialists: who presently fall to
besieging of the Castle. But the Swedes (whom the King had left in it,
presently after the Battle of Leipsich,) so well put them off; that they were
forced to retire from it. but is repulsed from the Castle


By this time, are the Town and Castle of Leipsich taken; and the Army drawn
together to Altemburg. Then had the Generalissimo a design upon Torgau: from
whence the Partee he had lately sent thither, had been turned back again.
His design upon Torgau diverted.
By the taking of this Torgau; should he be master of a bridge over the
Elb-streame: his way would be opened into the lower Lusatia, and the Marck, of
Brandenburg: yea and the whole conquest of Saxony, made more faiseable to him.
For this purpose, did the Imperial Army about the 26. or 27th. of October,
remove it self unto Eilenburg; a town upon the river Mulda, half way betwixt
Leipsich and Torgau. To this place, came there an Express from the Count of
Pappenheim, of his being hard at hand with his forces: whereupon the Imperial
Army returned back again to the Westward, (besides and beyond Leipsich:) and
went and joined with the Pappenheimers about Mersburg. by the coming of
Pappenheim:
Pappenheim being comne, persuaded his Generalissimo, by and by; to pass over
the Sala into Duringen, with the maine of his Army; and to go and take in
Erfurt, Weymar, and all the chief Passes and Posts, of that country. He
wrought so upon him, chiefly with the faiseablenesse of the Action; that there
was no likelihood of opposition in those parts: Duke William of Saxon-Weymar
having but 4. And his design upon Erfurt defeated;
or 5000. men for the guard of all these towns; and himself lying now sick
at Erfurt. A shrewd counsel! seeing by the taking of this country, (and of
the Passes through the Duringer-Waldt, after this) the back door had both
been barred and bolted; by which the King of Sweden should have broken in to
disturb them. This was once Walensteins own plot, to have comne, namely, this
way into Misnia.

Whilst he therefore prepares to put this design in execution, he has word
brought him, not only of the King of Swedens being comne to Erfurt; by the
coming of the King of Sweden.
but of the advancing of the Van of his Army, toward the Sala. This was Duke
Bernard, indeed, who was comne a day or 2. before, to pursue the Reere of
Pappenheim: as in the end of the Kings Story we have told you. Hereupon, is the
case altered: so that Tuesday the 30th. of October, went there out a
Proclamation from the Generalissimo, Walenstein calling his Army together:
That all Imperial Officers and soldiers, should upon pain of death, repair
unto their Regiments and Colors in the Army: all Officers, the same evening,
being by an Express commanded out of Leipsich. Wednesday October 31. did the
whole Imperial Army advance from Mersburg unto Ranstadt, and Lutzen; betwixt
Mersburg and Leipsich: whereabouts they quartered.

November the first, being Thursday; were there 3. Cornets of Horse sent back
into Leipsich, to be enquartered within the City: more Horsemen with their
Baggage, the next day coming in after them. The Soldat Suedois affirms, that
Walenstein and Pappenheim both, came into Leipsich to take a view of it, and to
have it fortified for the place of their Retreat: but the Iournall or Diarye of
these Actions, printed in the self same Leipsich November. 13. mentions no such
matter. The same first of November, went there two Posts through Leipsich, unto
Gallas; to cause him to hasten back with his Forces: which I hear to be
about nine or ten thousand: though fifteen thousand say some Relations. And
now were the Leipsichers enforced to pay in their fifty thousand Dollars: which
October 24 they had agreed upon.

Upon this first of November, likewise; did the Imperial Army remoove toward
Weissenfels upon the river Sala; encamps at Weissenfels.
eight English miles West of Lutzen. He sent also the Colonel Suvis, with his
Regiment of Foot; and the Colonel Bredaro (so my Spanish Relation writes both
their names) to take in Naumburg. The Horsemen leading the way, found the King
of Swedens Vantgard there before them: so that Bredaro's Horse having some
slight skirmish in the Suburbs, with the Swedish; returned again to
Weissenfels. These were those, which we called the 600 Imperial Horse; who (as
in the end of the Kings Story we told you,) were coming to take in Naumburg.

And now for that we can by no better means come by the motions on the
Imperial side, then by the discovery made by one of their own: I will here,
therefore, make use of my Spanish Relation written by a Walsteiner, and twice
printed in Lisbone.

The King (says my Author) being passed the river, and lodged with his Army
before Naumburg: the Imperial Army marched up likewise in Battle array,
before Weissenfels. The Kings men about this time, putting out some few troops
of Horse, there fell out some encounters betwixt them and the Crabats, but
nothing to the purpose. The Kings men retiring suddenly, the Imperial Army
disposed of it self, in the small villages about Weissenfels: news being
brought after a while, that the King did fortify his Camp about Naumburg.
Walenstein was once in the mind, to have marched presently, and to have
encountered with the King of Sweden: but by reason that the ordinary way betwixt
Weissenfels and twelve English miles distant.
Naumburg, was but narrow and troublesome to march; because of the continued
mountains: he only sent out Iulio Deodati Quarter-Master-Generall, to go
with a good guard of Crabats about by the way of Zeitz; to take a view of a
more commodious passage; and of the place and posture that the King was lodged
at.

Zeitz, is up the Elster, the river of Leipsich: 14 miles South-East of
Naumburg: and 12 from Weissenfels.
But his excellency the Generalissimo in an action of that importance, was first
desirous to hear the advice of all his Colonels: for the getting whereof he
employed the Count of Pappenheim. The Colonels dissuaded the encounter, upon
these considerations.

First, of the Kings being already lodged and fortified, in a Post of so
advantageous a situation.

Secondly, for that the time of year was so far spent, and winter so near
coming on, that keeping the Field would be most incommodious for the Army.

The Reasons why Walenstein assaulted not the King.
Thirdly, and above all, for that tidings were now comne apace, of Count Henry
Vanden Berghs going toward Cullen: which would put a necessity upon the
Generalissimo, to hasten toward But this of Henry Vanden Berg, was but a false
Alarm.
the diversion of the danger of that place; the loss whereof would be of so
perilous a consequence. Upon these reasons, (in which the Colonels with one
Consent agreed) it was concluded to be unfit; and at that time un-usefull, that
the King should be assaulted.

All these reasons served for the foundation of that resolution, and why he
sent away Pappenheim.
which his Excellency took presently; for the sending away of the Count of
Pappenheim toward the river of Weser, with two Regiments of Crabats only: to
the end, that with those, being joined to those Forces which he had before left
with the Count of Groensfeld, he might succor Cullen: and take order,
withal, for the levying of some new troops, in Westphalia and Paderborn.

In the mean time, was his Excellency resolved, to put his own Army into
Winter Quarters, about the river of Sala; He resolves to put his men into their
winter Quarters.
as also in Leipsich and other places near unto Dresden. All these divisions
was he minded, so proportionably to have parted into Bodies of Horse and Foot;
that each of them might be able to make resistance, till the next Quarters
could well come in to their succors; should the King, perchance, attempt upon
any one of them.

For the putting this design in execution; his Excellency removed his Army
from about Weissenfels: sending the Count of Pappenheim with two Regiments of
Foot, and some of Horse, from Mersburg, for to go and take in Hall Castle:
which was very strong, and guarded by 200. Swedish. Pappenheim had order
likewise, for the lodging of some troops thereabouts; according as he should
find things disposed.

His Excellency, after his dispatch intending to march toward Wesler, came to
lodge with the rest of his forces about Lutzen. But apprehending, no improbable
suspicion, that the King would never suffer him, to take in that place; under
the nose, as it were of his whole Army: and that by turning back and passing
over the river Sala, Walenstein opens a gap, for the King to have march^ away.
he might easily succor the Castle of Hall: he resolved upon another purpose.
Sending Colonel Contreras to take up Altemburg: his Excellency himself was
resolved with the rest of his Army, to have gone (Northward) and lodge at
Mersburg. By this disposing of himself, should he (at Mersburg) be near to
back Pappenheim: and by sending the other Colonels to Luca and Altemburg,
should there have been a space left in the middle, for the King to have marched
away, even from Naumburg unto Dresden. By this cautelous forecast, might his
Excellency have after followed the King with his main strength, and either
utterly have overthrown him, or at least cut off his passage, and have shut
him and all his forces, utterly out of the Empire.

But the Kings conveniences, were measured by other designs, far different
from our suppositions. F^r He having understood of the sending away of
Pappenheim, and the other 2. Regiments; resolved presently to come and set upon
us. Insomuch, that the Count Ridolfo Coloredo, being marched with the Crabats
toward Weissenfels, to fetch off a Captain, who was left in the Castle with
100. soldiers: he found the King This was the 5th. of November.
with his Army, already advanced far upon his march, in sight of the City,
toward Lutzen. Yet Coloredo came so fit, and in so good a time; that he had
leisure enough (notwithstanding the King had already sent some Musketeers,
But the King comes upon him.
to take in the Castle) to bring off the men with him. This having performed,
Coloredo still valiantly skirmishing, with his few Foot and Crabats; made his
retreat unto Ripach, in sight of the Kings Army.

At this very time, had his Excellency, through the reiterated messages of
Coloredo, given the Alarm unto his Army, by the accustomed sign of shooting
off 3. pieces of Ordnance: notwithstanding all which, it was even now night,
ere the Regiments could have recovered to their place of Rendezvous, about
Lutzen. The King by this time, was comne from Ripach; and had taken up his
lodging, about a league from thence. Walenstein puts his men into array, and
sends back for Pappenheim.
But Colonel Holck for all the darkness of the night, went about to put his
forces into battaglia: and endeavored by perpetual skowtes, to discover the
proceedings of the enemy. Neither wanted his Excellency any diligence, to
dispatch messengers to the Count of Pappenheim: giving him notice of the Kings
resolution; and a command therewithal, to return back with all his forces:
and to advance, in the mean time, his Cavallery and Dragooners, with all
speed possible. This message overtooke him, just at that instant when he had
entered Hall, and had clapped a Petard to the Castle gate: in which there was a
Swedish Commander, with a garrison of 200. soldiers. And thus far are the
very words of my Spanish Relation: wherein, though the defeat given by the
King the night before the Battle, be united: yet, certainly, there be many
other particulars on the Imperial side; which but from one of their own, we
could not have comne at. And so far, in my Readers names, I thank my Spanish
Relater: whom I have done no wrong unto, in Translating. And now have we
brought Walenstein to the stake; for the morrow morning begins the Battle.
This I add, that Gallas, though he were sent for, yet could he not come time
enough to the encounter. What may seem defective here, of Walensteins
Proceedings just before the Battle: shall be supplied by and by, in the
description of the Battle.

The famous Battle of Lutzen; fought the sixth of November 1632. Old Style.
Wherein you have the manner of the King of Swedens death, WITH The overthrow
and flight of the Imperial Army and their Generalissimo; the Lord ALBERT
Walenstein Duke of Fridland, etc.
HOw we have heretofore waited upon that incomparable Prince the King of
Sweden, from Erfurt unto Naumburg; you may remember to have read, page: 73. of
this Book. In which 3. days march of his; there was no such thing as the
defeat of the Count of Merode with 2. Regiments; which the confident Page 823.
The true name of Merode, I am told to be Werningeroda: of a town by
Halberstat, which he is Earl of.
Le Soldat Suedois avoucheth. Nor was Merode at all in the Battle: whom he
makes to be slain there. The only suspicion of any opposition, to be made by
an enemy in all this march, was; a news brought his Majesty by the Boores, of
some 22. Cornets of Crabats under the command of Isolani and his
Lieftenant-Colonel Vorgage (commonly to the Germans known by the name of
Vorgast:) who had been seen a day or two before, about the country. But
these Crabats were only heard of, not encountered with. Pappenheim was also
marched through: without ever so much as offering to take in Erfurt, much less of
fetching any composition or contribution of 2000. dollars, as the same Soldat
Suedois also affirms. page: 812.
Duke William Weymar was in the town with 3000. men (voyced to be 5000) with
Pappenheims small Army of 5000. Foot and 2500. Horse; was much to weak to
have meddled withal: though, by the counsel he gave to Walenstein it
appears; how good a mind he had toward it.

The King (as we told you) being arrived at Naumburg upon Thursday November the
first, (old Style) which is not Saint Martins day, as the former Page: 824.
Saint Martins day is November 11th. Old Style: in all Martyrologies and Roman
Kalenders.
French Author mistaketh: took order to have his Army lodged in the field,
town, and Suburbs; even as we before told you. The same day the King went out
upon a Partee, for discovering of the enemy. After him, that afternoon, went
these 3. Gentlemen of our Nation: Three English Gentlemen taken prisoners by
the Crabats.
Lieftenant-Colonel Francis Terret, Sergeant-Major John Pawlet, and Captain
Edward Fielding, These 3. going alone by themselves, to a forsaken village
where there were 2. ways through it: (the King having gone the left hand way,
and they now taking the right) fell into an ambush of the Crabats: the first
and the last named of these three, were taken prisoners by 2. Rit-masters of
the Crabats: one of them named Potnick, a Greek Captain. This adventure would
I not overpasse: for that these two Gentlemen being carried prisoners into the
Imperial Leaguer; kept under a guard in the Reere of the Army, all the day of
the great Battle; and after haled unto Prague among the fleeing Imperialists:
have had the means to inform me, of what otherwise I could not have comne by.
And thus much they having with much courtesy affoorded me; I could not but
quote them, for my better authority. They were that night carried unto
Weissenfels, where Walenstein, then lay in the Castle of it. He sent the Count
of Pappenheim to them, the same evening; to enquire of the King of Swedens
strength, lodging and intentions. The most of the Imperial Foot, lay now in,
and near about this Weissenfels: 700. or 800. of them keeping guard upon the
marketplace. The Imperialists then gave out themselves to be 50000. but it
appeared to be spoken by a Figure, and to terrify the King: for that they were
not any thing near that number.

To return to the King: His Majesty the next day (being Friday) in person
visited all the Avenues and Passes about the town: and went out again with
great Partees of Horse, to take some prisoners, by whom to learn something of
the enemies. Finding that the Imperialists lay still; and that the Passes by
which he should have gotten to them, were both dangerous and difficult: he
returned at night again, and gave order to entrench the Army before Naumburg
toward Weissenfels. Till the Trenches could be made, The King entrenches
before Naumburg.
the Army lay in the field: after which, the Foot were enquartered in the
Town and Suburbs, and the Horse in the next villages: some 2. or 3000. being
only left abroad all night, to watch the Trenches.

Upon Sunday September 4th. came there a Saxon Boore to Naumburg unto the King;
with a letter in his hand, to show him. The letter was written by the Count
Coloredo Sergeant-Major General of the Imperial Army; unto an Officer of his,
that lay with his Regiment at Querfurdt; on the Western side of the river Sala
right against Hall, and 10. A letter of Coloredoes brought unto the King.
English miles from it. Coloredo had enforced this Boore, to carry this letter:
and the Contents of it were to this purpose. That the Generalissimo had sent
the Count of Pappenheim to take in Hall Castle: That his men of Querfurdt,
should march up to join with Pappenheim: and that the next morning, the
Imperial Army was to part from Weissenfels. This letter seems to have been
written upon the Satterday night: according to which date, it agrees rightly
with Walensteins discamping from about Weissenfels; which was, indeed, done
upon the Sunday; after that Pappenheim was dispatched toward Hall Castle.

A debate being had, whither it were best to fight, or not?
Upon this Intelligence, His Majesty the same day calls Duke Bernard and
Sergeant-Major Kniphausen, to a counsel: propounding the great question unto
them two; whither, that in Pappenheims absence, the Duke of Fridland alone were
to be set upon? Duke Bernard (I am informed) was for the valiant Affirmative:
That the advantage was good; and that seeing they knew not how long they should
enjoy the opportunity of this Division; Walenstein was presently to be attacked.
But Major Kniphausen, was for the sober Negative, and that the enemy was not
to be foughten withal. His Reasons were two.

First, No man is to fight, but when he is apparently stronger then his enemy:
which the King at this time was not.

Kinphausen diswades it.
Secondly, No man is to attacke a stronger enemy, unless compeld by a pressing
and unavoydeable necessity. That is, either to force his passage when he is
hembd in; or when hunger and want of victuals constrain him to it. Neither of
which being the Kings case, there was no reason for present fighting.

Good reasons: which so far prevailed with the King, that giving over all
thoughts of present fighting, Whereupon, the King resolving to go join with
Saxony.
he was resolved to have left a garrison in Naumburg, and to have marched with
his whole Army to conjoyne with the Dukes of Saxony and of Lunenburg.

And these reasons are different (I must confess) from those flourishes of
From Page 815. to Page 820.
Le Soldat Suedois; which take up five whole Pages in him. I dare pawn my
moral and historical Faith upon it, that his muster of reasons there, are but
his own mistakings or Inventions, and never by the King nor Walenstein, so
much as dreamp't of. You here for the Kings part, have Kniphausens two
arguments: and for Walensteins, you may please to take notice of Coloredoes
Letter, and of the Generalissimoes intentions, agreeable to this Letter; which
we have before given you out of our In Walensteins Proceedings,
Spanish Relator. I will but confute my Soldat once more; and that for his
confounding a noble Story, which very next follows in him: and may seem to
cross my Relation. His mistake, (I mean) of Walensteins taking of Leipsich:
which having been done ten days before (full three weeks before St. Martins
day) he now affirms to be but first attempted upon our second of November.
These few Fails have I fairly noted in him; to dis-abuse my Countrymen: to
whom I hear him recommended, for the French Tacitus.

Pardon my digression. The King being thus resolved; sends Post unto the
Elector of Saxony, to inform him of his purposes, and to lay the plot for
their uniting. The King desired him, to come to Eilenburg, upon the West of the
river Mulda, 14 miles West of Torgau, where the Duke then lay: the King
himself resolving that he would advance to meet him unto Pegau first; goes
from Naumburg toward Pegau:
which is upon the Elster 14 miles to the South of Leipsich: and to Grim,
afterward; upon the river Mulda; 18 miles East of Pegau, and 14 to the South
of Eilenburg. True it is, that the Elector of Saxony lay at Torgau at the same
time, with an Army of 4000 Foot, to join with the Duke of Saxony.
and as many Horse: whereof 2000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, were the Duke of
Lunenburgs.

Walenstein the same Sunday, drew out from Weissenfels: leaving a Captain
only with his hundred men, for the keeping of the Castle. Thence marched
Walenstein unto Lutzen, Walenstein goes to Lutzen.
two Dutch Leagues to the East of it: where, and in the Dorps round about it;
his whole Army enquartered.

The next day being Monday, November 5th: the King according to his former
resolution, parted out of Naumburg, to go toward the Duke of Saxony: leaving
the town and garrison, under the Command of the Saxon Colonel Vitzdum. For the
more lightness and expedition in his march; he commanded his Baggage to stay
with the garrison still in Naumburg; for a day or two; being, he thought but
only to have gone and joined with the Elector of Saxony, and then to have
returned again to Naumburg. He supposing, withal, that Pappenheim being now
absent, and Walensteins men not together, that he should not be disturbed in
his march: about four before daylight (the Drums having beaten ever since one
a clock,) on the Monday morning, he advances toward Pegau. The King having
notice, of Walensteins forsaking Weissenfels: sends by the way, to take in that
Castle. The hundred men that Walenstein had left in it, did Coloredo come so
timely to fetch off; that he had done it, a very little, before the Swedes
coming.

In the middle of his march, about ten a clock, the same forenoone, came there
some Gentlemen ryding, and some Boores running to the King; with advice that
the Imperialists were lying still in several Dorps and Villages hard by, The
King having notice by the way, of Walensteins scattered lodging.
about Lutzen; without any intelligence at all, of the Kings being in motion.
This the King being informed of: convokes presently his high Officers to a
Council of War; to advise what were best to be determined. His Majesty, even
then, (and then first) put on the resolution for fighting: openly speaking it
out, That He now verily supposed, that God had given his enemies into his hand.
Ho! brave occasion, says the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg. Now God bless us (say
diverse great Officers) it is a happy opportunity. And truly so it was: for
diverse prisoners (even then brought in, by the Kings Partees, and by the
Boores) being by the King examined whither they had any Alarm in their
Quarters, of his marching: freely confessed that they had none, And so much was
evident enough, for that they were now surprised in their Quarters. Thus
thought all the Officers: all being resolved to fall on presently. And, indeed,
there was great reason for it: resolves to fall upon his Quarters.
for could the Kings Army have fallen in amongst those villages; he had given a
Camisado to several of their Quarters at once; have cut them off singly: for
that they could never have comne together, to unite their Forces, or have
succored one another. This was evident.

And thus near were 100000 good men's hopes and wishes, of having arrived to
the very highest of their expectations: nothing in the whole world being
betwixt the King of Swedens desires and his absolute victory; but the length of
the way only. The Gentlemen and Boores that brought him the Intelligence, told
him Lutzen was but hard by: which the King was in good hope of, for that He was
even then in sight of it. The Army advanced stoutly, and doubled their march
upon it: but their legs found it a longer way then their eyes; it being a sad
Campagnia; full eight English miles of ground to Lutzen. Besides all this, was
there a filthy Pass in the way, at a Bridge over a River; (where but one or
two men could go over abreast) which hindered the Army full two hours going.
By this hinderance, was it even night, before the Army could get within two
English miles of Lutzen: so that had the King (as he said) but two hours more
of daylight; of which victory; the length of the way, and shortness of the
day; defeated him.
Walenstein (doubtless) had been taken Sleeper: had been ex-Imperator'd, and
un-Generalissimo'd. But God that is both Ancient of Days, and Lord of Hosts,
had otherwise disposed of it: He had made the way so long, and the time so
short; (no doubt) for a better purpose.

This ill-fauoured Pass, was within two English miles of Lutzen: and in the
Village that belonged to it, were there two Imperial Regiments of Horse (one
of them Crabats) enquartered. These having a little notice of the Kings coming
had gotten upon their Horses, and taken up a high hill on the other side of the
Pass, next to Lutzen. They made as though they would have disturbed the Kings
Passage; but they did not; the Kings Foot marching fairly over, with some
Horse amongst them. Some of the Kings Foot, were still marching over, till it
was dark night, or within it. Those that got over first, entertained a slight
skirmish with the Imperial Horsemen: without any loss to the King, He rowtes
two Regiments of the enemies.
killing some 50. or 100. of them, and taking one Crabats Ensign. And now the
King taking another hill, (right against that, which the Imperialists
possessed) he from thence let fly some pieces of Ordnance amongst them: which
caused them to take the benefit of the night, with some confusion to march off
in.

This is that Ensign, so much spoken of: which had Fortune and the Imperial
Eagle, depainted upon it. But it is no such raritie; for that most (or all) of
the Crabats Ensigns, have the displayed Eagle for their bearing. This was
presented to the King for a fair Omen; as if He had already now conquered,
both Fortune and the Eagle. But the King (it is reported) took no great content
at it: being sorry (I believe) for that the night had prevented him, for taking
more of them.

and is feign to sit down till the morning.
And here the King being surprised with the darkness; was forced to sit down
in the open fields, with his Army: himself lying in his Coach, as other
Officers did that had them. Here lay he all night in Battaglia: every Regiment
lying down, in the same order that they had marched, with their Arms by them.
The Pikemen, they stuck up their Pikes an-end by them: and every Rott, (that
is every six) of Musketeers bringing their Muskets to their Rottmaster: he
set them right up with their mouths upward, and bound them together with a
piece of Match: where they stood ready at hand, for all occasions.

The Imperial Army was in a terrible Hubub, at the Kings coming over the
Pass: for now was the Alarm sent in hot, to all the several Dorps and
Quarters, even from Lutzen unto Hall and Leipsich. Order upon pain of death
was given, for every man with all speed possible; to repair toward Lutzen, to
their Generalissimo. Presently upon this, began all the Regiments to draw
together; some of which, were all night upon their marches: and some Horse that
were Quartered very far off, being not able to reach up, till ten a clock
next morning. And thus (even then) did the mist so long keep off the King
next morning, till his enemies could be made strong enough for him.

As every Regiment came in, so were they put into order: which continued all
night long; as the two English Gentlemen (then prisoners there) observed. About
ten at night, did Walenstein begin to think of the places most advantageous,
for the planting of his Ordnance: some of which, having mounted upon the
Windmill hills; he then began to cast up a trench of earth about them. All
night and next morning, his Dragooners and Pioners, wrought with their Spades
about the Highway; and to make the Ditches, or Draine by it, serve them for a
Brest-worke, to lodge their Musketeers in. And this was their work too, all
the next misty morning; which fatal weather gave them also the more respite,
to recover their fears and wearinesses; and to fortify themselves against
their unconquered enemy. And thus was the night (the last night to some
thousands) overpassed.

The King now over the Pass, had put himself into a necessity of fighting:
and being thus engaged, the sooner he fought, the better: for that his enemy
should be the less provided for him. The Bride, therefore; more longd not for
her wedding morning, nor slept less, then the King that night did. Tuesday,
(that fatal 6th. of November) at last began to draw near: and alas! it came
all to early. A gentle mist, as if fore-dooming how black a day it would be;
did his good will to have kept it night still: and the Sun, as if his great
eye had beforehand over-read the fatality of the following day, seemed very
loath to have begun it. So sweet a correspondencie (though secret) and so
sensible a compassion, betwixt Gods more noble instruments, there is; that the
day had rather have been no day, then become Gustavus his last day: and the
Sun had rather have concealed his own glory, then his fellow Gustavus
beams, should be extinguished. But the martial King, even forcing himself to
awaken Time, and hasten on mortality; would needs make those clocks and larums
of the wars, his fatal Drums, to beat two hours before daylight. Arm,
Arm, Repair to your Colors, keep your Orders, stand to your Arms: these
were the morning summons, to awaken the hearty soldiers; from a cold, a hard,
and an earthly lodging. The Army was easy to be put in order, for that the
most part of it, had lain, and slept in Battaglia. One while, was the King
purposed to have advanced, and fallen on presently: but the war being Gods
cause; he would, like David and Himself, first ask counsel of the God of
Battles: and at least recommend His own cause unto Him. The Drums having
beaten the first March, He caused prayers to be read to himself, by his own
Chaplain Doctor Fabritius: and where there were Ministers at hand, the same
was done through every Regiment of the Army.

The morning proved so mistie, that it was not possible to see which way to
march; nor where to find an enemy to strike at. And this (unluckily) staid the
Kings thoughts, from advancing presently. This was a fogge of advantage, unto
Walenstein: who purposing but to stand his ground; (which by working all night
about the ditch and highway, his Pioners had made more troublesome to be
assaulted) was now resolved; that if he must fight, he would there abide the
first shocke: and no way to seek the Battle, or to move toward his
Adversary.

About 8. a clock, the mist brake up: and (but for one mischance in it)
promised as fair a day, as ever was 6th. of November. As it began to clear,
the King took occasion to encourage up his soldiers: and going to his own
Subjects first, The Kings Orations,
he to this purpose bespake them. My dear brethren; carry your selves bravely
this day: fight valiantly, a Gods name, to the Swedes;
for your Religion, and for your King. This if you do, Gods blessing, and the
peoples praises, shall be your guerdon: and you for ever shall even be laden,
with an honorable and a glorious memorial: nor will I forget to reward you
nobly. If you play the Pultrons, I here call God to witness, that not a bone
of you shall ever return again into Sweden.

To the Germane Troops, this was the Oration, To the Germans.
o you my Brethren, Officers and fellow soldiers of the Germane nation! I here
most earnestly entreat and beseech you, to make full trial of your valors
this one day, against your enemies. Fight manfully against them this day, both
with me, and for me. Be not faint-hearted in the Battle, nor for any thing
discouraged. Set me before your eyes, and let me be your great example: even
me, who dreadlessely for your cause, am here ready to adventure my life and
blood, to the uttermost of any danger. This if you do, there is no doubt but
that God himself, will from Heaven reward you with a most glorious victory:
of which both your selves and long posterity, shall plentifully enjoy the
benefits. This if you do not, farewell for ever to your Religion: and your
liberties must for ever remain enslaved.

These Orations of the Kings, being from both nations, with a horride clashing
of their Armor, and with cheerful vows and acclamations, answered; the King
as cheerfully then replied. And now, my hearts, let us on bravely against our
enemies: and God prosper our endeavors. Sprightfully withal casting up his
eyes to Heaven, he with a loud voice thither sent up this forcible ejaculation.
Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, The Kings Prayers.
vouchsafe thou this day, to be my strong helper; and give me courage this day
to fight for thy glory, and the honor of thy great Names sake. This Prayer
(according to other Relations) I find that he sometimes thus varied (for he led
on, praying:) o my Lord Jesus, Son of God! bless these our Arms, and this
days Battle, for thine own glory, and holy names sake. This said, he drew
out his sword, which waving over his head, he advanced forward, the foremost of
all his Army.

His royal person was that day waited upon, His attendance.
by Duke Francis Charles of Saxon-Lawenburg; and by some of his Majesty's own
nearest servants. The Lord Crailsham also, Great Master or Marshall of his
Majesty's Household; had the leading of a body of Reformadoes; which were
especially commanded, to wait upon the Kings own person. And amongst these,
were our English and Scottish Gentlemen and Officers; whom (as I have before
told you) the King had at Schleusing heretofore Reformed. Of this Body, (which
consisted of several nations) were there still 3. or 4. close about the King,
ready to be sent with orders, up and down the Army: who were still supplied
by Crailsham. The King was that day attired, as usually he was accustomed, in a
plain Buff-coate, and un-armed. Some report, that a tenderness he had in his
shoulder, where a Musket bullet had a long time stuck: would not suffer him to
endure armor. And therefore when he was this morning desired to put on his
Corslet, he said The Lord God was his Armor; and refused it.

The Kings Watchword, was the same which had been of so good an Omen, His
Watchword.
before at Leipsich, GOT MIT VNS: God with Us. The General Walensteins being
now the same, which Tillyes then was; JESUS MARIA. This was the Kings order of
Embattailing. His whole Army, (which now, after he had left some at Naumburg,
and at Weissenfels, was between 17 and 18000 men) he divided into two Fronts;
and each of these, into the Wings and Battle; with their Reserves. Each of the
Wings, were composed of six several Regiments or Squadrons of Horse; lined
with five several Bodies, His Order.
of Commanded Musketeers: every one of which Bodies, had two small Drakes or
Feilding Pieces, which advanced playing still before them. The Battle in each
Front, consisted of four Brigades of Foot: a Reserve of Foot, being betwixt
the two middle Brigades of the first Front; and a Reserve of Horse hindmost of
all, betwixt the two middle Brigades of the Reere or Second Front. Before each
Brigade, marched six Pieces of greater Ordnance: and thus much the first sight
of the Figure shows you.

The Right Wing, marked with the Letter I, was led by the King himself: whose
place is to be seen just over the said letter, and number 6. near to the
first Brigade. The five Bodies of Commanded Musketeers, all marked with the
number 7. were commanded by the Count of Eberstein. The Horse Squadrons of the
left Wing, were committed unto the glory of the Day, Duke Bernard of Saxon
Weymar: whose place is at the letter K, over the number 12. by the fourth
Brigade of Footmen. The five Bodies of Foot in this left Wing, marked with 13:
were the charge of the Colonel Gersdorff: The Battle made up of the four
Brigades of Foot, was commended to the Swedish Count of Neeles, Colonel of the
Kings Life-guards. The four Foot Brigades of the Second Front or Reere, were
Commanded by Dodo Kniphausen, Sergeant-Major General of the whole Army: to
whose fair Conduct, the Victory is also much beholden. The Horse of the Right
Wing were entrusted to Colonel Claus Conrade Zorn, of Bulach: by which name of
Bulach he is commonly known. The Horse of the Left Wing, were committed to
Prince Ernest of Anhalt. The Reserve of Foot marked with 37, was commanded by
Colonel John Hinderson, a Scottish Gentleman: and the Reserve of Horse, marked
with 38, by Colonel Oeme, of the Palatinate.

The Imperial Army, had his Excellency the Generalissimo, Walensteins order.
thus ordered. He first drew it all up into one mighty Front: which he then
divided into three Bodies. His Right wing of Horse, marked with the letter A,
(whose end was near the Town of Lutzen,) was committed to the Count Ridolfo
Coloredo, that day Sergeant-Major General of the Army. This Wing, had also
its commanded Musketeers: besides some others that were lodged in the gardens,
by the town aforesaid. This Wing having also the advantage of the Windmills
and their hills, by the towne-side: made use of those natural Batteries, for
the planting of 9. pieces of Ordnance: the Mills and Millers house, serving
them also for a good shelter. The Battle or Middle-Ward, marked with the letter
B, was commanded by the Duke of Fridland himself, whose place was said to be
in the head of that great Regiment of Piccolomini'es Horse, which is in the
very middle of the Foote-Regiments, marked with 49. The Left Wing, opposite to
the Right Wing, and marked with the letter C: was led by Colonel Hendrick Holck;
newly made Lieftenant-Felt-Marshall unto Pappenheim: who but commanded till
Felt-Marshall Pappenheim should be comne into the Field.

All this Imperial Order of embatteling, I have presented in one mighty Front:
so, namely, as it appeared to the Kings people, and to him that took the
Figure of it: since (very largely) cut and imprinted in Copper, The Figure
described.
by John Iaacob Gabler of Leipsich: who also by the Kings own directions, and
the description of Oluff Hans his Majesty's Enginiers; last year set forth the
Figures of the Battle of Leipsich. And the manner of the same Figures of the
Battle of Leipsich; we have in this also followed. We know, that betwixt every
Brigade of Foot, there should be so much room left, as that another Brigade
might advance up between: the distance between them, being the breadth of one
of them. But our Cutter (plainly) to make his Figures fairer, has straightned
the distances. And this (I hope) is mended, by telling of. The 2. Reserves
also, were to be drawn up between the 2. Brigades that stand next before
them: but these we have left behind, as Oluff Hans in the Battle of Leipsich
also did: which, I suppose, was there done; for distinctions sake to the vulgar
beholder; every soldier knowing the true place of them. The explication of the
several letters and numbers, shall follow by it self, immediately after the
Figure of the Battle.

Having thus described the Order; the Field of the Battle would next be
considered of. The King had a North-Easterly march of it, from Naumburg toward
Lutzen: so that the rising Sun was something within a while, favorable. The
wind, also, (that little that was) blew fairly for him: so that the King very
joyfully spoke it, I thank God I have both wind and Sun to favor me.

The Country was a goodly vast level and Campagnia, as Corne-lands could be;
even, The field described.
as far almost as the eye could roave over. And yet was the place of Battle
subject to as many accidents (and Walenstein was Master of them all) as a
plain country almost could be. The King, right in his way of advancing, had a
wet ditch (made by hand) called the Flossgraben, cut traverse to him: so that
he was feign to edge about to the Right, with his whole Army; to pass by it:
and then to edge as much to the left again, to put himself right before the
enemy. The Imperial Army was embatteled all along beyond a broad highway,
which led from Lutzen unto Leipsich. On this side of this, was there a kind of
broad draine or ditch, which served for bounding and saving the ploughed
lands, and to keep withal, the Highway the dryer. Advantageous for
Walenstein.
This had Walensteins Pioners bestowed some cost upon: so that putting some
commanded Musketeers down into it, it served them as well as a Trench or
Brest-worke. This was so troublesome for the Kings Horsemen, that many of them
were overturned and left behind, in the getting over to charge Walenstein: for
indeed there were diverse gaps through it, which the Horse iustling for,
overturned one another. The ground also, behind the ditch, had 2. little
risings: and those did Walenstein make choice of, for the planting of those
Pieces, marked with the letter F, in the Figure. That Part of the Highway also
toward Lutzen; had an old Trench or dry ditch, drawn to it; which being
nothing of it self, but a Boundary for lands; that also did Walenstein put
Musketeers into: which served them like the Highway ditch, for a Parapet or
Brest-worke. This is marked with the Gallobelgicus Figure of the Battle, has
omitted this Trench. He has also turned the Highway wrong
letter H. A pretty distance beyond the Highway, near unto the Town of
Lutzen, (marked with D,) were there 3. or 4 Wind-mills: amongst which, the
letter E stands. Behind these, had Walenstein lodged some Musketeers: and
the Mill-hills served as natural Batteries for him to plant 9. pieces of
Ordnance upon. Between the Mills and the town, were there diverse gardens with
mudd-walls round about them: and in these also, (in one of them 300. being
after found dead) had he caused Musketeers to be placed. Leipsich Highway, as
it went sloaping along: so had he caused his men to bend and hang toward it.

And now to the Action. The Sun having by 9. a clockc clearly dispeld the
Fogge; it proved as promising a morning, as ever was 6th. of November: and that
commendation should our Almanacks have hereafter given it, but for one
mischance in it. And now the King shot his losing or warning-peece; and so
advanced.

The King advances.
Being passed the Floss-graben: He left also the Dorp of Chursitz behind him:
betwixt which and his Army, he left his Coach and Ammunition-wagons: of which
there were not above 100 at most: the King having left the rest at Naumburg,
with no purpose of fighting. The King advanced, till he came with the end of
his Right Wing, within Musket shot of a little wood: having all the way a full
view of the Imperial Army.

That Walenstein much over-powred the King in numbers; may appear by the
mighty long Front that he put out; full 2. English miles, from one Wings end to
another. This is also to be considered: Walensteins numbers much more then the
Kings.
that Walensteins (and all the old) Discipline; is to march 10. deep in File:
whereas the King, was no more but 6. deep: of Foot (I mean:) and of Horse,
but 3. or 4. deep: according as the Brigades were either stronger or weaker.
Besides this, that Walensteins Files were all the way almost as deep again;
his Ranks also were in Front so much longer: The King enforced to lengthen out
his Right Wing
that the King was feign to send for Bulach, and all the Squadrons of Horse,
from the Right Wing of the Reere or second Front to imp out his Feathers at the
end of his Right Wing: for fear that Walenstein should surround him. These
Squadrons when Generall-Major Kniphausen missed out of their places; he sent a
Gentleman to his Majesty: to know whither he had otherwise employed them? The
King was at the same time, likewise; sending the the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg
unto Kniphausen; to tell him, that he would but use them in that first charge;
and then return them back again to their Order. The Duke meeting with the
Gentleman, and telling him thus much: both then returned to their places.

The King wondered not a little at it, when he saw how fair a Clew Walenstein
spread: affirming to these about him; That if he had any Seconds behind his
first Front; he could not judge him to be less then 30000. True it is indeed,
that Walenstein had given out Proviant Comissions for 40000. and sometimes for
50000. people: but yet had he not so many fighting men: for that there were at
least 10000. women, servants, children, and such Hang-byes, belonging to the
Army; which are to be discounted. Besides this, it is to be considered, that
Walenstein had but one Front, and the King 2. so that we may well allow
Walenstein to be 20000. in the First Front: at the very first ordering of the
Battle. After which, accounting those that were still coming in, even till
10. a clock; and Pappenheims Horse and Dragooners, which came in about one or
two a clock: and his Foot, thought to make the second fierce charge toward
night: and then (doubtless) these could not be fewer then 10. on 12000. which
made up in all, full 30000. fighting men.

The Armies being comne within Cannon shot, the great Ordnance, began to play
one upon another, terribly. The Air roared, and the earth trembled: and those
manly hearts that feared not dying, were yet very loath to have no more play
for their lives, then to be beaten to pieces, with the bullet of a Cannon. And
here had Walenstein, surely, a great advantage over the Kings Army: The Battle
begun with great Ordnance.
for his Ordnance being all ready planted upon steaddy and fixed Batteries: the
Canoniers traversed their Pieces, and delivered their bullets with more aim,
then the Kings men could possibly: who gave fire in motion still, and
advancing. His Majesty's Cannon, ever as a piece was discharged, was there left
to be brought after: the Army still advancing, and marching away from it.
Plainly, the King liked not this sport: for that the Imperial Cannon did his
men far more spoil and execution; then he possibly could again return
them. Seeing therefore no good to be done this way, he causes his Army to
advance upon the very mouth of the Cannon, and to charge toward the Highway,
and to beat out those Musketeers, that were lodged in it.

The Imperial Army stood their ground all this time; expecting that the
fierceness of their enemies charge, would indifferently well be abated, by
that time they had beaten out those Musketeers, and had put themselves out of
order and breath, with scambling over the ditches. And indeed the place being
almost man's height, a many of the Kings Horsemen, were there left tumbling up
and down; but of the rest that gat over, this was the order of their Charge.
The commanded Musketeers, and the Foot of the Swedes Brigade having cleared
the Highway: the whole Front advanced to charge together.

The order of the first charge.
This whilst they were doing; the little Drakes or Field-Peeces, (2. of which
marched before every Body of Musketeers, that lined the Horse of the Wings)
were first fired: and the Musketeers at the same time giving their first
Saluee: the Horse then charged home upon the Imperial Horse: by the Drakes and
Musketeers, something before disordered. This order was held in the first
charge, by the whole Front of the Army: but I must now leave the Battle and
Left Wing engaged, to speak of the Right Wing first; where the King in person
commanded.

The King at his first advancing, having observed whereabouts in the Imperial
Left Wing; (now opposite to him) the Crabats were marshalled; and where the
Curiassiers; (who were completely armed in black harness Cap a pied) he calls
the Finnish Colonel Stolhanshe to him, (as it is likely he did other Colonels, as
he rode along:) and pointing to the enemy. As for those fellows (meaning the
Crabats) I care not for them; The Kings speech of the Imperial Curiassiers.
says the King: but charge me those black fellows soundly: for they are the
men that will undo us. Thus much did Stolhanshe himself oftentimes, (and at
table) relate unto diverse Gentlemen of our Nation: Some of which tell the Kings
words from Stolhanshes mouth, this way. Charge me those black fellows
soundly: for it is prophesied that they shall be the ruin of me. But this word
prophecy, others confess that they heard not.

The King fought at the head of the Smolanders Squadron. The couragiousnesse of
the King.
Himself was still the foremost: with his pistol in one hand, and his sword in
the other; and when his pistolls were discharged, laying on, and slashing with
his sword: and the enemy giving fire in his face, and laying at him again,
freely. Some have complained, that only with the Smolanders Squadron, which
you shall find at the number 6. and the Ostro Goths, at the number 5. or at
most the Vplanders, at the number 4. did now only advance and charge the
enemy. Perchance these 3. now gat the start, and were something forward, then
the 3. Squadrons of the Ingermanlanders, the West-Goths, and the Finlanders:
whom you see in their orders and numbers; 3. 2. 1. toward the end of the Wing.
These 3. Squadrons, indeed, fell not on at the same place with the King; but
advanced directly upon the faces of those 3. Imperial Regiments of
Curiassiers, which you see right before them, at the numbers 56. 57. 58. Nor
were they blamed after the Battle, for any slacknesse or not charging: for
that the King (as we told you) had ordered Stolhanshe to charge these
Curiassiers soundly. And as for Bulach and those Squadrons of his, now placed
to the right hand of Stolhanshe and his Fins, beyond number 1; they were in the
very beginning of the encounter so diverted; that they could not charge right
forward as the King expected. And for that, this is the true reason. That
Regiment of Crabats in the very end of the Imperial Left Wing, which you see
in the Mapp, at the number 59. did in the very beginning of the charge, wheel
about betwixt the Wood, and the end of the Kings Right Wing; The Crabats
wheeling about upon the Kings Wagons:
and there endeavor to fall upon the Swedish Ammunition-Wagons, in the Reere
of the Army. These Crabats would have made a foul pudder among the ammunition,
and have blown up most of the powder, doubtless; had not Bulach had an eye to
them. He giving a home charge upon them; beat them off from the wagons, for the
present: but the Swedish Colonel facing it about, are beaten off by Bulach.
to return to his own place again; was by the Crabats charged upon the
croopes, and put to some disorder. And this dis-array is easy enough to be
believed: for that the manner of the Crabats fighting, being but for a spirt,
and in no good order: whosoever will answer their charge, must necessarily do
it in disorder too: or else they cannot follow the Crabats; to do any good
upon them. And just now, fell the mist again: which did this good in that part
of the Battle, that this disorder among the Swedish Horse, was not discerned;
and so no advantage taken of it.

In this Interim, yea just at this instant; was the King slain: You see so
loath I have been to come to it; that I have wheeld about in my Relation, after
the Crabats: rather then too suddenly to strike the Readers hearts dead; with
the same bullets and wounds, that the King now died withal. But I must come to
it.

The King (as was said) out of the greatness and heat of his courage; having
made a home charge upon those iron-men, the Curiassiers, according as himself
had spoken to Stolhansh; he was there overlaid with numbers: for his men being
in danger to be hembd in, both by them and Piccolomini, whose Regiment now also
charged: were feign to give ground, and to retire toward their own Bodies
again. There did the King receive a shot in the left Arm: which he not
feeling enough at first, thought it had been nothing; and would needs have led
on still. The King being wounded in the fight:
But perceiving by and by his royal blood to gush out abundantly; and that
part of the bone was withal broken: he thus calls to Duke Francis Albert of
Saxon-Lawenburg: Cousin (says the King) I am sorely wounded, help me to make
my retreat. This whilst the Duke, and those that were with the King and him,
were about to do, and were already turned, (the Squadrons that the King
charged withal, being now also put unto the retreat) there came up to them an
Officer or Cavalier of the Curiassiers; who too well knew the King and observed
him, when his face had been toward him. This Curiassier, coming behind the
King, as he was now retreating; in his retreat shot through the Body.
This is the right Bird, (says he) with his pistol at the same time, shooting
him through the Body. But the Curiassier (though this were no sufficient
satisfaction for such a Kings life) did not carry it away so: for that Luchau
who was Stall-master, (Master of the Horse) unto the Duke of Lawenburg; shot
him dead presently: He slain, that shot the King.
that no man might ever live to glory, how he had slain the King of Sweden.

The King was held up in his saddle a very little while: but the Curiassiers
charged so fiercely in upon the Swedish; that they were not able to bring off
the dying King, who fell presently. And plied he was with bullets, even in that
interim: his Horse being also shot in the shoulder about the neck; The King
falls.
who ran homewards to the Swedish Bodies, without his royal Master: even
very lately, the soul of all those Swedish Bodies.

And just now, fell the mist: the Sun, who before shined so brightly, (even
almost from the height of his Meridian, it being now past a 11. a clock) on
the sudden muffling up his face in a mourning Cloud: as if not able to look
upon, the falling King of Sweden. The Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg seeing the King
fall, and his men beaten back, gave all for lost presently: shifting himself
withal out of the Battle, unto Weissenfells. This made him to be so ill
spoken of, Saxon Lawenburg gets him out of the Battle.
through the whole Army; and to be censured for worse then cowardice: the
soldiers not sparing to charge treachery upon him. But this scandal, those
that better knew him have thus excused. The troth is, that he had been at
Vienna till the end of June before: had since that time served the
Imperialists; and was but a fortnight or three weeks since, comne into the
Kings Army. So that he fearing all lost, gatt him out of the Battle unto
Weissenfels; that he might have this to answer to the Imperialists, should they
become victorious; that he was not at all in the Battle. But hearing, that
night, how the Swedish had the victory; he was by 4. a clock next morning in
the field, as forward as the foremost. However, he was the man that first gave
abroad the rumor, that the King was killed: and by him was it sooner known in
Weissenfels, then in the Kings own Army. This Duke finding no employment,
after the Battle, nor great good will among the Army toward him: went after
2. or 3. days, to his Cousin the Elector of Saxony; who sent him to the Army
in Silesia, and there he is now Felt-Marshall, unto Lieftenant-Generall Arnheim.

All this while, are the Imperialists masters of the Kings body; and of the
ground they had beaten the Swedish from. They had the King, I say, in their
possession; and there they stripped him first of all: The King stripped
every man being greedy to get some part of his spoils, that they might
hereafter glory to have taken it, from the King of Sweden. Some got his
Spurs: one of which, had the buckle broken of it: a common soldier got his
Sword, another his Ring, which was presented to Holck: his Buff-coate, his Hat,
and other parts of his clothes; all were now pillaged from him.

Why not carried off, by the Imperialists.
And this greediness of the soldiers, (every man to get something) was one of
the causes that his body was not carried off, and kept for ransom. Another
reason for which might be, that every man believed him not to be the King of
Sweden; for notwithstanding that himself told them he was the King: yet diverse
(for all that) suspected him rather to be some great man, that said so to save
his own life: as desirous rather to be taken prisoner.

Several reports there went abroad the Army, of the circumstances of his
manner of dying. Some relate it thus, that one Truckses who waited upon the
King in his chamber, being himself fallen down wounded besides the King (and
after brought off alive) was demanded by an Officer of the enemies, Who the
King was? and that asking the same question of the King, he should answer That
he was the King of Sweden; whereupon he thrust him through the body with a broad
sword, and then ran away: for that the Swedes now charged. Not much varying
from this, is the Letter of Nicephorus Kesel, Preacher unto Duke Bernard: who
names one Loebelfinger (a young Gentleman) in stead of Truckses. This
Loebelfinger, is son to Colonel Loebelfinger of Norimberg: who was now
servant, indeed, unto the Lord Marshall Crailsham: and so very likely to be
near the Kings Person.
Adding that some Horsemen of the enemies a-lighting to strip the dead bodies,
asked the King who he was; who answered, I am the King of Sweden; who do seal
the Religion and Liberty of the Germane Nation, with my blood. After which
subjoyning, Alas my poor Queen! and commending his soul to God; they then
killed this dying Conqueror. For one of the Imperialists at this time shot him
through the head, into the right temple, the bullet passing again out at the
left: another, thrust his sword into his body and right side: and he, or a
third; gave him a chop withal in the leg; and so left him naked, with five
wounds upon him: The dying King wounded and mangled.
the Swedes by that time coming on to charge again. This was reported by the
young Gentleman (says the Preacher) who having there received three wounds,
was laid among the dead as one of them, but being afterward brought off alive,
he then reported thus of it. But were it Truckses, or were it Loebelfinger:
he is said to have dyed of his wounds, so soon as ever he was fetched off: so
that he had no time nor strength, to tell more of it. That there is a
difference in the names, is an easy mistake: especially so suddenly after that
huddle. Truckses might report it from Loebelfinger; Different reports,
reconciled.
or Loebelfinger from Truckses: However, I have diverse Writings that run upon
the same thing: and therefore, surely, there was at that time such a belief
amongst a many in the Army. This probability is very much strengthened, by the
Imperial soldiers own report of it, made at Prague to those Gentlemen of our
nation, then prisoners there. How, namely, that the King being first wounded
and in his retreat pursued by them, would as they offered to shoot and strike
at him, call out and say, That he was the King of Sweden. My Spanish Relation
adds this to it. In the beginning of the encounter, one Innocentius Bucela,
Comrade to Colonel Piccolomini, knew the King, as he lay wounded and dying upon
the ground: whereof giving Piccolomini notice, The Imperialists go to see the
dying King.
he with ten more went to see the Body, which was yet quivering: and whilst
they were about to bring it away; a troop of the enemies charging, forced them
to retire and leave it. The noise of his death, was presently dispersed abroad:
but yet belief was not fully given to it, for that some prisoners affirmed
that he was but hurt, and carried in a close Coach, following his white
Ensign. Thus far my Spaniard. All this might be true. The Swedish prisoners
that reported him to be but wounded: were those that were taken so soon as
ever he offered to retreat: and before he was shot the second time. But that
they said he was carried off in his Coach, etc. was their Judgment: that being
wounded, it was likely he would go off in his Coach, which at first stood
behind the White Regiment.

What, now, if putting all these together, we should suppose Piccolomini
himself and his Company, A conjecture:
to be the men, that thus questioned and wounded, the dying King of Sweden? Was
it for merely charging with his Regiment, when the King of Sweden was first
shot, that Walenstein afterward bestowed as much Lands in Bohemia upon him, as
he was offered 400000 Dollars for, which amounts to 100000 pound Sterling? But
this I make but a suspicion, no accusation: nor have I heard it from Prague,
that Piccolomini should thus use him.

Past conjecture it is, that he who could not be conquered, was there slain,
and for the principal manner, in this very fashion: in the possibility and
circumstances whereof, I for mine own part do rest satisfied. His death was
known but to some few, of the great ones, (no not to those of his own Army or
Wing, The Kings death concealed from his own Army.
) for 24 hours after: all believing, what was either by Art or Error, given
out; how that he was but carried off wounded. Hence it is, that the Letters
written the very same night, speak so doubtfully of his death; or so hopefully
of his life: and that those few words, which He is reported to have spoken,
when he lay on the ground a dying; were after mistaken to be uttered at
Weissenfels, in that 6 hours, or 36 hours, which he was said to have lived.
The Royal Corpse; was after a quarter of an hour, recovered by Colonel
Stolhanshe: and in an Ammunition wagon (out of which the powder was purposely
shifted) was it privately carried out of the Field unto Weissenfels: for that
his Coach was run away among others, The Body recovered.
in the fright which the Crabats lately put the wagons to. And this long
insertion concerning the manner of the Kings death, I confess to be rather
seasonable, then methodicall: The Authors excuse.
an Historian (I know) would rather have referred all this, unto the latter end
of the Combat. But for that I have still observed, how curiously inquisitive
men have been, after the manner of the Kings death: I supposed that an
endeavor to give content, in that kind, would be no unseasonable
didistraction; (though the very heat and fiercest of the encounter in other
parts, be a while deferred) to those that so much longed for it: yea more, then
for any other part of the Story.

Return we now into the Battle, and to the Right Wing again. The mist that
we before told you of; was not (by their own side) judged to be any way
prejudicial, but advantageous rather unto the Swedish: seeing that the
Imperialists who had now the better of it, were by the falling of this Mist so
arrested, as that they pursued not the Retreat, which they had put the Swedish
unto. The rumor likewise of the Kings death, made them so to clutter about the
Body; that that also stayed them.

All this while were the four Foot Brigades of the Swedish Battle, pell mell
at it: The Second charge.
and they (even by my Spaniards confession) gat ground a-pace of those
Imperialists whom they had attacked. And now also did Stolhanshe (who certainly
had an Item given him of the Kings death, or great danger, by Crailsham,
Saxon-Lawenburg, or some other) charge so fiercely toward that very place, The
Kings body recovered
that he beat off the Imperialists, recovered the Kings Body: which he brought
off naked; after it had been a full quarter of an hour in the enemies
possession. And now was Piccolominies Regiment soundly peppered: the Swedish
both Foot and Horse after an hours fight, beating all the Imperialists along
before them; till they had driven them to the very gallows, which you see
behind them. And now did the Swedish get possession of these 7. and the
Imperialists beaten to the gallows
pieces of Ordnance which you see together at the letter F, under the number
50. which was Piccolominies Horse Regiment. These Ordnance were the easier to
be taken, for that they played not, Walensteins Powder-Wagons were by mischance
blown up so that his Cannon were scarce heard of, all the day after.

And thus ended the second Charge: for by this time was the mist becomne so
extraordinary, and by the smoke so thickened, as the Swedes could not see how
to pursue their adva^tage. And here was the mist, becomne as beneficial to the
Imp. as it had been favorable before, unto the Swedish. In this time fell
there so terrible an affrightment in the Imperial Army; that 1000. or 1500.
Dutch Horse, ran all away together. One of them was by a Gentleman of our
nation (then prisoner in their Reere) overheard to say: Oh, I know the King of
Sweden well enough, I have served him; he is best at the latter end of a day.
But the chiefest fright was among the Ladies, the Captains wives, and other
women, then behind the Army. Many Gentlewomen gat out of their Coaches, cut
asunder the harness, and mounted stradlings upon the bare horse backs, and
away they spudded among the soldiers. Now went the Wagon-horses and the
Ordnance-horses to it; all were ridden away with. Diverse women and children,
were there trodden to death: nor would the Horsemen turn head, notwithstanding
they heard the charge presently again renewed, and those about the Mills, all
this time at it: till they were gotten over a Pass, 4. or 5. English from the
place of Battle. The fright so pursued them, though no body else did: that
coming to this Pass, the Officers drew out their swords, and slasht and beat
off the soldiers, to give them way to get over it. There were at least 4. or
5000. people of them, and they quartered themselves confusedly up and down in
the villages which the Boores had forsaken: nor durst they ever return into
the Battle. Amongst these was my Author carried away: from whom I learned it.
Pappenheim renewing the charge;


After a little pause, the Count of Pappenheim with his Horse and Dragooners,
arrived; whom some will needs have, to have been in person at the beginning of
the battle. By his coming, was the charge thereabouts renewed. He put
himself into the Imperial Left Wing, (which was most distressed, and which
had been reserved for him:) to be opposite to the Swedish Right Wing; where he
supposed the King in person had commanded. is slain.
Just as he was ordering his Horse, he was struck with a bullet of a Falconet,
or small Sling-peece about the shoulder; of which he died presently: even so
soon as he was taken down from his horse, to have been carried unto
Leipsich. This was a brave fighting Gentleman: whose body was by Walenstein
carried unto Prague; where it was to be seen publickely. The Emperor (as a
little French Relation that I have, affirms) had newly sent the Collar of the
Golden Fleece unto him and Walenstein: which honor, before ever he received;
he was in the place where he should have worn his Order, thus dubbed with a
Sling-peece. He had make his Will, a little before: had shryven himself and
communicated at a dry-Masse: and made this short Testament upon it. His Soul,
he commended to God; his Body (if he were slain) to the Emperor: and his wife
and children, unto Walenstein.

He being shot, his Officers flocking about him, His men running quite away
upon it.
were heard to cry, o our General is slain, our General is slain:
immediately whereupon his Horse turned head, and ran out of the Battle without
stroke-striking; back again toward the Weser and the Lower Saxony.

But the Walsteiners, whom Pappenheims coming had set on; fell to it closely:
Piccolomini advanced, and Tersica, with their Cavallery; The 3d. charge.
and the Foote-Regiments seconded them with extremity of resolution. And now
began the sorest, the longest, and the obstinatest conflict; that had been,
since the King was killed. The charge was sustained by the Swedish, with much
gallantry: and never was Battle better foughten: nor seldom have Battalions
ever stood, amongst whom so much spoil has been committed. Full 2. hours,
were they in hot Battle. A terrible onset
On ths Imperial side was Piccolomini, twice or thrice, shot; Sergeant Major
Bruner, slain; and so was a young Count of Walenstein; and if the old one were
there, I wonder how he escaped pelting. The Abbot of Fulda, was at this charge
also slain: and think, then, how many Officers and common soldiers, was it
likely that these great Commanders did take along, to wait upon them into the
next world.

On the Swedes side, the chief of the spoil light upon the 2. middlemost
Brigades of Foot belonging unto Grave Neeles and Colonel Winckle: which you
see at the numbers 9. and 10. The Imperialists charged with so much fury, and
with Battalions of 2. or 3000. in a Regiment: that they by fine force drove the
Swedish to the retreat, in the plain field; and (as the most say) even then
recovered their 7. pieces of Ordnance. Grave Neeles, Colonel of the
Life-guards (which is the yellow Regiment) was there shot a little above the
knee: of which being carried off spoiled, he after dyed. Out of this Brigade,
did the Imperialists carry away 7. Colors: and to tell the troth, the Kings
own company which served here among the Guards, lost their own Ensign or
Standard Royal too. He that had carried the Colors, was after seen with his
sword in his hand: but his clowte was missing.

Colonel Winckles Blew Regiment, likewise; found as hard treatment. Himself
(brave man) was shot in the arm a little above the elbow, and in the hand; and
carried out of the Battle. His Lieftenant Caspar Wolff, was slain upon the
place, and most of his Colors taken. These 2. Brigades, were of the flower of
the Army: old soldiers of 7. or 8. years service, (the most of them) and whom
the King had there placed, for that he most relied on them. These old Blades,
stood to their Arms, stoutly; and the adverse writers confess, That their
dead bodies now covered the same ground, which living they had defended. These
were old beaten soldiers, indeed, but it was so long since they had been last
beaten; that they had by this time forgotten how to run away. This is the
reason that they were so shattered: that when toward night, they were to have
fallen on again: both these Brigades put together, could not make one Squadron
strong: which is but the 3d. part of one of them. By this you see, that 5. of
6. were there killed.

The Swedes Brigade, marked with the number 8. fared something better; because
near unto the Horse: and yet there came not above 400. off, alive or
unwounded. Duke Bernards Brigade, marked with 11; was something more out of
Gunshot: for that next the Horse of the Left Wing. Yet here was Colonel
Wildestein shot in the breast, of which he after died: Duke Bernards
Lieftenant-Colonel Winckler, being slain upon the place. In this sore
bickering, the spoil on the Imperial side, fell mostly upon old Bruners and
young Walensteins Regiments, both which were here killed; with full half, if
not 2 thirds of the soldiers. These Regiments performed their duties so
valiantly, and Walenstein himself took such special notice of them; that he
along time after (if not still) maintained them in his own house at Prague for
it. Hindersons Reserve of Foot, in the mean time, which you see at number 37.
had also their share in the knocking: one of the Offices and uses of the
Reserve being, still to supply and second where most need is; with fresh men to
derne up the holes, and stop up the gaps of the slaughtered. And whereas those
4. Brigades of the Van had so terribly been shattered; Generall-Major
Kniphausen, had out of his care sent up these 2. Brigades of the Count of
Thurn, and the Colonel Mitzlaff, which you see at numbers 28. and 29. to
relieve them. After a while, he sent them up those 4. Squadrons of Horse, which
you see at the numbers 33, 34, 35, The Imperialists beaten off: and 11. pieces
taken.
36. who so well (altogether) restored the encounter; that the Imperialists
began to give ground: which the Swedes so far pursued, till they had
recovered the 7. pieces again, and those 4. others which you see at the
letters F F, to the left hand of them.

Look we now aside, to see what was done in the Reere and Left Wing, by
Kniphausen and Duke Bernard. Generall-Major Kniphausen having sent 2. Brigades
of his 4. and 4. Squadrons of Horse, What Kniphausen did,
to the relief of the Vantguard: sent also his other 2. Horse Squadrons, at
the numbers 30, 3^. commanded by the Prince of Anhalt, and the Lieftenant of
Baron Hoffkirch, unto Duke Bernard. As for the other 2. Brigades of Foot, (his
own and Bosens) which you see at 27. and 28 together with Oems his Reserve of
Horse, to be found at number 38. these did Kniphausen still keep by him, in
the Reere of the Battle.

Duke Bernard had as hard a Chapter of it, as any man, against the Imperialists
Right Wing, and what Duke Bernard.
at the Wind-Mills, and (surely) had the most renowned Don Quixote been there,
there had been exercise enough for his valor, at these Wind-Mills. Soberly,
this was the hardest Post, for advantage of situation, all the field over: and
Count Coloredo, as well maintained it against him. Never man did more gallantly
behave himself, then Duke Bernard did that day: sure it is, (and himself
avoucht it) that first and last, in this and other places, he charged 12.
several times, one after another: any of which was a more desperate piece of
service, then all Hercules 12. labors; ba^e me but his going to hell to fetch
out Cerberus. And Coloredo gave Duke Bernard leave to charge, all: he had so
good an advantage, of the 2. ditches and the Wind-Mills; that he would not
scarce offer upon Duke Bernard.

His great valor.
The brave young Duke, pressing on in the beginning of the fight, had set the
town of Lutzen on fire: his reason being, that seeing if he would get the
Wind-Mills, he must with the end of his Wing, even touch (as it were) the very
walls of the town. Should Coloredo, then, have first filled those walls with
Musketeers; they must needs have so sorely galled his Horsemen, that there had
been no coming near: nor could Horse and Pistols, have done any service
against walls and Musketeers. In one of these Charges, did Coloredo so thunder
upon Duke Bernard, that the valiant Prince thought it not un-souldier-like
done, to shelter himself behind the Millars House, which you see at the letter
N.

All this time (as we told you) did Major Kniphausen keep his 2 Brigades and
Oems his Reserve, together un-engaged: doing no more with them, then fair and
softly advance them toward the enemy; at such time as he saw the Brigades of
the Van, to get any ground of them. The distance of his Reere from the Front,
was about 600. paces: and at that scantling he still kept himself, behind the
other. This was no small occasion of the winning of the Battle: seeing that so
often as any of the Van were disordered and put to the retreat; they with him,
still, found a whole great Body together, unbroken, by the sight, of which they
resumed new courage, and were set in order again.

And very glad was Duke Bernard when in the next breaking up of the Mist, he
came and found Kniphausen in so good order; whom (as he openly professed) he
feared to have found all to pieces. For now, betwixt 3. and 4. a clock, (which
was a little before Sunset) did the Mist break up; and there was a fair
halfe-houre after it. At which time Duke Bernard going abroad, to over-view the
posture and countenance of the Army: (which since his hearing of the Kings
death, the mist and smoke had not suffered him to discover any thing of:) he
came now along by the Battle unto the Right Wing; speaking to the Officers and
soldiers, and encouraging them to a new onset. Plainly he found the whole
Army (except Kniphausens part) in no very good order: which he and Kniphausen
(who took much good pains likewise about it) did their best to reduce them
to. When the Word was given for a new Charge: alas Camrade (said the poor
soldiers one to another) must we fall on again! Come says the the other
(embracing him,) Courage; if we must, lets do it bravely, and make a day out.
As Duke Bernard was leading on: the Imperial Generalissimo sent his 2.
Colonells Tersica and Piccolomini, to discover in that clear weather, what the
Swedes were a doing: who brought his Excellency word again, that they were
r'allied together about the Wood, and in very good order advancing toward him.

The 4th. charge.
This (no doubt) made the Imperialists hearts quake; to think upon the terror
of a fourth Charge. And now could the Swedes discover the Imperial Horse,
retreating in indifferent good order toward the Wind-Mills: whereupon they
bringing forward 10. pieces of Cannon, and turning those 11. likewise upon
them, which were before taken: they gave the Imperial Horse such a rowsing
Salvee of great Ordnance, and charged so upon it, that they put them into
disorder. The Imperialists beaten to the Wind-mills.
And here (as my Spanish Relator says) did the Generalissimo light upon a
slight fillipp: by a favorable Musket bullet, namely, which made no wound; but
left a blue remembrance only upon him. That he was indeed shot through the
Coat, was at Prague reported: though some would even there say privately, that
he was in no such danger.

And now were the Imperialists beaten round about, even to the very Wind-Mills:
the Swedes being Masters of the ground, that they shouldred the others out of.
But just now a little before Sunset, fell the fatal mist again: which so
hastened on the night, that the Swedes could not well see, which way to pursue
their enemies. Duke Bernard in his coming back was thus heard to say,
Merciful God! but for this mist, we had even now gotten the victory. Hence
went he back again over all the Battalians, his own Post again: toward
which, he now perceived the Imperialists to be making.

And now by Sunne-setting, was all the Field clear of the Imperialists,
excepting only about the Wind-Mills: and there, plainly, were both Coloredoes
and Duke Bernards men, fallen off one from another: like 2. Duellers leaning on
their swords, to take breath again. Certainly, they had so bangd one another,
that neither of both were in order: but either party shot at adventure right
forward, and let the bullet find his own way, as it could, through that night
of smoke and mistiness. Those Musketeers which (we told you) were lodged in
the mudd-wal'd gardens, were seen to give fire, give fire, continually: but no
men to be discerned. And the Swedes at adventure shot at them again: and as at
night they got ground, they stormed into the gardens; as if they had been so
many Castles, Here the next day, were a many found dead: 300. in one of them.

And just in the edge of the evening, when the Swedish well hoped all had been
finished: had Duke Bernard fresh word brought him, that Pappenheims Foot were
even now arrived, from Hall; and were beginning a fresh Charge, The 5th. charge.
about the Wind-Mills. Thus ran the Word over the Army, Pappenheims Foot are
comne, Pappenheims Foot are comne. This the Swedish believed: though Captain
Feilding assures me, that the Imperialists at Prague, would never acknowledge
it, that the Pappenheimers came at all into the Battle.

Now was all the service, (after half an hours silence on both sides;) turned
unto the Wind-Mills. The Imperialists courages, like the throws of a dying
body; struggled hard, at the last cast, for life; and made, for the time, as
fierce a Charge of it, as any had the day before passed. To withstand this, now
does Kniphausen bring on his 2. fresh Brigades: with whom are the other 2. of
Thurns and Mitzlaffs conjoined, that he had before sent to the relief of the
Vantguard: which, indeed, had not so cruelly been shattered. Now also Duke
Bernard r'allying all the Horse together, advanced to the Charge. The
Imperialists had, anew, put down some more Musketeers into the cross ditch
or Boundary of Lands, marked with H: which not a little troubled the Swedish.
Once or twice, did they offer to force that Trench, and to Storm over it: but
it was so troublesome and dangerous in the dark, that they did but over-tumble
one another, and were feign to keep on the other side of it, to bring on some
Musketeers, and from thence to give their vollyes. The best of it was, that it
was not above 100. paces distant from the Highway; close behind which, the
Imperialists were ranged. That which most galled the Imperialists, was the
Swedish Ordnance: which on the Right hand Flancke of them, and on the nearer
side of the Highway; were now turned upon them. This most cruel and hot
fight, continued till about 5. a clock in the evening: The Imperialists give it
over
much about which time, the Walsteiners or Pappenheimers or both together; fell
off in the dark, and gave it quite over.

And thus ended this long, cruel, bloody, and bravely fought Battle: which in
continual exercise, in one place or other, and so the battle ended.
(or at least with small intermissions) had lasted from 9. in the morning
until this time. Eight or 9. long hours, was every man in danger of a sudden
death: when at other times, he would have thought himself ill handled; by so
long a Fit of an Ague. I have cast the whole Battle, into 5. greater and more
remarkable Charges: not because there were no more, but for that these were
most eminent. And yet, perchance, were not these so distinct Acts of this
Tragedy, that they might be said to have begun just now (because the whole
Battle was but one continual Charge, some where or other) but for that the
greater Heates and Executions; were much about these times, and in those
manners, that I have specified. These Charges mostly concern the Battle and
Right Wing: for of the Left, I have not such particular Intelligence. If the
valor of particular and deserving Gentlemen, cannot here be described: it is
for that the malignity of that envious Mist, would not suffer it to be
discerned. Assuredly, there has been no such cruel Fight, that has yielded
so few observations. The Imperialists being marched off; the Swedish (gladder of
victory, then of enemies) had neither eyes nor wills good enough, to pursue the
Retreat upon them: especially over such troublesome passages, as the Ditch,
the Highway, and its Ditch: the Wind-Mills, and their Ordnance: and the
Gardens with their Musketeers in them. Nor had the Imperialists, after such an
afternoones drinking; any hearty good stomachs to such a supper, as were likely
to cost them such a Reckoning. Beating their Drums, therefore, after a while;
they sent away their Baggage and Ammunition, and made their retreat toward
Leipsich.

The Swedish at first hearing of the Imperial Drums, knew not what to make
of it: but doubted that their enemies meant to retire into the next Dorps; and
what they would do to morrow, they knew not. Now were Duke Bernard, Kniphausen
and some others, in consultation what to do? Whither to lie all night in the
Field, to expect another Charge in the morning; or to carry off their sick and
wounded men, and to retire the Army toward Weissenfels. Colonel Hinderson had
order in the mean time, to burn the carriages of those 11. pieces of
Ordnance, which were taken from the Imperialists: because in the night time,
the Swedes despaired of drawing them along with them.

But Walensteins self had already yielded up the Field (and the Victory
consequently) unto the Swedish: and by this accident, put an end to their
doubtful consultation. The Generalissimo, already upon his retreat to
Leipsich,) had given order for all the Regiments to follow after him. Hereupon,
a Ruiter or Horseman of the Baron of Brother to that Hoffkirch, that served on
the Kings side.
Hoffkirchs Regiment, was sent to find his Colonel; and to give him order to
go after the Generalissimo. This Horseman (it so chanced) had in the dark
stumbled upon the Swedish Colonel Oems Reserve of Horse: which having not been
brought to fight all the day, was now ordered to make the Retreat, and to
keep the Watch for the whole Army. Qui va la, who goes there? Whom seek you?
says Oems Sentinel: Hoffkirchs Regiment, says the Ruiter: Here it is, says
the Sentinel; and with that brings him to his Colonel. To him he told, that
his Generalissimo was gone to Leipsich, and had commanded all to follow him.
This being discovered to Duke Bernard and Kniphausen; they concluded the
Victory to be their own, resolved to keep the Field; and sent to countermand
Colonel Hinderson; who had already burnt one or two of the Enemies Carriages.

The Victory was then published through out the Army: and Word given, to stay
all night upon the Field of Battle. All this night was there a pitiful
crying heard, of the dying and wounded on both sides: none being able to find,
know, or relieve his friend or Camrade in the darkness. It Was a frosty cold
night: in which many a brave man dyed of the anguish of his wounds miserably;
who might otherwise have been cured: they being frozen to death, by the morrow
morning. The anguish and dolor of a wound, is the complaint that Nature makes,
for a remedy: but here alas! the confused complainings of the wounded, hindered
many a man from his friends hearing of him; who might else have given him
remedy.

The enemies Cannon taken.
The next morning did the Swedish find the rest of the enemies Cannon, upon
their Batteries by the Windmills; which together with those already taken, made
up some 20 or 21 Pieces: whereof 9 were Demi-cannon, and the rest Feild-peeces.
By which fewness you may collect, that even Walenstein was half surprised:
who (doubtless) otherwise, would more sufficiently have been provided. No
Wagons, either of Baggage or Ammunition; were left behind: seeing Walenstein
had time enough all night, to carry off them with him. Nor were there any
prisoners of either side taken, (either for numbers, or persons of quality)
worth speaking of. The numbers of the slain upon the place of Battle; is best
collected by the burials. The Swedish for their parts, Numbers of the slain.
affirm to have buried next day, betwixt 2 and 3000 men: of which the common
soldiers were buried in the bed of honor, the Field they dyed in; being put
together by heaps into the ditches by the High-wayes-side, and earth cast over
them. The Officers, were buried in Lutzen Churchyard, with some more military
solemnity. The Imperial carcasses were buried by the Boores of Saxony: which
kept tale of 3530. bodies by them enterred: besides which, there were some to
be seen unburied a month after.

But besides these of the Imperialists slain upon the place, the Boores had
knocked down God knows how many hundred soldiers (2. or 3000. say some) as
they fled away straggling about the Country. And the soldiers were even with
the Boores for it: for that in their flight toward Bohemia; some would go out
purposely upon Partees, to kill Boores: one Captain being heard to profess,
That he had that day killed fifty. And thus, both of Boores and soldiers;
there might perchance be 2. or 3000. slain after the Battle. The Wounded,
were as many more as the slain: but how many of them dyed after of their
hurts, comes not within our numbers. The High Dutch Relation annexed to the
Figure of the Battle (which Gallobelgicus has translated into his Book)
mentions 9000. but Fame (I believe) kills more then the Sword, ever. Half of
the Swedish slaughter, light upon the Lifeguards and Winckles Regiments: of
which more were carried off spoiled, then were slain upon the place.

True it is, that when 2. days the Swedes overviewed their Army, they wanted
about 4000. of their former numbers: but into those are the wounded to be
reckoned, which were not then able to muster. The reason now, the slaughter was
no greater, in such a long and hard fought battle: was for that there was no
chase after the Victory: for there uses to be the terriblest of the execution.

Of great Commanders slain on both sides; these only do I find mention of.
On the Kings side. First, the Kings Majesty himself: whose death is never
enough to be lamented: and to whom the more ingenuous Imperialists at Prague
were heard to give this honorable Testimony, That he was the bravest Enemy,
and the best Captain, that ever was in Christendom. Men of quality slain on
both sides.
Next to the King, was Grave Neeles, Nicholas Count of Wesenburg,
Sergeant-Major-Generall Isler, and Colonel Gersdorff: with diverse
Lieftenant-Colonells, Majors, Rit-masters and Captains; whom I have not heard
named. On the Imperial side slain, The Abbot of Fulda by his place a Prince
of the Empire. 2. the Count of Pappenheim, 3. Count Berthold Walenstein, 4.
Sergeant-Major-Generall Breuner. 5. Lo, Westrumb, Lan, Comarga, Witzleb, and
Foves: all (as I hear) Colonels. Together with Borda, Taxheim, Lampert, and
Cammerhoff. Lieftenane-Colonels: besides Sergeant-Majors Captains of Horse and
Foot, and other Officers. Whereas therefore you have heard of Merode and
Gallas, to be wounded to death; I Will assure you they were not in the Battle,
nor was Holck wounded to death; nor at all: nor Pappenheim cut off by the
middle; nor Isolani slain: which man is still Colonel General of the
Crabats; of which nation himself is. Our 2. Countrymen, were his prisoners;
and they saw him at Prague: and describe him to be, an old beardlesse man, full
of the palsy; a Gentleman of much valor, courtesy, and extraordinary
hardiness of body. As this is true, so believe the rest of that Writer, that
told you of the death of those great Imperialists.

The Imperial Ordnance, whose carriages had been burned; were at the Swedes
going toward Weissenfels Novem. 7th. slipped under the Castle walls of Lutzen:
into which they put a garrison of 200. Musketeers. For the drawing away of the
rest; every Regiment was charged to take care of one: and to lend horses for
the doing of it. That night went the Kings body to Weissenfels: where they
found themselves to have gotten but a doleful and a woeful victory: losing
that incomparable Conqueror, who was alone worth 2. Armies. The Rovall Body,
was carried to Naumburg to be embalmed: The Kings Body being embalmed:
after which when the Armies went again into the field, the dead King was
carried along in his Chariot, marching betwixt the Horse and the Foot, in the
middle of the Army. This so long continued, until upon the coming of the
Chancellor Oxenstiern, the Corpse was sent with a mourning Convoye toward
Spandaw, is convoyed into Spandaw.
in his Brother of Brandenburgs country. And thus dyed this great Deliverer:
which is a higher and a more holy Title, then that of Caesar, or of Conqueror.
Thus dyed he with a victory: which, had he expected but 3. days longer, he had
obtained without a Battle. So confident was the enemy that he never durst have
attempted them; that the Generalissimo had even already given out Orders, for
the dispersing of his Army to their winter Quarters. This is sure: for besides
that it is intimated in my Spanish Relation; the Imperialists themselves freely
at Prague confessed it. Then had he fallen in among them, as he thought to have
done, the 5th. of November. But he is dead: and that as heartily bemoaned of
the Germans, (to say of no more) as of his own Subjects: who yet profess
their loss to be unspeakeable. And in both their Chronicles shall his sacred
memory be made immortal: and his Name shall ever live in their mouths,
glorified.

Speak we now a little, of the distemper in the Imperial Army. When
Walenstein first beat his Drums, to retreat to Leipsich: he had purposed to
have made no more then a fair retreat indeed of it. But no sooner did his men
hear that signal: but they fell to running presently, without expecting
further order for their Rendez-vous. The flight, and wonderful confusion among
the Imperialists.
This fright was so great, that the most of them never came in order again,
till they recovered into Bohemia: yea even there, full three weeks after the
Battle; were there diverse multitudes of soldiers, and some almost whole
Ensigns seen; then first enquiring after their fled Colonels: who had not yet
seen their own Regiments. And this was not only so, with a great many
straglers; but even amongst those that were nearest about the Generalissimo:
there was not a Regiment (scarcely, if at all) that marched or Quartered in any
order; but straglingly up and down in Dorps, as every man shifted. Once did
our Countrymen (that were carried away among them) see 25. Colors of them
together: but this was in Bohemia; and the greatest show that they had till
that time seen of them.

Diverse Officers confessed, that they had lost 6000. men: which others made
more nice of, and professed to have lost but 4000. Their own confessions of
the Battle.
And as freely withal did they confess, that had the Swedes but sent off
1000. fresh Horse after them, they might have cut all the whole Army to pieces.
When in their Flight, (Retreat is now too fair a word for them) they came at
night to any Quarter; their custom was to stay still there, till some Swedish
Horse were heard of, or discovered to pursue them: of which though there
appeared but a troop of 40. they had order to hasten away after the
Generalissimo. This was the Crabats work commonly: who being of the nimblest
Horse; were still left last in the Quarters, and to bring word of the coming
of the Enemy.

And yet durst these, afterward at Prague, contend for it; That they had as
good of the Day, as the Swedish: for which their Arguments were, that they
killed the King; much about as many men; and brought away almost 60 Ensigns.
Had they only mentioned the King, their argument had been better, then their
other reasons can make it. It Is true indeed that when our 2. Countrymen told
Duke Bernard afterward, that they boasted to have taken so many Ensigns: They
took more Colors, then the Swedish.
nay (says he) that's too loud: but they have indeed taken 45. and we have 17.
or 18. of their Colors. But, now, the loss of their Cannon, their leaving the
field unto their enemies; and their right down running away, when none pursued
after them: the Court of Vienna it self can never speak with honor of it.
How the news of the Battle, was resented at Vienna.
And therefore, there was but a faint Thanksgiving made for it: a few pieces
shot off, but not a Bonfire that I hear of: and that expression rather for the
death of the King, and to make the people; then for the Victory. The Victory,
(absolutely,) must all foreign and Neutrall Historians, give unto the Swedish:
which was such a one, as would have made Austria quak't, had the King surviu'd
it.

The Generalissimo having taken Sanctuary in Leipsich; there came the next day,
some 1000. or 1500. Footmen to him: whereof some had Colors, and other some
had lost them. These were the remainders of 40. Ensigns. A little after, The
way of Walensteins flight.
came the Lieftenant-Felt-Marshall Holck, with the Sergeant-Major-Generall,
Count Ridolfo Coloredo, the Marquess of Grande, and some others of great
quality. And now also came their Baggage-Wagons: waited upon with a
Horse-Convoye. In the night about 6. a clock, were all these commanded to
Born, 14. miles onwards of the way, toward Bohemia: the General himself
within three hours and a half (the same night) following them. Holck staid
still in Leipsich: who going away next day, delivered up the Keys unto the
Magistrates again; with such a like Complement. That he was now as good as his
word, as it became every honest man to be. He hoped therefore, they would
speak nothing but honor of him: and show themselves merciful (as became good
Christians) unto such sick and wounded, as he left in their town behind him.
That day, some 16. or 17. troops of Horse passed by, in sight of the City,
with abundance of the Boores Cattle, going toward their Generalissimo.

His Excellency, went not into Born, but Quartered that night hard by it.
Thence went he to Altemburg; thence to Camitz: thence to Frawenstein: thence
through the Pass of the Behemer-Waldt unto Diewitz in Bohemia: 30. miles short
of Prague City. And now were the shattered troops, dispersed into their winter
Quarters: Walenstein himself with the remnants of the 2. Favourite-Regiments,
of young Walenstein, and old Brenner, going directly toward Prague City. These
2. Regiments, for their good service at the Battle, and their diligent
attendance upon him in the flight: he ordered to wait upon him in his own
Palace; and by Squadrons to keep guard about him. They were as his meniall
servants; they had their allowance for a standing table in his Court; his own
people served them: and he himself sometimes would see they had their
allowance. These were relieved, (that is changed) every 8. days: and then had
every man 6. or 8. Bohemian dollars given him (each worth 3s. English) and
their Wives or Wenches half as much.

Examples of his vast bounty,
Those Officers that did well in the Battle; he at New-yeeres-tide rewarded
with Gold chains; with his own Medall or Picture at them: some of them (to
the great Lords) being set with Diamonds; and worth 1000. ducats. Thus were all
the Goldsmiths in Prague set a work, upon his New-yeeres-gifts. And whereas
there was a dispute betwixt Holck and Piccolomini, whose Regiment was that
which charged, when the King was slain; he adjudged it to Piccolomini;
rewarding him with as much confiscated lands for it, as was better then 100000.
pound Sterling. Holck he made Felt-Marshall, in place of Pappenheim; who is now
the man that can do all in all with him. And hereas the King of Denmark
(whose subject Holck is) sent to command him home, under penalty of
confiscating his goods: let him (says Walenstein) I Will bestow ten times so
much upon him: giving him his choice thereupon, of any of these 4. Cities,
Teplitz, Brix, Saiss, and Diewitz: the meanest of which had 16 or 18 pretty
villages, belonging to the Lordship of it. And thus much, of the doings of the
Imperialists, both in their flight and in Bohemia have I learned from Captain
Edward Feilding.

Those that had done cowardly in the Battle, he said nothing of: but as they
came to Prague, he seases and imprisons them. Of these by Christmas time, there
were already 18. apprehended. Of whom, some were Counts and Barons:
notwithstanding, which, he February 4th. following, struck off eleven of their
heads upon a public Scaffold. and severity.
Some inferior people, he hanged and headed in a baser fashion: others of
their names, he caused to be hanged upon the Gallows, and to be poasted up for
cowards. One piece of mirth fell now out, as it were to vary this scene of
Martial severity. A young Colonel being brought upon the Scaffold, (which was
just before Walensteins window) began alowd; I come here to dye, for running
away after my Generalissimo: but the Drums struck up, and the Trumpets
sounded upon it; so that the short breathed Orator could be no further listened
to.

And thus leave I our great Imperial Generalissimo: The State he keeps.
who keeps a State in Prague: no Majesty in Christendom, comparable to him.
About Christmas, was there a fear of Duke Bernards falling into Bohemia:
whereupon such a puzzle there was amongst them, that Potents or Commands were
presently given out, for the drawing of 6000. men toward the Frontiers. So
easy was it to have conquered Walenstein and Bohemia.

And now for that the contrarily affected may not say, that my Intelligence is
particular, or all from one side: I will here afford them the Relation made by
the Spanish Gentleman before quoted; fairly, barely, without additions or
alterations translated: the original whereof I am ready to communicate unto
any ingenuous Gentleman. Two or 3. other Relations (I confess) I have in
French, printed at Brussels: which are so ignorantly and insolently done; that
even that side may be ashamed to give credit to them. I have taken nothing out
of le Soldat Suedois; for that there is little but words in him. Two or three
High Dutch pieces, and some Latin also I have by me, as foolish as the former:
but this only of the Spaniard, I have thought worthy your perusal.

THE morning began to peep, when news came that the King now altogether in
Battell-ray did march up toward us: whereupon His Excellency presently cast
his Army into that form, which appears in the Figure, leaving a little way
on the right hand some Wind-mills, according to the disposition and necessity
of the situation. The King had in the mean while, put his Army right opposite
to ours, not full distant the reach of a Cannon: approaching with his left Wing
near upon Lutzen; and with the right, touching upon a little Wood: which also
was very near united with his Front. In this order did his Excellency stay,
till the King should begin to moove: we having a small ditch along the Front
of our Army. The King moved soon after, with all his forces, making a show
that he was resolved to invest us, some-while upon one side, some-while upon
the other. At length, he set upon us in the Front, and sent his Cavallery of
the right Wing, to overturne ours. By reason hereof, we were forced to retire
our Baggage which was upon our left Wing, quite behind all our Army, to the end
it should not be cut off from us. Thus began the Encounter with equal order,
and continual shot of Cannon: which did on each side mutual hurt: every one
striving to get forward, through the midst of mortality and slaughter of men,
for to drive the enemy out of his place. The Earl of Pappenheim came in at the
very beginning of the fight, with some Regiments of Horse and Dragooners: whom
he instantly carried into the left Wing where it appeared the King did charge
with most obstinacy. And here the Earl giving the onsett with his accustomed
valor, was in the very beginning mortally wounded by a Fauconett: so that
being taken off his Horse to be brought to Leipsich, He ended his life before
his Journey: This valerous Cavalier having sacrificed himself to Gods service
and the Emperors, in the most important occasion which ever has offered it
self to benefit the Catholic Religion, and the whole House of Austria.

In the mean time the Front of the enemies Army, got ground apace, (...)
Resolution: our Artillery being never able to disorder it though many a shot
was made upon it: and being now comne near the ditch which was made on our
side, a great number of Musketeers was let down into it, from whence they
gave us many good Saluees. But especially did they power lead, into the
Regiment of the Colonel Piccolomini: Who after he had been exposed awhile to
the discretion of those Musketeers, determined to set upon them, and to drive
them out of the Ditch. And this he did accordingly, with so fortunate a
success, that if he had been seconded by other Regiments, no doubt but that
part of the Enemies Army would have been utterly rowted. But there being none
to back him, and he fearing to be cut off from the Army, (if he went too
far forwards) resolved to set with might and maine upon a Regiment Winckles.
of the Enemies, which He also utterly defeated, leaving it stretched out upon
the ground, in the same manner as it had stood before ordered in Squadrons.
After Pappenheim was wounded, the Cavalry which he had led, never so much as
turned their faces against the Enemy: whereby advantage was given him to get
the better of our Foot also on the left side. For all this, on the right side
was the fight maintained, with equal and all possible obstinacy: at which
time, a news being spread of the Kings death, it seemed that the Enemies Army
began to give back by little and little under the favor of a very thick mist
which was risen: insomuch that at first, it was not possible to find where it
stood: Hereupon, for the present, the victory was held to be ours. We being
desirous to go forward to seek out the Enemy, intelligence was had, that he
went to rejoyne his Squadrons about the Wood side: for which reason his
Excellence sent his Colonels Tercica and Picolomini to take more exact notice
of what was rumor'd. They being past on a little forward toward the Wood, saw
the Enemy in full Battell-ray, marching up toward us: in as good an order as
at the first. It was now very near night; and our Army not well joined
together: necessity constrained us to make a stay in our own place, near the
Wind-mills, which the Earl Coloredo defended valerously. He being charged by
forces, incomparably much greater, should have been forced to quit the Mills,
had not his Excellency sent to his succor the Colonels Tercica and Picolomini
with their Cavalry, to sustain the shocke of those Foot; as in effect they
did. It was now upon shutting in of the Evening, when the Enemy beginning
afresh a round Salvee of his Cannon, did notably annoy our troops and was like
to have done more harm, had not the Night come on. His Excellency, when he
least feared such an accident, Then was he not in his Litter, as Le Soldat
Suedois geeres him.
(being now in the Front of the Regiment of Picolomini, speaking with him) was
hurt in the left arm with a Muskett Bullet: but (as we may say) almost
miraculously: since it did him no other harm, then to leave a black and blew
mark behind it. His Excellency showed that day no ordinary valor, riding up
and down in the Front of all the Regiments: where from time to time necessity
called him: encouraging with his presence, every body to the accomplishment of
their duty, being accompanied by the two Princes, brothers of the great Duke of
Tuscany, of whom the one called Don Francisco lost his Horse he sat on by a
Cannon Bullett. The Colonels Lo and Camargo dyed on the place Picolomini came
off with ten Muskettado's, five whereof, wounded him in diverse parts of the
body; the other five went no further then his armor. He lost four Horses under
him, In these four numbers, lies the chiefest of my Authors mis-intelligence,
or partiality.
and three hundred of his best soldiers: His Sergeant-Major, two Captains,
and most of his officers were hurt. It is thought, that of our side, there dyed
near upon three thousand; but a great many more wounded. Of the enemies side,
were lost near six thousand, and as many more wounded: it having been the
most bloody and obstinate Battle, which ever has been fought in Germany;
especially in so small a number of the Imperialists which came not to twelve
thousand, where on the other side, the Enemies Forces amounted to above twenty
thousand.

At length, the fight being ended by reason of the night; his Excellency, was
not resolved whether he should keep his army in that place, or else to retire
to Leipsich. But having heard the opinion of all his greatest Officers, he
determined, with their good liking, to retire to Leipsich, notwithstanding the
arrival of five Regiments This sets the report right for both sides. The
Swedish say that the Pappenheimers came up in the night: and the Imperialists
affirm that they came not to the Battle.
of Pappenheims now newly comne from Hall. Because it was probable feared that
through the weariness of the soldiers, the number of the wounded, the
excessive cold: and which was most material, lest through want of provisions in
that place, the soldiers might scatter about the neighbor towns to provide
themselves against their wants; and in the morning if need should be, none
would be found ready for service. Hereupon our Army after three hours in the
night, began to march toward Leipsich: who not being able for want of Horses
and Boys (who in the beginning of the Battle, were either killed or hurt) to
carry off their Ordnance, left it there in the field; As the Enemy did likewise
his own, In these 2. relations of the Swedes leaving their Cannon, and Gallas
his joining, he had false Intelligence. But this shows that Gallas was not in
the Battle.
marching on toward Naumburg.

His Highness sent immediately for the Baron Gallas, who joined with him in
Bennis with the forces he had: He sent likewise to fetch Monsier Altringer to
come to him with his men, with an intent to make another gross, wherewith to
go and defeat the troops of the Enemy, which were left a-foote. His
Excellency now being in Frawenstein, upon the Confines of Saxony and Bohemia,
intends from thence to go to Prague.

In the beginning of the Encounter of both Armies, Innocentius Bucela Camrade
of Piccolomini, knew the King; who lay hurt and dying upon the ground. Whereof
having given notice to the Colonel; he w^nt with him and ten more, to see the
body which was yet quivering: and while they were about fetching of it away, a
troop of the Enemies charging, forced them to retire. The noise of his death,
was presently scattered abroad; yet belief was not fully given to it by reason
of the relation which some prisoners made, as that the King was hurt, but
carrried off in a close Coach, following his white Standard. But an Astrologer
entertained by his Excellency, being taken prisoner accidentally in the
Battle, and ransomed eight days after; brought undoubted news, that the King
was wounded with a Musket in his arm and two Pistol bullets, and fallen down
dead in the field.

The death of the King half verified the Prognostication of an Astrologer
named David Herlicius of Stargard in Pomerania; who said some months before,
that the King should never pass over the Kiver of Elve again: which he
interpreting to his benefit; believed he should become Master of the Empire,
(as among his Collegiates he was already reputed, You have no word here, of the
Imperialists arrogating of the Victory to their party.
) and cease to return into Swedland, where is nothing else but craggy
mountains. But God who disposes all things, has made vain the issue of that
hope, and given us to understand, that to him alone is reserved the disposing
of Empires.

Printed with all necessary privilege. In Lisbon. By Antonio Aluarez.
1633. Febr. 16.
THE EXPLICATION OF THE SEVERAL LETTERS and Numbers, in the Figure of the
Battle of LVTZEN.
The Imperial Army.
A VVAlensteins Right Wing of Horse. B His Battle or Body of the Foot: in the
middle whereof is one Horse Regiment. C His Right Wing of Horse. D The Town of
Lutzen. E The Wind-mills: upon the higher ground and hills whereof, he had
planted some Ordnance. F Three other places, where he had planted Ordnance. G
The Gallows. H A dry Ditch or Boundary for lands, which Walenstein made to
serve him for a Brest-worke, to lodge Musketeers in.
The Kings Army.
I The Right Wing of the Kings Vant-guard; consisting of six Horse Squadrons,
lined with five Bodies of Musketeers. This was led by the King himself: whose
place is over the letter I. K The Left Wing of the Swedish Vantgard, composed
of Horse and Musketeers, like the Right Wing. Of this, Duke Bernard had the
leading: whose place is right over the letter K. L The Fluss-graben. M The
Kings Battle or Body of his Army; consisting of 8 Brigades of Foot: whereof 4
were in the Van, and 4 in the Reere. Each Brigade, has 6 Pieces of Cannon
before it. N The Millers house. O The town of Chursitz.
The Numbers of the Van, or first Front.

The Right Wing.
1 The Finland Horse, commanded by Colonel Stolhanshe. 2 The West-Goths Horse
Regiment. 3 The Ingermanlanders Horse. All these six Regiments of Horse of the
Right Wing, were the Kings own Subjects. 4 The Vplanders. All these six
Regiments of Horse of the Right Wing, were the Kings own Subjects. 5 The
Ostro-Goths. All these six Regiments of Horse of the Right Wing, were the
Kings own Subjects. 6 The Smolanders, Soap All these six Regiments of Horse
of the Right Wing, were the Kings own Subjects. 7 All the 5 Bodies under the
number 7, are the Commanded Musketeers: which lined the Horse Squadrons: and
were led by the Count of Eberstein.
The Battle.
8 The first Brigade of Foot being all Swedish: belonging to Carl Heart, and led
by his Lieftenant-Colonel. 9 The second Brigade of Foot, which was the
Praetorian Regiment or the Life Gards, Dutch and Swedish: and led by Grave
Neeles, a Swede. This was also called the Yellow Regiment. 10 The third Brigade
of Foot, called the Blew Regiment, led by Colonel Winckle. 11 The fourth
Brigade of Foot, commonly called the White Regiment, the Green says
Gallobelgicus. Made up of Duke Bernards, and Colonel Wildensteins Regiments:
which Colonel, now led the Brigade. Here were 200 Scots in this Brigade.
The Left Wing.
12 A Squadron of Horse of Duke Bernards. 14 Another of his. 15 Colonel
Karbergs Regiment. 16 The Curlanders, led by Colonel Wrangle. 17 The
Lieflanders, led by Colonel Tiesenhausen. 18 A German Regiment; led by Colonel
Corvile. 13 All the 5 Bodies under this number 13, are the Commanded
Musketeers that lined this Left Wing of Horse: They were led by Col:
Gersdorff.
The Numbers of the Reere, or second Front.

The Right Wing.
The Horse of the Right Wing of this Reere, were Commanded by Colonel Bulach,
Sergeant-Major-Generall of the Horse. 19 Duke William of Saxon-Weymars Regiment
of Horse, led by his Brother Duke Ernestus. 21 Lieftenant-Generall Goldsteins
Squadron: led by his Lieftenant-Colonel Rhelinger. 22 Generall-Major Bulachs
own Squadron. 23 Colonel Beckermans Regiment. 24 The Landtgrave of Hessens
Regiment: made up of two weak Regiments: Colonel Rosteins, namely, and
Colonel Dalwicks: this last Colonel, leading the Regiment. 25 Colonel Islers
Squadron: who was a Sergeant-Major-Generall: though now he Commanded his own
men only. 20 Under this number 20, are the 5 Bodies of Commanded Musketeers,
that lined the 6 Horse Squadrons.
The Battle.
26 The first Brigade of Foot of the Battle, in the Reere or second Front;
This was made up of two weak Regiments of the Elector of Saxonyes, and Duke
Williams of Saxon-Weymar. This Brigade was led by Bosen, the Elector of Saxons
Colonel. 27 The second Brigade of Foot, belonged to Colonel Kniphausen;
Sergeant-Major-Generall of the whole Army: who Commanded all these four
Brigades in the Reere of the Battle. 28 The third Brigade of Foot, led by
the Count of Thurn; In this was the Count of Ebersteins weak Regiment, and
some Hassians: which helped to make up the Brigade. 29 The fourth Brigade of
Foot, led by Colonel Mitzlaff: made up of his own, Gerstorffs, and Rosses
Regiments.
The Left Wing.
30 The first Squadron of Horse of the Reere of this Left Wing: led by Baron
Hoffkirck. These were the Elector of Saxonyes men; which he sent unto the
King, then at Norimberg. 32 A Squadron of the Prince of Anhalts. 33 The Count
of Loewensteins Regiment. These had no Cornets, for that they were newly
leuyed; and their Ensigns not yet made. They were led by their own
Sergeant-Major. 34 Colonel Brandensteins Squadron. 35 Colonel Steinbocks. These
being the Kings ordinary Guards, were sent for up into the Front, and joined to
the Smolanders: the King himself fighting at the head of Steinbocks Squadron.
36 Colonel Sticknits Squadron. Here were some French Horse. 31 Under this
number 31. are the 5 Bodies of the Commanded Musketeers, that lyned the Horse
Squadrons. 37 A Reserve of Foot, for the Van of the Battle: led by Colonel
John Hinderson, a Scottishman. 38 A Reserve of Horse for the Reere of the
Battle: led by Colonel Oeme, of the Lower Palatinate.
Walensteins Army.
39 3 Squadrons of Crabats, Light Horsemen. 40 3 Squadrons of Crabats, Light
Horsemen. 41 3 Squadrons of Crabats, Light Horsemen. 42 3 Regiments of
Curiassiers, or men at Arms, being heavy armed Horsemen. 43 3 Regiments of
Curiassiers, or men at Arms, being heavy armed Horsemen. 44 3 Regiments of
Curiassiers, or men at Arms, being heavy armed Horsemen. 45 4 Regiments of
Foot. 46 4 Regiments of Foot. 47 4 Regiments of Foot. 48 4 Regiments of
Foot. 49 A strong Regiment of Horse of Piccolomini's in the head of the
Battle. Here (it is said) Walenstein himself was. 50 4 Regiments of Foot: with
some lynings of Horse amongst them. 51 4 Regiments of Foot: with some lynings
of Horse amongst them. 52 4 Regiments of Foot: with some lynings of Horse
amongst them. 53 4 Regiments of Foot: with some lynings of Horse amongst them.
54 2 Regiments of Horse with Foot among. 55 2 Regiments of Horse with Foot
among. 56 3 Squadrons of Curiassiers. 57 3 Squadrons of Curiassiers. 58 3
Squadrons of Curiassiers. 59 Crabats.
The Swedish Intelligencer.
THe Swedish Army having staid 2. days at Weissenfels, after their fatal and
mourning Victory; and having in that time, over-viewed and ordered their Army:
they not as yet knowing, the fright the enemy was still in; or whither he might
call Gallas and his Army to him: resolve to pursue, what the dead King had
before the Battle purposed; which was to conioyne with the Dukes of Saxony and
of Lunenburg. These 2. Dukes, indeed, had been united with their 8000. men
about Torgau; some fortnight or 3. weeks before the Battle: Lunenburg being
marched up so far, so soon as ever Pappenheim had forsaken the Lower Saxony.

And they now hearing of the Battle, and of the Imperialists forsaking of
Leipsich: begin to stir for the recovery of it. Friday November 9th. a little
after noone; some 10. or 12. Saxon Horsemen come to the Grimmisch port of
Leipsich: where professing themselves to be Imperialists; they are admitted.
Being gotten in, some one or 2. of them clogge up, and make good the gate; till
another troop of their fellows (then hard at hand) were comne into them. The
Saxons recover Leipsich town;
The Court of guard at the Port, is cut in pieces: and much execution done upon
the wearied and unprovided Imperialists. Toward night, the 2. Dukes of
Altemburg and Lunenburg, with the 3. Colonells Hoffkirck Tauben and Pfort;
attended on by 40. troops of Horsemen and Dragooners: enter also into the
City. These taking the absolute possession and Mastery of the Town, give
present summons to the Castle of Pleissenburg; where there yet was an Imperial
garrison. Satterday being the 10. they order the City, and prepare to besiege
the Castle. and besiege the Castle.
The 11th. they get up 3. Batteries, where Holck, had before done: and made
like his, of Horse-dung and Woollsacks; with boords over them. That day, the
Horse marched out of the town: and in the night, 500. Musketeers came in place
of them. Some also, were sent from the Swedish Army: that all might join
together in the clearing of the country. All this day the ordnance thundered so
upon the castle, that a piece of the Bulwark was beaten flatt down with it.
Monday, being the 12th, the castle, about noone, was again summoned: but the
Governor Mozer, not only sent his denial to those Summons; but to all that
should be made afterward: which was, a vow to live and die in his own
defense: and as for mercy or conditions he expected none from them: nor would
he accept of any terms, but what himself should offer them. Now therefore are
the ordnance set to argue the case forboth parties: at which mooting: we, for
a while, leave them; to tell what was in the mean time done in other parts of
the Country.

The Swedish Army being parted from Weissenfels, and Naumburg; The Swedish and
the Saxons join.
Satterday November 10th. arrived at Pegau. The next day, they move to Born:
and (thence as we told you) are some forces sent to Leipsich. Generall-Major
Dodo Kniphausen having intelligence with the Burgers of Frieberg: reprises that
by an Aenslaught; and cuts of some 3. or 400. Imperialists in it. Duke Bernard
does as much, to 2. or 300. Crabats, in another little town thereabouts.
Monday November 12th. the Army marched to Grim; where they found themselves to
be some 12000. and hither came the Saxon and Lunenburgers Army to join with
them. And now it is amongst them resolved; either to pursue the enemy, if he
any where durst in the field abide them: or else to reconquer those towns of
the Duke of Saxonyes: wherein the Generalissimo had left any garrisons.

Chemnitz recovered.
Chemnitz is now first set upon, 30. miles up the same river, due South from
Grim, toward Bohemia. Here were the remnants of the 3. Regiments of the dead
Comarga, Palant, and Contreras. Some service was on both sides done, before the
town would render: but my purpose being but to relate things brieflyer, now
since the Kings death: I shall only afford you the general Acts and Articles.
Upon these conditions, was the place rendered.

and the conditions.
1. That the Imperial Governor should give over the town; and leave all his
Gunnes, Ammunition, Victuals, and Ensigns unto the Swedes and Saxons.

2. That no Protestant, were he Ecclesiastical or Laye-person; should be
forcibly carried away by the Imperialists: nor should any harm or damage be
done to them.

3. That the Imperialists should not, (either now or hereafter) make demands to
the Elector of Saxonyes subjects, of any thing due for Contribution or upon any
other color: nor should be troublesome to them for that matter.

4. The Governor, so soon as ever the Articles were signed; should deliver up
the town keys: and should draw up all his soldiers together into the place
of Parado, in the market-stead: and that without matches lighted, or any corn
of powder, or bullet of lead, about them.

5. Both Governor and soldiers, Ecclesiastics, sick and wounded people,
should so soon as ever they requested it; have leave to go out of the town:
but yet without sound of Drums and Trumpets, and with no other weapons, but
their swords only.

6. The Governor should have leave to carry away his own baggage, upon his
own Horses and Wagons: of which, none of the other Officers, should have more
then one apiece. As for the common soldiers, they should carry away no more,
then they could bear upon their backs.

7. If any of the garrison were disposed, to turn to the Protestant Party: the
Governor should attempt nothing against them, in prejudice either of their
lives or honors.

8. The Governor and his soldiers should be convoyed as far as Frieberg:
who should be bound from plundering or burning any thing by the way, in the
Duke of Saxonyes Dominions. And in lieu of the soldiers that should convoye
them, they were to leave pledges for their safe return: after which; the
pledges should have their Passes.

9. In these Articles, should not those common harryers and plunderers, the
Crabats; by no means be comprehended.

10. If in any tittle, these Articles should be prooved to be infringed; the
Governor was to be laid hold of: and the conditions to be of no force,
against the besiegers.

Shall I call these 10. Articles, or 10. Commandments? for as yet have I
seldom read, that any enemy did not scorn to yield up his town, upon such
unsouldierly and dishonorable conditions: who was not forced by Storm, to
yield at Mercy. Look all History over; and you shall hardly find me 10. such
Articles: scarcely worse; and upon that, I dare give you the book you find
them in. By this you see, what estate the Imperial Army was in. Let all that
side hereafter, forbear to say, that theirs had the victory at Lutzen; seeing
that so suddenly after it, and within 25. English miles of Bohemia; 3.
Imperial Regiments did yield up such a town, upon such pitiful conditions.

Chemnitz being taken; the Swedish Army is divided: Generall-Major Kniphansen,
Kniphansen goes to Leipsich Castle.
being with some forces sent to Leipsich, to hasten on the taking of the
Castle: whilst Duke Bernard sent out Partees every way, to skowre the coast of
the Imperialists. Kniphansen being comne to Leipsich; and some greater pieces
of Battery brought thither from Dresden; the siege is gone on more sadly
withal. I find (I confess) writing for 2. or 3. sallyes made by the
Imperialists: and of an offer made by the besiegers, to break the ground and
to begin their Approaches, (one Moone-light night) right against the Thomas
Gate. But I write no more particulars. Let it suffice to know, that on Sunday
December 2d. the Governor Mozer (for all his stoutnesse) as feign to
condescend to these 9. Pleissenburg Castle taken,
Articles: which had they been of his making (which he before protested to
stand upon) I suppose they would have been more favorable to his party.

1. That the Governor with his Officers and soldiers, that defended the
Castle; as also the Ecclesiastics, the Conditions
sick and wounded people, shall depart out of it the day following.

2. The Governor shall be bound, either this night, or to morrow morning; to
deliver up his prisoners, whither Churchmen, or of the Laity.

3. That neither Governor nor soldiers, shall now or hereafter, pretend any
thing upon the subjects of the Elector of Saxony.

4. The Governor and his Officers shall have leave to carry away their own
baggage: provided there were nothing amongst it, belonging unto any of the
Electors subjects. As for the common soldiers, they shall march out with no
more, then they could carry upon their shoulders.

5. The Governor shall leave all his Ordnance, Artillery, Ammunition,
Provisions, Armor, and whatsoever else was necessary for defense; behind him
in the Castle.

6. And so shall he do with his Ensigns, if he has any.

7. The Governor shall not only be bound, but give sureties for it; that he
should have no powder-mines in the Castle: nor should his soldiers do any
other wrong to it, at their departure.

8. The Governor shall pretend nothing, either against their lives or honors;
that were disposed to turn to the Protestant party.

9. Lastly, That by virtue of this agreement, the Governor with his Officers
and soldiers, might freely come out of the Castle; and should have a Saxon
Convoye, even to the Frontiers of Bohemia: provided that he left hostages for
the return of the Convoye.

Articles, within a very little, as lowly as the former: and yet upon these was
Pleissenburg Castle rendered, December 3d. being Monday. The Saxons having
delivered the Imperialists upon the Frontiers of Bohemia; the Boores there, not
suffering them to enter: beat them back as far as Annaberg in Misnia: where
they were forced to become Swedish. This I find writing for: but I wonder how
Walenstein would use these Boores for it?

I pass by smaller rencounters; because I hasten (like the Swedish) to clear
the greater towns, of the Imperialists. And they, it appears, made such have
to do it, that they gave far better conditions to the next town, (for a
packing penny) then they had done to both the former. It Was now in the depth of
Winter; when as the soldiers would feign be in their Quarters; and their two
Commanders (Duke Bernard and Kniphansen) at Dresden. Thither the Protestant
Princes, began to come and send, to the holding of a Diet: and to consult
together, how the Wars were to be prosecuted, now after the death of the
great Director of the War; the incomparable King of Sweden.

Pleissenburg Castle being taken, and restored (like Chemnitz) to the Elector
of Saxony: Generall-Major Kniphausen goes with the Army unto Zuicka; which by
this time Duke Bernard had given a girdle to. And now are the Saxon Forces,
returned again toward Silesia: for that thereabouts, the Imperialists began
anew to bustle.

The Baron de Suvis, was now Governor of Zuicka: and he preparing for defense,
burns down the Suburbs; fortifies and man's the great Church, the Towne-house,
and Castle. Duke Bernard and Kniphausen (to be brief) making up Batteries of
Timber-worke; upon the fifteenth of December, Zuicka rendered,
began to talk in the tone of thunder to them: By this, in ten days space,
the besieged were brought down to lower and milder language: and contented
upon Christmas Day, to take this cold Pie to their dinners. Then were these
Articles concluded upon.

1. That by 5. a clock on Saint John's day in the morning, the Governor and
soldiers, and the conditions.
belonging either unto his Imperial Majesty, or unto the Catholic Leaguers;
should with flying Ensigns, Drums beating, matches lighted, bullet in the
mouth, and full Arms; depart out of the City: carrying along with them, some
field pieces; of powder, bullet, lead, and match, of each 2000. weight.

2. That the Foot forces, shall take all their Horses, Wagons, Baggage,
Movables, and their Leaguer-servants; along with them, without molestation.

3. That the Horsemen, servitors either to the Emperor or the Leaguers, of what
nation or quality soever they are; shall have leave to march out completely.
That is to say, with Horses, Saddles, Pistols, Carabines, and Cornets: and with
their Baggage in like manner, as was granted to the Foote-forces.

4. That the Imperial Commissary Conradus a Schleisburg; shall also be
comprehended in the Treaty.

5. That the sick and wounded men, shall go out upon the same terms with the
other: who if they want wagons to carry them away; the Duke will please to
allow them some: or else to suffer them so long to stay in the City, and be
carefully looked unto, till they be thoroughly cured. After which, they shall be
suffered to depart, without molestation. To this end, shall order be given to
the Swedish and Saxon soldiers; that the Baron De Suvie and his soldiers
(Horse and Foot) be suffered to depart, without wrong or molestation.

6. The Swedish assure also, that they shall not go about, either by money or
other ways; to debauch or inveigle away any of the Imperial soldiers, into
their service.

7. The departing Imperialists, shall have a sufficient Convoye, (of 2. or 300.
Horse at least) under some Commander; to guard them as far as Preswitz in the
way to Commotha: who shall not enforce them to march above 2 Dutch leagues a
day.

Upon these honorable conditions, went the Baron De Suvis out of Zuicka:
attended with a garrison of 1150. Foot, under 5. flying Ensigns: and 600.
Crabats, with some other Horsemen. Two hundred and fifty Waggons-loade of
Baggage and Ammunition, he had along: and was, in state and leisure, conveyed
into the very borders of Bohemia. The Swedish, toward the end of the Market,
were contented to afford good penny-worths: for this being the last town of
the Elector of Saxonyes, possessed by the Imperialists; the countries of
Saxony, Voitland, and Misnia, were now quite cleared of them. The Army put into
Quarters.
And then was the over harassed, tired, and victorious Army, put into their
Winter Quarters.

And by this time was that wise Statesman, the Rex-Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern,
Oxenstiern coming,
comne into the Country. He first convoking the Military Commanders, unto
Altemburg, (as I take it) some part of the glorious Conquerors Will and
Testament, was made known unto them. And whereas the King in his life time,
the Army is, divided.
had appointed Dodo Kniphausen to go with an Army into the Lower-Saxony; and
to have the Title of a Felt-Marshall: the Swedish Army is thereupon divided;
part remaining to that valiant young Prince Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, and
another smaller part, going along with the new Felt-Marshall.

Kniphausen made Felt-Marshall: and sent into the Lower-Saxony.
Both these Armies, (as also all those other of the several Swedish Commanders
about Germany) were to take their orders and directions, from the Lord
Chancellor: who was to command all in chief; by virtue of the Commission which
the King had given him: of being Ambassador to the Armies. This is that ancient
and honorable Title among the Romans, called Legatus ad exercitus: For the
pleasure therefore, and better understanding of the Readers; give me leave to
rub up my old notes, and to deduce this Office from Antiquity.

The Roman Senate, still used to send some of the prime Nobility, and skilled
in the wars, unto the General: whose counsels and directions he was to have
regard unto, in all but in the manner of fighting the Army. It Was the
honourablest military employment of all, and the most reverend. The Ambassador
to the Armies, has in him both the power of a General, and the sacredness of
a Priest: says Dionysius lib. XIo. speaking of Lucius Siccius. Hence the
Greeks styled them (...) and (...); Elders and Counselors. When there was a
Roman Dictator (an absolute sovereign and Military Emperor, or more) then he
appointed this Ambassador. Then also he commanded him: and so did the Consul
too, when he was abroad as General of the Army. Dolobella me sibi Legavit;
says Cicero, Consul, General Dolobella, has appointed me his Ambassador.
Their place was above the Tribunes. They were chosen out of the Senators: and
when there was no Dictator upon the Army; then had they a solemn election by
the whole Senate. Legati ex Senatoru^ ordine: and, ex Senatoria authoritate
legarentur, says Cicero. Chosen out of the Senate, and by it. Legati, public
lecti; quorum opera consilioque uterentur, peregre Magistratus. They were
chosen publicly: and the Magistrates sent abroad into the Provinces, were to
use their counsel and assistance. Cicero in Vatin: calls them Nuncios pacis
and belli: Curatores, Interpretes: bellici consilij Auctores; Ministros muneris
Provincialis. Heralds and Denouncers of peace and war: Curators and
Interpreters, Authors of military directions; Administrators of the affairs in
the Provinces.

In this they differed from the Imperator or Great General. Aliae sunt Legati
parts, aliae Imperatoris. Alter, omnia agere ad praescriptum, alter libere ad
summam rerum consulere deb^t, says Caesar: The General is to execute
according to the words of his Commission: but the Ambassador, may
extraordinarily give his advice, upon the highest point of the business. In
the Generals absence from the Army, the Ambassador kept the state: he had his
Lictors and his Secures; his Sergeants with the Axe and Rods to go before him.
Verres in Achaiam, sumptu publico and legationis nomine; eum imperio and
securibus missus est: says Cicero. Verres was sent into Achaia upon the
charges of the Commonwealth; and the title of an Ambassador: with command and
state.

There were 2. degrees of these Ambassadors, among the Romans: Consulares, and
Praetorij. The first sort, was for the whole Army: the other were but Duces,
Colonels to their Brigades, Regiments, or Divisions. Augustus Caesar, did all
abroad in the Provinces, by the first: whom Tacitus calls Consulares. And of
this dignity (as near as ancient orders may be compared to new imitations) is
the Lord Axel Oxenstiern, Baron of Kimith, Lord of Fiholmen and Tydoen,
Praesident of Lapland and of the North Marches, Knight, etc. Councellor and
Chancellor of the Kingdom of Sweden; and Ambassador General unto the Armies
in Germany.

And here must I conclude my Story (my unpolisht and unworthy Story) of the
most incomparable valiant and good Prince; that ever (yet) honored any age or
Story. The Protestant and well affected party (me thinks) may well be compared
unto the 2. Books of the Prophet Jeremy. Experience, is a kind of Prophet.
People, therefore, certain in experience of what he had done; were so strong
in hopes, of what he would do: that they even seemed to prophecy. But now,
alas! when their hopes are failed, they conclude with Ieremies Lamentations:
Josiah is dead, and well they may lament him. How likely, (had God spared him
life) he was to have fulfilled all men's hopes;) and how deservedly, he is now
to be lamented: See here (good Readers) by this following, course Character of
him.

The Character Of the High and Mighty Prince, and most victorious Conqueror
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, etc. Wherein the best of those conceits, in
Le Soldat Suedois, are not neglected.
THat this Prince was a Descendant by the Male-line, not from a Kingly Stem,
only, but from a Family of Deliverers: and that his Nobility by the By his
great Grandmother; descended of the ancient Gottori and Fu^cones, Dukes and
Kings of Sweden. His Father^ line being from Trolle and the Trollioes, Knights
and Counselors of Sweden, of 400. years standing. A Knight, of a Knights
family there; is equal in esteem with them, as amongst us those are, of the
Garter.
Females, is of a more ancient extraction, then the vulgar Heraldry has yet
taught us: are the advantages of his Birth, the additions to his Inheritance,
and the commendations of his Fortune. Nor could less be expected to the
propagating of such a Prince; then a Crowned Merit and Nobility; in his
Ancestors. And that, not of the first head only: least it should have been
mistaken for a chance of Natures, and not an Industry: but to produce the
Conqueror of Germany, there was the preparation of many Ages, required. Like as
in the delicatest Fruite-trees: it is not enough, that the Cyon be of a noble
Stock; but that it be bettered by many Engraftings and Removings. Ancient,
descending, and continued Merit and Nobility, derived from the loins of many
Ancestors: nothing less could have begotten such a King of Sweden. Sweden
glories in his Birth; He was borne in December 1594.
that's Her honor: but his Pedigree and Alliances, are from Germany. The more
kindly and natural, therefore, was his ambition to deliver it; and the less
exception lay there, to his being a Stranger. To be a sign, of whence he was
descended; were his 2. names given him. Gustavus, has been the ancient
Christian name of diverse of the Kings of Sweden: though none of them till his
carrying it, put the world into the conceit, that it was the Anagramme of
Augustus. Adolphus has been the bearing of the Houses of Holstein and of
Mecklenburg; from both which, he lineally was extracted. So was He borne, and
thus Christened.

His youth was bred up, with royal exercises: such as might season him with
Virtue and Religion, and prepare him for grand businesses. His body, though
brought up, Princely; yet not Cocknied up, tenderly: nor with too much soft,
and warm, and gaye, and sweet; effeminated. The Poets feign, that Mars was
borne in this Country: who had never proved the God of War, had not his body
been enured to the Frost, and Ice, and Rocks, and hardship of this Northern
Clymate. His spirit, was by the tutorage of the best learning and examples,
elevated; to esteem no good design too high for him: fortified with a
courage, that knew not how to stoop beneath a King; and (like his sword,
afterward) tempered with so irresisteable, and steely an edge, as should cut
through all dangers and necessities. At home, he learned Latin; in Italy,
Mathematics; othere where abroad, the French, Italian, and Germane languages:
all which as he learned very readily, so he spoke as promptly and elegantly.
Travail refined and furnished him: yea he privately travailed Germany, under
the concealed name of Mr. This assumed appellation, was made up of the 4. first
letters of his Title Gustavus Adolphus Rex Suecia.
GARS, even after he was King of Sweden.

At 16. years old, he was not only a soldier, but a Colonel; and though the
youngest, yet (perchance) not the unskilfullest, of his Fathers Army. Next
year, which was Anno 1611. King Charles his Father dyed: when himself, then
but a Minor of 17. years of age, was called to the Kingdom. The entry into
his reign, was the trial of his education: his Father left him embroyled with
the Dane and Muskovite; and shortly after, began the Polander to confront him.
The pretenses of these Princes, were indeed much different: but in the ruin of
a young King, they all had the same intentions. Poland claimed the Crown;
Denmark and the Muskovite; put in to recover what bordering lands they had
before claimed; and which, had either been conquered from them, by his
Ancestors, or freely for merit granted them, by the others. I will not write a
Story, where I intend but a Character. Let this suffice to know; that he gate
the better of all 3. Nations, both upon the green grass, and upon the green
Carpet: in the field, I mean, and upon the Treaty.

Two of his young scholars prizes, twere pity to pass over. In his war
with the Muskovite, he would needs lay siege to Notteburg Castle: Anno 1617.
which among other lands, the Muskovite had granted his Father, for his
service. The place of this, is upon an Island; in the middle of the mouth, of
the most raging swift river of Nerva, and at least Culvering shot, from either
shore of it. His Colonells, not willing their young King should receive a
check in his rising fortunes, by attacking an impossibility: diswade the
Action; himself only remaining constant to pursue it. See how God Almighty
made our young Joshua, to be honored among his people. The Muskovites proved to
have such thrushes, See the book called Descriptio Regni Sueciae.
and warts, and blisters, growing in the insides of their throats and mouths;
that they could neither feed nor swallow: so that having abundance of
Ammunition, and a whole years victuals by them; yet came they out and yielded
up the Castle to him. An inpregnable piece! which could neither be battered,
starved, nor have a bridge laid over to it. That year, took he another
Castle, almost as strong: whereupon the Muskovite was glad to make King James
his good friend, to procure his peace with the young Sweden.

Some while after this, had he a difference with the Dantzickers: who manned out
20. or 30. good Ships of War; with the first opening of the Spring, to have
burnt up his Navy in the Harbor. It Was about the end of winter then, when his
long and narrow Swedish Sea, was a yeard or two deep frozen. This Ice, our
young King causing his Boores (for 10 or 12. English miles together) to cut
open; came with his Fleet in the night, upon the Dantzickers; and burnt,
sunk, spoiled, or took the most of them.

In his Wars with his Uncle Sigismund King of Poland, he conquered so many
towns from him, both in Prussia and Livonia: that the Pole was enforced to
request the mediation of King Charles and the French King, to make up a peace
for 6. Sir Thomas Ro^ was our Kings Ambassador.
years betwixt them: which he afterward desired to be perpetuated. This was
concluded September 29. 1629. King Sigismund acknowledging Gustavus Adolphus to
be King of Sweden; and in his Treaty, so styling him.

And thus, wheresoever this young Mars entered; the dread of his Arms and Name,
were as full of terror to the enemy-Country, Annibal ad port^^.
as Annibal sometimes unto the Romans: nor ever returned he out of them, but
with the Olive and the Palm branches; the Emblemes of Peace and Victory.

But these Northern Trophyes upon his next neighbors, though they had much of
glory; yet have they much of Credit and possibility, also in them: but
Chronicle and Belief must strain hard, to make his Germane Conquests any
thing probable, with posterity: and were they not written in the times of the
doing, and acknowledged by his enemies: scarcely would the Legend be more
Apocryphal. For what credulity, (not facile to be abused) could persuade it
self, that 2. third parts of Germany, could (and by him that entered but with
11000. men) in 2. years and 4. months space, be wrested from so puissant an
Emperor? A mighty Empire and a Potent; formidable for its greatness,
confident upon the power of its Colleagues and Vpholders: vast in its extent,
terrible for its Arms and Captains; renowned for its Conquests, beyond
expectation, successful in all its enterprises: and that knew no bounds, but
the Alps and the Ocean. And yet this Empire, which either with its Armies, or
garrisons: if not by a cheaper way, the mere reputation of what it had, or
might do; held so many Princes at a Baye: was it self constrained to take on
the yoke, which Swedens Gantlett put upon it. In less then 2. years and a
half, he did all this: what might He more have achieved, had he gone on
another year and two months: and filled up the time of that malicious and
false prediction, which the Jesuits had cast abroad of him? They comforted
their credulous Novices, with his being Antichrist; and that he should reign
3. years and a half, and no longer.

The belief of his conquering so much, will be the more facilitated: if we
could but conceive (once) his familiar way of doing it: he made but a Comedy of
the wars: which others are so solemn upon; and make so full of Tragedy. I
will give but two examples. Coming before Elbing with an Army, scarce so
strong as their garrison; he after Summons and Hostages; worms out by fair
words, the Burgomaster and some great ones, to his Tent unto a Parlee.
Himself, in the mean time, with some few of his Gentlemen, goes to the Ports
and desires to come in as a travayler, to please his sight with the rarities of
their City. Such pleasancy of words and conceit he used, that the Citizens were
as desirous to see the King of Sweden, as he to take their City. Being in, he
walks gazing up and down, the people flocking still after him. Now in truth
good people (says he) if I had thought you had desired to see the King of
Sweden, I would have put on my best clothes to day. What need you fear me? my
Swedes and Fins shall be your drudges, cleave wood, fetch water, and do you
any servility: and with that he calls a stubbed Finn to him, and commands him
to remoove some lumber, or piece of rubbish. This said, he goes into a
Stationers shop, and there calls for Buchanans Poemes: just as in such a case
Alexander sometimes did, for Homers Iliades. And thus the Burgomaster knowing,
that the King was in the town; and He being sure, that the Burgomaster was in
His Tent: the composition became the easier. At that very strong town of
Konigshoven in Franconia, after this; showed he another example of this
facetious facility. Having summoned the town, he rides up along toward the
Ports: where when he saw the guards blowing their matches, and making ready to
shoot him: Sacrament (says he) if you make but one shot, the King shall know
of it; and he has vowed that not a man of you shall have Quarter. But if you
will treat fairly, you shall have your own conditions. This was his order
(mostly) in taking of a town: he would not stand entrenching and building
Redoubts, at a miles distance: but clap down with his Army presently, about
Cannon shot from it. There would he begin his Approaches, get to their walls,
Batter and Storm, presently: and if he saw the place were not by a running
pull to be taken: he would not lose above 4. or 6. days before it; but rise
and to another. And thus did he at Ingolstat.

It Is a hard task to give you the just portraiture of this Prince: he was so
perpetually in action, that he seldom gave himself time to sit, to have it
taken. But these (in general) are the rough drawings of his personal
excellencies. He bare a Port and Presence, full of a gracious Majesty; full
flesht, and faced: a rich and a gallant stature, 2. yeards and above: a hawks
eye; the world thought an Eagles. His more then flaxen-coloured hair, inclined
to the color of Apolloes: a sign he had much of the Sun in him. His tone
of speech, was of a manly and a masterly pronunciation: and his answers were
quick, full, smart, but not gybing: clean limbed he was, strong, active, and
hardy: made up as fitly for a King, as for a General. But for the guest that
reign in this Palace, and actuated it; his mind, and his spirit: that's to be
best guessed at by his Conquests. An undaunted courage, a strong judgment, an
admirable quickness of conceit, a natural vigilance and indefatigablenesse, a
marvailous forecast, with the best advantage to apprehend and dispose of his
occasions: these were his personal forces, that conquered so much of Germany.
Look else into his Leaguer. See there his encamping, his fortifying, his new
ways of fighting, and embatteling; his orders, his provisions, his directions,
and the soul and spirit of all these, his own diligences: and then tell me,
how he were easy to be resisted. An excellent dexterity besides, was he
endowed withal, to extricate and untangle the Gordian knottinesse of a
business; the master-spirit he had, over all that came before him; a gift,
withal to take the advantage of men's humors; and a native attraction in him,
to win hearts, as well as Provinces. A great Student he was, upon any
business of importance: and when his Chancellor was with him, a diligent
disputer and Canvasser of the Answer, which he was to give to Ambassadors.

He would have the proiecting of the design, still to pass from his own
invention; seldom calling a formal Council of War; and yet not despising
to ask upon the Bye, the advises of his Commanders. He contented not himself
to be the General of an Army, but he would be a Captain, yea a Sergeant of a
band; an Enginier, a common soldier, a Canonier: all, or any thing. The
surprise and suddenness of a danger, seldom astonished his judgment: but the
more desperate the peril were, the nimbler, commonly, was he in his deliveries;
still showing most vigor, where there was most need of it. There was not an
enterprise to be gone upon, not beneath the honor of a Colonel; but let the
danger be what it would, he would lead on the Partee. And it was an astonishment
to behold, that he was not only not worn out with the affiduity of his
labors and his hardships; but that he battned and grew fat upon action:
coming fresh off from one, and still pressed and ready for another enterprise.
He grew fat, I say, not with eating and drinking; no Prince was more temperate
then he, those ways. His feeding was upon strong and souldierly dishes: not
such delicacies, as were dainty of taste, and easy of digestion; but such
lusty, bearing meats, as would increase strength, and make resistance in the
stomach. Drinking, he was not taxt for: and notwithstanding it be the
Northern way of sinning; yet came not he to out-drinke the Germans: they were
not that way to be conquered. Briefly, that Northern corner of the world, has
not brought forth a Prince of his temper, and temperance; or a man so generally
well put together, in all imaginable abilities and perfections; to make a
General of. And so much, have the contriving and conduct of his designs,
manifested; which he had even almost given their period unto.

I have left out the best part yet; and that was his Religion: his devotion in
his Religion, (public and private) and his frequent Prayers and Thanksgivings,
(especially upon all eminenter occasions) were the things that rendered him
admirable. He would pray a shipboard, and a shore; in the Field, and in the
midst of a Battle: as if Prayer alone, were the surest piece of all his whole
Armor. And in his open Prayers, this one thing is of all the rest, most
considerable; That as other times he had sworn, publicly sworn; that his
purposes were not to Conquer, but to Deliver: so in his Prayers for divine
assistance, would he boldly appeal to God the searcher of the hearts, that He
knew his intentions to be no other. That a Prince, now, should thus dare it in
the face of Heaven; and call down just vengeance from thence, if he meant not
Gods glory in sincerity: they must be his enemies, that will not believe it.

The greatest imperfection of his body, was that his eyes, were dim sighted:
that though he could forsee, no eye better, yet could he not discern far
from him. The greatest infirmity of his mind, was his Cholericknesse: a
passion, indeed which he could not so well control; and which would easily,
now and then, burst forth, upon a slight, or imaginaned provocation. But this
was an inbred humor, not a humorousnesse in him: and the usual uncorrected
vigourousnesse of those Spirits it is, that have a richer allowance of Spirit
and Fire in them. This though it must be confessed, to be a peccancy, and a
distemper; yet is it to be observed withal, that of the predominancies of the
4. Humors, this principally renders a man fit for action. And truly, it might
in him the better be excused, for that he was still enchaft with businesses;
and had so many dispositions of men, and successes of affairs, to encounter
withal: especially sometimes, when he found but awckwardnesse. This fault
indeed, was he noted for: and it is for him that writes his Apology, not his
Character; to deny or defend it. And yet this help there was for it: that
upon a very little consideration, he would take himself with the manner, and
take up, presently: and with a gracious debonnairenesse and sweetness, which
was natural to him, give check to the ouerlashing of some less advised and
indigested speeches, that had in choler slipped from him. Ready, besides, of
himself, he was, to give satisfaction: not unto the Grandees and Chiefes only
of his Armies, whose merits and services might take the more exceptions to such
usage: but even to the common soldiers also, who ought not to stand upon such
puntilioes with a King their General. This would he do easily; especially
where he found himself used like a King, and sued unto.

Himself would say, when he took notice now and then, of this touchinesse of
his own nature, so apt with a little spark to take fire: That he must endure,
ever and anon, the diversities of their humors; the phlegm of some, and the
drink of others: and that in equity, therefore, they ought something the
better to bear with his cholericknesse. And an indifferent temper in men,
would have passed by this infirmity in him; could they have but consideted the
multitudes and varieties of those greater thoughts, which were still agitated
in that ever working brain and spirit of his; wound up, and laboring upon the
stretch, without intermission. A man, me thinks, should do with a bad humor in
a Prince, as with a bad Angel: give him his full Grains, and Allowances; and
then weigh him. But if you please to put into the either skale, those
extraordinary many virtues in him: his sweetness of disposition, his easiness
of access, the familiarnesse of his carriage, his care that every common
soldier should have his due, and his moderation in the greatness of his
successes, not thinking his shadow one spanne the more spreading; then surely,
the beam would so cast it on the better s^ide, that his choler would seem but
as the dust of the balance, to them.

But yet another fault was there in this most excellent Prince, which (now)
has spoiled all the rest. That, namely, his courage suffered his Judgment no
better to distinguish, betwixt the duties of a common Carabin, and a General
of an Army; but would adventure the King, as far as the Leader of a Partee:
and that, by consequence, he took no better care for the saving and sparing of
the best blood of the Army; but was too too prodigal an unthrift of it. The
marvel is not, that he was so hazardous of it, in a Cause so glorious; but
that in all those encounters, he lost no more of it: his own life,
perpetually, being as far and forwardly engaged, and still running the same
hazards; with the meanest of his Army. But yet for taking off this blame from
him; this, in his discharge, is to be said: That that natural constitution of
his, not of fire only, but of flame, made all the valor and couragiousnesse
of his Army, behold unto his example; and that the well speeding of his so many
victories, was principally to be ascribed to his presence in the encounters:
the very sight of such a Leader, like some puissant Aspect in the heavenly
Constellations, infusing a secret influence and irrradiation of courage into
his own; and of fright and terror, into his enemies.

And by these excellencies, arrived he to this height of glory: even of a
military glory. And see what a true-rais'd Fame can do! it has something in
it, not only beyond the nature of an Eagle, but of a Star, too; for the
higher air this Prince wrought himself up into, the fuller, still, and the
liker Statua, his virtues have appeared; and he bigned upon the eye of envy,
in his Mountie. Bodies merely up of craft or fortune, do out of cunningnesse
affect to conceal their own greatnesses. Like Mercury among the Plantets: who
though of a fiery and a flushing luster: yet so politic a Courtier and close
a waiter he is, (and that upon industry:) as by ever crowding near the Sun,
he has gained to walk so far obscured under his Masters glories; that his
devoutest servants (the Astronomers) can seldom or never procure the sight of
him. Whereas Bodies made up of true worth and substance; are like the Sun it
self, then arrived to the brightest of their Beauties, when in the highest
degree of their Exaltations.

And this is something, toward the Character of the King of Sweden, whilst he
was. And alas that I must say, Whilst he was! Now would I give all my part in
Grammar, to alter but one Tense, and to say He is. But because He is no more
amongst us, this Character and Story of his, may serve in stead of his Picture;
to conserve his memory. I confess I am not Limner cunning enough, to give
every part of him, his true stelling and proportion: nor have I the Art, either
with sweet touches or bold and masterly strokes, so to heigthen up my Piece,
or make it to stand off, as every way to be like him. In this only do I
please my self, that those who have had the honor to be about his person; may
here refigure a touch or two, that come something near the Life of him. This
also I assure my self of, that those nobler foes, who have sometimes been
made feel his Arms: will be amongst the liberallest to contribute toward his
praises; if it be but only to take off something from their own losses, to
justify their own disgraces; and to show that no man inferior to this
Character, could have been thus active and successful upon them.

That which is admirable beyond all the rest, is, That this Prince has left
the affairs behind him, in an estate seeming advantageous to both parties. The
one side, think skales turned, by his killing. His own Allies, he left in
possession of more then two third parts of Germany: of the better towns, and
the greater rivers; even from the Vistula in Muskovia, unto the Rhine and
Danuby: the Oder, the Elb, the Danuby, the Mayn and the Rhine; all these are
witnesses of his personal Trophies: and so are the Weser and the Mosel, of
others of his Captains. To continue these Conquests, he left seven fair
Armies behind him, with their Generals. In the Upper Saxony, his own, to Duke
Bernard; in the Lower Saxony a 2d. under Baron Kniphausen: In Silesia a third,
under Dubalt. In Bavaria a fourth, under the Palatine Birckenfelt. About Cullen
a fifth, under Baudissin: in Alsatia a sixth, under Gustavus Horn: and in
Schwabland a seventh, under The Duke of Wirtemberg, and Sir Patrick Ruthven. I
reckon not the Saxons: the Lunenburgers, the Bremers, nor the Hessens; because
under their own Princes: though all, whilst he lived, by him, as the General
Director of the Wars, to be commanded. Add to this, the strength of his
Confederacies: all Princes, (excepting those of the House of Austria, some few
Italians, and the Catholic Leaguers) being his Allies.

What now remains, but that the Protestant Princes of the Empire, do go on
still, to pursue the advantages, which he left unto them; to banish all
personal jealousies, and mis-intelligences; to soder up all old ruptures and
divisions; to lay aside the standing upon their punto's, and the Heraldry of
their genealogies; and to suffer the Wars to be conducted, not by Princes of
the best Houses, but the greatest abilities; to husband their time and
oportunities; to press action, and not to be too tedious in their
consultations; to take advantage of what is both passed and present; to study
how to conserve their own estates, under that of the Empire; to communicate
their counsels, and unite their Forces, for the reducing of Freedom and
Religion. This if they be negligent in; then, all the travels of the deceased
King; together with all their own pains and charges: yea all their Forces,
Armies, and advantages; shall not long serve their turns, but they must become
the prey of their Enemies, an Amphitheater of Tragedies, and an example to
posterity of confiscated estates, and of bodies incurably diseased.

And to say the troth, these Princes have even until this present, gone so
well on, that their unity has quite dashed all the exultations of the contrary
party; and they have trumped upon the best of the others hopes; and happily
gone beyond the fears of their friends, that still doubted them. They have
given the world to see, that the Schooling and lessoning of the King, has made
good impression in them: and that the loss of so great a Patron, though it
extremely pulled down the side; yet has it caused their motions to be
concentricall, to go all one way; and by union, to redouble their vigours.

And yet all this notwithstanding, and that the King of Sweden has left these
Princes of his party, in so good estate, that they have the less cause to
lament the loss of him: they being well set up on their feet again, and in
case to maintain their own freedoms. Admit the truth of all this: yet has
the adverse party, which he gave check unto, recovered the better of the game,
since this King is taken. Great are their advantages, by the death of this
Prince: these few pellets of lead which killed him, being worth more to them,
then a million of Ducats possibly could have advantaged them. And this loss of
him, who was the Sole Director of all; gave not only hopes, but probabilities;
that now, when the business was to fall to be managed by a many; the
diversities of Cheefes, would be so apt to foment iealousies and
mis-intelligences: as that it would give more facility to the contrary party,
to conserve what was not yet conquered; to satisfy some privately
discontented; to unite their counsels: to recall exiled tranquillity; and
firmly, once again, to re-establish a good peace over all the Empire.

If now, the Imperial party please to make profit, by their former losses:
then shall we see them turn a deaf ear to all bloody and violent counsels;
avoid the enforcing both of Princes and people, to turn desperate: remove all
suspicions and bad correspondencies; regaine exasperated spirits, by
sweetness; and seek how to reign by love, rather then by terror: no more
attempting the breach of the peace and public faith, under pretense of
conscience: it being to be dealt withal by persuasion, and not by enforcing;
as having to answer before another Tribunal, then man's Judgment. And
hereunto, it appears, that this party ought so much the rather to aspire;
because it may have hope even forthwith and henceforward, to continue in their
own rights and advantages: the death of this King, having cured them of a
bodily fear they were deeply already in; least he should have taken a higher
flight, pretented toward new Diademes: and fully have verified his Anagramme,
by changing the name Gustavus, into Augustus.

Whatever in this dull Character of mine, may seem defective; is abundantly
supplied in this most learned and concise Epitaph. Written by an Honorable
Son of the Muses; and worthy the Tombe-Stone of the great Gustavus.

Epigraphe.
SISTE VIATOR,
NEC DESPONDE ANIMVM;
VT NEQVICQVAM SPERES,
NI MORI SPERES;
VIX EST QVOD METVAS,
NI VIVERE METVAS.
FATO CESSIT VITAE MORTISQVE ARBITER SVMMVS:
PROXIMVM COELITIBVS NOMEN.
QVIN ILLVD EXIGIS?
DABO.
SED VT LITES LACHRYMIS,
REGI POTENTISS. PIENTISS.
GVSTAVO
QVO SEXTO NOVEMBRIS
NECI DATO
TOTA EVROPAE FACIES MVTATA EST,
IN PLANCTVM SOLVTIS HVMANISS. QVIBVSCVNQVE;
QVIN MAIORA POSTVLAS?
ACCIPE.
ILLE QVI DISSIDIA PVBLICA, PACE TERMINARE;
PACEM, BONIS ARTIBVS EXCOLERE,
ILLE QVI OPPRESSOS IN SVVM IVS ASSERERE;
ASSERTOS, LIBERATE DONARE;
LIBERTATEM, SECVRAM REDDERE
AGGRESSVS EST:
PROH DOLOR! INTERIIT:
SED VT SVMMVM ARDVAE VIRTVTIS EXEMPLVM AVDIAT:
NVLLVS, QVIPPE, POST HOMINES NATOS,
BONO PVBLICO
POTIORA INTENTAVIT,
GRAVIORA PASSVS EST.
ABI IAM, SI LICET, IN REM TVAM.
The Copy of the Swedish Conclusion. By the Princes and Peers of the Kingdom
of Sweden: Which was unanimously consented unto by them, at their Diet and
Assembly holden at Stockholm on the 14th. of March 1633. The Original was
printed at Stockholm, by Ignatius Murer.
WE underwritten, the Council, Peers, Earls, Lords, Bishops of Sweden.
Gentry, Clergy, Officers of War, Citizens, and the whole Commonalty who have
been convoked to this honorable Assembly; as well in our own names and
behalfes, as also in the name and behalf of all the Countries: do hereby make
known and certify. That whereas it has pleased Almighty God of his
providence and good pleasure, so heavily to visit us and this Kingdom, and in
so great a measure to afflict us, by taking unto himself, (by bodily death) the
renowned high and mighty Prince and Lord, Gustavus Adolphus King of the Swedens
Goths and Vandales, Great Prince of Finland. Duke of Estland and Carellen.
Lord of Ingormanland, etc. and to translate his blessed Majesty (of ever happy
and famous memory) out of this vale of misery, into his eternal happiness and
heavenly joy: and to exchange his temporal Crown into an everlasting Diadem
of glory: and so to have put a period, not only to his Majesty's careful and
labourious life and days, but also to his sufficiently noted and renowned
Counsels, worthy acts, courageous and undaunted spirit; almost incredible, at
leastwise wonderful Victories, against part of the mightiest and most
powerful Princes and Potentates of Europe. And which we chiefly must
condole: in him it has pleased God to take from us our head, our King, our
father and Pater patriae: Under whose worthy, famous, and most excellent
reign, we above all other Nations, in these doleful and calamitous times;
have found our selves without any opposition, in all security, safety and
tranquillity. And which aggrauates our misery, it has not pleased God to
suffer any Heyer-Male to proceed from the loins of his said blessed Majesty,
to remain upon, and to possess his Fathers seat. So that, not without
reason, ours and the Kingdoms care and danger is the greater; and we cannot
but so much the more take to heart this inestimable loss. Wherefore, upon the
Iniunction of the Peers and Council of the Realm, at their conuenting: we
have thought good, unanimously and obediently to come together, in the fear of
God; and to take into consideration the present State of our Kings Majesty's:
Heyer, as also the State of our dear Kingdom. And how the same may be happily
up held and maintained: and (next under the aid and help of God) be defended
against all danger and opposition. To this end, we are all of us jointly and
willingly assembled here, and we have pondered and consulted together, which
might best conduce to the good of the Realm. And at last, by the help of the
Almighty, and in the name of the Blessed Trinity; we have closely united, and
strongly bound and tied our selves; and after this conjunction, promise, and
obligement, among our selves; we have confirmed and established, That which is
here underwritten, and as follows.

1. 1. Article.

Inprimis. Whereas the death of our blessed and renowned King, has caused a
Kingly reign to cease among us: and the Cause so being, that their is no
Heyer-Male left behind his Majesty: nor any Children of any Hereditary Prince;
which might by undoubted right, succeed according to the Laws and
constitutions of the Realm. We have not disapprooved of that, which was
concluded at Workoping, Anno 1604. concerning the Renewing of the Hereditary
conjunction: and concerning the Daughters of our Kings and Heyer-Princes: which
in that assembly was confirmed and enacted. As also that, which unanimously and
jointly was concluded by us here present, at Stockholm, anno 1627. on the 4th.
of December, as follows. That in case his blessed and famous Majesty should
happen to decease: We did conclude, that his daughter the Princess, the High
borne, Christina, should be chosen for our Queen and Inheritrix of our
Kingdom. And therefore at this time do we again establish unanimously, (and
that in consideration of the famous and magnanimous acts and deeds, of the two
worthy Kings; King Gustavus the first, and especially of King Gustavus the
last, lately deceased: (whom justly we may term Gustavus the Great) by which
two, and more especially by the latter, we have received admirable benefit and
fame; and consequently, are bound to render all honor and respect, to this
well-borne Princess) according to our former promise and obligation: and do
now renew, what we heretofore have maturely confirmed. That is to say; We do
declare, pronounce, and confirm; advisedly, unanimously, freely, and without
constraint; The high and mighty Princess Christina, Daughter of his renowned
Majesty Gustavus Adolphus the Second and Great King; Queen of the Swedes,
Goths and Vandales; lawfully chosen: as also Haereditary Princess, Great
Duchess of Finland, Duchess of Estland, and Carellen, our most dear and
gracious Queen. And by these presents we do oblige our selves and our
associates, confederates and Princes and Peers of our Kingdom, inhabitants
and subjects of this Realm; to afford her gracious Majesty: all true and due
service and obedience: and do inaugurate her said Majesty: and establish her,
in whatsoever in righteousness maybe answerable before God and Man. Insomuch,
that her Majesty shall have full power and Authority, to command us in all
particulars. And to this end, as true faithful and loyal subjects, we do
confirm and ratify the Laws of the Realm, for her Majesty. And moreover,
we do here promise and oblige our selves to stand for her Majesty's safety
good and welfare, as of the Kingdom, even upon the danger of our lives, and
loss of our goods. Provided, that her Majesty when she shall come to years,
and full possession of the Government and rule of the Kingdom; shall make
assurance to us, and the whole State, of whatsoever may concern the
maintaining of all our liberties, laws, and privileges, etc. as the like has
formerly been done by our late Kings, (in the best form that may be)
especially by her Majesty's Father: his Majesty of blessed Memory, King
Gustavus the 2d. and has by the State of the Kingdom been approoved.

2d. Article.
2.
Secondly, we conclude, that in case any one, (high or low, of whatsoever
place, dignity or quality; whether of the State of Sweden, or other parts
subject to the Crown of Sweden) do refuse either with means, presence,
obedience, and all requisite subjection, to subscribe and submit to this our
resolution and establishment: and shall dare to oppose this Act of ours; or to
bend his heart, eye, or hand, to any other whosoever it may be, Inhabitant
within our Dominions or forrainer: We do hold, esteem, and declare the same
party to be a distracted and separated member from our Body; and an enemy, yea
Traitor of the Kingdom: and the same person who ever it be, being once
convinced of a crime of this nature, shall be punished without mercy.

3. 3d. Article.

Thirdly, although it seem not absolutely necessary, now to relate the former
Constitutions and Statutes, made and concluded upon against King Sigismundus of
Polonia, and his Children: which were grounded upon good reasons, and necessary
proofs: yet notwithstanding, to remoove all obstacles and objections from the
simply honest meaning people, We do confirm and establish, by these presents;
That this may be lawfully done, which we do now; notwithstanding whatsoever
has formerly been concluded against King Sigismund his Children, and
Descendants. And therefore do declare them to have no right or interest to the
Crown of Sweden; or to any part of the Dominions or Jurisdictions, there under
comprehended: but all their right, and pretenses, to be lost, void, forfeited,
and in the lapse; from this time forth for ever. And if it should so fall out
(which God forbid,) that any Swedes, or who-ever they may be; under the Crown
of Sweden, in high place and dignity: should unadvisedly go about (either
secretly or openly) to stand up in the behalf of any of the Children of
Sigismundus or his Descendants, to be received into the Kingdom of Sweden: or
to yield them any footing within the Jurisdictions, or upon the Frontiers of
the same Kingdom: We do hold the same person (how soever he be) for a
pernicious and heinous Traitor, both to us and the whole State. And if any
such, shall dare to stand out and persevere in so vile an insolency; he shall
be sure to meet with the merciless punishment, due to such a Traitor. And
moreover, whosoever he be, that shall give ear, and leave to any such; and not
in time make it manifest and known, with his intent that way; shall be subject
and liable to the same punished. In like sort shall all those be punishment,
that shall dare to harbor or lodge any such persons, without giving notice and
intelligence to authority. Now whereas at Orebroo in the year 1617. the 27th.
of February: an express and absolute order and decree was established, against
all such, by the Peers and whole State of the Realm: we will and ordain by
these presents, that the same decree henceforward remain as inviolable, as if
the same were herein expressed word by word. Wherefore, It is now by us
concluded and decreed, that the same decree of Orebroo, shall be fully
executed; and that to the same end, all Lords, and Judges, Officers, etc. each
according to his place and office; shall be bound to have an especial care for
the execution and performance of the same; as he will otherwise answer it, at
his peril.

4th. Article.
4.
Fourthly, With unaminous consent and deliberation, we here confirm, renew,
conclude and establish what formerly at other times Assemblies, and Diets, has
concerning the Service of God and his Church been concluded and settled: and
do generally, all of us, oblige our selves to remain in the same form,
discipline, and truth of Religion; according to the revealed truth of Gods holy
and heavenly Word; and the Articles of our Christian belief, contained in the
3. Creedes: that is to say, the Apostles Creed, the Nicene, and of Athanasius:
together with the true and invariable and ulalterable Confession of Augspurg.
In a word, as it has formerly been solidely concluded, in the Council of
Vpsal.

5th. Article.
5.
Fifthly: Whereas our Queen as yet is not come to her complete years, and
full age; so that she can be sufficient of her own self and ability, to
defend and Govern the Kingdom and the Realm: we could wish (and happy were
we, if it had been so) that there had been a full decree and order made by
his Majesty of blessed Memory, and the Princes and States of the Realm; so
that in the same there had been comprehended, whatsoever in this respect we
ought to have cleaved unto. But since it is otherwise, and must needs be so;
and that we do understand, that his renowned Majesty of blessed memory, did
commit his intent and resolution concerning this matter, to the Council and
Lords of this State; and had often commanded and desired them, to conceive a
right order concerning the same: which they having performed, and therein
declared their opinion, and showed the same to his Majesty, with his full
approbation: yet notwithstanding, by reason of his sudden death, and other
occasions thereupon ensuing, has it not had its full effect: although we may
well wish it had. Therefore in this case, we have read and manifested the said
order (made by his Majesty in his time) to some of the chief amongst us, and
of our State: who, as they have found the same most sound and wholesome; so
could we wish that the same were published to the common view and eyes of all
men: and might be confirmed and ratified unanimously by us all, and so be
published. But whereas we do also perceive and understand, that diverse
instructions and necessary appurtenances belonging thereunto, by reason of the
shortness of time, could not conveniently be in readiness: we,
notwithstanding, being desirous to further the welfare and State of the Realm,
in all good manner of proceeding; and likewise, that his Majesty: our most
gracious and renowned King (of blessed memory) his will and care (for which we
are for ever bound to extol his Majesty's name and memory) may really be
performed and executed: we do especially; all of us, in the name of the whole
State and Realm; desire and ordain that the same decree and ordinance of his
Majesty: shall be put in execution and performed, in the best manner and form
that may be possibly, for the good and welfare of our Realm and Countries; by
the 5. chief States and Officers of the Realm: to wit. 1. The Lord high
Steward, 2. Marshall. 3. Admiral. 4. Chancellor. 5. Treasurer. And in the
absence of the one or other, or of any: the Eldest of the Council of State
shall supply the place. And these 5. shall be in lieu and place of Government
of her Maj: for the Kingdom of Sweden, until her Maj: be grown (by Gods
grace) to perfect years. And this business have we sufficiently pondered. For
whereas the said five States and Lords, have ever been of Council with his
Majesty of blessed memory: and have undergone and waded through, the most
weightiest affairs of the whole Kingdom: we have thought good unanimously
with one general consent, to ordain and establish, as well for our Associates
and Brethren, as for our selves; that from henceforward, the five aforesaid
Grand and Chief Officers of the State and Realm, and in either the one or the
other his absence, the Eldest of our Council of Stockholm, being of the same
College and Assembly supplying the place, for the welfare and managing of the
State of our Kingdom, and the Tuition of our Queen; shall govern and bear
rule, during the Minority and Nonage of her Majesty: only in her name and
stead: and without any prejudice to the Realm or State; or violation or breach
of the Laws, Rites, and Privileges of the same; but rather powerfully for her
Majesty maintaining the five brotherly Offices and State-Rankes. To wit.
Courtright Council: Council of War, Admiralty, Chauncery, and Treasury or
Exchequer: as the same have been by former Kings instituted established and
upheld, especially by our last King of blessed memory Gustavus the 2d. Also,
all dexterity shall be used and employed by them, for the maintaining and
upholding of the Swedish Rights, Laws, Justice, and Policy; as far as their
uttermost industry and power shall be able to extend: defending, protecting,
all manner of ways, the Realm and Kingdom, and whatsoever depends upon it:
In such wise, as they in their Conscience shall be willing to answer before
God, the Queen, and the State; when they shall be thereunto called; And as
these do at this present oblige themselves to those that are, and hereafter
shall be called, into Authority: and as they do now oblige themselves by oath.
On the other side, We the Peers and Lords of the Realm, do promise to yield
unto these five selected Chief Offices: and to the Eldest of the Council that
shall supply either of their rooms; not only all worthy respect and honor;
but also all obedience and submissiue subjection: in whatsoever they shall
require and command us, tending to the glory of Almighty God, the good and
welfare of the Queen, and of the State and Commonwealth. And in case any one
should go about to oppose and to cross this manner of proceeding, or
government; either in deed or word: We shall by all our powers labor to
suppress such insolences, and to punish such parties; and so constrain them
to true obedience.

6. 6th. Article.

Sixthly, Whereas our Kingdom and Country is as yet in an open War and
Hostility, against the Roman Emperor, and the Popish League in Germany: We
profess our selves desirous and resolved to maintain it (as the same has not
only been undertaken, furthered, and happily maintained; but sealed also,
with the very blood of our most renowned and blessed King) even with our
uttermost power and endeavors, until it shall please Almighty God (in his
due time) to establish and settle a happy and desired peace for the good of his
Church. Whereas also it is most necessary, that we Arm, strengthen and
provide our selves, against other accrewing and newly growing enemies; and to
have a special care, to prevent all dangers and oppositions which may ensue:
we have therefore ordered and ordained; and do now will and ordain, That the
same Edict and Proclamation, which the last Harvest time was concluded and
confirmed: shall with all speed and expedition be published through out the
whole Realm and Kingdom: directly according to the same form, as we first
ordered: with condition, that all men's rights and privileges shall thereby be
kept inviolable. And by these presents we do promise, and do freely consent
and grant; with and upon mature deliberation, that in case the need and
necessity of the Kingdom shall so require; whether it be by reason of the
enmity that we are already fallen into; or in respect of some new enemies,
which happily may make opposition and enmity against our most gracious young
Queen, and the State of this Kingdom; in one manner or other: then we with
life and goods are ready and willing, to maintain our right and liberties: and
to stand with all our might and ability, in opposition against all such, as
shall dare to confront and withstand our proceedings.

7th. Article.
7.
Seventhly, We know well enough, that no Kingdom can possibly subsist without
means: neither can any War be rightly managed, without great charges. And
therefore, we have likewise thought fit and good, that the Lille and Quarne
Toll or Custom, shall be continued for the good and profit of the Kingdom,
according to the order and manner as the same is now raised and received. As
also, that the Messengerships granted the last year, shall for this time go
forward and take place.

Moreover, if so be that the War in Germany should yet longer continue; or if
it should happen, that our Kingdom and Country should fasten upon some other
war and trouble; We do likewise promise and oblige our selves; That when
thereupon we shall be required, by the Peers States and Lords of the Realm;
We will with all our means, power and abilities, stand and fight for our
Religion, Queen, Kingdoms, and liberties, Whenever necessity shall
thereunto invite us. For we have ever hitherto esteemed, the welfarre of our
Kingdom and State, to be our chiefest happiness: and therefore have
courageously adventured both our goods and lives upon it. To this we oblige
our selves by these Presents.

That We in all these particulars above written, are resolved: and have
unanimously, generally and particularly; in our own, and in the behalf of our
brethren, present and absent: as well unborne, as borne; freely and willingly
consented, agreed; approoved and concluded; and therein sufficiently accorded:
and do promise, as faithful religious and true sincere meaning Subjects, to
perform the same: We the Council, State, etc. of Sweden, have Underwritten
and Sealed.

Actum. At Stockholm the 14. of March. 1633.
The Diet of Heilbrun.
ANd that the Reader (for a Farewell) may perceive the present constitution of
the affairs in the Empire; and in what good correspondency the Protestant
Princes are at this present one with another; and how well disposed to the
continuance of the wars, for so good a Cause: I will conclude my Book, with
that new League, of these 4. Principal Circles of the Empire, that is to say,
The Franconian, Suevian, the Upper and Lower Circles of the Rhine; made in the
Diet of Heilbrun in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, 18. English miles from
Heidleberg; in the months of March and April last past: that so my Story may
end, as it begun; with a Diet. What Princes were present.
There were personally present at this meeting, the Duke of Wirtemberg and the
Administrator, the Marquess of Baden, the Count of Hanaw, with the most of the
17. Earls of Wetteraw. For the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Administrator
Lodowicke (Bro^her to the King of Bohemia) were there 4. Commissioners: whereof
Colonel Peblitz being the chief; he sat above all the Princes, at the upper
end of the Table; all the Propositions were directed toward him, and he had
the opening of all letters, in place of the Elector Palatine. There were
present besides, the Ambassadors of other Princes, and the Deputies of the Imp.
Cities in these 4. Circles. The Lord Chancellor Oxenstiern, (by whose
procurement this Diet had been convoked) had his lodging in the town, and
came not at all into the State-house, among the Princes: but sent them in this
discourse, and these Propositions following: which were the grounds and
materials, for the Diet to work upon. His style in the present Diet, was,
Councellor, Chancellor and Extraordinary Ambassador, for the most Illustrious
and High-borne, the Hereditary Heyer and Princess of the Crown of Sweden. And
with this Declaration, he began his Propositions.

Illustrious and Right Honorable Princes and States Evangeliacall here
assembled.

I will not too much trespass upon your patience, Oxenstierns Propositions.
with an over tedious recital of the Causes, upon which the High and mighty
Prince of ever-glorious memory, Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, etc. was
enforced to take Arms; and openly to make opposition against the Roman
Emperor Ferdinand the Second of that name, and his confederates the Catholic
Leaguers; more and more, at that time, every day prevailing in their
oppressions of the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes and States; and of their
Honors, privileges, and immunities, all the Roman Empire over; yea, and most
injuriously, beginning to encroach upon the next neighbor Princes, and their
Provinces: forasmuch as these things be notorious unto the world, and that the
Justice of the Kings Arms, be by no man doubted of. And yet some brief
recapitulation, do I think convenient to make of them.

Most apparent it is, that his said sacred Majesty (now at rest in the Lord)
was without any formal denuntiation of war, infested by the Emperor. His
Ambassadors, coming with the offer and means of a peaceable compounding of
depending Controversies; most disgraceful entreated: yea, and (contrary to all
laws of nations and civility) not without scornful affronts offered, turned
home again; and the whole Treaty by that usage, abruptly broken off with him.
That his subjects of Sweden, even contrary to long usage, amity, and Covenants,
heretofore, in general, contracted with the Roman Empire; and in particular,
with certain neighbor Princes and Free-States, have been disturbed in their
Commerces, Embargo's laid upon their Ships, and fetters upon their sailors.

That the Catholic Leaguers, likewise, notwithstanding that among other
Electors of the Empire they had been requested, that they would be pleased to
forbear the making themselves parties in these differences, but rather to
seek how to find redress for them: and notwithstanding, that at the request
of the French King, confederated with his sacred Majesty; there had been
Neutrality granted unto the said Leaguers, if so be they thought good to accept
of it: yet did they not only refuse that Neutrality, but entered also into a
stricter confederation of wars against his said Majesty; and conioyning their
forces under their General Tilly, with those of his Imperial Majesty: they
forbear not to do their uttermost against the said King; whom out of pure
necessity they by this means enforced, in hostile manner to oppose himself
against all of them.

And notwithstanding that these and the like motives, (which for brevities sake
be here omitted) do sufficiently justify his said Majesty's Armes-taking,
being he was enforced to them: yet this is the thing above all the rest to be
considered, the devises, namely, and vast projects of the House of Austria: not
only famous in discourse all the world over, but so far actually advanced
already, and so near to execution; that the very principal Ports of the
Dukedomes of Mecklenburg and of Pomerland, were really already seized upon; and
the Imperialists wholly, by this time, busied in rigging out such a fleet; as
might be able not only to disturb the Commerce betwixt the neighbor
Kingdoms; but also at pleasure to divert it to other places. By this means
should the Spanish yoke be first put upon the shoulders of the Northern
people; and from thence, (as the fittest place for such a purpose) might it be
flung upon the necks of all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths in Europe. And
just in the self same manner, and upon no other reason; was that most ancient
Family of Mecklenburg, without hearing of their cause, or any legal
formalities of Proceedinge: actually and de facto despoyled of their just
Principalities and Royalties. The Dukedom of Pomerland, likewise, without any
color of right at all, contrary to all equity and deservings, was actually
seized upon; yea, contrary to all covenants and sincere promises of the
Emperor: more then barbarously entreated.

The most just King, therefore, seeing by the excellent acuteness of that
Judgment which God from on high had endowed him withal; he was easily able to
foresee, what all this was likely in the end to tend unto: resolved to connive
no longer, at so prevailing and daily more apparent a mischief: but judged it
to belong to him, and to his neighbor King (against whom also, these and the
like projects were a hammering) in time to prevent this encroaching danger.
Unto this was his Majesty the more provoked, by the serious consideration of
the Roman Empire, and the most lamentable condition which within these few
years last past, it had been brought unto: wherein he observed, that those
Princes that were nearest to him in the bond of Blood or Religion, were partly
disseised of their Countries and their dignities; and either thrust into
Banishment abroad, or tyrannised upon at home, sometimes by their equals; and
which worse is, even by their inferiors otherwhile domineered upon, and with
skomes and contumelies abused. His Majesty perceived withal; how these Princes
with their neighbors, were with a continual fear kept under; their rights,
without all respect wrung from them: the fundamental constitutions of the
Empire, overturned; and that the other party might at pleasure do what they
lusted; were the Princes overcharged with the Imperial Armies. And to cast the
fairer gloss of Justice, upon all this; was that most extremely prejudicial
unto the Evangeliacall Electors, States, and Princes; The late Imperial Decree
pretended, for the restitution of the Church goods, (forsooth) and the
execution of it.

By these devices, was there nothing of the ancient Empire, Customs and
Constitutions, left unviolated: the peace, both of Church and Commonwealth,
was disturbed; the Sanctions and Constitutions of the Empire, profaned, the
orders for convoking and holding of Diets, abused, broken, and subverted; the
articles and practice of Commerce with neighbor States, innovated and
distracted: yea all places through the whole wide Empire, filled with
complainings, tears and sighings. All these miseries, did so cordially affect
that blessed King and most valiant Champion: (who being a Christian,
Evangeliacall neighbor Prince, had also his share in these sufferings, and was
by the pride and insolency of the adversaries, withal enforced to take Arms)
that he supposed it well became him, not to be forgetful of the Princes of his
own blood and Religion; and that he ought, withal, to give way unto that
evident Divine calling, which pressed him to endeavor the delivery of Gods
people.

And what event has followed upon this his resolution, from the first
undertaking unto this very day: is sufficiently every where made manifest.
Namely, that his Majesty cleared, first of all, the Coasts and Port towns of
Pomerland and of Mecklenburg, of the enemy: restored the Dukes of Mecklenburg,
again into their Countries, freed the Electorate of Brandenburg; chased away
the enemy, from the banks of the river Elb, and how after the Victory of
Leipsich, he led on his own Armies, against the Catholic Bishoprics and
Electorates; and how those Leaguers, whose business chiefly was, which way,
handsomelyest, to devide the lands of the Evangeliacal Electors, Princes and
States, and to live upon their bloods: He made to play least in sight, and to
shift themselves away out of their own houses; which they, erewhiles, supposed
had been so surely founded.

By which victorious proceedings of his Majesty, the whole course of the
business was so turned about again; that the Electors, Princes, and States
Evangeliacall in the Empire: who must suffer, before, and say nothing, took
courage, now, to put their heads into the world again, and to look after the
recovery of their ancient liberties and Dominions: yea, and to grow so bold
upon it, as to go through with the Diet of Leipsich; and to resolve upon such
Conclusions there, as apparently made show of their purpose to conserve and
defend the declining liberties, both of their Country and their Consciences:
yea and boldly to make demonstration unto the Emperor, of their being sensible
of the vniustnesse of his Proceedings. And notwithstanding that before the
Decrees of that Diet, could be brought to perfection; they were by the
over-powring inundation of the Imperial and Leaguer Armies, washed away into
nothing; and their assumed weapons, beaten out of their hands again: yet did
the self same Princes after the Leipsich Victory, so well recollect their
dejected courages; and the greater part of them by single and private
confederacies, so inter-league themselves with the Majesty and Crown of
Sweden; that either by re-assuming the performance of the Decrees of that Diet,
or by some other real and actual engagement, they did wholly commit
themselves unto his Majesty's sole direction and protection.

And thus, from that time until this; together, with the said King, have they
taken up Arms, together, with, and for the Crown of Sweden, against the
Emperor and the Leaguers. Which Arms, hitherto, (the Lord of Hosts them
graciously assisting) have they honorably maintained: and though with much
peril, yet not without much happiness.

His Majesty, of ever honored memory, had of long time, verily, desired
nothing more; then how he might consolidate the Evangeliacall Electors,
Princes, and States, by a common league, into one and the same Body of
Confederacy. But for that the power of the enemy, still with such fierceness
pressed in upon him; he could never find himself at so much good leisure, as
the bringing about of so difficult a business would require of him. For which
reason, He judged it most conducing to the common interest, to enter into some
particular, and as it were preparatory Confederacies in the mean time: that
the Cause, notwithstanding, might effectually go on, until some fairer
opportunity of occasion might at length be presented unto his Majesty; as
well to provide for his own and their safeties; as also to make up one common
tie and obligation between them. Until the happiness of which opportunity,
he thought to uphold and continue on the business, by the love of their
common safeties; and by the counsels and assistance of the Crown of Sweden:
which, for the time being, might countervaile a more formal Confederacy.

But for as much, as by reason of the continual expeditions and Marchings from
place to place, that he was still put unto; he could never have so much good
leisure, as to begin those fair Courses, nor to settle a better order for the
observing of Military Discipline: it is thereby come to pass, that not only
whole Provinces (as in such deadly wars it ever falls out, and especially
where the Field of War is so universal) have been wasted and much spoiled;
but the licentiousness of the soldiery grown to that head; as that without a
speedy remedy, the whole action must of necessity come to nothing. Verily, his
Majesty of ever glorious memory, had thought of nothing more seriously: and out
of the fatherlynesse of his care to the common Cause, had endeavored nothing
more diligently, then to have made his personal residence amongst the Princes,
in these Upper Parts of the Empire; and with his own neighborhood, not only
the more to have assured the Protection of those Upper Circles, (according as
he had begun already) but how also he might have been personally present in a
Diet of these four Circles, for the concluding of some settled good orders;
how the something decayed Military Discipline, might have been repaired.

And notwithstanding that my self for mine own part, was so stonyed with the
doleful and most lamentable death of my said dear Lord and Master; as that I
seemed to have cause enough to give over any more dealing in these businesses,
and to leave the managing unto their handlings, whom so deeply it concerned:
yet upon maturer consideration, how easily in the midst of these fiercenesses
of the enemy, there might betide some notable confusion, either amongst the
Armies or the Princes: and that the whole Cause might of its own weightinesse,
fall to so low a Condition as were not easy afterward to be repaired: and
that by this means, all the Counsels, proceedings, designs and victories of
my said sacred Lord the King; would come to no other end nor purpose, but to
the giving occasion to the final and total ruin of all his Confederates and
Part-takers: I had rather lay aside mine own private respects to mine self,
then so abruptly to desert the employment.

For this only reason, therefore, This clause alone, does clearly enough
confute that scandal of the dead King; How that under a public pretension, he
sought merely his own private interest: which was the Empire. This if so, why
should the Swedish kingdom now continue on the wars? Seeing their King is
dead, and their young Queen, not capable of being Emperor.
have I so earnestly hitherto endeavored, to uphold the business; and
courageously (according to my power) so to dispose of all oportunities, as
might suite to the best advantage of the public. Yea, and not only so, but I
have been an earnest suitor withal unto the Crown of Sweden; that the State
would be pleased still to continue on the war; that that most commendable
and praise worthy intention of His Sacred MAJESTY: might obtain the desired
and intended issue. In this my suite I have so far prevailed; that I have
already from thence received a full Commission, to treat and conclude with the
Electors, States, and Princes of the Empire, upon that matter: and if I find
the Confederates and Partakers so inclined, I have power from the Royal Heyer
and Crown of Sweden, in their names to continue on the work to a perfection.

For mine own part, therefore, I would see nothing with more gladness, then a
General Diet of all the Evangeliacall Electors Princes and States, of the
whole sacred Roman Empire, together. But forasmuch as Summer is now near at
hand, and that the enemy is notably by this time, upon the growing hand; and
earnest in his preparations for some new expedition: and for that these 4.
Upper Circles are not only round encompassed by the common enemies; but have
them already within their very bowels: therefore, there being danger in
delays, and for that a General Diet could not be convoked without much time
spending, and its peculiar solemnities, (by which means the whole business
would be in danger in the mean time to be rather ruined then remedied; so long
it would be before a public and joint determination could be agreed upon:
therefore have I thought it more necessary, (which also was solicited and
desired by diverse States both of this Upper Part of the Empire, and the Upper
Saxony) that upon the death of my said Sovereign Lord the King, to defer the
procuring of a General Diet, and so to hasten on the Diet of Vlm, as out of
hand to bring it to conclusion. This my purpose so soon as it was made known
unto diverse of the most Illustrious and Right Honorable Princes and States;
there was occasion given and means projected for another new meeting, for the
causes before rehearsed.

And here I render all due and humble thanks, both to the Princes and States
personally here assembled, and to the Ambassadors of the absent, severally and
altogether: for that upon the earnest invitation of my good intention; they
disdained not to give this meeting. And now most earnestly do I beseech you
all, that you would take to heart and with maturity consider upon the common
estate of the Cause Evangeliacall; and with your prudentest and providentest
consultations, and readiest of your assistance; promote and set forward the
common business of the Empire, the safety of your native Country, and your
own proper welfares. And most heartily do I desire of God, that you may have
profitable designs, happy expeditions, and all prosperous and desired
successes. And for mine own part, thus much I make free tender of, that I will
at no time in any thing be wanting, in what I shall either judge to be
beneficial to the Cause; or wherein I may any way be serviceable. And this I
promise both for my self, and in the name of the Hereditary Princess, and
Crown of Sweden.

To the end, therefore, that the points necessary, may the better and more
orderly be deliberated upon; and the Conclusion the better speeded; I have
thought it necessary, that the chief heads of the Deliberation, which are in
these Convocatory letters comprehended and exhibited; should be distinguished
into Articles: most obsequiously, and in the humblest manner entreating of your
Highnesses; that you would be pleased to make construction of them to the
fairest sense; and so to accommodate and hasten forward your own resolutions,
as may be most advantageous for the present state of the business, and the
eminentnesse of the danger.

1. That all the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, The Chancellors Propositions.
and States of these 4. Upper Circles now assembled, would conclude an Union in
the best form; and confederate and colleague themselves together, with such
firm conditions; as never to break off again, until the desired scope: that
is to say, the restitution of the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, and States,
and the fundamental laws of the Empire, be obtained; and due satisfaction
made to the Hereditary Princess and Crown of Sweden. Much less descend into
any particular treaties with the enemy; but one be made to stand for all, and
all as one man, until the full and final decision and determination of the
whole business be agreed upon. And in case some one or other of them, should
have a mind to fall off from the common League; that consideration be had, and
a decree before hand made, how such a man ought to be thought of, and in what
manner handled.

2. It is also to be considered upon, now that the Emperor after his agreement
made and sworn, having done nor intented nothing, but the oppression of the
Empire and the loyal States in it: and the Catholic Leaguers, also, having
added to the oppression as much as lay in their power; that is to say, helped it
forward, provoked one another to it, and backed one another in it; and has
wrung or beaten the defensive Arms of the Electors, Princes and States
Evangelicall, out of their hands: whether it were not the best course openly to
declare both Emperor and Leaguers, enemies, and so long to hold them for such,
until satisfaction be made unto the Crown of Sweden, and unto the Electors,
Princes and States offended.

3. It ought also thoroughly to be considered and agreed upon, how many Armies be
to be sent against the enemy, and how they are from time to time to be
re-enforced: and where money is to be raised for it.

4. What is the best means for getting of moneies, Ammunition, Ordnance, and
Victuals; and what paies are to be made unto the Generals: as also for the
horses to draw the Ordnance, and the Baggage Wagons; and how all this money is
to be raised.

5. That the course of the whole Proceedings may the more orderly be carried,
it will be necessary that some Office of Direction be legally set up and
authorized: and that in other causes in like manner, some legal determination
be now agreed upon.

6. And consequently, after this Office of Direction be resolved upon and
authorized; it will be very worthy consideration in the next place, how the
military Discipline may hereafter be better ordered, the Countries freed from
the fears and insolences of the soldiery, and Trading restored: and though
not every thing, yet how the grosser abuses may be remedied.

7. And if it pleases the Kingdom of Sweden, any longer to engage it self in
these actions; it shall be worthy consideration, how long it is fitting for it
to stand engaged: and what assistance shall the said Kingdom of Sweden expect
again, if in the mean time it self shall happen to be invaded, or come into
other danger.

All these Articles, and whatsoever may else be thought upon in the time of the
deliberation; I doubt not, but the most Illustrious and Right Honorable States
assembled; will maturely consider upon; and will so frame their resolutions, as
necessity and their own safety requires: and thus far forth, am I
confident of all and every one of them. To whom again in general and
particular, I make all humble tender of such fair offices, in which I may best
serve them.

Heilbrun March 8. 1633.
These Propositions were tendered to the Princes, etc. the very first day of the
meeting: that is to say, after the Sermon, and so soon as they had taken their
places in the State-house. To these, after mature deliberation, the Princes
punctually thus answered, Article to Article.

1. That they were all desirous to contract a most firm League amongst
themselves, and with the Crown of Sweden: and so long time constantly to hold
it on, until the desired liberty of Germany, as far as concerned either
Religion, or the Temporal Estate; were obtained: and that the Crown of Sweden
were satisfied their charges of the Wars.

2. They thought it better for the time, to forbear declaring the Emperor and
Leaguers, enemies; until a general Diet of the whole Empire: and in the mean
time to set out a public Manifesto and Apology, concerning their being
provoked to this Defensive.

3. In the Third Article, they desired to consult with his Excellency, (meaning
the Chancellor Oxenstiern.)

4. And if this Third were once agreed upon, they would deliberate concerning
the means of maintaining the Armies.

5. They requested his Excellency that he would be pleased to take upon
himself the Directorship, for these four Upper Circles; until the desired
restitution were obtained. And least this charge should be too heavy for him
singly; they thought to join some other Assistants with him: and if he
pleased, they would in every one of these four Circles, appoint an Office of
Sub-Directorship.

6. For restoring of the decayed Discipline, there should be new and certain
Orders conceived and authorized; the transgressors whereof, should exemplarily
be punished. The Regiments moreover should be reduced and reformed; the
superfluous numbers of Officers restrained; and the government and punishing of
offending soldiers, left unto the Magistrate of the place where they were
enquartered. Permission should also, with the Magistrates knowledge, be unto
the Subjects and inhabitants of every place; to defend themselves as they could
against plunderers. As for the billetting of the soldiers, it should be
committed unto the Magistrate.

7. And whereas the States of Sweden had pleased to declare their willingness
for the entering into a stricter Union with them; they accepted of the offer
with all due thankfulness. And for their parts, they were ready mutually to
oblige themselves to procure them all due satisfaction, if his Excellency would
be pleased to show them how to do it.

Fair Answers, all of them. After this, had the French Ambassador his
Audience: whose Oration was, To encourage the Princes to go on where the
victorious King had left: He in his Masters promising them all due assistance;
and desiring to be taken into their Union. The English Ambassador, likewise,
Sir Robert Anstruther, made his Proposition; which was a desire, chiefly, for
the Restitution of the Palatinate Concerning all which demands, to this purpose
was the fair and satisfying Resolution of the Diet, which brake up about the
twentieth of our April.

1. That the four Circles shall be firm one to another in a League offensive
and defensive: until such time as they can have vindicated their Liberties
against the Emperor, The Resolution of the Diet. These Articles, some Copyes
contract into ten.
whom they esteem as a real enemy.

2. That to maintain these wars, 16000 Horse and 40000 Foot, are to be
leuyed.

3. That the moneys to be contributed, shall be raised according to the Tax of
the Imperial Matricula, in the wars against the Turk: and the sum
needful, is to be 12 times as much, as one Contribution then was.

4. That the Magazines are to be appointed at Ausburg, Vlm, Norimberg and
Franckfort.

5. The Direction of the whole War, shall be carried by his Excellency the
Lord Chancellor of Sweden Axel Oxenstiern: who shall manage both it and the
Affairs of State, in the name of the Imperial States and the Crown of Sweden.

6. To him shall certain Commissioners be adjoined, as Assistants, one or more
from every Circle: and some likewise from the Imperial Towns of this
Confederation.

7. That in every Circle there be a Sub-Directorian Office, to see to things
belonging to the collecting and disbursing of the moneys; the disposing of the
Ammunition and the Victuals, and the well ordering of the Magazins, in their
own Precincts.

8. That the Magistrates of every place, shall have full Jurisdiction in their
own hands; and dispose of the levying and mustering places: as also of the
Enquarterings and Rendezvous, as they shall think fitting.

9. That the Military Discipline shall be reformed; the weak Regiments broken
to complete others: the superfluous Officers cashiered, Recreuts made, strict
order kept, and constant full Pays allowed.

10. To this end, the first Contribution is to be raised in May nevt; and for
the procuring of sufficient Sums, till the exhausted lands be somewhat
restored: the neighbor States are to be sought for to lend moneys. As for the
Neutralists and such other members of the four Circles as are absent, they are
to be put under Contribution.

11. The Palatinate is to be surrendered to the Administrator; and all
State-holders, Governors and Commanders in the King of Swedens name, are to be
put down: only Manheim shall still keep a Swedish garrison in it, that they
may have assurance to pass without let at all times, over the Rhine and Neckar.

12. No Free Quarters are in any place to be allowed: but the soldiers must
live upon their pays.

13. That these four Circles shall labor with the rest of the Evangeliacall
States (of all which, a general meeting is much wished for) to give sufficient
satisfaction to the Crown of Sweden.

14. That the King of France shall be a confederate on the same conditions, as
heretofore in the time of the King of Sweden. Other Princes may also come into
the League.

15. That the lands belonging to the Empire, shall by no means be alienated
from it, by any contract with a foreign Prince.

16. That if any of the Confederate States or Towns in these four Upper
Circles, fall off from this League, without hostile constraint; they shall
first be admonished: and if they then return not, to be held and dealt withal
as an enemy.

The Lord Chancellor was offered to be General of all the Forces: which he
modestly the first time refused: but being the second time put to him, he
accepted it. And thus you see the Palatinate in terms to be restored,
Heidleberg Town and Castle are since rendered: the wars go well hitherto.
And this is some comfort, for the death of the King of Sweden.

FINIS.
A Table drawn by way of a Iournall or Diary, to show where the King and
Walenstein still were: and what they and their Armies did, upon those days,
that are mentioned in the Margent. This belongs to the Third Part.
The King. Walenstein: and Bavaria. July. July. 5 About Norimberg: and has
some smaller skirmishes with the Imperialists. 6 About Norimberg: and has some
smaller skirmishes with the Imperialists. 5 Sends abroad to take up the Posts
and Towns of the Country. 7 About Norimberg: and has some smaller skirmishes
with the Imperialists. 6 Sends abroad to take up the Posts and Towns of the
Country. 8 etc About Norimberg: and has some smaller skirmishes with the
Imperialists. 7 etc Sends abroad to take up the Posts and Towns of the
Country. 11 Oxenstiern sets out, toward the King. 20 King sends out
Wippenhorst to beat a Convoy. 20 Sends Holck toward Misnia. 22 Oxenstierns
and Hessens Army, in Franconia. 23 etc Oxenstierns and Hessens Army, in
Franconia. 27 King learnes out Walensteins Magazine. 30 Dubatell takes
Freyenstat: and the King defeats Sparre. 30 Bavaria writes to Pappenheim.
August. August. 1. The Kings Oration. Some skirmishes between commanded
Partees, in the beginning of this month. 4 Partees sent abroad into the
Country. 5 Partees sent abroad into the Country. 8 Pays his Army. 10
Oxenstiern and Duke William Weymars Army, moove one toward another. 11
Oxenstiern and Duke William Weymars Army, moove one toward another. Partees
abroad. 13 Duke Bernard and Banier join with Oxenstiern and Duke William. 13
Holck takes Zwicka. 14 Duke Bernard and Banier join with Oxenstiern and Duke
William. 16 Holck spoils Misnia. 17 The Armies come to Bruck. 17 etc Holck
spoils Misnia. 18 The King comes to view them. 21 They join with his Army:
and Walensteins Trenches attempted. 21 Walensteins trenches attempted. 22 The
fight continues. 24 The great fight for the old Castle. 24 The great fight. 26
The King forms a new Camp, hard by Walensteins. 29 Partees sent abroad.
Partees abroad. 30 Partees sent abroad. September. September. Several small
Actions. All done by commanded Partees. 4 Consultations with the Norimbergers
about discamping. 5 Consultations with the Norimbergers about discamping. 7
Kept Holyday. 8 The King dislodges. 9 Sits down at Nieustat. 12 Walenstein
dislodgeth. 13 Removes the army to Winshaim. 13 Gallas besieges Lauff. 14
Devides his Army. 14 Walenstein comes to Forcheim. 15 Goes toward Norimberg:
but returns to go for Bavaria. 21 At Dunkenspiel. 21 Summons Culmbach. 22 At
Nordlingen. 24 Goes to Bamberg. Gallas spoils Voitland. 25 Mitzvall yields up
Rain. 27 The King defeats 400 Crabats about the Lech in Bavaria. 25 Bavaria
parts with him. 29 Walenstein takes Bayreit. October. October. 1 Passes the
Lech. 1. Takes Coburg, and Gallas, Chemnitz. 2 Passes the Lech. 3 Recovers
Rain. 3 Beaten from Coburg Castle. Holck and Gallas join in Misnia. 4 Holck
and Gallas take Friberg. 5 At Neuburg upon the Danuby. 5 Walenstein goes
toward Voitland. 6 Prepares to besiege some towns in Bavaria. 8 Takes towns
in Voitland. 7 Prepares to besiege some towns in Bavaria. 9 Takes towns in
Voitland. 8 Retires to Nordlingen. 10 Comes to Plaun. 12 Kniphausen takes
Lauff. 11 Forms a Camp at Weida. 12 Holck and Gallas take Wurtzen. 13 King
pursues and defeats Munich. 13 Walenstein mooves toward Leipsich. 14 King
pursues and defeats Munich. 14 Walenstein mooves toward Leipsich. 15 King
returns to Norimberg. 17 Sends some Horse to brave it. 17 -- goes toward his
Army, 18 Summons it. 19 Takes Weissenfels. 21 -- Recovers up to his Army. 20
Besieges Leipsich. 21 Besieges Leipsich. 22 Cashiers the English and Scottish.
22 Takes Leipsich town. 23 Comes to Arnstat. 23 Takes the Castle. 28 Musters
at Erfurt. 25 takes other towns in Misnia. 26 etc takes other towns in
Misnia. 28 Pappenheim joins with him. November. November. 1 Comes to Naumburg.
1 Sends back some Horse to Leipsich: and remooves his Army to Weissenfels. 2
His religious speech to the people. 3 Entrenches. 4 Has Coloredoes Letter
brought him. 4 Sends Pappenheim to Hall: and mooves to Lutzen. 5 Falls amongst
Walensteins Quarters. 5 Prepares for the Battle. 6 The victory of Lutzen. 6
Overthrown, and retires to Leipsich. 7 The Kings body embaulmed. 7 His Army
flies in disorder toward Bohemia. 8 etc His Army flies in disorder toward
Bohemia.

The Index to the Third Part.
A
ALtemberg Castle, the great fight about it, p. 39, etc. Armies sent for by the
King, their Stories, 28 Articles at the yielding of Zwicka, 93 At the yielding
of Leipsich Castle, 107 Propounded by Walenstein unto Hall, 109 At Kniphausens
recovery of Leipsich Castle, 175 At the Swedes recovering of Chemnitz, 172 and
of Zwicka, 176

B.
BAnier employed toward Tirole, 34 His actions in Bavaria, ib. goes toward
Norimberg to the King, 35 shot before Walensteins Leaguer, 38
Battle of Lutzen begings, 125 Bavaria Duke. Ioynes with Walstein, 2 -- His
Forces, 7 -- mooves Walstein to assault the King, 17 -- invites Pappenheim, 17
Bavaria Dukedom, some actions in it, 34 the State in which the Swedes left
it, 35 The King marches up into it, 59 His Acts there, 61
Bayreit taken by Walstein, 85 Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, his actions about the
Bodensee: and about the Danubye, 33 and in Bavaria, 35 -- goes toward
Norimberg to the King, ibid. joins with Oxenstiern, 36 His actions at
Altemberg Castle, 42, and 49 Left with half the Army in Franconia, 58 -- His
good service there, 69. 88 his valor in the Battle of Lutzen, 146 Has half
the Swedish Army committed to him, 178
Birckenvelt, Palatine; defeats some Imperialists in Franconia, 29 Left with an
Army in Bavaria, 64
Brandistein takes Naumburg, 73
C.
CHemnitz in vain besieged by Holck, 94 Taken by Gallas, 98 Recovered by the
Swedes, 176
Camp, the King forms a new one by Walenstein, 47 Walstein forms one at
Weida, 91
Coloredo, a Letter of his brought to the King, 119 Fetches his Captain out of
Weissenfels, 114 He commanded Walensteins Right Wing in the Battle, 129
Complement betwixt Bavaria and Walstein, 83, 84 Crabats, Garlick-eaters, 23
Take the Scholars of Altorff, 51 -- a Partee of them defeated, 61, etc. -- and
by the King, 54 and in Bavaria, 61 Their Barbarism in Misnia, 100
Cratz recovers Munchen, 34 Culmbach town puts off Walstein, 85
D.
DANISH Ambassador makes some offers concerning a Peace, 27 Dubatell sent to
Freienstat, 18 -- burns the Magazine there, 19 -- puts Walstein from Coburg
Castle, 87

E.
ELector of Saxony his constancy, 91 The King goes to join with him, 120
Emperor well pleased with Walstein, 21 What his Court gave out of the King of
Sweden, 27
Emperors Court, how it took the news of the Battle of Lutzen, 156 Empire,
the State of it, whilst Walenstein lay at Norimberg, 77 English and Scottish
of my Lord Marquess Hamiltons Army, reduced, 30 taken on by Duke William,
ibid. cashiered by the King, 71 two English Gentlemen, taken prisoners by the
Crabats, 118 carried prisoners into Prague, 143
Ensign of the Eagle and Fortune, presented to the King of Sweden, 124 Erfurt
the King musters at it, 71 saved by the Kings coming, 110
Explication of the Figure of the Battle of Lutzen, 165
F.
FIght before Walensteins Trenches, 38 the great fight, Aug. 24. 40
Friedberg in Bavaria, burnt. 34
G.
GAllas sent out by Walenstein, takes Lauff, 96 Takes towns in the Upper
Palatinate, and in Voitland, 98 Ioynes with Holck, 99 Their Actions after it,
100 Sent toward Silesia, 102
Grave Neeles slain at Lutzen, 154
H.
Mr. HArvey unfortunately drowned, 39 Hepburn, St. John, Commands three
Brigades before Norimberg, 5 Employed by the King in the great fight, Aug. 24.
43, and 44, and 45 The Author beholding to him, 46 Holck-Major General of the
Horse to Walenstein, 8 Sent into Misnia, 16 His doings there, 92 Takes Zwicka,
93 Raises his siege of Chemnitz, 94 forced by the Saxons to retire, Ioynes with
Gallas, 99 His Acts with him afterward, 99, 100 Ioynes with Walstein, 102 Made
Leiftenant -- Field-Marshall, 130 Mightily rewarded by Walenstein, 158 The
only man in credit with him, ibid.

K.
KIng of Sweden, noble of his word, 1 Like to overthrow the Duke of Bavaria, 2
Sends for his Armies, 5 His strength, ibid. and Leaguer, ibid. His answer to
Walensteins Courtsship, 16 defeats Sparre, 21 His Oration, 23 His integrity in
these wars, 25, 26 pays his Army, 26 Sets upon Walensteins trenches, 38,
etc. His sudden judgment upon view of Altemberg Castle, 43 H^ encamps by
Walstein, 47 The soale of his Boot shot away, 49 labors to cut off Walsteins
victuals, 50 Goes out upon a Partee, 53 defeats the Crabats, 54 Rises from
Norimberg, 575
King of Sweden. How he contents the Norimbergers, concerning his rising, 56
Goes to Nieustat, 58 devides his Army, ibid. goes toward Bavaria, 59
overthrowes 400 Crabats: and passes the Lech, 61 Recovers Rain in Bavaria, 62
Comes out of Bavaria to go after Walstein, 63 Comes to Norimberg, 68 Defeats
Col. Munich, 68 Recovers up to Duke Bernards Army, 69 Musters at Erfurt, 71
Comes to Naumburg, 73 Not purposed to have fought when he did, 120 Goes to
join with Saxony, 121 Thinks to fall in among Walensteins Quarters: which the
night hinders, 123 Rowtes two Regiments, 124 Slain, 137 His Character, 181 His
Daughter Elected Q. of Sweden. 190 The Imperialists honorable testimony of
him, 154
King of Bohemia sick, 23 Recovered and in the Field, 38
Kniphausen, Sergeant-Major General to the King, keeps the Pass at Furt, 37
the commendation of him, 56 left to guard Norimberg, 57 Takes Lauff, 67
Disswades the Battle of Lutzen, 120 Kniphausens good service in the Battle of
Lutzen, 146, 1^7 Recovers Leipsich Castle, 178. Appointed to be a
Felt-Marshall by the Kings Will. 178

L.
LAndgrave goes toward the King, 29 defeats some Imperialists in Franconia,
ibid.
Lauff taken by Gallas, 96 Recovered by Kniphausen, 67
Leaguer of the King about Norimberg, described, 5 Walensteins, 8
Lech river the King passes it, 61 Leipsich summoned by Walenstein, 103 The
town taken, 106 And the Castle, 107 Recovered by Kniphausen, 174
Letter of the Baron of Dudroff, 46 of Walenstein to the Leipsichers, 103
Letter of Coloredo's brought to the King, 119 Lunenburg Duke comes to join
with Saxony, 121
M.
MAgazine of Freienstat destroyed, 19 Mist, advantageous and disadvantageous at
the Battle of Lutzen, 136 Mitzvall a Swedish Colonel executed, 60, and 62
Monte-Cuculi takes Rain in Bavaria, 60
N.
NAumburg taken by the King, 73 Norimberg the King encamps about it, 2 The
town described, 6 the mortality in the town, 23
Neustat upon the Aisch; the King goes thither with the Army, 58
O.
ORation of the King of Sweden, to his Army at Norimberg, 23 Before the Battle
of Lutzen, 126
Oxenstiern, concludes the Neutralitie with Cullen, 28 Sets out with an Army
from Mentz, toward the King, 28 left in Norimberg, 57 Comes to orders the
wars, after the Battle of Lutzen, His Commission of Ambassador to the Armies.
178

P.
PAppenheim, comes toward Walstein, 73 and 110 Sent toward Hall, 112
Recalled, 114 Slain, 143 His Testament, 143
Partees sent out from Norimberg Leaguer, 50, etc. Peace, some overtures made
of it, 27, and 28 Piccolomini his valor in the Battle of Lutzen, 144, 162
Sees the King of Sweden dying, 140 vastly rewarded by Walenstein, 158
Provisions for Walsteins Army, 11.
R.
RAin in Bavaria taken by Monte-Cuculi, 60 recovered by the King, 62
Reasons. for the Kings Encamping before Norimberg, 3 for his Rising from
Norimberg, 55 of Walenstein for not fighting, 78 for rising from Norimberg, 79
for spoiling Voitland, 91 given by Pappenheim to Walenstein, to have him take
Erfurt, 110 Reasons debated, whither the King should fight or not, 120
Retreat of the King from Altemberg Castle, the order of it, 47
S.
SAxon-Lawenburg, His speech the night before the Battle, 122 The wounded
Kings speech to him, 136 Forsakes the King, and shifts himself out of the
Battle, 137 made a Felt-Marshall, 138
Saxons cut off Holcks bridge, 101 Schweinfurt, jealous of Walstein, 84
delivered by Duke Bernard, 85
September 7th kept Holiday, 57 Sparre Colonel defeated, 21 propounds a Peace,
28 set at liberty, 48
Speech of the Kings, to those of Erfurt, 72 To those of Naumburg, 74 To
Stolhansh in the Battle, 134
Stolhanshe his service in the fight, August 24. 43 The Kings speech to him in
the Battle of Lutzen, 134 He brought off the Kings Body, 141
Stratageme of Kniphausens, 67
T.
TOrgau, Walensteins design upon it, diverted, 109 The Elector of Saxony, and
Duke of Lunenburg, conjoined at it, 121
Tombs of Dukes of Saxony, in danger to be rifled: redeemed, 100 redeemed
again, 102

V.
VIctory of Lutzen published, 152
W.
WAlenstein. joins with Bavaria: and comes against the King, 2 vows to burn
Norimberg, 3 His and Bavaria's Forces, 7 His great Officers, 8 His great
Leaguer described, 8 His diseases: and Authority in his Army, 10 His severity
and bounty, 11 His good parts, 11 His Discipline and orders for his Army, 11
His purpose in besieging the King, 12 His first attempts upon the Country, 13,
14 Courts the King of Sweden, 16 The Emperor well pleased with him, 27 His
Trenches set upon, 38
Walenstein. his Horse said to be shot under him, 49 said to be in danger of
taking, 50 Rises from Norimberg, 79 devides his Army, 82 His way and numbers,
ibid. Parts with Bavaria, 83 Takes towns in Franconia, 85 Put off from
Culmbach, 85 and from Coburg Castle, 86 His purpose for marching through
Duringen, diverted, 89 Falls into Voitland, 90 Encamps at Weida, 91 Summons
Leipsich, 103 takes the town, 106 and the Castle, 107 Takes Weissenfels and
Mersburg, 108 diverted from Torgau, 109 calls his Army together, 110 Opens a
gapp for the King to march through him, 113 Prepares for the Battle, 114 Goes
to Lutzen, 121 Touched with a Bullet in the Battle, 162 Gives over the Field,
150 flies into Bohemia, 155, etc Examples of his vast bounty, 158 and Martial
Discipline, 159 The State he keeps, 159
Walenstein the younger, slain at Lutzen, 154 William of Saxon-Weymar, his
actions about the Bodensee, 30 Takes on the English, 30 Goes to join with
Oxenstiern, 31 His Forces, 31
Winckle Colonel wounded in the Battle of Lutzen, 144 Wippenhorst Colonel;
sent out by the King, 18
Z.
ZWicka, taken by Holck, 93 Recovered by the Swedes, 176

FINIS.
An Elegy on the King of Sweden.
What sadd news does the curious strive to hear?
So sad; he cannot safely live, and fear?
I see in every eye a terror struck,
A grief too great for credit; since we look,
On Kings, as if they were not clay and dust,
Vain hopes; in whom alone, men vainly trust.
Say if at once, the great Gustavus died
In fight; such as would add to Caesar pride.
A death Triumphant, at whose spreading fall
The Empire groaned, as if to expired withal.
See how the cunning foes securely bark,
Venting their malice from truth-hating dark,
Read their State-faces, for their hearts none can,
But he who measures Heaven with a span.
Observe their joy, for such a barbarous thing,
As joy for loss, of a most manly King.
What did you fear day-Owles? he would un-Crowne
Your Triple-head, or break your Idols down?
He sure had done it, but that God did see,
It was not much to do, by such as he:
He saw we only looked upon his sword,
And forgate him, who conqueres, by a word;
Since then, so much on miracles you stand,
God can raise up some weak and feebler hand,
Flies, Vermin, Frogs; such as did Pharaoh fright,
A Lance of Bulrush, and a Lamb to fight.
God sure will do it, and his blood exact,
At their foul souls, that joy in such a fact.
It is a soldiers trade, and pride to kill,
He may more safely do, then you wish ill.
Then do not triumph on a Lion dead,
Whom living, all your men at arms did dread.
Starting aside, as do the fearful brood,
From his stern eye that rules the gloomy wood.
O thou will be long lived in Austrians fear,
When thy great name shall strike their Nephews ear.
Yet let us mourn thy loss, to all but thee:
Who now art mixed with eternity,
So was he borne, as he the heir had been,
Of skillful war; and victory his twinne:
So did thou show thy day, and close thy Eeven,
As some new Planet had appeared in Heaven.
Predominant on Hills, and Vales, and Woods;
Vnaccest Marshes, and resisting Floods.
Witness thy swift march on the various soil
Of German' pased, rather with power, then toil.
So art thou come and gone; as thou were sent,
To show what God can do, not what he meant.
For had thou lived one year above that day,
Vien had been thy seat, and Rome thy prey.
But it was time to dye: least men had said,
He was not mortal until he were dead.
And now he lives again so full of glory:
His deeds resist the credit of his Story.
Upon the glorious King of Sweden.
Seek not (sadd Reader) here to find,
Entombed the Throne of such a mind;
As did the brave Gustavus fill:
Whom neither time nor death can kill.
Go and read all the Caesar's Acts,
The Rage of Scythian Cataracts;
What Epire, Greece, and Rome has done:
What Trophies Goths and Vandals won.
Read all the worlds Heroic Story,
And learn but half this Heroes glory;
These conquered living: but life flying,
Revived their foes, He conquered dying:
And Mars has offered as he falls,
An Hecatomb of Generals.
The great Comparer could not tell,
Whence to draw out his Parallel:
Then do not hope to know him here;
For whom earth was a narrow Sphere:
Nor by a search in this small narrow room,
To find a King so far above a Tomb.
Upon the King of BOHEMIA.
STay (Reader) it is vain to fly,
Deaths universal Monarchy.
Mankind has no repose but one:
A bed of dust, curtain'd with stone.
Here lies a King whom envy must,
Acknowledge to be good and just;
A Prince unflattered, worthier far:
Then his own fame, or such as are.
Pure gold by strong afflictions tried,
By hope and patience mortified;
Religious Martyr, Austrians hate:
Unchanged in all the powers of fate.
In this Tomb only now at rest;
Until the rising of the blessed.
It is enough this Tragedy to tell:
This is the Prince for whom Gustavus fell.
AN ELEGY, Upon the most victorious KING of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus.
LIke a cold Fatal Sweat which Vshers Death,
My Thoughts hang on me: and my laboring Breath
Stopped up with Sighs: My Phant'sy big with Woes
Feels two Twinn'd Mountains struggle in her Throes,
Of boundless Sorrow one, The Other of Sin;
For less let no one rate it. To Begin
Where Honor Ends. In Great Gustavus flame
That Style burnt out, and wasted to a Name
Does barely live with us. As, when the Stuff
Which fed it fails, the Taper turns to Snuff.
With this poor Snuff; This Fiery Shadow we,
Of Fame and Honor must contented be;
Since from the vain graspe of our wishes fled
Their glorious Substance is, now He is Dead.
Speak it again, and Louder; Louder yet:
Else whilst we hear the Sound we shall forget
What it delivers. Let hoarse Rumor cry,
Till She so many Echoes multiply,
Those may, like numerous witnesses, confute
Our unbeleeving Souls, that would Dispute
And Doubt this Truth for ever. This one way
Is left our Incredulity to sway;
To waken our deaf Sense, and make our Ears
As open and dilated as our Fears;
That we may feel the Blow, and feeling grieve
At what we would not feine, but must believe:
And in that horrid Faith behold the World,
From her proud height of Expectation hurled,
Stooping with Him; As if She strove to have
No Lower Center now then Swedens Grave.
O! could not all thy purchased Victories,
Like to thy Fame, thy Flesh immortalize?
Were not thy Virtue, nor thy Valor charms,
To guard Thy Body from those outward harms,
Which could not reach Thy Soul? could not thy Spirit
Lend somewhat, which thy Frailty might inherit
From thy Diviner part; that Death, nor Hate,
Nor Envies bullets ere could penetrate?
Could not thy early Trophies, in stern fight
Torn from the Dane, the Pole, the Muscovite?
Which were thy Triumphs Seeds, as pledges Sow'n,
That, when thy Honors harvest was ripe grow'n,
With full Summed wing Thou Falcon-like would fly,
And cuffe the Eagle in the Germane Sky:
Forcing his Iron-Beake and Feathers feel,
They were not proof against thy Victorious Steel.
Could not all these protect Thee? or prevail
To fright that Coward Death, who often grew pale
To look Thee and thy Battles in the face?
Alas they could not. Destiny gives place
To None. Nor is it seen that Princes Lives
Can saved be by their Prerogatives.
No more was Thine: who closed in thy cold Lead,
Do from Thy self a mournful Lecture read,
Of Man's short dated Glory. Learn You Kings!
You are like Him, but penetrable things:
Though You from Demigods derive your Birth,
You are at best but Honorable Earth;
And, how-ere Sifted from that courser bran,
Which does Compound and Knead the Common Man:
Nothing's Immortal or from Earth refined,
About you, but your Office and your Mind.
Here then break your False Glasses, which present
You Greater, then your Maker ever meant:
Make Truth your Mirour now; Since you find all
That flatter You, confuted by His Fall.
Yet since it was decreed, Thy Life's bright Sun
Must be Eclipsed, ere Thy full Course was run;
Be proud, Thou did in Thy Black Obsequies
With greater Glory Set, then others Rise.
For in thy Death, as Life, Thou heldest one
Most just and regular proportion.
Look how the Circles drawn by Compass meet,
Indivisibly joined head to feet,
And by continued Points, which them unite,
Grow at once Circular and Infinite:
So did thy Fate and Honor now contend,
To match Thy brave Beginning with thy End.
Therefore Thou had, in stead of Passing Bells,
The Drums and Cannons Thunder, for thy Knels.
And in the Field Thou did Triumphing Dye,
Closing thy Eyelids with a Victory.
That so by Thousands, who there lost their breath,
King-like Thou might be waited on in Death.
Lived Plutarch now, and would of Caesar tell,
He could make none, but Thee, his Parallel.
Whose Tide of Glory swelling to the brim,
Needs borrow no addition from Him.
When did Great Julius in any clime
Atchieve so much, and in so small a time?
Or if He did, yet shall Thou in That Land
Single for Him, and unexampled stand.
When ore the Germans first his Eagle towr'd,
What saw the Legeons which on them he powered?
But Massy Bodies, made their Swords to try,
Subjects not for his Magis triumphati quam victi. Tacit: de Mor. Germ.
Fight, but Slavery.
In that so vast expanded piece of ground,
(Now Swedens Theater and Tomb) he found
Nothing worth Caesar's valor, or his fear;
No Conquering Army, nor a Tilly there:
Whose strength, nor wiles, nor practice in the War
Might the fierce torrent of Thy Triumphs bar,
But that Thy winged Sword Twice made him yield,
Both from his Trenches beat, and from the Field.
Besides, the Roman thought he had done much
Did he the Bank of Rhenus only touch:
But though his March was bounded by the Rhine,
Not Oder nor the Danube Thee confine;
And, but thy Frailty did thy Fame prevent,
Thou had Thy Conquests stretched to such extent,
Thou might Vienna reach, and after span
From Mulda to the Baltic Ocean.
But Death has Spann'd Thee. Nor must we divine
What Heir Thou leave to finish Thy Design.
Or who shall Thee succeed, as Champion
For Liberty and for Religion.
Thy Task is done. As in a Watch the Spring
Wound to the height relaxes with the String:
So Thy Steel nerves of Conquest, from their Steep
Ascent declined, lie slackt in thy Last Sleep.
Rest then Triumphant Soul! for ever rest!
And, like the Phoenix in her Spicy nest,
Embalmed with Thine own Merit, upward fly,
Borne in a Cloud of Perfume to the Sky.
Whilst, as in deathlesse Vrnes; each noble Mind,
Treasures thy Ashes which are left behind.
And if perhaps no Cassiopeian Spark,
(Which in the North did Thy first Rising mark)
Shine ore Thy Hearse: The breath of our just Praise
Shall to the Firmament Thy virtues Raise,
Then Fix, and Kindle Them into a Star,
Whose Influence may crown Thy Glorious War.
HENRY KING.

On the famous CHAMPION of Christendom, Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, etc.
CAn Christendom's great Champion sink away
Thus silently into a bed of Clay?
Can such a Monarch die, and yet not have
An Earthquake for to open him a grave?
Did there no Meteor fright the Universe,
Nor Comet hold a torch unto his hearse?
Was there no clap of thunder heard to tell
All Christendom their loss; and ring his Knell?
Impartial Fates! I see that Princes then,
Though they live gods, yet they must dye like men;
And the same passing bell must toll for them,
Which rang but now, the beggars requiem.
When such a soul is from the earth bereaven,
Me thinks there should be triumphs made in heaven;
And tears should run at Tilt at his decease,
To welcome him into a place of Peace:
Who, though he made war, yet did always strive,
Dying in war, to leave peace still alive.
Upon the most puissant and victorious Prince and Soldier, Gustavus Adolphus
King of Sweden, etc.
It Is sin to weep, or praise: oh let me vent
My Passion only in astonishment.
Who sheds a tear for thee, brave Swede, thus slain,
His eyes do penance for his weaker brain.
And yet those eyes themselves, deserve this doom:
Which thus mistake a Trophie for a Tomb.
Or else, Thy foes may weep as then they dud,
When as thou dy'dst: but all their tears were blood.
Oh what a tempest, what a sea was forced,
Of tribute-groanes, and tears, to waft one ghost?
No way, but death, they had, to fly thy face:
Thou quit'dst thy body, to pursue the Chase.
But, who pretends thy praise in best expression,
Endicts his judgment of confessed presumption.
Bold tongue, touch not that head, that heart, that hand,
Which brought on's knees, when he did tiptoe stand,
The pride of Austria; backed with all, but heaven;
Himself of all, but of himself bereaven.
Thus having plumed the Imperial Bird, alone,
Upon those Eagle-wings to heaven he is flowne.
Why should he stay on earth? The game is done.
Others can part the stake, which he has won.
It Is low ambition, underneath his Story,
To aim at any Crown but that of glory.
Then Canon play, His body's sacrificed:
He is not canon'd: no, He Is canonized.
On the King of Sweden: An Elegy.
IF thou be set in death, bright Northern star,
That were the Cynosure o'th'Germane war,
If (sublime soul) thou have chose to disappeare
In our horizon, to inform some sphere;
(For, our incredulous hearts would misbeleeve
Themselves feign, out of grief, they have to grieve,
And Fame and Fate are tender, yet t'addresse
A truth so horrid to the world by express)
It Was, lest thy superstitious legions should
Have idolized an arm of flesh and blood.
Oh thy prophetique soul that predivyn'd
This cause, as prescious of th'Eternalls mind!
So when God saw his Israel apt to adore
The glorious instrument, that wafted ore
Their sea-sav'd tribes from Pharian servitude,
He snatched that rich dust from the multitude.
Or, were thou (Brave Prince) thus subduc'd, to show
It Was to no thirst of Empire we should owe
Those rare achievements, but to testify
Heaven was thy prize, thou made such shift to die:
Or, both to satisfy and yet convince
The jealous fears of every rival Prince,
That at thy Mounty gazed with envious eye,
Were thou thus pleased un-emperor'd to die,
For, thou had else characterd, in thy name
And deeds, Augustus for thy Anagramme,
And all th'extracted quintessence, thy spirit
Of all th'heroique Caesar's did inherit;
Only that thirst of purer glory stood
Betwixt thy breath and such a public good.
So have I seen a Falcon (to soar high,)
Lessen her self to invisibility:
The glimpse of this made thee, so often, expose
Thy penetrable parts to shockes of foes,
That one would think thou heldst intelligence
With th'adverse Canon, or some Thetis drench
Had fortifyed thee Cap a Pee'gainst steel,
In all but (what foe never saw) thy heel,
The sea-sequestring Chief, whose sceptred Rod
Established freedom to the Church of God,
Had yet his period, and from Nebohs top
Was feign, by Prospective, to taste that hope,
He might not live to graspe in the promised Land,
Whose seizure heaven kept for a Ioshuahs hand:
So thou (Mosaique Prince,) this fair foundation,
By thee being laid to unslave the Germane nation:
Dy'dst, though confined, content; Posterity
Shall raise a roof will crown their liberty.
Propitious heaven, some brawny nerves assign
To give perfection, to this high design.
Mean time, grim death, and greedy Destinies,
Ye were not in some grave opinions, wise,
To snappe his twine that sent you monthly shoales
To plie your Stygian barck, of war-slaine souls:
Now that his death has dulled Bellonas rage
You may go court Disease, or languid Age,
Or blind bold Empericks murdering ignorance;
That quashes more lives then Art can advance,
To keep your Ferry custom'd, or depend
On sins and plagues to expedite man's end.
Since Fates grand factor for mortality,
By your improvidence has gained to die.
He that allai'd Bavaria's lofty puff,
Ruffled and discomposed the Spanish Ruff:
Reduced Bohemia, the Palatinate
Regained, checked Colein, and gave Mentz the mate,
Pricked the swollen tympany of the Austrian pride,
Taught her refluxes to the Catholic tide.
Enforced that oil of Empire from his brinke
Of Vastness, down to Reasons Center sink,
That re-invested truth and liberty
In all his visits, through fair Germany,
That tooke-in Cities with his very name,
And Caesar-like, Came, Saw, and Overcame,
That having done The Imperial office, (saved
Religion,) yet The Imperial wages waved,
With the petard of whose Authentic word
All ports flew open: upon whose lightning sword
Sat wing-clip'd Victory, who in stern fight
Won with his pike more then his pen can write:
The fount of indeficient Stratagems,
The Assertor of inthralled Diadems,
That knew no quarrel, but the public right,
Whose valor forced all fortitude to flight;
That rushed through danger, as if none were near,
When nothing else was nigh; feared only fear:
Who though he could not dance the Brawles, yet, in
His complete steel could tread a Matachin,
And without Mimmick complements or Cringes,
Had th'active Rhetoric that turned the hinges
Of all the grand designs of Christendom;
And thou art, or to convert or conquer Rome;
That like the Danuby rising but a spanne,
Grew boundless as his Baltique Ocean,
And by fine force, no Sinons slye surprise,
Got, ( Alexander-like) fair victories.
That like the Sun, which from his early East
Gallops in twelve hours progress to the West,
In eight months (as his history reports)
Conquered his eighty Cities, Castles, Forts;
That, humble at his rise, knowing how nigh
Supremacy borders on tyranny,
Yet ( Phaebus-like) concentred at his set
His beams, to clear with glory, Natures debt;
That had the skill so rarely to combine,
Sweetness with strictness in his discipline.
That what the rigid Captain could not bring
To bow, crept to the mild Majestique King.
(And yet how often has he the King declined
To unscrue a Centinells or Perdues mind)
That pared those Vultur-talons, and that beak
R'envers'd, that under Jove's bird joy'd to wreake
Their bloody teene on the recrescent breast
O'th'publike weal, for private interest.
And (skie-borne Perseus) from the ravenous jaw
Of Fridland, freed th'enchain'd Andromeda:
He, he is slain, and yet the stupid world
Is not with him, back to her Chaos hurld.
For, staulking Eulogies, and talking tombs
Are Popular incense, such as Fortunes grooms
Are sacred with: and now each Burgers hearse,
Yawnes for her hachments, and her tears in verse;
And shall He have no more? He whose retreat
Was Crown d with victory; on whose last sweat
(The steame whereof had fainted us) a flood
Waited in stead of tears of Roman blood,
Whose camp (the Campus Martius of the North,
Where he sowed soldiers) brought Commanders forth,
Whose forward springs were differenced from ours,
By putting winter sieges forth for flowers,
Whose eager pursuites of adventures hard,
Rivers nor Rocks nor Forests could retard;
Beyond whose courage no plus ultra's were,
And yet no soldiers wants beneath his care,
Whose Mausolaean monument is All,
That Germany shall henceforth freeborne call;
And must He have no more? fond Grief! no more!
This sea that has no bottom, knows no shore.
Yet thanks to Fortune, this grand-sacrifice
(That did in him whole hecatombes comprize)
Was, like a Roman expiation, lead
To death with wreathes of honor on his head.
She that sits Pilot at the sternes of States,
And all these casual conquests moderates,
Saw that unless this Worthies blood were spilt,
The fortune of the war would over-tilt
To us: and Sweden proving Conqueror
Had triumphed both 'ore Ferdinand and Her,
Therefore to appease his Grief, to peize our Pride;
And ballast Fortunes Bark, Gustavus did.
Upon the King of Swedens Death.
BRave Prince, although thy fate seem yet too strange
To be believed in Paul's, or on the Change,
Though we lay wagers, and do gladly choose,
To take that side where we are sure to loose.
We but deceive our grief, and feign would say
Thou liv'st, to give our sorrow longer day:
Were there no reason else, this might suffice
To prove thee dead, that we want victories.
We hear of no towns taken, and the Foe
Has been too long without an overthrow.
In thee the fortune of the war expired,
And now what can be done to be admired?
To what use serves thy Army, but to weep!
Whose greatest conquest now must be, to keep.
But when thou did command the valiant host,
How did thy victories out-fly the post?
How were they here before the sail, or wind
That brought the news, but still left more behind?
One scarce could travel so much ground so fast,
As thou did overcome: such warlike have
Went with thy deeds, which did all letters stuff,
That we could not believe them fast enough.
With thee to conquer was the same as pass:
Another long siege, but thy journey was:
And they which did thy sudden marches see,
Say 'twas thy progress to take Germany;
Indeed, what was the city, or the place
That thought it not a siege to see thy face.
And did not to thy single terror yield
More then thy troops, who only made the field.
For, when, at first thy Army was so small
That the Foes poorest Regiment was all,
Who seeing with brave scorn that venturous sight,
Might think thou came to Muster, not to fight,
Yet thou made both sides equal, and with thee
Thy few men proved more then thy foes to be.
Who when he lost the day found that the war
Lay more in thee then in his numbers far:
Which made him, when his Ensign he forsook,
To fly, not from the ordnance, but thy look,
For though the Canon played, and bullet flew,
Thou made the battle, and from thee they slew.
Who could instruct thy Engines; scarce a shot
Went from thy soldiers gunne without a plot.
And dangers which it felt, could not impart;
Were still increast and made more sure by Art.
As if it had not been enough to kill,
Unless thou did subdue the foe in skill.
Which from thy Childhood thou had learned so well,
That thou did then things for the Chronicle,
And made thy name great, even when so young,
Almost to use thy sword before thy tongue.
And far beyond thy years, thy face did move
Fear in thy neighbors, when in Ladies love.
But all thou did then in thy younger age,
(Although enough for others) did presage
Only thy riper Conquests: and did try,
By lesser war to conquer Germany.
Now every march was project, and to move
Did Stratagem and a new conquest prove.
Had thou been then when the unpracticed age
Did know no other valor but their rage,
When Alexander met his Asian Foe,
Whose soldiers were no Army, but a show;
Each man so sprucely dressed, each horse so gay,
And only trimmed to make the braver pray.
Thy deeds had then been wonder, and less Art
Had conquered all the world, then now a part.
Alas it is easy to be victor there
Where the Foe first disarmes himself with fear.
And many have been great Commanders thought,
For meeting with no enemies that fought.
But there to purchase glory, and to be
A Conqueror, where so much victory
Had often gone before: and there to win,
Where to escape fairly had a Conquest been:
Shows all the Stories that are writ of old,
Are but small truths when thy exploits are told.
Of which this was a great one, that to show
Thou gav'st thy passions first an overthrow.
Thy fortune did not swell thee, none could guess
By thy vain triumphs, at thy good success.
No soldier did insult, so tame the drum
Thy self so humble, as if overcome,
When most victorious. These were things did move
Thy enemies, and made them Conquest, love
More then their peace before, who to be free
Did gladly choose to be overcome by thee:
And if perchance they did one charge abide
They did resist, as they were on thy side.
For thou by all with such desire were seen,
As if no foe, but had their Captain been,
And fought'st for them thou took'st: who did endure
No other Change, but to be more secure.
Such were thou to thy foe, but more thy care,
To be such to thy Army, as they were
To one another; who did use to make
Each mean imp^^^ment glorious for thy sake.
And would ennoble the obscurest place,
And make the lowest office not seem base,
By giving first example: while thy hand
Did more then thou to others did command.
Each Captain was thy equal, but in this:
That still thy danger was far more then his.
While with an even presence thou would dare
To pass the Canon, though thy death lay there.
With such a bold and fearelesse march we read
The Angel did the holy Armies lead:
Who free from all attempts would stand between
Two furious Camps, as much unhurt, as seen.
And so did thou (great soul) till heaven did see
That thy bare rules great Conquerors would be,
And took thee hence: who to requite thy fall
Left thy example to be General.
On the King of Sweden.
I Will not weep thy loss; nor say there is none
Can relieve bedridden virtue; thou being gone.
I will not curse thy victory, or say,
Though we were Conquerors, we lost the day.
That thou were all of us; that in thy fall,
(Thou being its soul) 'twas the worlds funeral;
They that thus mourn, and sadly mention Thee,
Pity themselves; and make an Elegy
On their own hopes: and troubled at thy doom,
With crafty sorrow write on Christendom:
I that have read devoutly all thy Reign,
And feared a fever, Age, or some such pain,
As easy Princes die of; might surprise
Thy ripe designs: robbing thy Obsequies
Of wonder and amazement: bless thy fall,
Worthy thy Great self; braver far then All
Thy envyed Actions: there being naught to do,
Greater then what thou have done, but to die so.
When thou had tamed all powers; made every thing
So hopeless weak, Ambassadors might win:
Thou would no longer stay: to show thy hand
Aimed at a Nobler Triumph, then their land.
That King who shall thy worth, thy war intend;
May get thy Empire, hardly such an end.
Upon the King of Sweden.
THe Youth, hereafter, when old wives shall chat
Gustaves high deeds; will ask What Giant's that?
For if by virtue we may measure man,
He did exceed six cubits and a spanne.
That size was low to him: for we now tell
A Story higher grown then Chronicle.
Where we find none that ever labored more
To take away, then he did to restore.
When Austria's Court, Astraea out had hurld;
Then up stood He, Chief Justice of the world.
Over Free States Caesar did himself extol;
And on their ruins, reer'd his Capitol.
When he usurpt that Piece which had not on
His Image or his Superscription.
What though the Eagle be the highest flowne?
Yet was not the air diffused for him alone:
But every bird, how small so ere it be,
Has as good right to its own nest, as he.
Rome for her best example, is paid all:
And Carthage for her often lent Hanniball.
Virtue the theme, the School boy now needs none
But Him, to make his declamation.
Who by so much Romes Fabius does surpass;
As others he; yet no Cunctator was,
In his quick expeditions: He Would not be:
Like to the crawling Spaniard: whom you see,
Has for the poor Low-Countryes warred so long,
That they claim now by just prescription.
Which land though won at length, must cost too dear;
Since that of Canaan cost but forty year:
His speed will make time think, he had the hap,
At once to view and conquer, by the Map.
Whose hand fought Brachygraphie: and did take
More in an hour, then ever tongue yet spoke.
For no Curranto in a week could say,
So much as He could do, but in a day.
And when it seemed to lie, or write too much
In English; 'twas good History in Dutch.
If it some towns, his Conquest had out-runne,
As Prophecy; 'twas true ere all was done.
Yet dealt he not with such as used to yield;
They never gave; He always took the field.
For when the game was his, and won the day;
'Twas not their dotage, but his own good play.
Armed when he retreated; he would go,
Like a Sheld-Sea-Crab, backwards; and as slow.
His front was to'ards; though from the foe his pace:
And looked then like a Ianus, both sides face,
Like that stout David 2 Samuel 24.13, 14.
Hebrews choice; rather then flying,
Desyr'd his men should be three days a dying.
Whose royal soul justly to dwell, denied,
In her own body, yet unglorifi'd.
He was a Dog, no King, first chose to rub
His wretched life out, in a narrow tub.
"Who thinks the world too skant; a holy heat
"Justly entitles to the style of Great.
Besides, the body rightly thought upon,
Is to the soul, but her Pavilion:
Whose nerves about the bones do tie the skin,
As coards the canvasse do, unto the pin.
And at the first wise Nature never meant,
To make the soldiers mansion, of his tent.
Wherefore this Prince like Moses, after He
Had led the people from captivity;
And scourged the nations, like some humane God,
Till rivers bled, done wonders with his rod:
Died on the top of honor. Pisgah is
For a brave height, a mount much short of this.
But lest we worship Him: we know not where,
This day to find his hidden Sepulcher.
FINIS.
THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER.

The Fourth Part.

RELATING THE CHIEFEST OF THOSE MILITARY Actions of the Swedish Generals:
wherein the King himself was not personally with the Army.

As in the Palatinate, Triers, Alsatia, Suevia, Westphalia, the Lower Saxony,
and Silesia.

Wherein you have Those Proceedings, omitted in the Second Part: which are
continued, until the time of the Kings death.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BVTTER and N. BOVRNE, MDCXXXIII.

THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER.
The advancing of another Spanish Army into the Palatinate, after the King of
Swedens departure thence toward Bavaria. What they did and suffered there,
from Easter Eve until Whitsuntide 1632. with their retiring out of it; the
Rhinegraves pursuit of them: and the State they left the country in.
THat the Spaniards had twice before, since the King of Swedens coming into
these parts; attempted the re-enforcing of their weakened garrisons in the Lower
Palatinate; and how they had, both times, been forced over the Mosel again,
by the King and Rhinegrave: we in our See page 58. and 75, of that book.
Second part have before told you. Hearing now the King to be marched up after
Tillie; and their friend the Imperial General Commissary Ossa, to be very
desperate and busy in Alsatia, next unto the Palatinate: they in March
following, resume their former enterprise; and provide themselves of two
several armies, for that purpose. Fourteen thousand strong, (though some
mention but 10000, and others 80 0) was the first army said to march up, and
the Count of Embden was their General. Some believe that the Spanish Marquess
de Santa Croce, The Count of Embden comes wi^h an army into the Palatinate.
was also in the action with him. The second army was to be brought up by Don
Cordova: who was to relieve the Count of Embden. Much encouragement had the
Spanish, to hasten this their undertaking; for that they had intelligence sent
them home from about Triers, that there was some contrast and jealousies
betwixt diverse of those chiefer Commanders and Governors of towns in the
Palatinate; whom the King had left there at his departure.

The Count of Embden with the first army, upon our Easter eve, the last of
march 1632; passed himself in good order, They being past the Mosel,
by the bridge of Triers city, over the river of Mosel: which they might
freely enough do, for that they had the favor generally of the Elector of
Triers subjects; and a garrison of their own men in this city The Spaniards
being now upon the Eastern side of the said river, they first of all (as both
times heretofore they had done) go along the banck of it, unto Traerbach: two
and twenty English miles, to the North-east from the bridge aforesaid. In the
strong castle of this town (like as in the most of all the good towns of this
Electorate, those excepted which the Rhinegrave ere whiles had put them out of)
had they their garrisons. Thence advance they unto Kirchberg in the Huntsruck,
twelve English miles to the East of Traerbach. In this town, take in Kirchberg,
had the Rhine-grave at his late taking of it, left 200 men (who indeed were
not above 160) for the defense of it. These (though but a weak garrison God
knows,) yet endured they some Canon shots before they would listen to a
composition: which, there being no other remedy, they were glad upon soldiers
terms to accept of; and the Spaniards as glad to yield them, their intent
being to make have into the further parts of the Palatinate.

Next advance they unto Simmern, and Simmern.
5 or 6 English miles to the North of K^rchberg: which town they found not in
so good a posture of defense as that they came last from, but readyer to take
the Law from the stronger Some Swedish forces there were, enquartered here and
there, in the better towns of this country of the Huntsruck. These rallying
themselves now together; were resolved to make some head against the
proceedings of the Spaniards. But not being of themselves strong enough to
confront the gross of the Spanish army, and out of hope withal to be
seconded from about Mentz; and all through the bad correspondency betwixt their
chief leaders: (Duke Bernard I mean, and the old Rhine-grave) contented
themselves only to lie upon the catch, and to intercept some loose troops of
their enemies; which for pillage sake, but afterward loose 5 Cornets to the
Swedish.
durst adventure the straggling a little further from the army. At several
times, they latcht up 4 or 5 of the Spanish Ensigns, which were at Mentz
afterward presented unto the Queen of Sweden. This country of the Huntsruck
is very apt indeed for such like military reprisals: it being a very hilly and
woody place: as if nature had meant it for the dressing of ambuscadoes; into
which such strangers as are not well traded in the country, may easily enough
fall.

The Count of Embden never staying to revenge this, marches Northward toward
Over-wesel first, and to Boppart afterward, this last lying not far from
Coblents, where the Rhine entertaines the Mosel. These two towns, They clear
the country, as far as the bancks of the Mosel.
and by their taking, all that corner of the Huntsruck, and Bishopric of
Triers, betwixt the Rhine and Mosel, being thus again made Spanish, (even as
far as Coblents, where of old they had a garrison:) the Count of Embden
converts his arms up again by the Rhines side toward the Southward, and
making all the speed he could to the bancks of the river Nah, whose stream
runs traverse to his marching. then pass the Nah into the Palatinate.
Where this river droppeth into the Rhine, stands the town of Bingen, and 10
English miles to the Northward up the said stream, is the town of Creutznach.
To both them the Spaniards now send some Partees, who bringing these word
again that the towns were defended with good Scottish and Germane garrisons:
they forbear to attempt either of them, quietly passing the river Nah, betwixt
both, into the Palatinate.

In none of these their proceedings hitherto (except where we before told you)
had they met with any considerable power of opposition. The Swedish army was
not yet advanced into the field, The Rhinegrave now sent out to observe them,
the Rhinegrave only with his Horse-regiment had hitherto been by Oxenstiern
sent out from Mentz toward them; and that rather to observe them then oppose
them. He perceiving them after their passing of the Nah, to advance to the
Eastwards toward Mentz, retires still before them, till he came to Nider-Vlm;
within 6 or 7 English miles of Mentz, sits down to stop them at Nider Vlm.
to the South-west-ward. Here sets he down his Regiment: because that this was
the nearest Pass, by which the Spanish must come at Mentz city. At this dorp,
ends that ledge of little mountains; which by a small rivers side (for 8 or 10
miles together) comes trending along from the very Rhine bancks.

The Spanish having borne up close hitherto, with the Rhinegrave; and being now
approacht within half a league of him: they at that distance, about the tenth
of our April, there sat down and rested. Hereabouts (at Mentz) they learned
by some country Boores, that the chiefest of the Swedish forces were now
amassing; and that here, if any where, they were likely to meet with
opposition. And they judged rightly: For now at Mentz, was the Rex-Chancellor
Axel Oxenstiern: who together with that gallant young spark Duke Bernard of
Saxon-Weimar; had an army in readiness of 15000 foot, and 72 Horse Cornets.
The Spanish had notice, who, whilst Duke Bernard prepares to draw out the
Army.
besides, given them, of the new and great fortifications about the city; and
that Duke Bernard had already drawn out the most of these troops, into the
new worcks: which the King before his going had given order to be made; as well
for the lodging of a camp royal there, as for the safeguard of the 2 new
bridges, over the Rhine and Maine; all which you may see described page 57. of
our Second part. Thus much had Duke Bernard done, by the seventh of April; at
which time, the Spanish were comne up within a day and halfes march of
Creutznach. The town lying at this guard; and the Rhinegraves horse (at the
Poast we last told you of) enquartered betwixt the Spaniards and the city:
they, (having intelligence of his posture) first resolve to set upon him there;
before those other forces should be drawn out of the city, to assist him.
Friday morning before day light, April 13. was the time they appointed to make
a Cavalcado upon his Quarters; and Lucas Cagro, Commissary General of the
Cavallery, was the man; that with 1400 horse in 12 Cornets, undertook the
action. It so chanced, that the Rhinegrave, the very night before, had received
both notice and assistance; and was both ways now provided, to entertain
them. The Chancellor Oxenstiern had newly sent him 400. Finland horse, under
the well-tryed Colonel Stolhanshe, who had also taken up his lodging upon the
side of the same hill, on which the Rhinegraves men lay ^nquartered. Toward
them (though not close up to them) the Rhinegrave that night hitched; giving
notice unto Stolhanshe withal, of the Spanish purposes, Don Lucas knowing
nothing, that his enemies knew so much; thinks in the dark morning to get the
advantage of the hill-knap, and then to fall down upon them with the more
weight afterward: he still supposing his enemy to be in his old Quarters. The
hill top that Don Lucas thought to have gotten, was the same knap which the
Rhinegrave had before possessed himself of: on the side of which, Stolhanshe
was also lodged. The Spanish thus in the dark morning, with as much silence as
they could, mounting up the climb of the hill; stumbled first upon Stolhanshe
and his Finlanders, all ready in array to entertain them. These charging one
another; down comes the Rhinegrave at the noise of the first volleyes, upon
the polles of them. defeates 1400 horse of the Spaniards, that first set upon
him.
The Spaniards having once discharged their pistolls and Carbines; and not
being able to discern, what forces they had now to deal withal: never staid
to charge the second time; but turned their backs with all speed, and in much
disorder hastened down the hill again. The Fins charge them upon the croopes:
and the Rhinegrave followed them down the hill likewise. There were 10 fresh
Spanish Cornets, now coming into the succor of their fellows: who meeting
them altogether now in rout, turn the bridle in like manner, and run away
with them for company, toward the leaguer. The Swedish still pursued, till the
Spanish had recovered under favor of their own Canon. In this flight, the
Spanish left 5 (8 some say) Horsemens Cornets behind them, with about 120
common soldiers. Don Lucas his Liefetenant-Colonel (whom they called General
Adjutant,) was here taken prisoner: together with 2 Ritt-masters or
Horse-captaines, some few Officers, and diverse common soldiers; all which were
sent to Mentz, to be kept in durance for their ransom.

And now because we have chanced upon these two names, of Commissary-Generall
of the Cavallery; and General-Adjutant: it shall not be amiss (I hope) for the
understanding of our story the better; to digress a little, for the
expounding of these two offices. I take it, that this Commissary-Generall of
the Cavallerie: is not altogether unlike a Sergeant Major of the horse, in the
Swedish discipline: beyond whom, he has the power of a Commissarie, for the
provision of the troops, See how many marching men make up a complete Brigade:
in our Book of the Swedish discipline.
over which he is Major. He is called Commissary-Generall; because his command
is not in a single Regiment alone; but either over all the horse of the Army;
or some Brigade at least in it. Which Brigade in the Spanish discipline is not
so small a Body of men, as the Swedish Brigades be: but it is a full Tercio
(so the Spanish call a Brigade) that is, a whole third part of the Army, how
many soever the Army be. The General-Adjutant, that was Leiftenant to this
Commissary: was the Leiftenant-Colonel to his Regiment. The General-Adjutants
office, is to be assistant to the General: That is, to be sent abroad for the
giving or speeding of the Generals commands, to the rest of the army. He is
commonly some able man, or some favorite at least unto the General. His place
in the Army, is that of a Leiftenant-Colonel; of whom he has precedence, but
is behind all Colonels. A General-Adjutant is the same officer, which in our
English discipline, we call a Corporal of the field. The French call him Un
aid de Camp: an Aid or Assistant of the field.

To return to our Story. The Spaniards being thus put to the rout: and having
in the time passed since the last fight had about 100 of their men slain, and
as many more taken prisoners; that had been sent out upon espyalls, and for
provisions: the rest collecting by the sequel, that the Swedish armies were
already drawn out into the field: they all that day, and the next after it,
contained themselves within their quarters. There (if by their next actions we
may suppose) did they thus resolve among themselves, That seeing Mentz was too
strong to be meddled withal, and that the Swedish forces (now comne together)
were likely to be upon them at every turn, and to way-lay them withal, upon
their march, betwixt Mentz and the Palatinate; The next purposes of the Spanish
that therefore the best of their play would be, by a sudden advancing to get
before them; and by making toward Frankendale, to re-enforce themselves by
joining with Don Philip. Their next purpose was to take in Spires city, and
the towns next unto it: where, being backed with the neighborhood of William
Marquess of Baden, Ossa and Harincourt, (all then in the nearer parts of
Alsatia) they resolved to expect the coming of the Swedish: and there to
accept or offer battle, according to occasion, or advantage.

This, (as if it had been the maine of their intention) they next day put in
execution. April 14, therefore, breaking up from thence, They dislodg,
they march to Altzeim 12 English miles to the Southward of them. Here they
quarter for that night: holding very fair correspondencie toward the
townsmen. From Altzeim go they the 15 unto Bockenheim; a dorp with a castle at
it, and make toward Spiers city.
nere unto Neulingen, 16 English miles further to the Southward: where, upon
the downs or wild and hilly heath, they for that night encamped. Hence mig^^
their fires be discerned, from off Wormbs steeple. Facing it about now to the
Left, they the 16 arrive at Grunstat; a town but one league and a half from
Bockenheim, to Wormbs-ward; and within 7 or 8 English miles of it. Hither, the
same day, out of Franckendale, (9 English miles to the South of Wormbs, and
upon the same river of Rhine with it) comes Don Philip de Sylva, Don Philip de
Sylva joins with them.
with 2000 horse and foot (3000, some name) and 10 pieces of ordinance, to
join with them. The Spanish thus re-enforced, and so near now unto the
Imperial city of Wormbs: verily believed it was, that they had a months
mind toward it. But from these thoughts, was Don Philip able to dissuade
them: who having been so near a neighbor unto Wormbs these many years;
could well enough now inform them, how strong a garrison of Swedish foot, with
8 Cornets of horse, (besides the Traine-bands of the Burgers) there now was
within the city. For this reason (perchance) did the Spaniards forbear to
attempt upon it. The next day, April 17, again facing it about to the Right:
toward Spiers city they make, which then bare due South of them. That night
unto Turckenheim they come: 2 leagues and a half from Grunstat. By this time,
had they well enough stored themselves with other men's cattle, and such like
country provisions: Soldiers commonly (especially if enemies) having this
good quality with them, not to leave, but to take, The wood is called Heart, in
which it stands.
things where they find them. April 18, they get up as far as Neustat upon
the Heart, by the small river of Spierbach: a very good town, 9 English miles
due south of Turckheim.

All these places, it is true, lie not in a straight line from Altzeim unto
Spiers: and yet not much out of the way, neither: but being good towns, the
Spanish thought not too much of the labor, to step aside a little, for to
take them. April 19, turning a little more to the Eastward: they reach 4
leagues further: and within 5 English miles of Spiers city. The next day being
the 20 they first show themselves before the ports of it: and the gross of
their Army being in the afternoon comne up; they immediately show them their
Canon, and demand up the city. A fair, but not very strong Imperial town
this is, (yea the Chamber of the Empire.) The place of it, is upon the Western
bancke of the river Rhine; some 11 or 12 English miles on this southern side
of Manheim, in the Palatinate. It had heretofore accorded with the King of
Sweden, and accepted of his garrison: as Page 59 of our Second Part, we have
told you. It was now kept with some 200 men, by Colonel Horneck: who had
heretofore done the King very good service. And now also, as if he had not yet
forgone all his former courage and reputation; he answers the first summons,
as if he had meant to have beaten the Spaniards out of Christendom: for he
thunders and sallies upon them, bravely. But the Spanish bringing forward their
Approaches or Rolling trenches, soberly; and with many hands, having by the
next morning almost perfected their lines, and gotten up 1, or 2, Batteries:
Horneck, fearing another Black May day of it, should his town be stormed: he
upon the very next summons, the second day of planting of the siege; hangs out
his white flag, to treat upon the rendering.

The chief of the Articles which he desired for his garrison, were these
four. The Spanish take Spiers.


1. To go out with full Arms, swords by their sides, The conditions.
Colors flying, drums beating, bullet in the mouth, and matches lighted.

2. To have all his baggage, for himself and company.

3. To have four field pieces.

4. To be convoyed by the Spaniards as far as Wormbs, 20 miles English, down
the Rhine, to the Northward.

For the townsmen, ( Lutheranes for the most part) he to this purpose
articled. That they should not be molested in their persons goods, privileges,
nor consciences. For the Cloyster-people, and the Lawyers (which were many) and
such other Officers and dependants upon the Imperial Chamber; he needed not
make any conditions for their safeties: for they being all Catholics, were of
themselves so able to make a party in the City, in favor of the Spanish;
that they had been one of Hornecks chief fears, and the occasion of his so
sudden giving up the city.

And thus was the fair and Imperial city of Spiers rendered up unto the
Spanish; about 10 a clock in the forenoone April 21, This being May Day,
according to the Spanish computation.

Some say, that Colonel Horneck had (with that garrison) undertaken the keeping
of the city; and had refused other succors: Duke Bernard going to relieve
Spiers, comes too late.
which if he did, he was then the more to blame for it; for that, had he held
it out, he had within a day or two been relieved. Duke Bernard Weymar, with
the Palatine Birckenfeldt, having once learned which way the Spaniards after
the last fight April 13, had directed their march, he upon the 16, advanced
with 8000 foot and 3000 horse, out of Mentz, to have followed after them: and
to have adventured to relieve whatever place, they should have attacked. He was
already comne as far as Wormbs, to this purpose: which was within little more
then a days march, of the Spanish leaguer. Some say, that Horneck had notice
of all this: and so much was at his sending for to Mentz, laid unto his charge
by the Chancellor Oxenstiern; who immediately sent up word to the King, of his
manner of yielding up the city. Horneck, indeed denied, any notice he had of
Duke Bernards coming: notwithstanding which, he was still kept under arrest,
till his sentence came out of Bavaria from the King, that he should lose both
Horn and neck too, for it. But execution was deferred, and his excuses, of
the impossibility for him with 200 men, to make good such a compass of walls;
when, especially, so potent a faction domineered in the town, were accepted:
which were, indeed, presented to the King, in his behalf, by the Queens
Majesty, Duke Bernard, and some others.

Duke Bernard hearing Spiers to be thus taken by the Count of Embden; and
and that Don Gonzales de Cordova was already upon his march in the further
parts of Luxemburg, returns home again, upon hearing of Don Cordovaes coming.
to pass the Mosel also into the Palatinate, for the seconding of Count of
Embden: he sends part of the Army toward Manheim, first, and returns the
other toward Mentz again: Manheim,
whence the Rhinegrave was with some of them, sent toward the Mosel, for the
stopping of Don Cordova. Wormbs was at that time also taken new order for;
Wormbs,
and that galla^t Cavalier Christopher Haubald (who had lately taken Hanaw, as
P. 22, of our Sec. Part we told you) now became their Governor. Hanaw city
(you may please to understand) had been restored to its Earl, the Lord of it;
and Haubald with the Kings garrison, drawn out of it. He being now Governor of
Wormbs, had 24 foot-companies, and one troop of horse, left in it for his
garrison: the other 7 Cornets of horse which were in it, when the Spaniards,
the other day, marched by it; being now drawn out, to augment the Army, Haubald,
first of all, slights and dismantles part of the Suburbs: the better to
fortify the city: at which work, causing 1500 Laborers to be daily
employed; he hoped within 14 or 16 days to make it so fensible; as not to
fear the first sight or terror of an enemy. and Mentz, strengthened.
Mentz had all this while been new strengthened, by the labors of 3000 Boores
and soldiers; and some new worckes made to it: especially by the
Gustavi-Stadt, or New town, which the King of Sweden had caused to be added to
it.

In this town, and a little before this; had the Bailiffe of Mentz been laid
hold of and imprisoned by the Chancellor. His fault was, for having continued a
secret corresponcie with his old master the Archbishop: and for having made a
late and secret voyage to him unto Cullen. The Chancellor, it seems, since the
Spaniards marching by, had been abroad to look to other places. At his
coming home, about this April 20. the French Ambassador still resident in
Mentz, made a great complaint of the Colonel the Governor, whom the Chancellor
had left within the city. The cause was, for that he upon the hearing of the
Ecclesiastics faction in Spires, in favor of the Spanish: had commanded those
at Mentz, to depart the city; and had arrested some of them, for not obeying.
The wise Oxenstiern willing to gratify the Ambassador, released the arrest
quietly, and restored the Ecclesiastics to their Cloisters.

Toward the end of April, came the Queen of Sweden into Mentz: whom the
Chancellor with some gallanter troops of horse, went to meet withal. Diverse
Princes and Gentlemen (both of the Country and Army) went also to receive her
Majesty as far as Costum; The Queen of Sweden comes to Mentz.
about a mile or 2 from Mentz, and on the other side of the Maine toward
Franckford. Here were 80 Companies of foot also put into Battaglia: through
whom, the Queen with a train of 20 coaches passing over the new made bridge;
took up her lodging in the Electorall Palace, where she remained till August
after, that she went toward Wurstburg.

The Queens person thus brought into a place of safety, and these 3 good
towns, with others, taken order for; part of the Army is sent with the young
Rhinegrave toward the Mosel: The Swedish sent toward the Mosel, to oppose Don
Cordova.
fresh news being again brought to Mentz, that Don Cordova was comne almost
as near as Triers, with 22 troops of horse, and 6000 foot forces. This was
about the beginning of our May, the 8 of which month, Duke Bernard Weymar
having at Mentz discharged himself of the Army; goes through Wormbs
immediately up into Bavaria, to the King of Sweden: the cause of whose
discontent, we shall anon tell you; when namely, we enter into Gustavus
Horns Story.

We left the Count of Embden within Spires, whose Army since their taking of
that town, had attempted nothing upon the rest of the country: excepting
only that he enquartered some troops in Aenwiler, Cron-Weissenburg and
Landaw. The occasion for this was (I suppose) in the Marquess of Baden; as we
shall tell you by and by. From the townsmen of Spiers, (notwithstanding any
former conditions made with Horneck) did the Count demand 100000 Dollars, The
Count of Embdens doings in Spiers.
which upon their complaint of poverty, were moderated to 80000. His soldiers
made bold with their Hosts, now and then, if they saw any thing that liked
them. Diverse of the richer sort, were now likewise accused for former
practices with the Swedes: but the quarrel was not to the men, but to their
purses.

The Marquess William of Baden (he that is commonly called so) having been by
his Imperial Majesty appointed his General heretofore, in this Circle of the
Rhine: The Marquess of Baden demands to have Spiers surrendered unto him.
sent word now, unto the Count of Embden, that he had order from his Imperial
Majesty, to take the city of Spiers (which was the Chamber of the Empire)
into his own charge, and Imperial protection. The Count returned him this
answer; That he for his part, had commission from the King of Spain to take
in so much of the country, as had heretofore been Spanish: so that every man
being obliged to perform his best service for his own Master, The Count of
Embdens denial of it.
and to expect his commands only: he could not see that he ought to yield up
his possession in the place, until he saw some order for it from the Court of
Brussells. This return was the Marquess constrained to accept of for an
answer.

But the Count of Embden very suddenly after this, was feign of himself, to
forsake the town, without receiving any other Commission from Brussells, then
that he could not from thence be relieved. His necessities.
The Swedish troops already advanced toward the Mosel, intercercepted a
Courryer and a Packet of his to Don Cordova, and her Highness the
Archduchesse: That unless he might be seconded from thence, within 14 days;
he should no ways be able to keep his possession in the country: but be
constrained to venture his Army into the mercy of the Swedes, at his
countermarching. And so it fell out indeed: For the Rhinegrave having with his
Army by this time taken possession of the Huntsruck; Don Cordova that was now
advanced as high as Triers, judged it a better piece of Soldiery to retire
again with his Army, then to adventure it upon such difficulties. Some of his
horse, and 2 Commissaries (as I find) amongst them, being sent over Triers
bridge into the Huntsruck, to discover the posture of the Rhinegrave, and to
make provisions for the following Army: Don Cordova cannot get over the Mosel.
were light upon by the Swedish, and sent prisoners into Mentz. Those that
escaped, carried this word back unto Don Cordova, that the Swedish were too
strong for him in the Huntsruck, and that they had possessed themselves of all
the advantageous Poasts, in the woods and mountains. This news caused Cordova
to retire, and to leave the Count of Embden but in a bad taking.

The Count of Embden forced to forsake Spiers.
Some other necessities, pincht at the same time upon the Count of Embden. The
Chancellor Oxenstiern had an Army in his way to hinder his retreat: and so
made it dangerous for him to go: and the Marshalls De la Force and D' Effiat,
were already parted out of Lorrayne, and into the edge of the Palatinate, with
a French Army: and this made it as dangerous to stay also; So that go or
stay, there was danger in it. And true it is, that the French Army was by the
21 of May, and the Reasons.
comne as far as Zweibrucken, (the town of the Palatine the Duke of Deux
Ponts) upon the Western frontiers of the Palatinate; about 40 miles distant
from Spiers city. The coming of these French forces, was in favor of the
Elector of Triers: whom his Majesty of France had (against the Spanish) taken
into his protection. Two prime forts had this Elector of Triers: both which he
had yielded to consigne over into the French Kings hands: and these, this Army
now came (though the Elector, perchance, could have better been contented not
to have been put to it, to make this consignation) to take possession of. One
of these Fortresses, was the town and castle of Vdenheim: and this was close
by Spiers, The French come with an army through the Palatinate.
within 6 English miles of it: too near to be ill neighbors. The other
strength they went to take seisin of, was the castle of Hermanstein; where the
Mosel falls into the Rhine: and this corner if the French gat into, they would
prove very troublesome to the Spanish in their passage back again, through
the Huntsruck. And so, indeed, it after happened. To these two, is a third
necessity to be added. The Prince of Orange was now preparing for the field; so
that there was likely to be more use for the Spanish at home in the
Low Countries, then here above in the Palatinate.

And these are some of the reasons, that constrained the Count of Embden, so
suddenly to forsake these quarters. This is sure. That about the same day
month, that he took Spiers city upon, he again forsook it, Saturday April
21. he entered it, and upon Whitsun Monday May 21, he again leaves it. Don
Philip de Sylva, who had so long been General in these He was General of all
the Spanish, in the Palatinate, and the 2 Electorates of Mentz and Triers.
parts upon the Rhine; now prepares likewise to return home with the Army.
This General, took order before his parting, for the re-enforcing of the
garrison of Franckendale, with 3 fresh troops of horse, and 1200 footmen. The
Magazine he also caused to be new stored, and the sick and unserviceable
people, to be brought out of it. For the defense of Spiers, did the Count of
Embden appoint 1000 horse and Foot; and so left the neighbor country, to the
direction of the Marquess of Baden, as he had desired. The General Ossa
perceiving the Spanish about to go; he forsakes Alsatia, just about this
time, going with all speed to the siege of Bibrach: of which see Page 170. of
our Second Part.

The 2 Spanish Generals parting from Spiers May 21, and having drawn out all
their troops of the neighbor quarters: and taking but 5 fielding pieces along
with them: they give it out, before their going out of Spiers, that their
purpose now was to march upwards into Alsatia, by the Rhines sides, and there
to join with the General Ossa. This was a devise to amuse the Swedish
withal: The Spanish feining to march up the Rhine,
whom the Spaniards (the chief of their desire now being to make a quiet
retreat) were not willing to have any thing to do withal. Having advanced to
the Southward as far as Germersheim, (or thereabouts) that is, some 8 or 10
English miles from Spires: they that very night, turn faces about to the
right, suddenly turn aside toward the Mosel,
toward the Mosel. And indeed the old Proverb is here true enough, That the
furthest way about, is the nearest way home: seeing that by this means they
escaped that rugged and woody passage through some of the crags of the old
mountain Vogasus; which all the way to the Westward, they left above them upon
the right hand. The first good town of the Palatinate which they touched at,
was Keysers-Lauter; about 30 English miles from Spiers, upon the river Lauter.
Here staid they but one night, May 23: their desire being to make such hasty
marches; that they might be past by, before the Chancellor Oxenstierns army at
Mentz, should hear of it: or at least before the Rhine-graves Army about the
Huntsruck, narrowly scaping by the French Army.
should be conjoined with him. One night before that the Spanish lodged at
Keysers-Lauter, did the Van of the French Army arrive at Zweibrucken: which was
within 18 English miles of Keysers-Lauter. Thus the Spanish being in good time
passed by, The French (as soon as they heard of their going by) instantly send
away the troops appointed to take possession of Hermanstein: into which the
Elector of Triers entertained them, upon Saturday May 26 following.

The Spanish, with long and hasty marches, still advance toward the Mosel:
and the Chancellor Oxenstiern having notice brought him of it unto Mentz, the
same night of their departure; he with all speed, the next day, preparing all
things necessary for the expedition: parts, upon the 23, The Chancellor
Oxenstiern, makes out after the Spanish,
with the Palatine Christian of Birckenfeldt, from Mentz unto Altzem; Fifteen
thousand foot (half so many perchance) and 80 troops of horse, was he said
to lead along with him; and having sent word of it to the Rhinegrave; and given
him order to come toward him: he for that night encamps before Altzeim. This
having been the way that the Spanish had before taken, in their advancing
toward Spiers; the Chancellor supposed they would make their retreat that way
again; and had therefore thought to take up that pass before them. But their
march lay not that way, now; but some 2 or 3 leagues more to the Westward. The
next morning May 24, was there word brought unto the Chancellor, that the
Spanish had quartered the same night at Gelheim; a market town some 7 or 8
English miles from him.

The Chancellor not willing to loose this opportunity; prepares to go to meet
with them; and to give them as good a farewell out of the country, as they had
received an entertainment into it. The younger Rhinegrave was dispatched,
before hand, with some troops of horse of his own and Hornecks Regiment, to
attack the Spanish; whilst the gross of the Swedish foot, with the Canon,
might get up to them. whom the Rhinegrave first lights upon.
The Rhinegrave first found the Spanish Army in an indifferent fair and large
valley, near unto Steinbach cloister: where encountering those 4 Cornets of
horse, that then had the Van of the Army; he routed them first of all, and (as
some say) took away 3 of their Cornets.

The Spanish having field-room enough to put themselves into Battaglia, did it
presently: and rightly supposing withal, that it was not some few troops, or
any one single Regiment alone, that durst thus confront their whole Army: and
that too, in a place of no advantage; and where they might well discover their
whole strength: they certainly concluded thereupon, that the whole Swedish
forces were at hand, and they (doubtless) withal resolved to bid them
battle. The Spanish entertaining the skirmish,
Putting out therefore some primer horse-troopes (and those well lyned with
musketeers) to entertain the Rhinegrave: they first of all wheel about their
whole Army a little to the left; the better to gain the advantage of the
wood, in case of necessity to retreat unto. And as if they had now also
considered; That their former way toward the river Nah betwixt Creutznach and
Bingen, was so stopped up by the Swedish, that they must either fight for their
way, or decline it: they then resolved upon the latter. Sending away their
baggage-wagons and heavyer lumber, on before toward the town of Lautereck:
send away their baggage before, and alter their course of marching.
they maintained the skirmish with the Rhinegrave, till their baggage were well
advanced into the woods, which was a place of safety.

Yea they did not maintain the skirmish alone, but they had the better of it.
Two of the Rhinegraves own troops, having too fiercely and too forwardly
given on upon them; they make to get them further off: the Swedish feeling, by
and by, that horsemen and musketeers, were too hard for pistolls and
Carabiners, only. These two troops being soundly pelted by the Spanish; take
the rout presently upon it; They route 6 troops of the Rhin graves,
and turn the bridle toward their own people. Four troops of Hornecks
Regiment, being sent by the Rhinegrave, for the succouring of these
runne-awayes: received into themselves so great an impression of cowardice,
from the others fears; that they also turn the bridle with them, and gallop
with all speed toward Altzeim. Nor could the Rhinegrave by any means get them
to make head again: one Cornet and one Sergeant (2 of each, say some
relations) he presently caused to be hanged: and yet would the others ever stay
to profit by the example.

and recover the advantage of the woods.
The Spanish contenting themselves to have thus beaten them away, and to have
recovered the honors of their 4. former Cornets: continue on their march,
never looking to pursue after them. And this, indeed, was their wisest course:
more conducing both to their safeties, and their purposes: their intention was
not to fight, but to retreat; and hitherto they had made thus much good of it.
By this time was the Chancellor near at hand, with the ordnance and gross of
the Army: upon whose coming, the Spanish disdained not to save themselves
(though in good order) among the trees and thickets of the forest. Some
troops they left upon the edge of the wood, to entertain the time with the
Swedish; till their baggage should have gotten on further out of danger. I do
not find that there was much more that day done, against those in the
woods-side. It was almost night, by this time; for the Swedish Foot had met
with so many hills and bushes in their march, that they could no sooner get up
to make a day of it.

The Spaniards, so long as day light lasted, made very good use of the wood to
defend themselves in, against the Swedish. Every tree, served their
musketeers, both for a Rest, and for a Buckler: every bush, was as good as a
Turnpike or a Galthrop, to keep off any charge of horses, and to hinder their
coming on in order. Among the boughs of the trees, were not the enemies Pikes
manageable. Nothing but Canon, could do them any mischief: and out of their
reach, they could quickly get them. In this posture did the Spaniards maintain
it, till the approaching darkness: the favor of which advantage, being the
thing they most longed for; they now marched away with all their diligence. The
Swedish not daring to pursue them, Continuing their retreat,
for fear of ambushes: were feign for that night to encamp, without the edge
of the wood aforesaid. All that night, the Spaniards marched: and by break of
day the next friday morning, May 25, did the Swedish horse again pursue after
them. But the woods and hilly ways, proved so cumbersome; and the Spaniards
had so far gotten the start of them; that though the Swedish Cavallerie did,
now and then, overtake some of them, They are pursued by the Rhin^grave.
and made some spoil upon their Reere (among such especially, as were by any
mischance cast behind their fellows) yet still did the others get so much
ground of the Swedish Infanterie, as that they could never get up, to give them
a general onset.

Those Spanish horse that were left behind, either to manne the Reere, or to
guard the baggage; would turn again, now and then perchance, and give the
Swedish their pistolls, and so kill or spoil them a man or two, that way; but
yet they never stood to it: their purpose being to make good their retreat, and
if they did skirmish, now and then, yet still was it but retyring. The Swedish
being all horse, had this advantage upon the Spanish Foot: that they could ride
out and in, The manner of the retreat.
and charge them upon which flanck they pleased, the Rhinegrave upon one hand,
and the Fins under Stolhanshe upon the other, and both at pleasure. And yet
that which afflicted the Spanish worse then all this, was, that their enemies
still soliciting them with renewed Alarmes; they could never be suffered either
to pitch or sleep; nor to take any manner of rest, night, or day, for 40
hours together. Being thus enforced to march forwards, still, and forwards; if
any encu^brance withal, cha^ced to fall among their wagons, or any carriage of
their ordna^ce to be broken: either must those necessary impediments be
forsaken, or the men's lives most desperately be exposed that durst stay behind
either to mend or defend the^. The whole Army would never make Halt or stay,
for any private occasion: and in this posture did the Spaniards retreat, and
the Swedish horse pursue (the gross of foot following on as fast, as might be)
till they came to Lautereck aforesaid; full 16 miles of ground from Gelheim,
(near which the fight began) and as heavy to march, as some other thirty.

The Spaniards seeing now no remedy, but that the Swedish were likely to
pursue them ever; They burn their carriages at Lautereck:
and perceiving withal, diverse of their own wheels and carriages to be by
this time much broken and shattered in the woods and rugged mountains: they
there resolve to rid themselves of that lumber. Here set they fire unto a
many of their wagons; the carriages of their ordnance, they burned; and the
pieces they drowned in the river Lauter. Their sick and wounded men, they put
upon the horses that had drawn them; and so hasted to the Northward, toward
the Mosel. Being thus lightened; now double they their march: and from thence to
the river Nah, (which gave them entrance into the Duchy of Semmern, and the
Huntsruck:) they had something a more champion country to do it in. Here the
Swedish gave it over, staying about Lautereck awhile to refresh themselves:
from whence, the Army turned aside, and there the Swedish give it over.
partly toward Creutznach, 15 English miles to the right hand, and North of
Lautereck, and partly back again to Altzeim. The way betwixt the first
encounter and parting of the Armies, lay strewed with dead, maimed, sick, and
wearyed bodies, ever and anon; Spaniards, Italians, Wallons and Burgundians: of
which (if you will take the Swedish and the Boores reckning) there were full
2000. The drowned ordnance were found, and weighed up again. Some 400 (others
name 800) wagons, either burnt or left behind: 40 of which the Spaniards
hoping to have carried away, and therefore not burned, Their losses.
fell whole and wholly into the hands of the Swedish. In these, were much
bedding, brass, pewter and iron: with such like leaguer-housholdstuffe. Diverse
prisoners were taken; and among them, about 60 Officers: all which were carried
into Mentz. Of the Spanish Army that thus marched away, were there said to be
8000 foot, and 3000 horse; or near upon it: which I believe not: all which, by
the beginning of June, were gotten as far as the Mosel; and some part of them
already passed it. Much encumbrance did they after encounter withal, in the
Elector of Triers country. The French forces, and his own, he now made to
way-lay them; and encumbrances in the Bishop of Triers country.
employed 3000 Boores, to cut down the trees for the hindering of their
passage: and all victuals was conveyed away out of their reach. Thus the
Spaniards made good their retreat: and though they did it with much hazard,
and many losses; yet, al-together, was it a very good piece of service of them
And (I believe) the Swedish were as glad, as the Country, that they were so
cheap rid of them.

Don Gonzales de Cordova and Monterry Governor of Maestricht, having not been
able to get over the Mosel, to the relief of the Count of Embden; now, for
fear that the Swedish should have passed over after him: stayed for the said
Count in the country of Lutzenburg: and afterward peecd in with him about
Naamen and the river Maze. The Count of Merode, with those forces which he had
thereabouts newly levied for the Emperor; was then about the Mosel toward
Cullen; but he went not along with Embden nor Don Cordova: he being then in
entertainment with the Elector of Cullen.

And thus ended that expedition of so much expectation, of the Spanish Armies
into the Palatinate. But this is the fortune of the wars, that the masters of
the field must now and then take their turns, and be beaten out of it.

The Swedish part of the Army, which returned from the fight, to Altzeim; went
presently with the Chancellor back again to Mentz: and the other part, that
moved toward Creutznach; went forward with the Rhinegrave, after a while, into
the Huntsruck. There he reprised (though with some little ado, at first,) the
towns of Kirchberg, Simmern, and others; wherein the Spaniards had left some
weak garrisons. Nor had the Swedish, after this, much ado about the
Palatinate: till that in July after, they were sent for by the King to
Norimberg.

The state in which the Spaniards left the Palatinate, shall we now tell you
of. The state in which the Spanish now left the Palatinate, and the Bishopric
of Spiers.
Having made themselves masters of Spiers, they forced some garrisons upon the
next neighbor walled towns, that had been voluntarily quitted by such
Swedish, as were there enquartered: even as the selfsame towns had been
before quitted by the Spanish, as Page 59 of our Second Part, we have before
told you. These towns were Aenwyler, Cron-Wessenburg, Landau, and some others:
and out of these (as being nothing fencible) they now at parting withdraw their
new-put-in garrisons. At Germersheim only, did they now leave some companies.
This being a pretty tight place of it self; would be a good safeguard, besides,
unto the strong town of Vdenheim (or Philipsburg) which lies but one Dutch
league to the East of it; the Rhine running just between them. The garrison of
this town, which had been put in partly by the Bishop of Spires, and partly
by the Chapter: and which by often going out upon Boote-haling Partees, with
the Spanish garrisons of Heidleberg and Franckendale, (especially before the
Spanish and the Bishop had any difference) had been three quarters
Spaniolized: they now left in very good terms with themselves; and upon terms
with their Lord the Bishop, now enemy to the Spaniards. The Chapter or
Dom-Herren of the Cathedral Church of Spiers was their friend; and their own
Bishops adversary: and for their sakes, did the Spanish now forbear the other
lands of the Bishopric. The quarrel was this. The Bishop Philip Christofer of
Spiers, was now Elector of Triers also: whither in the year 1623, he had been
chosen. This Prince had not only concluded his Neutralitie with the King of
Sweden: See Page 69, and 72, of our Second Part.
but put himself under the French Kings protection; and by a Proclamation
commanded all the Spaniards out of his country. His Fort and Electorall castle
of Hermanstein, had he now also actually consigned over unto the French: and
had likewise sent unto Vdenheim, (the town of his Residence for his
Bishopric of Spiers) to have that delivered over to them. This so enraged
both his Chapters, of Triers and of Spiers, (who were wholly Austrianized) that
they forthwith proceeded to a formal and legal Admonition of him: which
amounts to little less, then a Deprivation. Differences betwixt the Bishop of
Spiers, and his Chapter concerning Vdenheim:
The Bishop sending his Trumpet unto the garrison of Vdenheim, to deliver up
the place unto the French; his desire was countermanded by the Chapter of
Spiers: so that the Governor answered peremptorily, That he held for the
Emperor. Thus were the French Generals frustrated of this hope.

Having here made mention of the Elector of Triers and his French dependancie,
Swedish Neutralitie, and enmity with the Spaniards: it shall not be amiss to
repeat something here, (though from an ancienter original) which may conduce
to the understanding of his State, and our Story.

This Philip Christofer, then Bishop of Spiers only; had his ordinary
Residence at this Vdenheim: and some old discontents betwixt the Palsgrave and
the Bishop, about it:
concerning which, there had formerly fallen out a controversy betwixt the
last Prince Palatine and him, and upon this occasion In the year 1618. the
Bishop had a mind to fortify this Vdenheim: against which, the Palsgrave thus
argued. That the place had been viewed, and the model projected by Spinola.
That it thereby being made suspicious; would become also dangerous to his
Estate; if either his enemies should get in thither, and the causes.
or the Bishops in time to come, prove enemies to the Palatinate. He urged
also, that this fortification would hinder his right of sending convoyes or
Safe-Conducts by, or through the town. That it was contrary to the privileges
of the city of Spiers; which was, to have no new Fort erected, within 3
leagues of it. The Bishop not desisting for all these reasons, the Elector
Palatine procures a meeting of some Princes at Heilbrun, upon it. There did the
Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquess of Durlach, and the Earls of the Wetteraw,
assist the Palsgrave with 4000 armed men, to slight and dismantle the whole
Fortification. Hereupon was it thus agreed betwixt the Palsgrave and the
Bishop, with consent of the Dom-Herren or Prebends of Spiers: that the part
betwixt the Fore-towne and the Castle, should be left unfortified: and never
to be made up, but by consent of the Palatines. That the Bishop should never
put above 30 men into it, for Day-Warders: and that in time of wars, the
place should be a refuge for the Paligraves subjects. But this agreement was in
time of these late wars then broken by the Bishop; when the Palsgrave had no
power left, to exact the performance of it. But thus much has the Bishop now
gained by it: that this town of Vdenheim, which he built against the will of
his friends, he has now fortified for his enemies. The Captain that now
commanded in this Philipsburg, having made this denial to the Bishops Trumpet;
to show him withal how much good earnest he meant in it: set fire presently
upon some of the new buildings next the castle, to prevent the lodging of any
enemies in it: and prepares himself thoroughly for resistance. This was the
state of Udenheim, when the Spaniards forsook the Palatinate.

The constitution of all the country together, was this. In Franckendale the
Spaniards left, (or were to leave) 1200. In Heidleberg, 2000. In Spiers, 1000;
and in Germersheim, about half so many. In Neustat, likewise, Bretten,
Sintzheim, Pfeddersheim, Germersheim and Fidelsheim; they left some smaller
garrisons. Some writing tells me, that Don Philip de Sylva did not send in
those 1000 foot and 5 Cornets of horse into Franckendale, as he had promised. I
perceive that the chief command over the Militia in the Palatinate; was
entrusted, principally, in the hands of Colonel Metternich, Governor of
Heidleberg All the Country of Alsatia, was left to the Marquess William of
Baden. But he staid not long in that his regencie. For hearing how ill the
Spanish had sped in their retreat; that the Swedish army was returned to
Mentz; that Gustavus Horn was comne down to be General about the Rhine and
Mosel: and that the passages betwixt Heidleberg and Franckendale, were likely
to be every where blockt up, by his horse quarters: he by mid June draws all
the forces, out of Spiers and Germersheim; and retires homewards to the
defense of Alsatia; and that which he calls his own Marquisate of Baden. And
into these parts, Gustavus Horn presently sent the wars after him.

The Rhinegrave after the departure of the Spanish; (for want of other
employment) made a design for the recovery of Kirchberg; wherein they had left
a garrison. The Rhinegrave had advanced the service, even to the making of a
saultable breach in the wall; The Rhinegrave besieging Kirchberg,
and the mounting of his scaling ladders. His men, having order now to storm;
so soon as they perceived the resolutenesse of the defendants, and that a
Leiftenant who had the point, and fell first on upon the Breach, was with 50 of
his followers shot dead upon the place: they could by no means be persuaded
to give on, after them: but (cowardly enough) came running off again, faster
then ever they went forward. And thus was the Rhinegrave feign to sound the
retreat, and, for that time, is beaten off again.
to levy his own siege of Kirchberg Shortly after this, when, namely, the
French Armies were comne a little nearer to these quarters: and Gustavus Horn
upon his march thitherward, to the sieges of Coblentz and of Grafenberg: the
Spanish in this town, Simmern, and other places, yielded upon the first
summons: and went off with soldierly Conditions.

This siege, was in the end of May, and the beginning of our June: by which
time, was Gustavus Horn comne down out of Bavaria from the King of Sweden:
with commission to command the Army, in the parts about the Rhine and Mosel.

GUSTAVUS HORNS PROCEEDINGS. From the time of his being sent down out of
Bavaria by the King: until the time of his going up again thither with an
Army, after the Kings Death.
HOw the gallant young Cavalier, Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, (second brother
unto Duke William) had at the Kings marching up into Bavaria, been left
behind with the Army about the Palatinate: you may collect by what has been
before written. The reason forwhich his leaving there, is no secret in those
parts. His birth, which is of an Electorall family: his hopes, sure (if he
lives) to be heir to his Uncle, the Duke of This old Duke being since dead,
there is another heirelesse Prince, in the possession: after whom, the Honor is
entaild upon Duke Bernard.
Saxon-Coburg: with his personal valor and abilities: had allured the King of
Sweden, to settle some desires upon him. Seldom has there been any great act
of war, but that something of Love has chanced in between, as if to cheer
and sweeten the sad Scene of it. This observation, would the Poets thus
represent, by still bringing in a Venus, into Mars his story. The God of love,
is painted, armed: and Love though a comicall passion, yet still bears it a
Part, either in the Plot or the Catastrophe, of wars Tragedy. All Stories
would be full of these discourses, had they the luck of it, (like that of the
12 Caesar's) to have a Suetonius, as well as a Tacitus: a chamber-Blab to tell
tales of what was enacted in the withdrawing room, as well as what was
executed in the Leaguer. The King of Sweden, plainly, had made some private
overtures unto Duke Bernard, of a marriage betwixt him and a fair young Swedish
Lady, daughter to his own Sister, whom his Queen had brought with her into
Germany. This Lady being left with the Queen about Franckford, Duke Bernard
was left about Mentz also: by which neerenes, he had the better opportunity to
make Court unto his Mistress. Where the fault was, I know not. Sure it is,
that in the Kings absence, there had fallen out some discontent betwixt Duke
Bernard, and the Rex-Chancellor Oxenstiern. The occasion was, for that the
Chancellor had given some command over the Army, The cause of Duke Bernards
going up to the King.
(which Duke Bernard had expected) unto the Rhinegrave. Not unto that Cavalier
the Rhinegrave, Otto Lodowick Leiftena^t of the horse but unto the Rhinegrave
Otto, uncle to this Ge^tleman: who had heretofore been a suitor unto the King,
to bestow the town and Jurisdiction of Bingen upon him, which had been part,
erewhiles, of the Elector of Mentz his Bishopric.

Duke Bernard, hereupon, going up to the King, then at Munchen: received some
hopes of satisfaction; and of being made Leiftenant General of the Foot, unto
his Majesty: which he withal expected, should by sound of trumpet have been
proclaimed throughout the Army. But the King suspecting, how ill Sir John
Banier, (whose place that is) must needs take that: gave not that content unto
Duke Bernard, in this particular. A speech there sometimes likewise was, in the
Army, that Duke William Saxon-Weymar, should have been Generalissimo, or
Leiftenant General overall the Kings Armies and Commanders. These misses,
caused some private discontent in Duke William and his brother Bernard, which,
some suspect, was never heartily taken off again, to the Kings dying day.
However, the King to give Duke Bernard and his brother some content;
immediately sent away Gustavus Horn to command that Army about the Rhine and
Mosel; which Duke Bernard came from: that so there might be one less in the
Army, betwixt the King and them; and when at his coming out of Bavaria, he
left Duke William with an Army, he had the Title of Leiftenant-Generall. And
this is some part of the secret, and of Gustavus Horns coming down, to this
Army.
for Duke Bernards going up; and Gustavus Horns so sudden coming down,
toward the Palatinate.

Gustavus Horn coming Post out of Bavaria; upon Monday being Barnabee the
brights day June 11 arrived at Franckford: whence the next day he went to
Mentz, unto the Chancellor. Here they 2 first overlooking, and then new
ordering the Army, drew it out into the field presently. The Spaniards, then
in possession of most of the best towns, in the Elector of Triers his
country, (the Chapter and some of the people favoring them) perceiving by
this time, that the Swedes were likely to come against them in favor of the
French: and that the French themselves, under the marshall D'Estre, D'Effiat
(now dead) in 2 several Bodies, were coming nearer every day, and nearer to
them: they find means, The Spaniards thrust a garrison into Coblents.
(by the favor aforesaid) to choppe a garrison, all on the sudden, into
Coblentz. The situation of this town, served their turn several ways. 1. It
commands the passage of the Rhine: on the Western bancke whereof it is seated,
and there too, Of the meeting and confluence of these 2 rivers together, is
Coblentz, in Latin called Confluentia.
where the river Mosel falls into it. 2. It became as ill as a Blockhouse
against the most strong Castle of Ehrenbreisten or Hermanstein, which is the
Bishops Palace upon the other banck of the Rhine: into which he had lately
admitted a French garrison. 3. It was a strong place of it self, and had a
great command, over all that corner of the Huntsruck. This shrewdly startled,
both the Elector and his Frenchmen: who meant to have put themselves into it,
but that the Spaniards had thus leapt into the saddle before them. This
neighborhood of these 2 great and emulous nations, (the breadth of the Rhine
only being betwixt them) was the occasion of many a quarrel. The French
author of le Soldat Suedois complains, that the Spanish once, having taken
some of his Contrymen prisoners, upon promise of good quarter: cut their
throats afterward, in cold blood. It had been privately agreed (it seems)
betwixt their Majesty's of France and Sweden, The private agreement betwixt
France and Sweden, concerning Triers.
that France should have the sole Protection (so was it yet called) of the
Elector of Triers country: and that, if need were, the Swedish should help to
beat the Spanish out of it. It appears also by the story, that Gustavus Horn
had Commission from his master, for the same purpose: and that he now prepared
to execute it. He had a good mind likewise, to get the Dom-Herren or Chapter
of Triers into his Clutches: but they being then at Triers town, shifted
themselves away into the neighbour-countrie of Lutzenburg: so soon as ever
they gat an inckling of his coming. Horn staid not long within Mentz: ere that
the Army advanced toward the Mosel. Marching all together in one Gross, (or
not very far asunder) toward Triers city and the country of Lutzenburg; the
Rhinegrave Otto Lodowick, Horn advances toward the Elector of Triers country.
(the most of whose Army was already in the Huntsruck,) all on the sudden, with
his part of the forces strikes down on the right hand, keeping the Mosel on
their left: toward Coblentz. Horns division that came presently after, held on
their march through the Huntsruck, toward Trarbach: whose army was now said to
be some 8000 foot, and about 6000 horse, under 126 Cornets.

June 17, the Rhinegrave first invested Coblentz: and (to omit the usual
advancings of all sieges) having gotten up a Battery on the Lands side, the
French, from over the water, out of Hermanstein castle, thunder also with their
ordnance, into Coblentz. The Spanish within the town, being conscious of the
scantnes of their ammunition, The Rhinegrave besieges Coblents,
fall the third day to parlie with the Rhinegrave. The Elector of Cullen had in
this mean time of the seige, sent in some Ambassadors from his castle of
Bonne, up the Rhine, to persuade thus much with the Spanish: that in case they
must needs render, they should rather article to deliver up unto the French,
then unto the Swedish. But besides that the Spanish had in the time of this
little neighborhood, contracted a greater spite or scorn, of the French
then of the Swedish; neither would the Rhinegrave consent to that motion:
because, that though he well knew, that the town was hereafter by Commission
from the King of Sweden, to be turned over unto the French: yet should the
French never say, that they had received it from those that lost it, but from
those that won it: and not glory in it, and takes it.
as their own conquest, but as the King of Swedens Resignation. The Spaniards
could get no quarter at the Rhinegraves hands, till they had delivered him the
Elector of Triers his chief Marshall: whom, together with two great Jews
Merchants, they had before seized on. It had gone hard with the Marshall,
perchance, if the Rhinegrave had not stood upon these terms for his deliverie:
the Spanish were very angry with his Master the Elector, for thrusting them
out of his country, and not trusting their Master of Spain with his
protection, as well as France: the one being as much a Catholic as the other.
All conditions being agreed upon; Thursday June 21, being the 4 day of the
siege, The Spanish forsake Triers country.
the Spaniards march out of Coblents, with soldiers conditions every way; and
were by the Swedish convoyed into a place of security.

This town being taken, (which was the chiefest strength of all that
country,) the weaker Spanish garrisons on the further (Eastern) side of the
Rhine, in Ober Laenstein, Nyder Laenstein, Engers, Mantenau, Hamerstein,
Lanneck, and Montabour; voluntarily forsook their old quarters; all retyring
themselves quietly toward Luxenberg. Three Regiments of the
Catholicke-leaguers, which had by the Count of Merode been newly levied in the
Electorate of Triers, and its neighbor countries of Gulick-land, and the land
of Marck: were by this time upon their march, toward the relief of Coblents.
They were the Regiments of Metternich (Governor of Heidleberg) Roelinger and
the Count of Bronckhorst; which were coming upon the service: but meeting, by
the way, with those that had forsaken these towns; they presently convert
their march toward the mountainous parts of Alsatia; where they first
enquarter themselves in the towns of the Strasburgers jurisdiction: and piece
in presently afterward, with Ossa and Monte Cuculi.

The Elector of Cullen (brother to the Duke of Bavaria) upon the return of his
Ambassadors, being startled with this neernesse of the danger; he on Saturday
June 23, ships away himself and Treasure, down the Rhine unto Cullen city:
The fear of the Elector and Bishopric of Cullen, upon it.
whither he was followed by the most and chiefest of the Spiritualitie. His
whole Electorate was in a bodily fear also; for that the wars were, by this
time, brought so near them. Near them indeed; Bonne it self, (the Palace and
Residence of the Elector) being not above 30 English miles (by a line) from
Coblentz; some of the Bishopric, not a dozen: and that down the Rhinestreame
also. The Elector (as I find written) presently sent away to envite Pappenheim
to his succors; and entertained the Count of Merode with 7 Regiments of horse
and foot, into his service. But Pappenheim being before engaged to the
Archduchesse for the relief of Maestricht; could not now help him: and Merode
expecting every hour, to be by his Generalissimo the Duke of Fridland,
commanded for other service. These uncertainties put the Elector of Cullen, and
his neighbor the Duke of Newburg, (in the same case, and fear with him) to
bethink themselves of those safer counsels; which we shall presently tell
you of.

Gustavus Horn takes Trarbach,
Whilst the Rhinegrave is at the siege of Coblentz, Gustavus Horn with the
other part of the Army, was as busy about Trarbach: the most considerable
town upon the Mosel, on that side; and midway betwixt Coblentz and Triers
city. The Spaniards were possessed of this town also: but the place being not
to be defended; they without much forcing forsake it, and retire into the
strong Castle of Grafenburg, hard without the town upon the Mosel. The Spanish
having good store of all military provisions within the castle; maintain the
siege very resolutely: and Horn as fiercely lays about him. He had within 4 or
6 days, brought his Approaches close up to their castle moate; Besieges the
Castle of Grafenburg.
and had a day or two battered their hard walls, with 14 pieces of Canon He had
so soarely shaken a great Rundle or Tower of the castle that he could within a
few hours make it saultable. Upon another side also, close by the water; had
he a second Battery: and there would he within a day or 2, be ready for a
storming. The Spanish Governor perceiving all this; and that he had hardly men
enough to defend all his walls, in a general assault; nor hope of being
relieved, from other parts: he having done his part very well, on Monday July 2
hangs out his white streamer from the castle, to signify his desire of a
Parlie. Articles being the same night concluded upon, the Spanish march out the
next Tuesday, being the 3: and were convoyed toward Luxemburg. and takes it.
This was a strong place; and of as much importance (almost) as the Castle of
Hermanstein. Here did Horn find so sufficient a store of victuals and
ammunition; that had it been as thoroughly manned, as victualled; he could not
in thrice that time have mastered it.

In this mean time, had the Elector of Triers given a very friendly interview
unto the Rhinegrave, about Coblentz: showing good content toward him, for his
clearing Coblentz of the Spanish. The Elector of Triers well contented with the
Swedish.


So well was he appayed with the Swedish usage of his subjects; that he sent
presently into Spiers city, and other places of both his Bishoprics, to
publish the new agreement, and confirmation of the Neutralitie, that he had
contracted with the King of Sweden.

To this town of Coblentz, had the Elector of Cullen by the 26 or 28 of June,
likewise sent his Ambassadors: and thither were the Rex Chancellor Oxenstiern
comne from Mentz, and Gustavus Horn for 2 or 3 days too, whilst his Army was
before Gra^enburg. There did the Elector again solicit and obtain his
Neutralitie, both from the Kings of France and Sweden: The Bishop of Cullen
obtains a Neutrality,
the French Ambassador being also at the Treaty. The Neutralitie extended no
farther, then to the Electors Bishopric of Cullen upon the East side of the
Rhine: but to his Bishopric of Paderborn, and his lands in Westphalia, it
extended not: for the Landgrave of Hessen had his garrisons then, in many of
the towns of those parts. The Neutralitie, was also to be confirmed by the 2
Kings; for whose seeing of the Articles, and return of the Expresses, there
were 6 weeks, (2 months say some) allotted. Upon this agreement, was the
Elector to casheire the Count of Merode and his Regiments, and not to give him
passage through his country, unto Ossa and Monte-Cuculi in Alsatia. This is
the reason, that though Merode presently after this, received a command from
Walstein to march into Alsatia, yet could he not obey those directions, but was
feign to pass the Rhine at Keyferswert, and conjoyne himself with Pappenheim,
then going to Maestricht. The Duke of Newburg also, and the Duke of Newburg
treates for it.
whose house and residence then was about Dusseldorp upon the Rhine, next
neighbor unto Cullen, he likewise solicited a Neutralitie: but what terms he
obtained, I know not, this one thing is observed, that this Prince has either
been not constant, or not fortunate, in his Treaties.

Horn takes in Bern castle and Veldents.
Gustavus Horn being master now of Trarbach and of Grafenburg, seases, in the
next place, upon Bern Castle, and Veldents town: both upon the Mosel toward
Triers, and within 5 or 6 English miles of Trarbach.

And thus the Spanish being on both sides of the Mosel, and by the Rhines side,
cleared out of the Elector of Triers country; even as far as Triers city:
the Elector contented; the towns which the Swedes had taken, delivered back
into his hands; and by him, consigned over to the French, (according to the
King of Swedens agreement with the French King:) the Elector of Cullen, also,
having sued out his Neutralitie, and discharged ^erode of his service, and
attendance upon the Rhine and Mosel: all these things being so quickly and so
quietly dispatched, about those parts, and the French then likely to be made
strong enough, by the coming of the marshall D'Estre and the vicount Arpaiou,
to attack Triers city: Gustavus Horn retires the Army back again unto Mentz.
And all in good time. Oxenstiern goes toward Norimberg.
The Chancellor Oxenstiern, with 8000 of the forces, that had been left about
Mentz, and with some of the Rhinegraves Army, now returned out of Triers
country; was by the 11 of July marched up to the relief of the King of Sweden
before Norimberg; so that there was some want of an Army about Mentz and the
Palatinate. Duke Julius, Administrator of the Duchy of Wirtemberg; had
likewise sent word unto this our Swedish Felt-Marshal; of Ossaes and
Monte-Cuculies being upon the wing upon the frontiers of Alsatia, Wirtemberg,
and the Palatinate: and of Metternichs, the Governor of Heidlebergs purpose, to
take in Wiseloch: so that now it was high time for Gustavus Horn to have
dispatched with the Spanish, and to look this way again, toward the
Imperialists.

True it is that the Rhinegraves Army, after the taking of Coblentz, had been
sent back toward the Palatinate: and had there recovered Sintzheim and
Bretten both a little East of Spiers, and South of Heidleberg, toward the land
of Wirtemberg, and Marquisate of Durlach. Upon this neerenesse of the Swedish;
Spiers forsaken by the garrison.
the Imperial and Bavarian garrison, which the Spanish had left behind them
in Spiers city; voluntarily abandon it. Captain Onrust with 250 men, was
commanded to go for Heidleberg: some companies of Metternich, with the new
levied forces of the city; went with Commissary Eltzen, to the Marquisate of
Baden. They took 12 pieces of ordnance along with them, 100 double muskets,
one wagon laden with match, many barrells of Gunpowder, great store of
Saltpeter, and all the Armor of the townsmen, that they could lay their hands
on: so that the Burgers were feign to keep their watch and ward at the ports
and upon the tower, with battons, bars of iron, and such other wepons. The
Boors were fain to furnish the departing soldiers, with horses for their
wagons: many of which were returned them, by Tom Long the caryer. Three hundred
Swedish, are upon this, thrust into it, and 4 troops of horse.

That, now, we may the better understand the wars of Alsatia and this part
of the Palatinate: we shall do well to look into the neighbor Dukedom of
Wirtemberg, and Circle of Schwaben; from whence the Imperialists came into
these quarters. Duke Julius His young Cousin was not yet comne to the government:
as He since is. He yet was with his mother at Geneva, to keep out of the
Emperors reach: to whom by agreement of Duke Julius, with Furstenburg; they
were to have been committed for education, as Page 33 of our First Part, we
told you.
Administrator of Wirtemberg, having (as we told you Page 173 of our Second
Part) again consented to the King of Sweden, according to the Conclusions of
the Diete of Leipsich: and that agreement of his, having a little before that,
been consented unto in a Diete of the States of Wurtemberg at Stutgard: the
King gives him order to this purpose. 1. That the Imperial towns of
Reutlingen and Esling within that Duchy; (which is a part of the Circle of
Schwaben) with the towns of Salmenschweil, Zwifalten, and S. Blasi, in the
Schwarzwaldt with the Counties of Baar and Zollern: and (finally) the whole
Country betwixt the town of Tubingen and the frontiers of the Switzers, to the
southward; should afford place of billetting, to the 2 Regime^ts of the Count
Crafft of Hohenloe, to those 2 of Schavalitzki and Kanofski, Colonells; and to
the companies of Cranckh, Leiftenant Colonel.

2. That the appointed Treasurers and Commissaries, should have monyes ready
collected for the soldiers pay, and necessary provisions: upon assurance, that
their Chiefes and Commanders should be bound, for the keeping the soldiery in
good Discipline, and restraining them from disorders and wrongs doing.

Upon the publishing of these orders, the levies went forward; and the 2
Imperial cities aforenamed, were each charged with the billetting of 3
Companies. But they, fearing the unrulinesse of the soldiers, bought it out.
All the other places of the country, came in with little ado; declaring for
the Diete of Leipsich and the King of Sweden, as General director of the
wars. The town of Elwang only, (which is the chiefest of the Bishopric of
that name, in the Northern parts of the Circle of Schwaben) stood out against
these orders. Some Imperialists had been newly thrust in thither, and they
signified their obedience to the Swedish and Wirtembergs Officers, with their
pikes and muskets: whereupon some troops being sent for to enforce them, the
Elwangers lost 4 or 500 men, and 2 of their greater Officers: being feign also
to depart the city. The rest of the Imperial troops in the lesser towns
hereabouts, hearing of this defeat: betake themselves into the stronger towns,
and especially into these about the Bodensee or the lake of Consta^ts; on the
Southwesterne corner of the Circle of Schwaben, next to Schwitzerland. This
corner a man may call one of the back doors to Germany: for that this and
Tirole, are the great Passes and Avenues, to the Succors out of Italy. The
Commissarie Ossa (a notable pragmaticall man) had with great judgment and
diligence taken order for the locking up of this back door, and for keeping
the key of it. And that was Lindaw especially: which standing in a little I let
in the lake of the Bodensee, he had taken good order, heretofore, both to
provide and fortify. The same service had he done the Emperor, in the towns
of Constantz, Ratolfsell, Vberlingen, Moerspurg, Buochorn, and Bregentz, all
round about this lake; which is in length 44 or 45 miles English; and 12 in
breadth, in some places. The same had he done to Zell, Wangen, Ravenspurg, and
diverse others: which helped much unto the securing, besides, of the Arch Duke
Leopolds lands, and the Emperors second Sons lands, in Alsatia; which join
upon the west of it. This that follows, was something toward Ossaes order.
The Regiment of Colonel He that had been Tillies Enginier, to take Magdenburg.
Farensbach he billetted upon the County of Rechberg, the Lordship of
Weissenstag, and the Tenants of the Abbess of Buchau. The Landgrave of
Stullingen, (a Protestant, and chief of the family of the Pappenheims, uncle
to the soldier, and hereditarie Marshall of the Empire) he, and the Count of
Bultz, were charged with the Regiment of Balderon. The Counties of Furstenburg
and Witzleb and town of Memmingen, were feign to entertain the Count of
Ritbergs Regiment: The Duke of Savellies Regiment was laid upon other
Lordships. Other troops were sent to Kempten, Isnau, and Pfullendorff.
Colonel Vithzthumbs Regiment, was sent toward Alsatia, and some into Zabern,
the place of Residence for the Bishop of Strasburg. And for that there had
been diverse companies of the Catholick-leaguers forces, billetted up on the
hereditary lands of the house of Austria, and betwixt Vlm and Ausburg: Ossa
required the Duke of Bavaria to remove them, that there might be some
Imperialists brought in place of them. This the Duke took regret at; rather
contented to have such guests, as those, upon another man's lands, then in his
own country. As for the Emperors Tenants and Copy holders, they were warned
to appear at Stockheim; and either to take soldiers into their Country, or
to buy it out with their ready money. All this had Ossa done, very
substantially: by which he first of all made himself sure of th^se 3
principal towns of importance, Zell, Lindau, and Constantz: all which, he
persuaded either to take in garrisons from him; or to raise some of their own,
for the Emperors service. Zell promised to raise 500. Constantz took in 10
Companies from him, and Lindau as many. And very well secured he, in the next
place, the Bishoprics of Moerspurg, and Constantz, with the Lordships of
Bregentz and Veldkirch: and kept, lastly, the passages free from out the
Grisons, and the Switzers Countries, as also out of the possessions of the
Imperial family, on that side of Alsatia.

By this you know something of the state of that Circle of Schwaben: and what
towns and enemies the King of Sweden and the Duke of Wirtemberg, had there to
do withal. The Duke had by the beginning of this year, increased his Army
to 8000; and had well begun to put the Kings orders in execution. The Duke of
Wirtemberg puts into the field.
Beginning on that side of his Duchy, which was next unto the King; he had by
the 20 of June, taken in the Princely Abbey of Zwyfalten; with the town and
jurisdiction about it: with those other places that lie in that Southwesterne
frontier of Wirtemberg by the Danubie side, toward Bibrach. Thus skimmes he
over some other of his Frontiers on the South, and toward the Westward: from
diverse of the weaker towns whereof, which were Catholic; he drives out the
Imperialists, and thrusts his own and the Kings forces upon them.

For all this that was done by the Duke of Wirtemberg, in his country; or by
the Swedes, in the Palatinate: the Imperialists began again to bustle very
sturdily in the neighbor Alsatia. The Commissarie and General Ossa, who about
the 22 or 23 of May, had been skared from Bibrach by the King of Sweden, Ossa,
Monte Cuculi and the Marquess of Baden, rallee together in Alsatia.
(as Page 171 of our Second Part, we have told you) was by this time comne
through Schwaben by the way of Weingarten: where having (this second time) left
the best order that he could, and 3000 Boores up in commotion; he was now with
some forces, conjoined with the Count of Monte-Cuculi in Alsatia. So was the
Marquess William of Baden too; so that now they had an Army in the field of 5
or 6000 men, whereof about 25 Cornets of Horsemen. The next good towns, of
Benfelt, Schletstat, Colmar, Brisach, Elsas-zabern, and others; were all
indifferently well garrisoned, and at their devotion. The 3 Regiments of Count
Bronckhorst, Metternich, and Roellingen; which should (as we told you) have
relieved Coblentz; were long before this, comne through the County of
Luxemburg, and part of Lorraine into Alsatia; and kept a quarter in the
jurisdiction of the Strasburgers. These were Monte-Cuculies friends too, and
ready to join with him upon occasion.

Upon confidence of this strength; Ossa (being Imperial Commissarie,) sends a
Trumpet unto the town of Strasburg, to require entertainment and quarter for
these troops, in the towns of their jurisdiction. Strasburg having before
accorded with the King of Sweden, (as Page 174 of our Second Part we have told
you,) refuse Ossa in his demands: who gives order, thereupon, to Monte-Cuculi,
to seize on Marlenheim, Bar, and other towns of the jurisdiction: the
subjects whereof they made to pay, for the refusal of their Masters. who
advancing into Durlach,
Having done their pleasure here, they with their whole Army aforesaid,
passing with speed through the Lower Marquisate of Baden, (then in possession
of their partner the Marquess William:) they all on the sudden, in the end of
Julie, overspread his cosins land, the Marquess of Durlach: where they found
more booty, then opposition.

Thence pass they onwards into the Palatinate; where they attack Bretten: a
pretty town of the Palatines, lately by the Swedes recovered from the
Spanish: about 12 or 13 English miles to the East of Vdenheim. taken Bretten in
the Palatinate.
Here having broken open a Port with their Petards, they enter into the town,
and sack it; burn the gates, dismantle the walls, and enforce 200 Germans
(which the Swedes had lately left there in garrison) to follow their Ensigns.
This shows their mercy, or their need of soldiers; for that they gave so
fair quarter to the Swedish. Nine of the principal Burgers, they took away
with them: whom they meant to retain with them, as Capital pledges, for the
good abearance of the residue.

The Duke of Wirtemberg making toward them; they countermarch to Knitlingen,
The Administrator of Wirtemberg, seeing the danger now so near him, ( Bretten
being within 4 English miles of his frontiers) knew there was no way to avoid
the storm, but by making a hole in it. Drawing, thereupon 8000 armed men unto
that side of the country, he resolves to fall upon the Imperialists. But this
they prevented: for no sooner heard they of the Dukes coming; but forbearing
to advance any further to the Northward into the Palatinate; they call off
their troops from that haunt, and hunt-counter with them. Back again to
Knitlingen they go; 3 English miles from Bretten: where hearing, by this time,
that the Administrator was not so near them as they expected; they resolve to
have a bout with this Knitlingen. Covertly, therefore, and out of ambush laid
there in the night time, sending some of theirs to seize upon one of the city
gates: they present their Army before the walls, to second them. The Port
being gained, the townsmen, and some country people gotten in thither for
shelter; make toward the gate to regaine it. But there was Monte-Cuculi too
hard for them; and there they lost their town to him, and betwixt 300 and 400
of their lives, into the bargain. Lost their town, I say; for the goods of it
being pillaged, fire was put to the 4 corners of it: so that now, a travailer
can hardly find Knitlingen; unless he rakes for it in the ruins.

Thence after a day or 2, forfeare of the Wirtembergers, and so to Rhinehausen.
make they Westward some 10 or 12 miles, unto the Rhineward, putting themselves
there, under the favor of the garrisons of Germersheim and of Vdenheim. Their
chief Quarter thereabouts was at Rhinehausen, about 3 miles from Spiers, and 4
from Vdenheim. where they have a design to recover Spiers.
Here have they a new design to recover Spiers: so that getting together all
the Ponts and Rhine-ships, that they could lay their hands on; they trust to be
in the night let in by their corresponde^ts within, and so to reprise the city.

This, whilst in the beginning of August, they are about; they found the Scene
to become more suddenly varyed, then they expected. For Gustavus Horn being
returned unto Mentz, by the end of Julie; Gustavus Horn advancing into the
Palatinate.
and having intelligence of their recovering of Bretten; and of Metternichs
besieging of Wiseloch: he by the 10 or 11 of August, had rallyed all the forces
he could spare out of the Electorate of Mentz, and the towns along the Rhine;
and was resolved, now, to go out in quest of these Imperialists. His horse,
he first of all passes over the Rhine, by the bridge of Mentz, putting them
upon the Eastern side of the water, next unto the Imperialists. His foot,
advance along the other side, unto Wormbs; and are there passed over the Rhine,
unto their Horsemen. The appointed Rendezvous, was at Manheim: 12 English miles
from Spiers, encamps a while at Manheim.
and 16 from Wiseloch. Under favor of this strong town, and the Neccars
meeting there with the Rhine, Horn for a while encampeth. His purpose in it
was, that he might learn out by his espyalls (now every where sent abroad)
what was the state of the Wirtembergers army, the countenance of Metternichs
before Wiseloch; and the posture of Monte-Cuculi. Of Wirtemberg he heard, that
he was ready to second him, and that he lay, in the mean time, at his
close-ward, keeping his eye still, upon the point of Monte-Cuculi.

Of Wiseloch, he learned thus much, that Metternich, Governor of Heidleberg,
and Lamulius, (or la Mulie, as others write him) Governor of Vdenheim (as I
take it) had put their strengths together, to attack it. That Captain Rosberg
having been first sent thither about the 16 of Julie; had first summoned it,
and then presented them his Canon. That upon the towns refusal to render, The
story of the siege of Wiseloch.
the 2 Governors aforesaid, had round begirt them with their garrisons, and
ever since, continued to besiege them. That Colonel Strasburger had been
surprised near unto Heidleberg; and slain in his own defense, by Metternich:
who embaulming the dead Colonel, sent his body to the Governor of Mentz, to
be redeemed with the exchange of some Imperial prisoners: sending him word
withal, that money went hard with him; that his oil was dear, and that his
men had taken a great deal of pains about him, That Metternich had lately
received some small seconds, from Monte-Cuculi; had sore pressed the besieged,
and was already gotten so near the walls, that they could heave in
hand-Granadoes into the town, and shoot in other artificial wild fire.

Upon this news, Horn marches to the releife of it: Metternich, upon Horns
coming, raises his siege.
but Metternich getting intelligence of his coming needed not be bidden go;
for that he the 15 of August, in all have raised his siege, made all speed
possible to recover into Heidleberg. It so chanced that some few hours before
that Mitternich had received tidings of Gustavus Horns coming, he had
dispatched a trusty Officer of his Army, (a Corporal) accompanied with 6
Horsemen, with letters unto Ossa and Monte-Cuculi, to give them news of Horns
coming, and to desire this their last succors, with which he believed, to
take in the town, before it could be releived. Horn came so suddenly upon
Metternich at his rising, that the Swedish Vant-curriers had already surprised
some of those laggs, that had not made so much have as they should, into
Heidleberg. Some out-riders of the Swedes, had light upon Metternichs Corporal
likewise, as he was now coming home again, from Monte-Cuculi. The letters
found about him, discovered thus much: that the next day, (being the 16 of
August) he would send some good troops, to reenforce the siege of Wiseloch. A
flying report, after the dispatch of the Corporal, was (I know not which way)
brought unto the 2 Imperial Generals, that Metternich had already taken in
Wiseloch, but was himself by the sudden coming of some Swedish, again
besieged in the place. This false report, caused them to send the very flower
of their Cavallerie, to disengage Metternich.

Gustavus Horn having by the Corporalls letters understood, that Monte-Cuculi
the next day, would send some succors unto Metternich, (though this latter
circumstance he understood not) resolved to prevent their ever coming to him.
And whereas there was a place of Covert near the Highwaies side betwixt
Rhinehausen (whence the Imperialists were to come) and Wiseloch: the shadines
of that place did Horn make choice of, to dress his ambush in; out of which he
meant to fall upon the others, as they were bypassing.

Monte Cuculi sending 1000 Horse toward Wiseloch.
The next day came there a full thousand Horsemen along, of the very flower of
the Imperial Army; lead by Colonel Vitzthumb (a Colonel of Elsas Zabern, as
I take it) and the Colonel Montbaillon: who had the Reere of them. Their own
strength, and the mis-intelligence of their enemies posture, whom they had
thought to have surprised at the siege of Wiseloch; made them advance with so
much the more speed, and security. Horn had so ordered it at first, that they
should pass along by the place where his horse lay, unto the Post where his
Foot were lodged; that so he might have gotten them into the middle of him. But
perceiving, they are waylaid by Horn,
when they came something near him, that they struck short down on the tone
side of him; and did not come so right forward, or so close to his ambuscado,
as he expected: he was feign to send out the Rhinegrave with a forlorn hope
of Horse, to engage them to the encounter; whilst he could bring up some
stronger troops to second him. The Rhinegrave was presently upon the Polls of
them: for the Imperialists perceiving so few to come upon them; never doubled,
or so much as mended their march for the matter. Montbaillon (a gallant
Cavalier, as it appeared) drawing out some Curiassiers of Harincourts, for his
seconds: now making a virtue of necessity, leads on some of his own Horse to
confront the Squadron of the Rhinegraves. Montbaillon falling on, lay to it
bravely, fellow soldiers, says he: Vitzthumb, thereupon, bringing up the rest
of the forces. The Swedish Felt-Marshall having made his game, as well as ever
he desired, (which was but to make them fight) brings on some Squadrons of
Horse and Foot upon the front; and others, upon both the flancks, of the
Imperialists. Montbaillon, by this time, perceiving the cards to be pack't
against him; would feign have flung up his game and have been gone toward
Mingelsheim, to the East of Wiseloch. But the Swedish being dealt much the
fairer; would not consent they should go off so, without leaving their stakes
behind them. There was Montbaillon shot dead with a Carabine; and Treilly, his
Leiftenant-Colonel, and defeated.
fell at the same time by him Diverse Rittmasters were there dismounted, and
above 200 of the common soldiers. Vitzthumb escaped a scouring, by his good
Horsemanship, and so did 6 or 700 others. The Swedish had the chase of them,
till they came to Mingelsheim, full 6 English miles from Wiseloch. Diverse of
the fleers having run their horses out of breath, were feign to light on
foot, and run into the woods to hide them: but a bush was not bail good
enough, to hold them from being prisoners. Their Horses, Arms, and Buff-coats,
were good spoil to these that took them: and so was their months means too,
which they were by the Law of Arms, to pay for their ransomes. The prisoners
confessed, that these 1000 Horse, were the very pride of their Army (almost
half of them being Curiassiers and Dragooners) and that the rest, were not
much to be redoubted.

Ossa and Monte-Cuculi having news, by those that escaped, of this soar
defeat, looked for no more courtesy, Monte-Cuculi fleeing over the Rhine;
if they should there expect the Swedes coming: and thereupon they the very
same day, leave their old quarters at Oberhausen and Rhinehausen, and hie them
away toward Vdenheim. The boats which they had before gotten together to
surprise Spiers withal, they were now enforced to convert to another purpose:
to carry, namely, their luggage toward Vdenheim, and there, the selfsame
night and next morning, to waft themselves over the Rhine in them. The next day
August 17 being Friday, comes Gustavus Horn unto Rhinehausen, in pursuit of
his enemies: but there found he none, besides some sick and maimed men, who had
not been able to follow after their fellows. By them did Horn learn, how
their 2 Generals had passed over the Rhine: and being pursued to the bancks of
it by Gustavus Horn;
and the project they had for their many boats, to have taken Spiers city. The
Imperialists staid not upon the further side of the Rhine, near the place
where they had passed it: but hasting along to the Southward by the side of it,
they go immediately toward the fair city of Hagenau in Alsatia, they go to
solicit Hagenaw,
about 10 English miles from Strasburg. This town, they solicit to their
party: but the townsmen liked better to stand upon their own guard, then to
undo themselves, by the chargable entertainment of such guardians. Now do
Ossa and Monte Cuculi solicit the 3 Regiments of Bronckhorst, join forces
with the 3 other Regiments,
Metternich and Roelingen, to come and join with them: which their own
safeties, made the other willing enough to consent unto. The Marquess William
of Baden, now puts his subjects to it, to do their uttermost for their own
safeties: which was for them to take Arms, as many as could be gotten to it
Now does the Commissary Ossa bestirre himself (that was properly his part) to
supply the good towns of Benfeld, and prepare their towns, to be besieged
Schletstat, Colmar, and the rest with garrisons, victuals and ammunition: all
of them looking shortly to be besieged. For these provisions, were the villages
of the Strasburgers harryed.

Nor did they fail of their expectations. For Gustavus Horn sending instantly
to the Magistrates of Strasburg, to desire passage for his Army over the
Rhine, by their bridge: the ill usage of their subjects by Monte-Cuculi, and
the danger themselves should perpetually be in, (nothing being now left them,
but the walls of their own city:) became most prevailing arguments for the
obtaining of the passage. Upon Tuesday, therefore, August 21, is the bridge
freed for the Swedish Felt-Marshall, who with the Rhinegrave Otto Lodowick,
Horn obtaining passage of the Strasburgers:
with 6 Coaches, and 2 troops of Horse in his attendance, came the same day
into the beautiful town of Strasburg: where he was received with the
Towne-Oration, and such a present of Wine, Fish, and Oats: as is accustomably
made unto Princes and Ambassadors. The bridge demanded, is about an English
mile without the town of Strasburg, toward the Palatinate. It is about 3
quarters of an English mile long: the Rhine there entertaining some other
riverets, and they together, making some overflowings, and continued pooles of
water. The bridge is upon wooden Arches; no broader then the length of a
Deale-board; which lie so loose and unfastned upon it, that the citizens have a
saying of their bridge, that if a dog runs along upon the ends of the
boards, he will be gibbetted, or tilted over into the water.

The Swedish Army the next day coming after their General; had not been
very squeamish (that is none of a soldiers sins) in taking what they found in
the Marquisate of Baden, as they had passed through it. Marquess William, had
made himself an active man in these wars, and a furtherer of the
demolishment of Knitlingen. Now therefore do his subjects pay for it: made to
redeem their houses, from the fire, by a ready paying in of their
Contributions. August 22, the Swedish Van of Horse, were passed over the bridge
aforesaid; and so over the river Ill, into the enemy country of the Upper
Alsatia. This Vantgard consisted of 3000 Horse, and some few Regiments of
Footmen. passes his Vantgard over into the Upper Alsatia.
In the Rhinegraves Regiment, were 12 Cornets; in Colonel Islers, 5, Zillart
had but 4, Schavalitzki had 10 there, himself in person being behind, Vrseler
3, besides some troops of Curiassiers of the Generals, and 2 Ensigns of
Dragooners: in all, about some 36 or 37 Cornets. They drew 12 pieces of
ordnance (besides field-peeces) along with them, and the chief of all the
baggage and provisions for their whole Army.

The rest of the horse, were behind with the gross of the Foot, unto which,
diverse troops of the Wirtembergers, under the leading of Colonel Helmstat,
were by this time conjoined. This Reere, (consisting of 6000 Foot, besides
Horse) was brought up by Colonel Christofer Haubald, Governor of Wormbs; who
as it appears, was Leiftenant general of the Foot unto his Excellence the
Felt-Marshall; as the Rhinegrave was over the Horse. The Imperialists had no
certain Army in the field at that time, but dispersed themselves round about
Brisach, Schletstat, Colmar, Obernheim, and Hagenaw.

Haubald had commission from his General, to take in Stolhoven, leaving
Haubald behind with the Foot, to take in Stolhoven.
by the way: an indifferent strong town of Marquess William of Badens; upon
the East, and contrary side of the Rhine from Strasburg, and about 14 English
miles from it. Summons being given and refused, the approaches are begun, and
the Batteries. Haubald gave such free fire upon the town, that not a man,
scarcely, durst appear upon the Bullwarke. The defendants having lost all
their outworks, and their breach being almost saultable: were said to have
hung out a white flagge, in sign of parlee. Shooting being thereupon, given
over, hostages sent into the town to treat, and the Swedish before the walls
upon confidence thereof, roaving up and down too carelessly without their own
Covert, and within the command of the town ordnance; had a volley, all on the
sudden, sent in amongst the thickest of them. There, were diverse both killed
and spoiled; and Colonel Schavalitzi had his horse shot under him. Haubald
perceiving this treachery, sends to demand his hostages again, and to bid
them look to themselves, for he would be bobd with no more parlies from them.
Commanding all his Batteries, therefore, to give them another general Salve:
the terror of that wrought such a repentance in the townsmen, that they hang
out their white flag again, and send out their wives and children to beg
mercy of the Swedish. This was against the mind of the Governor, which
service Haubald having done,
John Philip Schawenburg, (Sergeant Major General unto Monte-Cuculi) and those
Lorrayners and Italians, that were of the garrison: he, having been before
over-wrought by the inhabitants to the parlie, had been again provoked by the
Lorrainers and Italians, to thunder out this second defiance: and now again
enforced by all this feminine importunity, to condescend unto a final
yielding. He, therefore, with those that had been against surrendering, was
kept prisoner, by Haubald: the Germane soldiers finding good quarter, upon the
usual condition of taking entertainment with the conquerors. Here did Haubald
find 4 great pieces of Canon, and 50 double Muskets, as they call them. Small
store of ammunition, was there to be had: the great want of which necessaries,
was the cause of the soon yielding: though Schawenburg, like a brave enemy,
made countenance to the contrary.

Stolhoven being in this manner taken in; passes his Army over the Rhine to
his General.
Haubald thence advances toward Strasburg: and there with 12 pieces of
ordnance, besides fielding-peeces; passes the bridge over to his General: who
had before this time, blockt up the strong town of Benfeld.

Leaving both them, thus employed: turn we aside, a little, unto their
neighbor and Confederate, The actions of Wirtemberg.
the Administrator of Wirtemberg; who is presently to come into these parts and
into our Story. He, in the mean time, (that is, since that Ossa and
Monte-Cuculi had been taken up with Gustavus Horn) had presently upon that,
withdrawn his Army from his frontiers next to Bretten and Knitlingen; where,
we told you, he had in the end of July and beginning of August, waited upon
Monte-Cuculi. Thence goes the Administrator more inwardly into his own
country, to the Southward; and along the Western bancke of the river Neckar.
There, toward the middle of August, takes he in Rotenburg, 6 English miles
from Tubingen. who having taken in Rotenberg and Horbe,
A little after this, he recovers the good town of Horbe; 10 miles up the same
river, and same side of it. Both these, were on the nearest frontiers (almost)
of the Dukedom; next unto those parts, where Horns wars now lay; and by
taking of them, was the midway betwixt both their forces, made the cleerer; and
they the nearer together to conjoyne them. This done, and the Administrator
having notice of the taking of Stolhoven; some few of his, being now sent (by
order from the King of Sweden) to augment the garrison of Ausburg: he sends the
greater part of his Army over the mountains, through the rich and pleasant
Kintzkher thale (commonly called the Kintzinger dale) which the river Kintzkh
both waters and names. Some Swedish troops had been left behind, on that
side the Rhine, about Stolhoven, to re-enforce these Wirtembergers: and their
design now was, upon the Imperial city of Offenburg, upon the said river
Kintzkh; now comes and besieges Offenburg.
about 10 English miles from Strasburg. This was the agreement betwixt the
Administrator and the Swedish Felt-Marshall: to give action to the
Imperialists, on both sides of the Rhine, at one instant; that they might not
well know, which way next to turn them. But of this siege, presently; and in
the order of time, that it ought to be.

We left Haubald, even now, passing over the Rhine-streame. That done, and he
advancing to the South-westward, by St. Arbogast and Nidernheim: the Imperial
garrison of Obernheim, a little beyond Benfeld; avoid out of it before his
coming. But the townsmen taking themselves to be more interessed in the
keeping of their own, then the mercenary soldiers: put on a resolution in
their State-house, to defend themselves against the Swedish. But for all their
big words, after they had been once beaten in, upon a slight sallie which
they made, Haubald besieges Obernheim;
to hinder the Swedish Approches; and that they heard the Canon bullets rattling
a little among the tiles of their houses: the good men suffered themselves to
be persuaded by their wives and daughters, to make but a money matter of it,
and to hearken to a parlie. The townsmen, which is yielded to him.
thereupon, being used to driving of bargains, more then to driving away their
enemies; now bargain for their liberties: and 10000 Dollars they paid for it.

Whilst this is a doing about the end of August, the Wirtembergers assisted by
some Swedish, are at the siege of Offenburg. Summons being given; the citizens
having first obtained a little respite, to consider of it; seem desirous to
enter into a Parlie. This was but a trick of theirs, to gain time withal:
seeing they were assured to be relieved from Monte-Cuculi, if there were any
port yet open, by which to receive the succors into their city. The
Wirtembergers thinking all their own; were not so careful, either to surround
the city; or to have their Sentinells and espialls abroad, as they ought to
have been: By this negligence of theirs, 3^0 Imperialists thrusting themselves
into the city; the townsmen break off their Parlie, The Wirtembergers
besieging Offenburg;
and let fly their ordnance among the Wirtembergers. Here was Colonel
Iagermaister slain; with diverse others of the Wirtemberger Officers. The
besiegers finding the besieged to plie them hard with sallies; to beat them
out of their Approaches; and to fill up their Lines, by flinging in the earth
again: were feign, directly, to send for Gustavus Horn to come and help them.
Thither came he in person, with some re-enforcements. By his strength, and
skill, and diligence; the lines in 4 or 5 days were perfected, Batteries, and
wide breaches made; and ladders gotten ready, for the Scalado. The garrison
and citizens perceiving this; they, to begin the month, and end the week
withal, Are feign to send for Gustavus Horn to help them:
Saturday September the first (old Style) sent out to treat the conditions of
surrendering. They are granted upon indifferent terms unto the garrison:
whereupon the next day, September the 2, 300 soldiers on foot, and 120 on
horseback, march forth freely out of the town, to him that sent them. Monday
and Tuesday were the days appointed for the treating with the townsmen: who
for having dealt so treacherously with the Wirtembergers, were compelled,
first, By whom the town is taken.
to redeem themselves with 20000 Dollars: and 2, to prevent their
correspondencie with the Imperialists, was there a garrison of 500 men put upon
them. 3 Their suburbs which themselves had partly burnt down, and partly
beaten down, for the fortifying of their town, were they made promise, not to
build up again, for ever. 4. They were to take an oath of homage to become
hereditarie subjects unto the Crown of Sweden. 5. and lastly, to be forbidden
meddling with any Arms, for ever Here was found an excellently well furnished
Magazine; both for victuals, Guns, and ammunition: which well helped Gustavus
Horn to beat all the rest of the country. Whilst these conditions are a
treating, the Army had given summons to the strong and well provided Castle of
Ortenburg; Ortenburg Castle surrendered.
the chief strength of the Kintzinger-dale aforesaid, which (to be brief) was
feign to follow the example of its predecessors, and to resign up it self on
wednesday the 5 of September.

By the taking of these 2 most important places, was the town of Brisach quite
foundered: which though full 30 English miles, from this Offenburg; yet it
being upon the same side of the Rhine with it; there was never a considerable
strength between, to shelter it. Hereabouts, had Monte-Cuculi all this while
lain: as if to give aim to the losing of the Country. Ossa and Monte Cuculi,
avoid the country
The Swedish Army now making that way; both he and the Commissary Ossa, (not
able to abide their coming) are feign to depart the Country. Ossa (as I
find) went first of all toward Nancy in Loraine, or else to Bisanson in
Burgundy; to leave his Lady there, in a place of security: presently returning
over the Rhine again, into Schwabland. Monte-Cuculi resigning his Generalship,
in those parts, unto Marquess William of Baden; adventures with some troops
of Horse, especially, to brush through the Eastern skirts of the Duchy of
Wirtemberg, and so to Kempten in the very edge of Schwabland; and to get that
way into Bavaria. Thereabouts (as I find) had Sir Patrick Ruthven a blow at
him: being said to kill him 300 men, and to take 150 prisoners. Thus, with much
ado, gets he over the Lech about Schonga and Fuessen: and in Bavaria you have
before heard of him, in the Kings story.

The coast being thus cleared of the Imperialists; there was not a foe, in the
field, to make opposition against the Swedish or the Wirtembergs. The Earldom
of Furstemberg, taken.
Hereupon, is the fair Kintzinger-dale brought under Swedish contribution: and
in it, the inheritance of Eggon Count of Furstemberg, who, as in our First Part
we have often told you, was sometimes the Emperors great General, in this
Circle of Swevia. How he had resigned his Generalship, and retired into a
privacie; you may see Page 119, and 220, of our Second Part. In what estate,
the country and himself were now in; it is best knowing out of his own
Letters, written unto James Hannibal, Count of Ems: which were by the way
intercepted.

MY LORD:
I Yesterday received a Letter from the Marquess William of Baden: and the sad
news in it, Furstenbergs letter, and complaint.
of the falling of the Marshall Horn with 10000 men, into his Marquisate. That
also he had required 300000 Florens from him, in present payment; and a place
of Rendezvous, for 4 fresh Regiments. I am very sorry to see him made a beggar
as I my self am; though otherwise, there be no comparison betwixt us: he
having received at the Emperors hands so brave and good a country, as is his
Marquisate; whilst I, for mine own part, have neither master nor money. Thus
am not I able to help him; nor he me; nor you either of us. I had before spent
almost all I had, in these wars; and now am I utterly ruined of the residue.
And thus much could I not but give you part of, that you might help to condole
with us.

Your LOPS. true friend and servant, Eggon Count of Furstenburg.
Heyligenburg September. 8. 1632.

THis conquest, was felt as far as the Count of Hanaw-Lichtenbergs
possessions: all the Lords and Gentlemen on that side the Rhine, being likewise
made sensible of it. The Kintzinger-dale was again opened for the
Strasburgers; The advantage of these Conquests.
and the way quite cut off from the Imperialists, that no succors could pass
from Schwabland or Italy. By this conquest, was all clear again from
Strasburg unto Kitzingen in Franconia, to the North-Eastward: to Rotweil upon
the Neckar in Schwabland, to the South-Eastward: on the 3 side, unto Vdenheim
in the Palatinate; and on the 4 side quite through the Hercinian forest or the
Swartz-walt into Bavaria. All this, was by these conquests, put into the power
of the King of Sweden. Some say, that the grief of of this news, added some
speeding malignity, unto the Arch Duke Leopolds infirmities: which Prince, now
lying for his pleasure at Swatz in Tirole; The Archduke Leopold dies,
was unexpectedly (and after much hunting) taken with a Catarrhe in his head,
which fell down and put one of his eyes out: which being followed with a
flux, and a continual fever; in few days made an end of him. He dyed
September 13, at which time, his Imperial Majesty, likewise, was most
unprincely handled, by an unmannerly and rebellious Quartan ague. and the
Emperor is sick of a Quartane.
The Archduke dyed in an ill time: seeing, at this instant, his own Estates,
laid open to the prey: his family, all embroyled; his Allies, much ado to
subsist; his fair hopes, blasted; his great designs, returned upon himself;
his enemies, beginning apace to be many; and his friends, few; his neighbors,
not much to be relied on; for that, they began to recall the bad
remembrances, of ancient and forepassed jealousies and mis-intelligences. In
this ill time, dyed the Archduke: who had he lived but 2 months longer; would
well have cheered up himself, with the death of the King of Sweden. Presently
after the death of this Leopold; his Counselors take care for the ensuring of
the passages of his country of Tirole: and confirm Marquess William in his
Generallship, against Gustavus Horn: helping to make him up an Army of 4000
men, with which he kept himself about Ensisheim.

To return to our Swedish Felt-Marshall. The country on that side of the
Rhine being thus ranged into order; the selfsame Wednesday night, that
Ortenburg castle was taken upon; did Gustavus Horn with certain of his
troops, Horn returns to Strasburg:
both Horse and Foot, pass Strasburg bridge again: himself lodging the same
night within the city. His forces went to their old quarters again, beyond
the river Ill: whither a little after that, the rest of his Army followed. The
Wirtembergers returned into their own Country, first; and so toward the
Bodensee; and that to divert the Imperialists from disturbing Horn at his siege
of Benfelt; as by and by we shall tell you On Thursday, September 6. did Count
Henry of Nassau Dillingberg, come and join his Regiment, unto the Swedish
Army. Friday, the 7 of September, being the Anniversarie day of the famous
victory of Leipsich; was a day of devotion both in the Camp and City: to the
celebrating whereof, the Lord-Marshall was himself gone into his leaguer.
There were Prayers added unto the Thanksgiving; going thence, to the siege of
Benfelt.
for the prospering of the design intended; and that was the siege of Benfelt:
which by an Express, the same evening his Excellency certified the
Strasburgers of: and that he would the next morning, put himself upon his
march, thitherward.

The place, is in the lower Alsatia, which there begins: and on the Western
banck of the river Ill; which having run 12 or 14 English miles further,
through Strasburg, drops presently into the Rhine. East of the town, (which is
but a very small one) is the river. The place of the town, is by a morasse:
the river there, branching out, into at least 20 small Ilets. Before it, is
there a hilly and a woodie country. The City of Strasburg, had some
pretenses to it; The town described.
and it now was a troublesome neighbor unto it: that, holding for Prince
Rodolfe William Bishop of Strasburg, second son unto his Imperial Majesty.
It Is a royal fortification and a regular: in form of a spur or Mullet, 5
cornered. The walls, strongly beset with towers, and rundells: the Bulwarks,
thick and high: with two wett ditches about them; and on the East side, a
little Suburb, washed by the river. All this, was very strongly pallisadoed,
with some outworks to it.

A worck is was said to be, of well near 20 years fortification. Count Herman
Adolph Count of Salm Rifferschet, Statholder or Governor of the Bishopric of
Strasburg (in which Benfelt stands) and Deane of the same Strasburg: The
Rhinegrave is of this Family of Salm.
had excellently well provided it, of victuals and ammunition: some pieces of
full Canon, had they upon their Bullwarcks; which shot 48 pound bullet. Their
garrison, was about 800 Foot, and 140 horse: some of their Foot, being sturdie
Boores, which there learned to be soldiers. Their Governor was one Colonel
Bulach, a discreet Gentleman, and a very resolute Commander.

Saturday September the eight, did his Excellency Gustavus Horn advance
thitherward. That very night, did his vantguard take in some Mills, with the
Hospital or cloister on the North side of the river (which betwixt that and
the town, had many great Ilets and branches) cutting off, and beating in, some
of these townsmen, that had undertaken the guard of them. Monday September the
tenth, began Horn to plant his Ordnance, The siege laid
which I hear to be 3 whole Canons, 4 half Canons, 12 fielding pieces, and 4
mortars. And now was he engaged upon a hard piece of service, and all eyes were
fixed upon the issue of it. Horns head Quarter, was upon the western bancke of
the river, and North side of the town: and on that side he begun his
Approaches. His trenches went round from North to South The defendants (it was
known) were resolved to dispute it, and the Swedes had here pitched themselves
upon their hopes, for the command of the whole Bishopric of Strasburg, and for
the Lordship of all the neighbor Alsatia. The Strasburgers were deeply
interessed in the success of the Action; for besides that Benfelt was the
great hinderer of their traffic; they, by their giving passage unto Gustavus
Horn, had committed such an act of enmity against the Emperor, as they must
now do like a sick man; not take so weak a Dos of Physic, as should be but
able to stir the humors; but a potion strong enough to expel them. If Horn
prevailed not before Benfelt, the weight of the wars would, certainly, fall
heavy on their side. Horn, therefore, knew well enough, that all their
Magazins and their Armories, were at his devotion. Thus was he backed.

Ossa, and the Count of Salm, then resident in Zabern (a good soldier) with
Metternich of Heidleberg; had all engaged their words, that Bulach should be
relieved: and to cut out Horn so much work, otherwhere, by their diversions;
that he should never be able to lie long before Benfelt. And thus was the town
backed: so that it was a siege of the greatest expectation (though not of so
much noise) next unto that of Maestricht; that has been in these latter
troubles. The quiet of the Palatinate, the security and profit of the
Strasburgers, and the Conquest of Alsatia; much depended upon Benfelt.

By September the twelfth, were the Swedish masters of the Toll-Sconce on the
East side of the town, a good distance from it, and upon the third branch of
the river. This sconce had the command of the Bridges over the river Ill: and
over the Causey which led thence into the Suburb. By the taking of this, was
the river it self also at their devotion. By the thirteenth, were they
Approached within 30 Rodd of the outtermost Graff: and under the command of the
enemies Canon. Horns lines first brake ground, midway betwixt his own Head
quarter and the town: which he led cranckling in and out, gaining still nearer
and nearer upon the town. They were run sloaping along the north side of the
town and so ended right against a Bulwark, on the very West of it. All along
this Trench, were his Batteries, Blinds, Traverses: and Redoubts, to watch and
save the Approaches: and out of this, was begun another lesser line, from a
great battery.

This lesser and nearer Approach, was run all along the Northwesterne side of
the town, in a half Circle, just as the town ditch directed it: of which it
was within a few paces. At the westerly end of this lesser Approach, was the
Ditch cut and drained: and there was the Callerie led over: of which we shall
in its time, tell you. Horn beginning his Approaches, has his Pyoners beaten
out, now and then, by the townsmens sallies; who flung the earth in again into
the Trenches. And this was done often, for, certainly the place was very well
defended. Ever as Horn brought his Lines nearer, he also brought forward his
Batteries. Strasburg sent him supplies of Canon, Grenades, Fireworks, and
Ammunition, (and victuals too) as much as he desired: so that he was nothing
sparing of his lead nor gunpowder. The most of those buildings which a Canonier
could have but a clear view of, from off his Battery, he beat about the
townsmens ears: steeples, towers and rundells, as well as houses. For the
fury of the great and small shot, and the terror of the Fire-workes (which
had twice already, set fire upon some Courts of Guard, Centry-houses and
stables, next unto the rampires:) was no man (without extreme hazard) able to
appear upon the Bullwarke: so that though the town kept some pieces of Canon
yet undismounted upon their wall, yet hardly durst a Canonier tarry by them,
unless when the rampire were to be assaulted. A trial of this, was made
September 13, whenas 30 Swedish Horsemen made a dare, close up to the very
brinck of the outtermost moate, and came off again without danger.

Horn by the middle of the month, having gotten forward, as far as the
outtermost wet-moate, had a design for the cutting of that, and to derive the
water out of it into the river. To hinder that, do the besieged issue through
a sally-port; and resolutely beat off the Boores that were Horns spade men,
and the soldiers that defended them. Yet was that service by degrees performed;
The first mo^^ won.
and so much of the water drained out, as lay higher then the river. The rest
was partly filled up, where needful: and Horn being now gotten to the Suburb
(which the townsmen partly had demolished, and Horns Fireworkes consumed) made
use of the rubbish for filling up the moate; and of the timberwork, for the
making and bringing over his Gallerie. September 26 in the night, was the
Gallerie begun to be put over the moate: upon which, though the besieged
sallyed, yet were they persuaded in again; and the Gallerie after a while
perfected. These military Galleries, are in the manner of B^idges: made upon
Piles fastened into the ground, and joyse (...) ^^osse over them and plancks
over all, like a Bridgework. Now were his men lodged in this slighted Suburb;
which was some shelter to them: and hence, was every Orlope or peeping hole of
the wall so flanckerd with their Firelocks, that hardly could a head appear
out of the town, or over a work, but he was dashed in the teeth with a bullet.
Horns next work, was to make up a great Blind, for the shelter of his
Enginiers and laborers: who were now working toward the second Graffe, close
under the Bullwarke September 29, did the Strasburgers furnish him with 4 more
Canon, for a new Battery upon his Approaches: so that under the favor of
these volleyes, did he in a short time in crooked lines, advance as far as
that second Graffe: the bancks whereof they now fall to cutting. Do the
Benfelders what they can, by their sallyes; yet, they within a few days, lost
half the water out of that moate too: the Swedish were well forward with their
second gallerie; and lodged on another side, within a few paces of their
Foretowne. The second moate won.
This was the work of the first month: by which time the Swedes were become
Masters of the river, the Tolskonce, the Bridge, both the moats, the Suburbs,
and finally of all without the walls and ports of the very city.

Monday October the eighth, the Swedes thinking to make a short work of it:
made a furious assault upon the Forecitie: but being not able to carry it by
Scaladoe, they were feign, Diverse assalts repulsed.
with some loss, to give it over. And yet this attempt was once or twice
renewed in the week following: and the besieged kept waking by the expectation
of an Alarm, every day. The Saturday after, being the thirteenth of October,
the besieged, toward evening, desired a parlee, that they might have a truce
granted for a few days; requesting a safe conduct for their Drum, to be sent
unto the General. He not liking the propositions; no sooner was the Drum
received into the town again: but he commanded a rouzing volley to be sent in
after him: The beseiged desire a truce which is denied them.
to signify unto the besieged, that no other cessation of Arms was to be
expected; but till his Canoniers could lade their pieces again, when they had
discharged them.

The Count of Salm that was Governor for the Emperors Son, of his Bishopric
of Strasburg, to which this Benfelt belongs; wrote his letters unto the
French Ambassador at Strasburg, to request his mediation for a truce for
Benfelt. The color for his request was, that the truce might last till the
French Kings pleasure might be known, upon what terms he would take the
Bishopric into his protection. But neither would this be granted: and the
denial was sent to Zabern, 9 or 10 miles from Strasburg, where Salm resided.

Presently after the leaguer was first laid, and the Quarters entrenched: The
Rhinegrave blocks up Schletstat.
had the Rhinegrave been sent out with the most of the Horse, to block up
Schletstat; a very strong town upon the same river of Ill, some 8 or 9 English
miles to the Southwest of Benfelt. His Partees flew up and down the country,
to spoil the Imperialists mustering places; to observe the motions of the
enemy: and to prevent their sudden disturbing of the leaguer. He had sent
word, a little before this, unto the Felt-Marshall; of the Count of Salms
assembling of some good forces together, on that side the Country: and that
they had given it out, how they would shortly give the Swedish a Camisado in
their own trenches: being very confident of beating up a quarter, and of
thrusting in some supplies into the besieged. Horn upon news hereof, had sent
into the Palatinate and to the Strasburgers; that they should lighten their
garrisons (as many as they could spare) and send the forces to his leaguer,
with all speed possible. Upon this, did the Count of Solms, and the Colonel
Smidberger come into the Camp, with their Regiments.

Monday October 15, toward evening; An offer to relieve the town
Count Salm first showed himself, within a little of the Trenches: with some
4000 Boores, 2000 soldiers, and 600 Horse, in his Army. Whilst Horn sent out
some good troops to entertain and stave them off; the besieged fall also out,
upon a work of the Swedish. But the Count of Salms Boores, plainly, came not
on with that bravery that soldiers would have done, nor did they once touch
upon any one of Horns Quarters: so that the besieged perceiving their Aides to
press no nearer, they fall off again, and withdraw themselves into their
City. Salms his men also, after some lighter skirmishes, retire themselves
into the Dorps toward Schletstat; which next morning they fire at parting.
That day, out went the Rhinegrave Lodowick, with a Partee of 500 Dragooners,
500 Horse, and 1000 commanded musketeers; to try what metal they were made
of. He lighting on them by the flame and smoke, which they made in the
Country; kills 300 of them as they were scattered up and down, and takes
about 150 prisoners: whereupon the most of the rest retired unto Molsheim on
the river Brusch, 10 miles North of Benfelt: which was the appointed Rendezvous
for them.

The defeat of these succors, and the hopes of them: is put by.
made his Excellencies and the Rhinegraves Healths, to be heartily remembered at
Strasburg; for that now they esteemed Benfelt as good as taken. But the Count
of Salm said not so: for he gave it out, that he but recoild to come on again
with more fury, and that the next time he would bring 10^00 men with him: yea,
that he would either leave his bones before Benfelt, or relieve it. The
garrisons of Heidleberg, Franckendale and Vdenheim, it was given out, should make
diversions: The King of Bohemia comes to Franckfort.
but that threat was quickly taken off, by the coming of the King of Bohemia
unto Franckeford: who though he levied no forces, yet did he much amuse the
neighborhood, with the belief of his purpose to do so. As for those of
Franckendale, the Benfelders hopes of their aid was defeated, by his Majesty
of Bohemiaes entering into a Treaty with them. For all this, the Count of Salm
divulged it, that all the Imperial garrisons of Brisach, Kenzingen, Endingen,
Molsheim, Dachstein, Schirmeck, Schletstat and Colmar; even all the power they
could make, they would rallie together into one Army, and put it to such a
push, as either to hazard all their towns, or relieve Benfelt. These hopes
found he means to convey into the town, which Bulach had art enough by great
circumstances to make probable: and upon hope of that, to keep his men in
courage and expectation. The Count of Salm indeed, after this, showed himself
in the field now and then, but could never bring his 10000 men together.
Commissary Ossa had now need of men about the Lake of Constantz, so that he
could spare him no forces to succor Benfelt.

This was Ossa put unto, by the Duke of Wirtemberg: who had purposely made this
diversion upon those parts, that Horn might have the less disturbance before
Benfelt. There had the Wirtembergers gotten the townsmen of Cell, The
Wirtembergers take towns about the Lake of Constaniz.
to take in a garrison from them; which they had before denied unto Ossa. This
was a town of very great importance. Richenau Abbey upon the Lake, they had by
force, taken, for they were 10000 men, now in the field: and Lindau and
Bregentz both, were sorely afraid of them.

Nearer home, did the Rhinegraves troops skowre the coast up and down, daily,
making their Cavalcadces sometimes to the very gates of Zabern it self, one
way; and otherwayse, as far along the Rhines side as Brisach: there
affronting the Imperial Quarters: who before Brisach had a few forces. Those
of Brisach again, would now and then put into the field: The Count of Salm
also would send out some Partees; but the Rhinegrave put so between them, and
so spoiled their mustering places: that they could never bring their Army
together, according as they had promised.

The besieged, by this time, wanting forage for their horses, they about
October 20, The state and hopes of the besieged.
turn 100 horses out of their port among the Swedish: and even yet they held
it out resolutely. Their hope now was, that the raines at this time of the
year, would fill the Ditches and Mines up again, which Horn was now a
working: but that hope failed them. His Galleries being now perfected; he a few
days after, causes the enemies walls to be attempted, if but to see what
countenance the besieged still carried. They beat off an assault.
But those he found so good, that his men were beaten off again: one of his
soldiers only having snatched down an Ensign from the Rampant, in despite of
all the small shot of the defendants, purposely aimed upon him. By this time,
was Gustavus Horns Army more increased, then when he first sat down before
Benfeldt: and that especially and of late, by the coming of Battalie a French
Colonel, with 600 men: which he hoped to make up a Regiment complete, out of
those forces which his King had a little before casheired in Lorraine.

By the 25, had Horn sapt himself, close unto the Rampire, and by the 26,
(notwithstanding all Countermining) had he brought his mine under it, put in
his powder, and made it ready to play. The 27, he prepared all things ready to
storm into the Breach, which upon the springing of the mine he infallibly
expected. That morning, did Governor Bulach send out a Trumpet with open
letters in his hand; which he desired leave of the Felt Marshall to carry to
the Governor of the Bishopric of Strasburg, then at Zabern: to discover the
weak estate of the town to him, and to desire him to propound the conditions
for his rendering: requesting a 3 days truce in the mean time, till the
return of the messenger. But this message was by Gustavus Horn, controlled;
The last assault.
and the Trumpet sent back again. Toward night, do the Swedish resolve upon
the firing of their mine: which the besieged perceiving; resolutely fall out
upon it, and fight with them at the mines mouth, all that afternoon the whole
night following, and the next day till 2 a clock after dinner. Horn continually
relieved his men, with new seconds: yea his dragooners and Horsemen too, were
on foot brought on, still to pursue the storming. His men were very earnest
with him, that he would accept of no composition, but that they might have
leave to take it by force; and that their reward for all their hardship before
it, might be the pillage of it.

But Bulach having both done and suffered, as much as might be expected from a
man in his place; perceiving his men to be sorely harassed and over-watched;
his enemies forces increased; they backed by Strasburg; and himself not likely
to be relieved from Zabern; that the mine was ready to spring, and the besieged
hasty to fall into the first breach: Benfelt yielded
is contented that some of his people had already hanged out a white Ensign,
in sign of parlie: himself sending out to require hostages. This was done in
the afternoon of Simon and Iudes day, October 28: whereupon the next day, both
parties agreed upon these thirteen conditions.

and the conditions.
1. That the Governor, with all the Captains, Officers, and common soldiers,
should depart freely: going out with Colors flying, drums beating, matches
lighted, bullets in the mouth, and with full Arms. And that they should carry
all their families with them, with horses and wagons sufficient, for the
carrying away of their baggage; that they should have a field pieces, and one
wagons loading of powder, bulletts and matches. That the Governor, moreover,
should with his wife, children, cosins, sisters, and servants with their
baggage, be convoyed into Zabern: and the other Captains and soldiers, to
Brisach: pledges being given on both sides, according to the custom.

2. That the Ecclesiastics and Religious persons, and especially those that
lived in Achle; should have free exercise of religion, as heretofore they have
had: and leave to maintain themselves upon Alms; and as for those that were
resolved to go otherwhere, they should have free leave to go: together with
their goods and soldiers for the guard of them.

3. That the citizens also should have free exercise of the Roman Catholic
religion.

4. Those that were Officers of the Bishopric, should have leave of departing,
likewise, with their goods and families; 2 wagons with their horses, being
allowed them: they first of all delivering unto certain deputies appointed in
the King of Swedens name; their Coucher-bookes and other Records concerning the
estate of the Bishopric: together with a true account of all things hitherto
deposited.

5. The sick and wounded, which were not now able to march out with the rest;
should have leave to tarry in the town, till they were recovered: after which,
they should have Passes, to go whither they desired.

6. That the Governor, Captains, Officers, Soldiers and Citizens, that had any
lands within the Bishopric; should have liberty among the rest who had
yielded themselves into the King of Swedens protection: either to inhabit and
make the best of them, or to sell them, as they pleased.

7. That the Governor, now presently after the rendering, should have a Pass
from Gustavus Horn, for the sending of an Officer with his letters, unto the
Governor General of the Bishopric, to certify him of the proceedings.

8. That none of the privileges, freedoms, jurisdictions, and Rights of City
or Citizens; should be diminished; nor should any ransomes be exacted of them:
but that they should have a protection rather, against any injury that might
be done by the garrison, which was to be put upon them: and that right and
justice might indifferently be administered to every man.

9. That all and singular the citizens now within the town, should have leave
either to sell their goods presently, or within a certain time, when they
could: after which they might freely depart, and take Passes to that purpose.

10. That the Citizens having houses either in the town or Country, should
have leave to till their lands; and enjoy their stocks, horses, cattle, and
other goods serving to that purpose, without ransom.

11. That the prisoners on both sides, should be set free without ransom.

12. That all military ammunition, victuals, and other things, not
particularly belonging unto the Governor, Officers, Soldiers, nor Citizens;
should without fraud be delivered unto such persons, as should be appointed by
the Felt-Marshall.

13. That the yielding of the town, should be at eight a clock the next
morning; and of the Suburbs, before evening. And if the Governor by reason of
some hinderance, could not go in the morning, he should then have leave to
tarry with his family in his own house, till the next morning and the
soldiers, in the Suburbs

Upon these Articles Tuesday October 30, was the town delivered: the Governor
marching out with 400 Foot, and 120 Horsemen. One of his Foot-Captaines and
whole company, turned soldiers to the Swedish. The town thus conquered, was
afterward entrusted over unto those of Strasburg: The town being made over to
the Strasburgers,
by which courtesy, they were not a little strengthened; this strong town,
having, shrewdly heretofore punished them.

It pleased his Highness the Duke of Lorraine, about the end of the next
month; is claimed by the Duke of Lorrain,
to lay some claim unto this town of Benfelt, as also unto Dachstein, (which
the Swedish had by that time taken) and to Zabern. His Commissioners met with
Gustavus Horns, at Marienkerch. His plea was, that he had lent certain monyes
upon them, and that they had thereupon been consigned over to him, for
security. Wherefore he in friendly manner requested, that Benfelt might now be
returned over to him. The Swedish Commissioners gave good words: but as for the
town, they could say nothing to it, till a Diete might be convoked in the
Empire. which is denied him.
In the mean time, they desired the Duke to rest assured, that if he neither
supplied the Emperor with Aides nor Provisions; the Swedes would no way be
injurious unto his Highness lands, or subjects, but help to defend them
rather: should the Emperor, upon pretense of his Highnesses being friend to the
Swedish party, offer to assail them.

Benfelt thus taken, his Excellency the Swedish Feft-Marshall sent the
Rhinegrave to take in Marckelsheim; The Rhinegrave takes Marckelsheim.
a town hard by, defended but by one company of Imperialists. The Rhinegrave
had but a weak Partee as yet with him: the cause, that his summons were gybed
at. The Imperialists told him, he was no customer for them: nor had he
companions enough, to make them afeard of him. It Is ill jeasting with edge tools.
The Rhinegrave, hereupon, sending to Benfelt with all speed for some field
pieces; he the same day, made his entrance into the town, by force and
battery. Here found he but 20 Horsemen, and those he took prisoners: the rest
of them that belonged to the garrison, were gone out that morning to convoy in
a Foot company, which was coming from Colmar to reenforce those of
Marckelsheim. These the Rhinegrave having notice of, way lays, meets withal,
and defeats: bringing the Captain of the Foot-Companie, his Leiftenant, and
all his men, prisoners with him.

Other Swedish Partees severally sent abroad, do at the same time take in all
the best of those small Strengths, that lie along the river of Ill toward
Schletstat-ward or a little beyond it: about 2 or 3 English miles from the
river. These towns were, Epffich, Upper Bercken, Dambach and Kestenholtz;
together with Gemar upon the Ill, a little beyond Schlestat: so that Schletstat
became hereby blocked.

But the chiefest of the Army, and Gustavus Horn with it, advances toward
Molsheim: a good town upon the river Brusch, Horn takes Mutzig, and
about 10 English miles West of Strasburg: and little above that distance North
of Benfelt. Horn causes Mutzig to be first taken, Molsheim.
a pretty town one English mile West of Molsheim, belonging to one Lansperg a
private Gentleman, that had served the Bishop. Molsheim, the fourth of our
November Horn likewise investeth. The town not able to resist, begins to
treat within 2 days: and the very sixth of November, (that fatal sixth of
November, the day that the King of Sweden was slain upon) receives in 3
troops of Swedish Horse, with some Foot-Companies for a garrison. This secured
Strasburg on that side.

Thence turns our Felt-Marshall back unto Schletstat: and that we now relate
unto you. For though our purpose was, to have lead on our Story no further
then the Kings death; Horn turns toward Schletstat.
yet for that there wants but one months work, for the taking of 2 or 3
towns more, in this Alsatia; and consequently, of Gustavus Horns marching up
thence, into Bavaria: we chose rather to transgress upon your patiences, after
the Glasses being out, then to leave the Story of these parts, unperfected.

This Schletstat is a very strong Imperial town, (and the strongest, next to
Benfelt) upon the river of Ill, about nine English miles to the Southeast of
Benfelt. The Jesuits found to be Coniurers and Poysoners.
There is a College of Jesuits in it; and those, famous (or rather infamous)
for the Study of Magic or the Black Art: which some excuse, by the name of
Judicial Astrology. I feign nothing upon them: for so much was at Strasburg
by a novice of theirs, publicly upon his execution day (since Christmas last)
confessed. This young fellow being native of Strasburg was brought up by the
Jesuits of Schletstat; and by them employed, for the poisoning of some chief
men of Strasburg, for which he was executed. He confessed, that all the
Jesuits of the College, (excepting two) were Magicians; and a many of them
Poysoners. And, indeed, both these Arts diabolical, do our Cunning men and
women, in these latter days practice together: that if by one of them, they
shall foretell, the being in love, sickness or death, of any that requires
their counsel; they may by the Figgs, and Philters and Potions of their other
Art, endanger to make good their prediction. Nor are these feats only
practiced by the Jesuits, in their College of Schletstat; but in other places
too, as the world believes. These Arts, and lying, confute stronglier, then
all their School Divinity. Murder will out; but these, I leave till their
discoveries.

This Schletstat, though as strong as the Devil could make it; was not able a
month together to resist the Arms of Justice, and a good cause, that were now
brought against it. Schletstat besieged.
Leiftenant Colonel Breitenbach defended it: who had two troops of Horse and
600 Musketeers of Colonel Metternichs Regiment; which we heretofore told you
to have comne from out of Cullens country, into the Strasburgers Jurisdiction.
I purposely omit to relate the order of the siege laying, the manner of the
Approaches, or the sallyes of the besieged: minding to tell you of what
strength the Imperialists were still in these parts, and what endeavors they
now made, to deliver this and Colmar; which Gustavus Horn caused at the same
time to be blocked, that he sat down to Schletstat.

By this time was Monte-Cuculi gone through Schwabland into Bavaria: and
Commissarie Ossa had his hands full about the Lake of Constantz; so that the
Generalship in these parts of Alsatia, was again made over to Marquess
William of Baden: and he now the second time again appeared, after the
spoiling of his country. The Marquesses troops, were commanded by Major
Ascanio; and sent to lie at Ensisheim, a town upon the river Ill, 12 English
miles South of Colmar, where the Chamber and Judgment seat is, for the
Marckraviate of the Upper Alsatia. Some few Imperialists, lay also encamped at
Brisach upon the Eastern bancke of the river Rhine, due East of Colmar and 12
miles from it. To these, were some Foot-Companies to be conjoined, out of
Lorraine; whose levying for the Emperors service, the Duke had there given way
unto. To take on these Lorrainers, do 12 Cornets of the Brisachers Horse, upon
the sixteenth of November pass over their Bridge to the Westward; to meet the
other, coming out of their own Country. Ascanioes men, were by that time
comne from Ensisheim unto H. Crux a town within 5 English miles of Colmar. The
Imperialists gathering together to relieve Schletstat.
And these were about 18 Cornets more, (besides Foot:) all resolved to affront
Horns Quartiers, and to attempt the relieving, at least of Colmar. The
Rhinegrave Otto Lodowick, having notice of the Brisachers being abroad; he
with 3 Regiments flies in upon the necks of them: kills, takes, and disperses
them; scarce 100 of them recovering with safety unto Brisach. Seven Ensigns
took he from them: and that he might pursue the victory, before Ascanioes men
should have notice of his being so near, he falls upon his Quarters about
Heiligen Crux aforesaid. These taking the route, at the first charge; fled with
all speed toward Ensisheim. Being come to Wittenen hard by Ensisheim; they
began there to unbridle and disperse, thinking themselves there, in a good
place of security. But the Rhinegrave having pursued them upon the spur;
hembd them in upon the sudden, set fire upon the 4 corners of the town, to
fire and smoke out the Imperialists. Of these, as they came without order, and
at several places running out; were 300 knocked down upon the place: and among
them, 2 Barons of Reiffenberg, Leiftenant Colonel Roben; a Sergeant Major, 6
Horse Captains, with diverse Cornets, and under Officers. Three hundred, (the
most of them Dragooners) being on the outside of the town, had, at first, are
defeated by the Rhinegrave.
flung down their Arms, and desired to be taken into the Rhinegraves service.
Ascanio being at Ensisheim, escaped with 3 Cornets of Horse, (the remainder of
200) away to Marquess William: who then lying at Thann; departed presently
upon it toward Burgundy: Thus lost he all his country, fortunes and
reputation in the Emperors service; which he had before received from his
favor.

Horn lying close to his siege of Schletstat all this time, and a great part of
the town next the walls, being already burnt and spoiled with his Fireworkes
and Grenades Governor Breitenbach was upon the second of December, enforced
to treat a composition. The first demand made by Gustavus Horn was, Schletstat
taken.
that the townsmen should pay him 2000 Dollars: and the many Jews there, a
sum by the Poll proportionable; each Jew as much as 2 Christians. These Jews,
are many there, and have a free Sinagogue to blaspheme Christ in: and these,
the Jesuits for filthy lucres sake, endure well enough; but a Protestant they
worse hate, then the Devil they Conjure by. The money was paid December the
fifth, the garrison being 2 days before, departed upon these articles.

1. The Impe^riall garrison both Horse and Foot, shall December the third,
depart freely, with flying Ensigns, Drums beating, trumpets sounding,
matches lighted, bullet in the mouth, 2 field pieces, one wagon of match and
bullett, together with their baggage and sick people: all to be convoyed to
Brisach; sufficient hostages being left in the town, for the safe return of
the Swedish Convoy.

2. Such sick and wounded soldiers as were not able presently to travel,
should be left in the town Hospital: who if ever they recovered, should not
be compelled to serve the Swedish party; but upon their desire, should have
the Felt-Marshall or Governors Pass, to return back to their own Regiments.

3. All spoils and booty gotten in the time of this siege; whither Horses or
other prises; shall remain still unto the takers: but as for the prisoners, a
reasonable exchange or ransom, shall end the difference.

For the safeties of the citizens, were these following Articles agreed upon.

1. No kind of revenge shall be taken upon the townsmen, for any defense made
by them during the time of this siege: but they, together with the
Ecclesiastical persons: shall still be permitted the free use of the Roman
Catholic religion. All Cloisters, likewise, Castles and Jurisdictions
heretofore possessed by the townsmen; shall still remain to them. Nor shall
any Citizen or Inhabitant, of what condition soever he be, who has either
been an Imperial Officer, addicted himself to the wars, or done any
special piece of service in defense of the town; suffer any thing, either in
life or fortunes, now nor hereafter, for it.

2. Neither King nor Kingdom of Sweden shall assume more authority to
themselves over the town, then heretofore the Roman Emperors or their
Deputies, have done usually: and therefore shall all the immunities,
privileges, and Customs of the City; and in particular also, the town of
Kinzen with its Castle and Jurisdiction, be left free to them.

3. If any of the Citizens, Officers, Servants, or Inhabitants, Spiritual or
Temporal; shall be desirous to depart the City, either now or hereafter: he
shall at any time have free leave so to do; and either to carry away his goods
with him or otherwise to dispose of them.

4. The Burgers shall not be over-burthened with Billetting or enquartering of
soldiers: only shall the garrison have their competent allowance made them; for
which, the soldiers shall be bound to keep good discipline; and accept of such
lodging as the Magistrates shall appoint them.

Dated December 2/12 1632. and confirmed by Gustavus Horn, and the Council of
war.

A day or 2 after this, was the Swedish Leiftenant Remthinger with a Partee of
70 Horse, set over the Rhine at the dorp of Schona, which has a Castle to it:
The Dutch Relation calls him Leiftenant General and Gullobelgicus, but a
Captain.
9 or 10 English miles East of Schletstat. Early in the next morning, was he
followed by Zilhart, with more Horses and Dragooners. These 2, upon Saturday
December the eighth, steal suddenly upon the good town of Endingen; about a
league from the Rhines side, to the Eastward. Here was the Imperial Colonel
Croneck, with 5 troops of Horse enquartered: who was himself in the very
beginning of the fight shot dead upon the place; above 100 of his men slain,
5 Imperial Cornets defeated;
and all the rest dispersed; Croneck had a design, to have surprised the
Swedish Colonel Einhausen and his Regiment; whose Post was near the Rhine,
not far from Endingen. It was a mistie morning, when this defeat happened;
under favor of which gloominesse, the Imperialists made the better shift to
escape Zilhart, who had the chase of them. Cronecks dead body, was presented to
Gustavus Horn; who sent it into Schletstat Church, to be interred. and the
town of Endingen taken.
Endingen town, did hereupon become Swedish: who having that footing on that
Eastern side of the Rhine; the Imperialists, that till then had kept a kind
of Field-leaguer, without the walls of Brisach: (but 8 English miles South of
Endingen) break up their Quarters presently upon it, and retire themselves
into the city.

Presently upon this, does Gustavus Horn take in Horburg: a pretty town upon
the river Ill, with a bridge at it. 2 English miles East of Colmar: by the
taking whereof, was this Colmar the more straightened.

All this time, that is ever since the beginning of November, had this
Imperial town of Colmar, been also blocked up: which since the taking of
Schletstat, had been more pressed. The place of it, is upon the small river
Lauch, (which a little from thence falls into the Ill) about 13 English miles
to the South of Schletstat. Colmar besieged.
The Imperial Governor being resolved to hold the place, and the Citizens
perceiving him not able to do it; there falls out a difference upon it, betwixt
the Burgers and the Soldierie: The townsmen feared, that by the Governors
obstinacy, their City would be taken by assault; and then should their houses
be plundered or worse served: and therefore press the Governor to a Parlee. He
refusing; the citizens getting all their Billmen at once together; they just at
dinner time, on Sunday December the ninth, sease upon the Governor with his
Leiftenant, and imprison them: kill many of his soldiers that resisted them;
and sent word with all speed unto Gustavus Horn, to come and take their city.
This made their conditions to be the better, and these they were.

By this you see that these towns of Schletstat and Colmar did not as yet know
of the death of the King of Sweden.
1. His Majesty of Sweden is contented to suffer the city of Colmar, still to
remain as a Romish Catholic city: and in the enjoyment of the same her
privileges, Immunities, and rights, (as well the Spiritualty as the
Temporaltie) which they had in the year 1626: nor will his Majesty assume
more authority over the same City, then the Roman Caesar's have heretofore
exercised.

2. The King will receive the Ecclesiastical persons (both men and women) into
his protection: and leave them the free exercise of their own Religion.

3. In the ordering of the Magistracy, the King shall please to have
consideration, of the welfare and safety of the townsmen; and that with
respect unto the ancient customs: not bringing in any new impositions.

4. The city shall not be over-burthened with a greater garrison, then they
shall well be able to maintain: and the billetting of them shall be at the
discretion of the Magistrates, according to their former orders.

5. All that were willing still to remain within the City, would his Majesty
take the protection of: and whoever were minded to depart, should have free
leave and liberty.

These Articles were dated at

Horburg, December. 10. 1632. and signed Gustavus Horn.

Monday morning December the tenth, was the Imperial garrison turned out at
the Ports, to shift for their own safeties, the Townsmen not so much (you see)
as putting in one Article, in favor of them. The same night, did Gustavus Horn
personally enter into Colmar: without exacting any one half Dollar from the
townsmen. The only thing that he added unto the Articles, (which was by
entreatie too) was, that the Lutherans might have their old Church again within
the town, with the free exercise of Religion, as heretofore they had enjoyed.
This being granted, the Lord Commissary-Generall and Resident, Glazer, Religion
restored in Colmar.
the Lord John Noe, and many principal Protestants, who now lived in exile for
their conscience sake, at Strasburg; did the 14 of December return back
again, unto their own houses in Colmar. That day, was there a Sermon of
Thanksgiving preached there, by Doctor John Smidt, Superintendent of the
Augustane Confession: who, with the rest, had the selfsame day five years,
been exiled out of Colmar.

His Excellency Gustavus Horn, had in the mean time sent the
Leiftenant-Generall the Baron of Croneck, Hagenau yielded to the Swedish.
unto the Imperial city of Hagenaw; 12 English miles to the North of
Strasburg. His message to the Magistrates was, that if they thought good to
submit themselves unto the Swedish protection; then should their ancient
Estate, Privileges, Rights, and Customs, be left entire unto them: but if
not, all should be by force confiscated. The charges of the war, moreover,
which he should be put unto for the conquering of them, should doubly be
exacted out of their purses. These offers being sent unto them, by a fortunate
and a conquering Army; became prevalent at the first motion, and were accepted
of. Thus easily, was Hagenau made Swedish; having not so much as seen the
countenance of a Swede, till they took some of them in, to be their garrison.
And thus became the valiant and discreet Gustavus Horn, the great conqueror of
the Upper Alsatia: and as much of the Lower too, as there needed.

And that we may dispatch all the wars in these quarters near the Rhine, at
once; by this time was the town of Franckendale in the Palatinate given over by
the Spaniards. The King of Bohemia by treating with the town, had before his
death, drawn the Governor Werres unto these conditions.

1. That upon the eleventh of November, himself with all his soldiers should
march out of Franckendale, Franckendale rendered.
in this equipage: That is to say, with Colors flying, Drums beating,
trumpets sounding. 3 Brass pieces of ordnance, and such other ammunition, as
themselves had brought in thither.

2. That the Spaniards should be allowed 200 wagons, for the carrying away of
their baggage.

3. That they should have a sufficient Swedish garrison, to convoy them unto
the frontiers of Luxemburg.

Upon these terms, were the Spaniards by agreement with the King of Bohemia,
to have left the town upon the eleventh of November: but whereas they were to
have received 7000 Rex Dollars for such ordnance and Ammunition, as they had
heretofore brought into it, and now left behind them: perchance upon the King
of Bohemia'es sickness first, and death afterward, they could not sooner
receive their monyes. The Gentleman employed by the King, to treat with the
Spaniards, was Colonel Colb; and they were put to it by the King of Spaines
and the Archduchesses agreement with King James (now also pressed by King
Charles) to deliver up the town unto the Prince Palatine, so soon as he
should be able to keep and maintain it. The Spaniards would never treat with
the King of Sweden about it; but with the Prince Palatines Ministers only: so
that now, the King of Bohemia being likely enough to hold it, they condescend
to deliver it. And indeed they had Commission from Brussels for it: being the
willinger now to part with it, so fair a way; for that they saw, Gustavus Horn
(perchance) would not let them long have held it.

And yet this might they have done too, had they known that he should have
been so soon sent for out of those Quarters, toward Bavaria. The Spaniards
marching out, November 26. a garrison of country boores is put into
Franckendale, to keep it for the Princes Palatines.

There being now no more towns (besides Vdenheim and Heidleberg) in those
parts of the Rhinish Circle; which were not Swedish; the victorious Gustavus
Horn received directions from Chancellor Oxenstiern, to march up into Bavaria,
and to join with the General Banier: the Bavarians being strong enough at
that time, to fall a great way over their river Lech, Gustavus Horn leaving
part of the Army with the Rhinegrave; marches up into Bavaria, with the
residue.
even to the bancks of the Danubie in the Duke of Wirtembergs country. Leaving
therefore a sufficient part of the Army with the Rhinegrave, for keeping what
was conquered in Alsatia: he the eighteenth of December passes the Rhine at
Schona, to go against the Bavarians about the Danubie. These, he quickly made
to find the way over their Lech again; and since then, with the assistance of
Duke Bernard and Banier: has forced quite out of Bavaria, to another part of
the Danubie: even their old starting holes, of Ingolstat and of Regenspurg. But
this prosecution, I mean not to meddle with. Turn we back now to the
Landgrave of Hesseus victories.

THE ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE LANDGRAVE OF HESSEN: From the time of his
receiving some aides from the King of Sweden, at Werben; until his joining
with the said King again, about the Ringaw. A Story of some 3 months.
THat our Reader may not mistake the chief person in the Action, it is Landgrave
William of Hessen-Cassel, whom we treat of: Son and heir unto that so famous
and learned Prince, Maurice of Hessen who was yet alive, at Franckford: banished
from his own Estate by the Emperor.

The chief of the quarrel which the Emperor had to him, was for his Religion,
and some Church Lands; The Landgraves complaint against the Emperor, again;
was for a Sentence (partly) by Caesar passed against him Anno 1623, by which,
the town and Universitie of Maxpurg in Hessen were adjudged away from him unto
his Cousin the Landgrave Lodowick of Hessen Darmstat: a Lutherane by profession,
and not so point blanck opposite unto the Catholic party: and whose son
has been a diligent instrument of the Emperors, to draw the King of Sweden to
a Treaty, when he lay at Mentz; and still works with his Father in Law the
Elector of Saxony to the same purpose. Of this Imperial Sentence, the Elector
of Cullen, (with him of Saxony) had been one of the Commissioners and
Executioners: which made the Landgrave stomach him.

After that the business of Germany became (on the Catholic side) a
Leaguer-warre, and a Quarrel of Religion; then were the Protestants, on all
hands laid at; by these Leaguers, as well as by the Emperor; every of them
flying upon his next neighbor. Whereas, therefore, the Landgrave had chiefly
been borne down by the Electors of Mentz and Cullen, on the one side; and by
the near Abbeys of Fulda and Hirschfeld, on the other; with these he now
begins to cry quittance: so soon (namely) as he finds himself strong enough,
and that the King of Sweden had so potently already advanced into Germany.

To make way therefore for this Landgraves invading of others; we will first
show you, how he cleared his own Country at home: even then infested by the
Imperialists.

About the beginning of September 1631 (as in our First Part we have told you)
the Landgrave returns from the King of Sweden, with some aides for the guard
of his own Country: and that gallant Cavalier Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar,
was also at this time with him. The Landgrave being returned; first, musters up
an Army of some 4000 Foot; whereof 3600 were old soldiers; the rest, traind
Boores: and amongst them, 3 Companies of hardy Forrestiers and Huntsmen: of
which last kind of people, the Princes of these woodie countries have a great
multitude. To these 4000 Foot, were 1000 Horse and 2 pieces of ordnance joined.

His quarrel seemed chiefly to be intended, against the Bishoprics and
Abby-lands: which was as cross as might be, unto the late Imperial Decree of
Ratisbone. And not so only, but even against the Imperial family also. The
Emperors second son, Prince Rodolph William, was now Abbot of Hirschfeld in
Hessen-land, next neighbor unto the Landgraves own possessions. This young
Prince, upon the resignation of his Uncle the Archduke Leopold: was made
Priest, and had his Bishoprics of Passaw and Strasburg: in lieu of which, the
Archduke was made Administrator of all the lands of the house of Gratz (of
which this Emperor is) in Alsatia, Tirole, etc. This Princely young Priest, was
in the year 1628, chosen Abbot of Hirschfeld aforesaid; and should have been
Archbishop of Madenburg also: whose missing of it, was the destruction of that
goodly City. He had the Abbey of Hirschfeld, with condition, that the
Landgraves right unto the City, and the Citizens freedom of religion, should
be reserved. The present Abbot and Prince of Fulda, was one John Bernard
Schenck of Schweinsberg; Elected Anno 1623. who by the Title of his Abbey, is
likewise one of the Princes of the Empire. To the town of Fulda has the
Landgrave some pretenses also. This town of Hirschfeld, and the Abby-lands
about it, (being upon the river Fulda, in the very heart of Hassia) were since
these wars, still guarded by some Imperial forces: and military men (for the
most part) being nothing dainty of committing Actions of Trespasses; had
trenched, with the furthest, upon the Landgraves Royalties, and the Cities
privileges. This was another of the greevances. Toward this Hirschfeld,
therefore, so soon as he came from the King; the Landgrave converts his forces.
He cleeres Hirschfeld
The General Fugger, was already gone out of his country: hasting to be one
at the Battle of Leipsich; by which means had the Landgrave the better
opportunity, to bring the place to a composition. That done, he about the
middle of the month, advances Westward unto Fritzlar, with the 5000 men before
mentioned. This handsome town, though situated upon the river Eder within the
bounds of Hassia close unto the Frontiers of Waldeck; yet belonged it unto the
Archbishop Elector of Mentz: and had been often heretofore quarrelled at, by
the former Landgraves. The garrison answers his summons, as if they held for
Jupiter, in thunder and lightning, namely, such as they could make with their
ordnance. The Landgrave replies, as if he had Commission from Vulcan: for
having gained to the gate by his Approaches, he claps to a Petard; and by that
breach, his soldiers rush into the City. Then would the garrison have
compounded: Takes Fritzlar
but soldiers (whose very vocation suffers them not to be too tenderhearted)
use not (when victorious) to listen too suddenly to the word Quarter. The
Execution being over, the town is plundered: and do the Landgrave what he
could, with his drawn sword to beat off his own people; yet for 2 hours
together they flew upon the spoil. The Landgrave gave as good order, as the
present fury would hearken to, for the sparing of the Ecclesiastics: for all
which, a many soldiers came Masking abroad in the Monks and Friars Cowles and
Habits: the rude Forrestiers, perchance, mistook the Monks in their several
Weeds, for some strange wild beasts; such as they used to kill in the woods,
and to go marching home with the skins upon their shoulders. The Hassians
showed the more spleen against this town, for that the Governor had scoffed
heretofore at their Landgrave; had plundered 2 of his dorps in the jurisdiction
of Girdersberg: and disarmed the soldiers that defended them. For this reason
also, was the Governor himself now carried prisoner into Zingenhaim.

Altringer and Fugger in the mean time, having upon their hearing of Tillies
defeat, hasted back again; Altringer and Fugger fall into Hessen.
were passed through Duringen, and now fallen into the Eastern parts of Hessen.
They there first take in the town of Vach; and Fredeland Castle next to that:
both about the river Werra. Passing this river after this, they advance toward
Hirschfeld, before mentioned, and take that also: but the Landgrave having by
this dispatched about Fritzlar, sends Duke Bernard Weymar with some 18 troops
of horse and 1000 Foot toward them; himself immediately following with the
gross of his Army. The Imperial Generals, quit Hirschfeld upon this news;
and notwithstanding that the Count of Tilly had ordered them to fall Iustily
upon the Landgraves forces: yet they now taking the Count of Manfeld unto them,
(who lay with some forces in the neighbor jurisdiction of Fulda; for the guard
of that goodly rich Abbey) all together march Eastward out of the land of
Hessen, toward Isenach, and so to the Weser; by which river Tilly now was
coming to join with them. The Count of Sultz, then about Gelnhausen, (or
betwixt that and Fulda) coming also to piece in with them, marches back again
toward the Lorrainers, upon the news, namely, of Fuggers retreat, and of the
Swedish entrance into Franconia.

Hassia cleared of the Imperialists.
Thus became Hassia cleared, though but for a very little space. The Landgrave,
presently upon it, defeating four troops of the rambling Crabats by the way;
comes and pitches his army by the river of Fulda, near unto his own court
and chief town of Cassel. And time it was to do it: seeing Tilly before the
end of the month, was fallen upon his Frontiers; and Altringer and Fugger
returned toward the river Fulda, again to spoil his country, and to join
with Tilly. The story of which actions, we leave to be read in the General
Tillyes Proceedings: already printed in our Second Part.

Tilly being gone out of his Country, in the beginning of October; the
Landgrave with 8000 Foot, 10 troops of Horse, and 14 pieces of ordnance,
(whereof 6 pieces of Battery) sets forward again to pursue his former purpose
against the Bishoprics. October the seventh to Munden he comes, The Landgrave
takes Munden
a Bishops See some 7 or 8 English miles to the north of Cassel, where the
river Fulda falls into the Werra. Here had Tilly been lately; and there left
some 600 men. Against this, the Landgrave casts up 2 Batteries: from whence he
all that night thunders upon the Tillians. The garrison now out of hope to
defend themselves, or to be relieved by others; parley and yield. Their
conditions were, to go out with flying Ensigns, Bag and Baggage, Full
Arms, etc. And to be convoyed by 2 troops of the Hessens Horse into
Gottingen, 12 English miles to the East of Munden.

Hence marches the Landgrave Northward, into the Bishopric of Paderborn; which
is upon the West side of the goodly river of Weser, and holden in Commendam by
the Bishop of Cullen, who writes himself Administrator of it. Hereabouts,
September 27 (old Style) had Tilly left the Count of Gronsfelt and Colonel
Reinacher, with a small army; for the guard of this Bishopric of Paderborn,
advances into Paderborn.
and of the rich Abbey of Corbey, which lies close upon the Western banck of the
Weser. Three of the foremost of the Landgraves troops, did Count Gronsfelts men
light upon; and cut the throats of the most of them, carrying away their
Ensigns. Full of desire to revenge this, out goes Leiftenant Pfaunkuck with a
troops of Horse: but these staying to refresh themselves (or to do worse
perchance) in a small Dorp near unto Paderborn; Some of his troops, twice
defeated.
were also surprised by the Gronsfelders, and cut in pieces like their fellows.

The Landgrave himself was at first gone toward Hoxter, in the jurisdiction
of the Abbot of Corbey; which y^^^ds unto him: paying him 8000 Dollars for a
Ransom. Thus do other towns thereabouts. Thence advances he toward
Raderborn, from which parts, Gronsfeld and Reinacher (being too weak) were
retired along the Weser toward Hamelen. Paderborn City compounds with him, and
gives him 50000 Dollars for its ransom. At Nienhus upon the river Lip, some
2 English miles to the North of Paderborn; he takes down the Elector of
Cullens Arms, and causes the King of Swedens Eschutcheon to be set up in the
room of it. Some 8 English miles to the South-west, he takes in Soltkott:
whence some of his troops advance into the neighbor country called The
Dukedom of Westphalia; He takes towns in Paderborn,
and take Geseck. Others, keeping, still in Paderborn Diocese, and upon the
South of it: take in Warburg upon the river Dimel: a fair town just upon the
Frontiers of Hessen, the County of Waldeck and Paderborn. The next good town
of Waldeck, is Volckmarsen, upon the small river of Tuisch, some 5 English
miles to the South of Warburg.

and in the Dukedom of Westphalia.
The same Division of his Army turning now Westward into the aforesaid Dukedom
of Westphalia; takes in Statberg: a fine town upon a hill by the river Dimel,
some 15 English miles from Warburg; thence go they to Brilon 10 English miles
more Westerly. In this part of Westphalia, is the Elector of Cullen Lord of a
many places. At Arensberg a very fair town upon the river Rhur, (some 25 miles
West of Brilon) has he a goodly Castle: which the Landgrave now seases. Out of
Paderborn and Westphalia, took he a world of Cattle of all sorts; which he
sent home to his Boores of Bischehausen, in recompense of what the Tillians had
lately taken from them. All these abovenamed towns, in the Dukedom of
Westphalia, and the Bishopric of Paderborn; are to be seen partly, in
Mercators Second Table of Westphalia, and partly, in the particular Mapp of
Paderborn: but best of all, in the Mapp of the Dukedom of Westphalia.

The Elector of Cullen writes unto him.
The Elector of Cullen having heard of the Landgraves progress in his Diocese
of Paderborn, and Dukedom of Westphalia; writes to him to hold his hand: the
Landgraves answer to which, is as follows.

Most Reverend, most Illustrious and loving Cousin, etc.
YOur Letters dated at Cullen 2^/18 of this October, His answer.
we have received by your Trumpet. And whereas you in them complain, of us
for our invasion of the Bishopric of Paderborn, in answer thereunto We will
not conceal, how heartily sorry we are, and how sensible; of those many and
several Armies, which as well from the Catholic leaguers, as others; have
for these many years together, been sent into this our dear Country of
Germany. How unchristianly and inhumanely, the Protestant Princes, and States
of the Empire, and our own dominions in particular, since we came to the
Government thereof, have been used by these Armies: and that against all
reason, without any cause, and besides all color of right and justice: we are
yet sensible of. And which is worse then all this: we yet feel, that when we
and our poor Subjects, did at any time complain or sue for justice or
redress; we were but scorned and rejected for our labors: contrary to all
laws and rights of nations in general, and unto the Imperial Capitulations in
particular: as also against the peace of Religion and of Policy, all
Constitutions and Articles of the Empire, and of the Circles thereof. We have
endured the most barbarous usage that might be, in our said dominions:
Enquarterings, namely, Taxations, Burnings, Robberies, Sackings of our towns
and villages: yea also and of putting to the sword, innumerable innocent
subjects of ours of all sorts. The miserable estate of the Protestant Princes,
before the Kings coming into Germany: for even thus, were all of them served.
But we have since understood, what their intent and drift then was, in so
doing: by all force and violence, namely, to render us every where odious, and
to make a most miserable beggar of us withal; by at once depriving us of our
Country, goods, and subjects. During all which proceedings of theirs, and most
lamentable sufferings of ours; the worst of all yet was, that upon those
infinite complaints, prayers, cries and lamentations, which both by word of
mouth, letters and Ambassages we made unto his Imperial Majesty, your self,
and other Princes our Cosins, etc. we were never able to obtain so much, as
that any one of all these, would once vouchsafe to take the lest pity of our
cases, or show any Christian compassion toward us: as if we had utterly been
incapable, yea unworthy altogether; of any law, Justice, kindness, favor, or
benefit. By this means (God is our witness) we being become a Prince
rejected altogether, by such as bear sway in the Empire; found our selves (and
that upon just grievances, not to be longer endured) enforced to take upon us
such a resolution, as is indeed less desperate and more salutarie; then if we
had longer suffered and wincked at, the said horrible and most enormous
proceedings.

For this reason therefore, have we made alliance with those, that by the most
especial providence of God, and to their own great hazard, dangers and
expenses, are comne armed into Germany; to the comfort of the Evangelicall
Professors, and consequent'y of our own selves: whom (fighting for the just
cause) God has already blessed with such notable victories, as we already
most heartily thank him for them. Thus being obliged, to seek (by Gods help)
together with our said Allies and our sword, (which our enemies have by force
put into our hands) such a Peace and quietness; as we have not been able
heretofore to obtain, by any prayers, or any (even almost unworthy and
unprincely, and therefore unexcusable) patience, complaints or petitions. Being
now by these reasons obliged, to take the same courses, as your said league
has given us examples to do; and being now utterly robbed and despoiled of
what was our own, to seek what heretofore was not our own. Wherefore we
kindly pray you (as being a most excellent and high member of the said
Catholic league) not to take it in ill part, if we now follow the Rule, which
is so solidly grounded upon Reason and Justice, Quod quis iuris statuerit in
alium, eo ipso, ipse utatur. That every man would be content to have the same
sentence pass upon himself, which he has pronounced upon another.

And thus, since there cannot at this present, any end of these Germane
miseries be expected; without such conditions be first assented unto, whereby
those insupportable grievances of the Protestants may beforehand be removed:
and without the consent of such Princes, (not of us alone) as the Catholic
League has by force (as it were) drawn into this war; and in whose hands
the right of peacemaking yet remains. And forasmuch as the General Director
of the Protestant war, his royal Majesty of Sweden, The King of Swedens
Title, given him by the Protestants.
by name, (our most dear and honored Lord and Cousin) has appointed us what
to do, until either by the sharpness of our swords, or rather by some fair
means (if it were possible) such a true peace might once again be settled,
whereby both our selves and posterities might become sufficiently assured of
our safeties, and that hereafter we might no more stand in awe of the like
miseries and abuses. Mean while that such a peace is expected, his said most
Excellent Majesty has promised us his royal Protection: intending to bring
all to consent unto such conditions, and to give such assecurations, as shall
be sufficient to hinder all further bloodshed and destruction. We therefore for
our own parts, now do, and ever hereafter shall, (according to our peaceable
and Christian inclination) so soon as ever we shall understand the said Lord
General Director, and other interessed Princes, to be satisfied in themselves,
and be pleased to signify unto us, the means whereby this war (which has
been enforced upon them and us,) may have a happy conclusion; offer our selves
with all readiness, to perform whatsoever may become a Prince that keeps a
good Christian Conscience within him, and is not desirous of any troubles; even
as we have not been the causers of these miseries.

Thus We remain,

Yours, etc.


With this breaking in of the Landgraves into Westphalia, and upon such a
quarrel too; was Francis William Bishop of Osnabrug (though something out of
the way) so much affrighted, that he fled speedily unto Cullen. And there he
thought himself yet at home; seeing when he was but Count of Wartenberg, he
had been Major Dome, Hoffmeister, or Lord Steward unto that Elector, till the
year 1625, that he was chosen Bishop of Osnabrug. But the Landgrave meant him
not: he was yet busy in Paderborn and Westphalia. About the middle of October,
he first summons the Temporal Lords and Gentlemen of the Bishopric, to
appear before him; to take the Oath of fidelity to the King of Sweden and the
Protestant Party; The Landgrave summons the Gentry of Paderborn.
to agree among themselves concerning the levying of the Contributions; and to
consult upon the enquartering of his soldiers. Here did he give out Commissions
also, for some new levyes. Thus does he likewise, in the jurisdiction of the
Abbot of Corbey. In the conquered places of Westphalia, he had at his first
entrance published his Proclamation: which was, for the calling home of all
such Westphalian soldiers, as were in service either with the Emperor or
Catholic leaguers: giving them 6 weeks time to come in, after which he would
sease upon what ever they had in the country.

Those of Westphalia send to agree with him.
The Catholics of this Duchy of Westphalia, being startled by the neernesse
of the danger, send their Deputies unto the Landgrave: desirous to purchase
their peace at the best hand of him. To their Proposition, this was his
Answer. Although in respect of Tillies, Altringers and Fuggers vile demeanors
in his country, by ravishing of wives and virgins; by burning, The conditions
he offers them.
plundering and massacring of his subjects, and that in such a manner, as the
like was scarce to be found in any Story; he had provocation sufficient given
him, to slacken the reins of all good military discipline; and to suffer his
soldiers in the like manner, to ryott it in all forms of licentiousness
within the Lordships of the Catholics: yet his disposition being better
inclined unto fair and just courses; he would not now become rigorous upon the
revenge, against those that had in so good time requested their peace of him.
And yet thus much withal, would he have the Deputies to take notice of; that
if within 8 days next, the Governor of the Province Frederick Furstenburg,
with some of the Magistrates of Arnsberg, did repair unto himself or his
Commissioners; and there conclude upon the admission of his garriso^s into the
towns of We Will, See for these towns, in the Mapp of the Dukedom of
Westphalia; in Mercators Appendix.
Meschede Geseke, Kallenhard, Beelick, Brilon, Morsburg, Niderbach, Hallenberg,
Smallenberg, and Winterberg; and that his soldiers might be maintained by these
towns; which should moreover redeem themselves from pillaging, by paying him
a sum of ready money: they should then be free from all danger. But if herein
they hearkened not unto him, then would he not forbid his men to do as the
Tillians had done himself would force what garrisons he pleased upon them: and
what calamities might befall unto Westphalia thereupon, let themselves or any
man conjecture.

The Landgrave was now at Cassel; here was this treaty held, and hither,
indeed, were the Westphalians glad to send as he would have them. Thus made he
but a short work of it in Westphalia, Paderborn, and Corbey: for by the middle
of November, were part of his forces received into the above-desired garrisons;
and the rest returned into Hessen. At home in Hessenland in the mean time,
were the 2 great Abbey towns of Fulda and Hirschfield (the first Abbeys of the
Empire) glad to compound with him. The jurisdiction of Hirschfield is reformed:
that is, The Abbyes of Fulda and Hirschfield accord with him
all the Imperialists put out (indeed Tilly had called out the most of them, to
go along with him) and the Landgraves forces taken in. Those of Fulda, send
him 6000 Dollars unto Cassel; and will be content to continue their
Contributions; and withal to take an oath unto him, as their Protector, so
that the King of Swedens name might not be used in it. This is a clause which
many Catholic towns and persons, have usually indeed checked at: but how
far the Landgrave had power to condescend unto them, I know not.

He goes to the King of Sweden.
The Landgrave, thus, having given the law to all these people, and finding no
more work at home; goes to seek it of the King of Sweden: to whom (as you
have heard in our Second Part, in the Kings Story: he went with his Army
toward the end of November.

THE ACTIONS OF THE LOVVER SAXONY. Of the taking of the great city of
Rostocke in the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, by the King of Swedens and Duke John's
forces, October 16 1631.
HOw far Duke John Albert of Mecklenburg had by mid-September, proceeded in
the siege of Rostock; we leave to be read page 81, etc. of our First Part, and
the Third Edition of it. The Lord Virmont, that was Sergeant-Major General of
the Imperial Army, which Walenstein had lately left in those parts; was now
Governor within the said City. A brave valiant Gentleman, truly he was; one
that did what might be done, for the keeping of that so important a City. But
hearing it to be now seconded by every man, that the General Tillie was so
utterly defeated at Leipsich, as he was far unable to resist the so much
prevailing fortunes of the King of Sweden, and therefore no way likely to levy
this siege: he finds himself necessitated to give way (with the rest) unto
the times; and resolves to prevent a Scaladoe, by a Parlie: he wanted pay to
content his soldiers, and therefore they want wills, to perform their duties:
The Townsmen grew weary, and would trust no longer: and the soldiers mutinous,
and would fight no longer. Every man now called for a Parlie. and therefore by
the 15 of October, was the Governor enforced to send his Drum out into the
enemies leaguer, to demand it. The Treaty, in the upshot, came to these 14
conditions.

1. That the Lord Virmont Sergeant-Major-Generall, should be licenced by Duke
John of Mecklenburg, to depart the town the next day, with all his Officers,
Soldiers, and their families. Have leave also to carry with him 2 half
Curtoes, or Quarter-Canon, and one Field-piece: provided that none of them had
the Arms upon them, either of the King of Sweden, the Dukes or Dukedom of
Mecklenburg, or of the City of Rostock. And that they should have 100 bullets
to them, 2000 pound of powder, and as much match, and musket bullets. That they
should go out with full Arms, matches lighted, bullet in the mouth, colors
flying, and with bag and baggage upon their wagons. And that they should have
a Swedish Convoy as far as Wolfenbuttle in Brunswick-land; whither they
should be suffered to go in, if it were not besieged: and in case it were,
then should they be convoyed into some other town near unto the said
Wolfenbuttle or the river Weser, which then had an Imperial garrison in it:
and that they should leave sufficient hostages with the Duke, for the safe
return of the Swedish Convoy.

2. That John Duke of Mecklenburg his Grace, and the Lord Achatius Todt,
Leiftenant-Generall of the Horse to his Majesty of Sweden: should take order
for the furnishing of these Imperial forces now going out, with sufficient
bread, beer, and Horse-meate, all the way, until they came unto the place
aforesaid. And to the end they might be no ways disturbed in their march on
the further side of the Ebb; the said Duke and Lord should give them their
joint letters, unto the Dukes of Brunswick and of Lunenburg.

3. That the Officer who should now be appointed to go along with, and to
command this their Swedish Convoy, should have a charge not to forsake the said
Imperialists, until he had fully and safely brought them to one of the places
aforesaid. And to the end that this Officer should take no advantage or
occasion, to excuse himself from going thorough with them; the Lord Virmont
should have a private letter given him under seal, wherein the names of this
Officer Frederick Ilenfeld, and of those 150 Horsemen which were to go upon
the convoy, should be written: that in case the Swedish should offer to
return, Virmont might then produce this letter to stay them.

4. That this convoy allotted them should take care, that no injury were
offered upon the march unto the Imperialists; either by the King of Swedens
troops, the Dukes of Saxonier, or of Mocklenburg.

5. That the Imperial Officers should have horses sent them for the carriage
of their private baggage and Valeeses; and for such wounded and sick men to
ride upon, as had no horses of their own: and that they should have 40 wagons
go along with them, so far as the said convoy was to conduct them. That the
Magistrates of the city should likewise furnish them with horses, for the
drawing away of their ordnance: which should also be returned by the same
Convoy. Virmont should pass his word also, that the Swedes in their return
should no ways be molested by the Imperialists: and that (if necessity seemed
so to require) the Swedish also should have a Convoy back again of some of
these Imperial Horse: until they should be passed all the danger: which Horse
taking their Hostages back from Rostock with them, should by a Swedish Trumpet
be brought home again.

6. All prisoners should on both sides be set at liberty, without ransom:
paying only for their victuals, for the time passed.

7. Such as had run from their Colors unto one another army, should also
be turned home again.

8. All conference, upon the way, betwixt the soldiers of either party, should
be forbidden: and no Officer was to inveigle away one another soldiers.

9. All differences risen heretofore betwixt the Imperialists and the Burgers
of Rostock, should be buried in oblivion: and those personal and particular
suites which were at this present depending; should be made an end of by the
Magistrates or Officers appointed on both sides: who should with all speed
convenient, procure redress unto the plaintiff.

10. All such works, as had been made up of late for the fortifying of the
City, should so remain unslighted: and that for avoiding of all danger, all
the new dug mines about the town, should be discovered to the Enterers. The
Burgers also should not be plundered nor exacted upon, by the departing
Imperialists.

11. That the Lord Virmont should have free leave, to send Volponius (his
Leiftenant Colonel) into Wismar, to discover the state of that City: and if he
saw occasion to advise that garrison, to go out also; they of that town
should have the same conditions, with those of Rostock; whither they thought
good to go out presently, or to stay 3 weeks longer: till which time, a
Cessation of Arms should on both sides be granted.

12. That it should be free for the Duke of Fridlands Chancellor and
Counselors, either to go now out of the town with the soldiers, and to carry
all their goods and Records with them; or to stay behind still: and to be
assured that they should no ways be damnified.

13. Whereas the Arms of the Citizens, had during the siege time been made
use of by the soldiers: all those pieces of Armor which Virmonts people had not
evident and present use of, should be left in the town behind them.

14. If (which God forbid) any scarrefire should break out in the town, at
the going forth of the Imperialists; there should no advantage thereupon be
taken by the Swedish, to quarrel either Virmont or his people: but an
examplary and severe punishment, should light only upon that person; by whose
negligence or mischeivousnesse, such a Casualtie had been occasioned.

These 14 Articles being the same day agreed, and signed by both parties; the
next day being Friday October 16. did the Governor Virmont march forth of the
town; together with 3200 Foot, two troops of Horse, and all other things
formerly agreed upon: 150 Swedish Horse attending without the town, to bring
them going to the place aforesaid. The Imperialists being arrived about
Wolffenbuttle, made immediately toward the river Weser, whereabouts the
General Tilly at that time was; whom Virmont thought to do a very good
service unto, if he should now join with his weak Army. Virmont being upon
his march thitherward; was countermanded by the Count of Manfold, Governor of
Magdenburg; then Imperial Felt-marshall for the Lower Saxony, and directed to
conjoyne himself with Colonel Bonickhausen (who had a Regiment near hand, of
13 Cornets of Horse) and that they two should presently besiege Halberstat,
Virmont besieges Halberstat, in vain.
into which, some Swedish forces had very lately gotten. Virmont obeys
presently, hoping for the losing of one town, to make himself a saver, by the
winning of another. His summons being by the town denied, he sets his 3 Gunnes
to work, which he had brought out of Rostock. A furious battery he made so
long as it lasted, and great hopes of a sudden breach he also conceived: but
(alas) his hundred of bullets would not hold out ever, nor that small store of
powder which he brought with him out of Rostock. Thus seeing no good to be done
upon that nation, which came not into Germany so easily to loose cities, but
to win them; he was feign to surcease his volleyes, and to be rising. This
when he had signified unto the Count of Mansfeld; he received a command to
repair to him into Magdenburg: which he was bodily afraid, would be besieged
by the Swedish: as indeed it was, within a few days after. That the town of
Magdenburg might not be overcharged, nor the ways ungarded, Virmont is sent
immediately into Wansleben, about 10 English miles short of Magdenburg to the
Westward, and Bonighausen took up his quarter at a lesser town, not far
from it: where how they both sped, we may hereafter tell you, when we come to
speak of Magdenburg.

The Levies agreed upon by the Protestant Princes and Cities of the Circle of
the Lower Saxony, in their Diet at Hamborow, 1631. for their own defense
against the Imperialists.
THis goodly Country of the Lower Saxony (which is the ninth Circle of the
Empire) contains the 2 Archbishopricks of Magdenburg and Bremen, the great
Bishoprics of Hildesheim, Lubeck, Suerin, Ratzenburg, Minden and Schleswick:
the 5 Dukedomes of Saxon-Lawenburg, Mecklenburg, Brunswick, Lunenburg and
Holstein; the 2 Earledomes of Roffain and Delmenhorst: and the free Cities of
Lubeck, Hamborow, Mulhausen, Northausen, Goslar, and Gottingen. Here also be
most of those potent Hanse towns, (each being a complete common wealth within
it self) as Magdenburg, Lubeck, Wismar, Rostock, etc. so famous both in
ancient and modern Stories.

The greater of these free, Imperial, and Hanse towns, being of the Lutherane
or Augustane confession; had sent their Duputies unto the famous Protestant
Diet of Leipsich: which being ended April the third, no sooner were these
Deputies returned home again; but they are sent the second time unto another
Diet held at Hamborow, in the beginning of May following. The consultation was,
in what form they might safelyest subscribe unto the Decrees of the Diet of
Leipsich, and how far engage themselves in a joint Union and levy; for the
defense of the Protestant Religion, and the liberties of Germany. But this
consultation, though something was done in it to countenance the cause; yet
were no public levyes set on foot, to defend it. That which broke the plot,
(for the time) was the Count of Tillies letters to them: not so much for the
Reason or Rhetoric in them; but for the authority of the writer of them: an
Army is a shrewd Topick-place, for to draw arguments from; it persuades
terribly. The Germans were very well able to distinguish of the obedience unto
Caesar, which Tilly advised them to have regard unto. The thing, they were
willing withal; it was their duty: but the degree of obeying, was that which
most troubled them: What Tilly called obedience, they feared might prove
slaverie: they found a contestation in themselves, betwixt the keeping of their
obedience; and the preservation of their liberties; and how these two might
possibly hold long together, was a difference which they had not yet
reconciled. Thus has it oftentimes fallen out in the Empire; diverse Common
wealths there, having great privileges, they will league one with another and
struggle hard to preserve them: so that when ever Caesar has projected great
desires, then began the conflict. Better therefore (even for both parties) is
a Monarchy, then such an Empire. This was the purpose of the General letters
unto their assembly.

MY LORDS etc.
Tillies Letter.
I Have, to my great wonderment, received news of late, of that general
meeting of certain Protestant Electors, Princes, and States, at the town of
Leipsich: and how they have with one consent there agreed, to raise a common
and a mighty army among them all; that they have already gotten together a
great power, and have more forces daily in levying. Now, that these
preparations of those princes, could not but with great danger be promoted; and
must of necessity be the causes of a great distraction, they all knew: seeing
that all private armings which were undertaken without the consent of the
Emperor, did not only occasion many a sinister suspicion among the people; but
were flatly likewise forbidden to be made, by the fundamental constitutions of
the Empire. Having assurance, therefore, of their present consultation at
Hamborow, for the best way of subscribing unto the said Diet of Leipsich; he
could not but advise them friendly, that in their said consultation, they would
make this the chiefest of their thoughts, how they might preserve their Faith
and obedience unto Caesar. His advise unto them, therefore was, that they
should be chary of withdrawing themselves from the Emperors service, who was
their Sovereign Magistrate: but that as faithful and good subjects, they
should persevere rather in their due obedience; not suffering themselves to be
drawn aside unto any contrary undertakings. He wished them seriously to
consider withal, how that as all their safeties and well-beings, did solely
and wholly depend upon their Lord the Emperor: so on the contrary, was there
nothing to be expected from other princes (and from forrainers especially, who
merely intended their own private) but the losing of their privileges and
Commerce, the ruin of their States, and the necessary drawing on, of a public
servitude.

How frequently has experience taught us, what miserable events has
unevitably befallen those people, that have leagued against his Imperial
Majesty, and had embroyld themselves in a war against him. For these reasons
he nothing hereafter doubted, but they would so well consider upon what might
follow, that these his admonitions (which in the sincerity of his soul he
propounded unto them) should find some place among their consultations: and
that they should not hereafter need any other Monitor, to remember them of
persevering in their due loyalty and obedience. This if they did, it would be
a most strong recommendation of them, unto Caesar; both to continue his grace
and favor royal unto them; to enfranchise them with more ample privileges;
and to do any thing for the promoting, preserving, and enlarging, of their
present conditions and commerces: For the doing of all which, their continuing
in obedience, must needs give his Imperial Majesty a most large occasion.

May 19. 1631. Your very loving Friend John Count of Tilly.


Who can blame an adversary, for using the best Colors and flourishes he can
find, to carry his own cause withal? And let this be the gloss to the
General Tillies reasons, that they were pressed by an enemy. However, their
own fears prevailed with them; and what they did next, they did more
privately. Their wills were still good unto the Cause; and they underhand
promoted the Decrees of Leipsich. Thus as the King of Sweden grew stronger,
they grew more courageous: and when the Protestant Princes struck in also with
them, then was there another assembly a little more boldly talked upon.

Green wood laid near the fire, naturally shrincks up it self, contracts its
own pores and opennesse, by which the flame might enter it; that by a nearer
uniting of its parts, it might prepare it self for resistance. The same
operation had the burning of Magdenburg, (now newly this month done) upon
these its neighbor and confederate Cities: it did as much arm, as terrify
them. The King of Sweden, also, daily more and more prevailing; some of the
Princes of this Circle, began to take Commissions from him, to levy and arm
for him: he became the Protector of their public liberty; and under him,
they singly promoted their personal pretenses. The Duke of Lunenburg, as next
heir to the Dukedom of Brunswick; (the present ruling Duke Vlrick, having no
likelihood of issue,) he arms to put in for that, which Tilly had almost
devoured. The Archbishop of Bremen, had lost his town of Stoade: and almost
all his whole Country, was now possessed by Imperial garrisons which Tillie
had left there. Other Princes (yea all of them) had the same grievances: and
all now resolved, to recover their Countries.

The General Tilly being thoroughly now defeated, as if the weight of his
former reasons, had grown lighter with the decay of his power; the whole
Circle in November following, appoint a more general meeting at the same
Hamborow; whither all the Bishops, Princes and States either came, or sent
their Ambassadors. Here they resolutely conclude for the levying of 3 new
Regiments, upon the common charges of the Circle: the purpose being, to clear
the country of the new encroached Imperialists. The first Regiment was
undertaken for, by the Archbishop of Bremen, the Duchy of Lunenburg and
Zella-Brunswick, with the Bishoprics of Lubeck, Brunswick, and Hildesheim.
This was to consist of 1950 Foot, and 127 Horsemen. The second Regiment was to
be raised by the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, the country of the Lower Saxony, the
Bishopric of Ratzenburg, and the city of Lubeck: which was to be 1675 Foot,
and 366 Horse, strong. The third, which was to be of 1448 Foot only; was to be
raised and paid by the Dukes of Holstein, and the Bishopric of Schwerin. All
these were to be joined to Duke George of Lunenburgs own Army: he being to be
General over them.

The Hamburgers excused themselves, from bearing any part in these levyes; for
that (as they said) they had very lately received some favors and privileges
from his Imperial Majesty; who had newly honored their town with the Title
of an Imperial City. Thus much also I take leave to add out of mine own
private observation. There was a difference now depending, betwixt his Majesty
the King of Denmark, and the Hamburgers; wherein the Emperor had already
interposed his letters and authority, The Hamburgers refuse to be against the
Emperor:
cited the Deputies of both parties, to appear before the younger Augustus Duke
of Brunswick, and Lunenburg, and other his Commissioners, at Lunenburg April
the third, 1631. New style. The Hamburgers indeed appeared, but the King of
Denmark refused: and so the matter still hanging, the Hamburgers having
continual need of the Emperors good favor; by reason of their differences
with the King of Denmark.
durst not engage themselves amongst those Princes, that so openly thus opposed
him. The other Princes went on with their new levies: of all which, the
Archbishop of Bremen, and George Duke of Zella-Lunenburg, were most forward;
both of which had received Commissions and instructions, from the King of
Sweden.

The Archbishop of Bremen thereupon, levies in his own Country: and the Duke
of Lunenburg goes to Hamborow, about monyes and Bills of Exchange; which took
him up till mid-Januarie. Of both their commings into the field, we shall
speak in their due places. And while they are at their levies; let us
entertain our Readers with what happened in this Lower Saxoni, in the mean time;
and that is the yielding of Wismar and Damitz, unto the Dukes of Mecklenburg.

How this strong Hanse town of Wismar, had been by Adolph Frederick Duke of
Mecklenburg besieged; we have told you page 83 of our First Part: The
continuation of the siege of Wismar
Rostock being won, General Todts Army that had taken it, removed to
Wismar, and sat down before it. Colonel Gram commanded in the town; who to
hinder the Swedish and the Mecklenburgers working; sends out 1000 sallyers, to
beat the besiegers out of their Approaches. After a hard skirmish, and some
slaughter; they are contented to retire again into their City: first having
in this sally, slain General Major Breitenbach, that then commanded in the
Approaches.

Gram seeing his town laid hard at, and no hope of succors; sends out to the
Duke of Mecklenburg, to treat upon Conditions. These were his desires: That he
might have liberty to dispeed a Captain unto Leiftenant-Generall Diepenbach,
to tell him what state the town was in: and that there might be a Cessation of
Arms till his return with the Answer. A Council of war being called in the
leaguer, Wismar treats.
Grams proposition was upon these terms assented unto.

1. That the town Captain should have a Mecklenburgers Trumpet, to go along
with him.

2. That this Captain, was to have Because he was to go as far as Bohemia.
three weeks allowed him for his return; and if he could not possibly make
his journey in that time; then he should have a month.

3. That the conditions of rendering the town, should by Gram be consented
unto, and under his hand and Seal, delivered to the Duke of Mecklenburg;
before the Captain should take his journey.

4. That in the mean time, there should be a Cessation of Arms both by Sea
and Land, on both sides: and pledges given for it.

5. That during this truce, the besieged should contain themselves within
their walls and Out-workes, and the besiegers, in their Quarters: the one, not
coming nearer to the Leaguer; nor the other, approaching no nearer to the
town.

6. That after the return of the Captain, Gram should immediately deliver up
the town and out-workes to the King of Sweden and the Dukes of Mecklenburg:
according to the agreements, before hand concluded upon.

7. But if in the mean time, the Fort called The Whale, should for want of
victuals be enforced to surrender; the taking in of that, should be no breach
of truice, or treaty.

This was much about the twentieth of our December: and whilst the Captain is
upon his way, the strong town of Damitz was yielded up: and that we now turn
to.

The place of it, is upon the very Southern Frontier of this Dukedom of
Mecklenburg; The siege of Damitz upon the Elb.
near unto the Marck of Brandenburg, next unto the Lower Saxony: from which
the river Elb only parts it.

It Is a very strong place, and had been long besieged by Colonel Lohausen:
against whom Colonel Strauben with his own, and some of the Duke de Savellies
Regiment, very well defended it. The town, at length, prettily thus betrayed
its own weakness, unto the Duke of Mecklenburg. Strauben upon the taking of
Rostock, fearing that the Baron of Virmond would have comne into his town; and
perchance have taken his command from him: writes a letter unto Virmond; to
diswade him. His reasons were, for that his Magazine was so empty, and his
provisions so near spent, that they would never maintain both of them, a
month together: so that he advised him to go seek some other Quarter.
Yielded.
These letters fell into the Duke of Mecklenburgs hand: whereupon, the siege
was more pressed and hastened. In the end, therefore, of December, was the
rendering concluded upon, on these articles.

with the conditions.
1. That the garrison should next day depart the town: without carrying away
any victuals or ammunition: without wronging the buildings, slighting any of
the works, or leaving any powder-mines or trains, in Cellars or other places.

2. That the Governor with all his own soldiers and officers, and those of
the Duke De Savelli, should freely march out of the city, with all their Arms
and Baggage-wagons, Colors flying, matches lighted, bullet in the mouth: upon
no pretense soever to be disturbed.

3. That they should by Lohausens men be convoyed unto Munden upon the Weser:
and be secured against all molestations by the way, either by the Kings forces,
or any other his Allies.

4. That they should have 16 wagons, for the carrying away of their sick people.

5. That such Ecclesiastical persons of the town, as had a mind to depart:
should have free leave to go themselves, and to carry away their Church
ornaments with them.

6. That the prisoners, on both sides, should be set at liberty, without
ransom.

7. Lastly, that 2 principal officers of the garrison, should be left for
hostages with Lohausen, till the safe return of his convoy.

Upon these conditions, was the town rendered; 400 of the garrison, quitting
their own Ensigns, became soldiers unto Lohausen. Those that marched toward
the Weser, were in the end of Januarie after, met withal and cut in pieces by
General Baniers men: as we shall anon tell you.

About the eighth of Januarie, the Wismar Captain, whom Governor Gram had sent
to Diepenbach, again returned: Wismar yielded.
whereupon, Tuesday January the tenth; was the town rendered, upon the
conditions before agreed. It chanced, that a Swedish Leiftenant, (one of those
that was to convoy Gram and his people into Silesia:) offered, upon the way, to
debauch some of his soldiers from him. Gram was so incensed with the
Leiftenant, for enticing away his men; that bending his pistol upon him, he
shot him dead upon the place. General Todt (a fierce man) having notice of
this feate; and of a discovery of false play withal, that Gram (contrary to
his covenants) had carried away 300 muskets in the straw and hay of his Baggage
wagons; and that he had pillaged some ships in the haven; and drowned some
pieces of ordnance, after the time of the agreement: he sends out Lohausen
after him, with a powder, Upon occasion of a quarrel by the way,
with Commission to lay hold on, and to send him and his Commissary, prisoners
into Gripswald, Gram was marched out with almost 3000 men, whom Lohausen falling
aboard with, kills 300 upon the place; and so terrifies 2000 more, that to save
their lives they became soldiers to the King of Sweden. The Commissary offered
12000 Dollars for his ransom: Todt takes Gram prisoner.
but before he gat out of Gripswald, more perchance were fetched out of him The
Swedes found 20 last of gunpowder within Wismar: with great store of fair
brass pieces, and military ammunition sufficient.

And thus the whole Dukedom of Mecklenburg being cleared of the Imperialists,
and the Walsteiners: and the true Princes r'impattiate into their own
possessions: the General Achatius Todt, (after a while) goes with his Army to
the assistance of the Bishop of Bremen: who having before risen with some 6 or
8000 men, and well recovered some of his towns again: he was now hard laid at
by the Count of Gronsfelt, by whom, the towns of Langwedel and Verden were
reprised from him. (...) of (...)
But a more desperate enemy was now coming upon him; Pappenheim was now
entered upon the stage of this Lower Saxony: (...) to ^^^ne with him.
and to him now turn we.

HOw inhumane a devestation of that so ancient and goodly Hanse town of
Magdenburg, the Counts of Tillie and Pappenheim had lately made, The Story of
Magdenburg.
we have in our First Part delivered. Of the cruelty of which fury; we did not
then, nor can do now; discover the one half to you. A goodly city, reduced
to such ruins: as if Hannibal had done it, and not Tilly: Hannibal (I say) who
had the Art by fire and vinegar, to moulder away the rocks and mountains into
crumbles; for the forcing of his own passage. Those that have since seen the
80 or 100 meaner houses, now only (with the Cathedral) left in Magdenburg:
have admired not only how the stone buildings, but the stones themselves
(unless in some vast Lime kiln) could possibly have been turned into such
scavage and such rubbish. It Is my Complaint, this; not my Declamation. I know
there is a sharp Latin pen; that has labored to excuse Tilly and
Pappenheim upon it; and to charge the whole blame upon the Townsmen, and the
Administrator. Tilly (he says) offered them I know not how much mercy. If to
offer a man peace with the loss of his Freedom and Religion, be mercy; then
must we find out another name for oppression. It was not their Emperor, that
the Magdenburgers resisted: but his Son: might Prince Rodolph William the
Emperors second Son, have been Bishop of Magdenburg, and the alteration of
religion and old customs yielded unto: then, upon those terms; might the
Magdenburgers have had such a mercy. That was the quarrel against Magdenburg:
they had accepted of Prince Christian William of Brandenburg, a Protestant; and
refused Prince Rodolph William of Gratz, a Catholic: and this ruined them.

How willing that Champion of Religion and of the Free towns the King of
Sweden would have been to redeem the city; may appear by his printed
Apology. See Page 100 of our First Part.
And to show that this was in earnest, had he then been able; he now goes
about it, so soon as he is: no sooner had the Victory of Leipsich made him
both strong and famous; but he devotes himself to the regaining of it. How the
General Banier, had at the Kings coming away from Hall and Leipsich, been
left thereabout with order to invest Magdenburg: The L. Marquess Hamilton,
goes to Magdenburg.
we before pointed at, Page 28 of our Second Part. The Lord Marquess of
Hamilton likewise, then lying in the neighbor Marck of Brandenburg, had
commission for the joining with Banier for the reducing of it. His Lordships
Army arryving in Pomerland in the beginning of August; presently did this
service unto the King of Sweden; that it was confessed to be one of the
occasions of the victory of Leipsich. The same of its being 20000 strong;
hastened Saxony to join with the King, and encouraged the whole Protestant
Party: and made Tillie, besides, to leave his garrisons 6 or 8000 stronger then
he needed otherwise to have done; who would have shrewdly troubled the King at
that great Battle.

This Army being landed at the White house by Wolgast, August the second; lay
there about 3 weeks or a month, for Arming and refreshing. Thence went they
to Ancklam, Vckermund, and Stetin: about which they lay in Dorps some 3 weeks
longer. Thence went they to Dam, Grippenhagen, Konincksberg, and Custrine: and
some into Franckford upon the Oder. Hence, after some 40 days, they went to
Moncheberg, Strausberg, and Bernaw: all on the West of the Oder. Thence to
Spandaw Brandenburg, and Zerbst: where they crossed the Elb. Thence to Kalbe and
Saltz; and so to Magdenburg, a little before the middle of November.

The town of Magdenburg had ever since a week before the Battle of Leipsich;
been entrusted with a great part of the riches and spoils of war, a long
time prowled together, by Tilly and his officers: who seeing the King would
fight, had sent them into that place of safety. The Governor of it, was Count
Wolff of Mansvelt: and his garrison, some 3000. The L. Marquess Hamilton and
the General Banier; sat down to it; about the middle of November: their
Quarters for the Foot-forces, being in 2 Dorps, about two English miles short
of the town, toward Saltz, the Elb being on their right hand. Both the
Generals, were lodged in one of those villages, where the Foot lay: which were
such decayed forsaken cottages; that the houses were neither enough, nor
sufficient, to keep the men dry. And thus had Tillie left the Country.
Baniers Horse, were quartered in the next Dorps on the left hand of Magdenburg:
the nearest at the distance of an English mile: though their guards were
nearer. Both Horse and Foot, might come to 6 or 7000 men. Works they had none
against the town, but only 3 Skonces: first, a greater one, upon the top of a
hill, half an English mile from the city: secondly, another to guard the
Avenue of their Quarter; and a third upon the right hand by the Elbs side,
which was indeed never finished. General Banier was, for the most part in the
Quarters: though now and then he made a posting voyage to Hall; 44 English
miles to the Southward: where about this time his wife lay in; and Bauditz was
one of his Gossips.

Pieces of service, there were only these 2, all the time of the 7 weeks
leaguer. The first was, (about the middle of the siege) upon a little Island in
the Elb: to which the townsmen used to send their Boats, a fuelling. This being
observed, some Dutch Foot were sent out against them, betwixt whom fell a
slight skirmish, not worth relating. Two slight skirmishes.
The mischance was more remarkable, then the encounter: for that a spark of
fire lighting into the powder, in one of the Dutch boats; blew that up, and the
assailants in it. The second service was toward Christmas, and by the horse:
300 of whom being put over to the further side of the Elb; there intercepted
some of the town garrison, that were sent over the bridge for forage.

The town, by Christmas eve, was brought to a Parlie, in which, had Banier
been as forward as my Lord Marquess, the town might have been rendered.
Three Commissioners were on both sides appointed for the treaty: The town
Parlies:
a Colonel, a Leiftenant-Colonel, and a Sergeant-Major. The Leiftenant Colonel,
sent from the Besiegers, was named Solomon Adams (as I take it) who is now
Governor of the town: and the Majors name is Chamberlain. The place of
treaty was between the Quarters and the town; each side bringing a guard of
100 foot, and 50 Horsemen. The conditions offered being something pressing, the
town Commissioners answered, that they were not as yet in such necessity; but
if they might have fair terms they would be willing to surrender. On
Wednesday they met again: but nothing was concluded: Drums and Trumpets,
going still between, from the town unto the leaguer. The night following,
there slipped 2 of Pappenheims horsemen into the town so that the L. Marquesses
Trumpet being next day sent in, with a full expectation to bring the news of
yielding: the Count of Mansfeld returned this peremptory word by him, that he
desired to be excused, Broken off, upon the news of Pappenheims coming.
he could not with his honor continue on the Treaty; for that he had
intelligence that his succors were marching: Pappenheim would be there by
such a day and hour; and that would he trust unto.

A Comfort, as cold as the season. News being still brought of Pappenheims
coming: upon New-yeares day would Banier needs be rising. Now he began to
show himself, and his Commission; by which he was not to fight, to the hazard
of the Army: whereupon depended the Lower Saxony. The L. Marquess, (as his
Captains now in town justify it to me) was very loath to have risen: but
Banier now countermanding all counsels, drew off his men the same evening and
hastened toward Saltz upon the West side of the river Sala, 7 English miles
South of Magdenburg. The siege levied.
The English and Scottish being too weak to abide Pappenheim, were feign to
go along too: and Banier thinking not himself sure enough at Saltz; went next
evening 6 miles more southerly, unto Kalbe; upon the same river. Beyond the
town on the other side the Sala, are there some strong Works: for the
guarding of the town and Pass; which is of good importance; Into these,
Banier now drew his men, over the Bridge; see now, who was most frighted. The
English and Scottish with 4 Dutch companies of Sir Alexander Leslies
(Generall-Major to the L. Marquess) staid within the town upon the other
side, Baniers fear.
next unto Magdenburg, Banier sent to the L. Marquess, to draw over toward
him: threatening if he would not, to burn the bridge, and to leave him to the
mercy of the enemy. He told the L. Marquess also, that he would blow up his
house in Calbe, which he was Quartered in: so soon as ever he were comne out
of it. This house, was a good high one, and next unto the River: out of the
windows whereof, (it is supposed) Baniers fear was, that the enemies
musketeers might play into his Works, and annoy his people. The Pass being
viewed by Sir Jacob Ashlie: he assured the Lord Marquess, that he might safely
march away in a quarter of an hours warning, in despite of Pappenheim and his
Army. The L. Marquess also by the sight of it being confirmed; refused to go
over the bridge to Banier, but staid here with his men, till after Pappenheims
quitting of Magdenburg: they went thence unto Halberstat. And thus came this
second endeavor of relieving Magdenburg; Pappenheim comes into Magdenburg.
unto nothing. Whether it were Baniers fear or Commission, that left
Pappenheim a fair way, to come into it, I know not: this is sure; that no
sooner were the Besiegers gone, but he entered into the town: and to him now
turns our Story.

How the Catholic Leaguers in their Diet of Ingolstat, did in December
conclude upon the setting forth of a flying Army, under the command of Godfrey
Count of Pappenheim: you may see Page 1^3 of our Second Part. His moneys for
the levy, were mostly made over to Cullen: thither went himself in person a
little after the Battle of Leipsich. He was to be Leiftenant-Generall, for the
Lower Saxony: and the Count of Gronsfelt; whom Tilly with some small forces,
had lately left about the Weser, was to be his Felt-Marshall. Some Commissions
had before his coming, been given out for Regiments: as to Lambo, Quade,
Aschenburg, Ohr, Nienhausen and Palant; all Colonels. Part of Lamboes Horse
Regiment gathered out of Luickland; himself saw mustered before him at Cullen,
in the beginning of December: but being neither complete nor armed; it went not
along with him. Nienhausen that was Amptman of Stierwaldt by Hildesheim: had
not a long time after gotten up above 300 Foot, and 150 Horse. Palant, was to
have a double Regiment, of Horse and Foot: Two Horse-Regiments of Westerholt
and Westphalia, were said to be already in Munsterland: so that none of all
these went now along with him into Brunswickland.

And yet he even now, promised to relieve Magdenburg; and about the middle of
December, he sets out from Cullen to Wolfenbuttle in Brunswickland: 44 English
miles, to the Southwest of Magdenburg. Thitherward he goes, only with his own
private retinue: not so much as with a Cornet, or a Company. For the patching
up of of his Army, he was to lighten the garrisons of Brunswickland: out of
every one of which, these were his proportions. Out of Nienburg on the Weser,
he drew 300 Foot, of young Tillies Regiment, Governor of Ingolstat: commanded
by his Leiftenant Colonel Steven Andreas. Out of Minden and Hamelen, each 300,
of Gronfelts Regiment: commanded by Captain Seubersdorff. Of Blanckharts
Regiment, he had 300: and as many out of Kalemberg, Nieustettle and Steinbrugg:
commanded by Captain Pop. Out of Gottingen had he 400 of old Tillies Regiment;
commanded by Wilich. Out of Wolfenbuttle, 1000: half belonging to Count
Gronsfeldt, and half to Baron Glein, Governor of the town. Glein went along
with his part: and Captain Scharffseder lead the other moitie. Lastly, he had
7 Ensigns or 300, which we told you came out of Damitz: which belonged to
Baron Loebel, a Counselor of War to the Emperor: who being not there, they
were led by Stauder, his Leiftenant-Colonell. These were in all 3200. Cornets
of Horse, he had 25: whereof, of Bonickhausens. 12: Of Horsts, 8. and of
Lintlo's 5. in all about 1500. Horse and Foot, in all: 4700.

Pappenheim, indeed, gave out himself to be 10 or 12000 and for so many he
commanded bread to be baked at Wolfenbuttle: and yet to conceal the smallnes
of his numbers, did he never march from Wolfenbuttle unto Magdenburg, but in
the night, and in divided Companies.

There had particular intelligence been sent out of Kalemberg to the General
Banier, of the smalnesse of Pappenheims Army: and the Prince of Anhalt (as I
hear) offered to lay his own head, to a Dollar, if he were 5000 men. But Duke
Frederick Vlrick of Brunswick being deceived by Pappenheims Bakers, (who
showed Commissions to provide for 12000) writing to Banier, that he was indeed
so strong: this was the thing that scared the Swedish General; who considered
that the town of Magdenburg, had 2900 more, to join with him.

His Commission (I hear) was not to fight, as little as Baniers: the chief of
this his first expedition, being to spoil the works to fetch the goods and
garrison out of Magdenburg: for which he was said, to have carried 3 or 400
wagons along with him. These wagons served also to barricadoe the Army on the
wing: many of these having 3 or 4 soldiers in them with double hakes: which are
pieces that shoot 6 ounces bullett.

The weaker towns of the Duke of Brunswicks, betwixt Wolfenbuttle and
Magdenburg; he now plunders: this was but to keep his hand in ure, and for his
recreation. Helmstat, a town and Vniversite 24 English miles from
Wolfenbattle, is so served; after his lying 4 days at it, Here he left Loebels
7 companies of 300 men. Thence goes he to Schoningen 12 miles further: and so
to Garleben; whence he thrusts into Magdenburg. He enters Magdenburg:
There having a while refreshed his Army; he devides his own and Manfelds
men, into 2 great Partees: which are sent severally abroad upon both sides of
the river, for the speedyer plundering of the Country.

No sooner were the L. Marq. Hamilton and the General Banier gone out of
Saltz; but Pappenhelms men were the same day pillaging of it. Eroleben,
Elendeleben, Biren, and sends out 2 Partees, to plunder the Country.
and Altensleben, are made prey of: and so is Mulingen Castle; the Court and
Residence of the Count of Barby. On the Eastern side of the Elb, is the Baron
of Glein (Governor of Wolfenbuttle) sent out, with some 6 troops of Horse and
1500 or 2000 Musketeers.

He goes or sends first, to Gomeren; 8 English miles South-East of Magdenburg.
This Partee of his makes toward Barby town, within 2 miles of Calbe: where
(if we will believe Gallobelgicus) they were very strangly frighted. The
plunderors (as they thought) discerned a great many fires about the town:
which they supposed to be so many Courts of guard: and that the Swedish, in
this neerenesse to Kalbe, had been there enquartered. The townsmen hearing
afterward, by what apparitions their town had been preserved, concluded
verily (says he) that it was a guard of Angels, which had thus skared away
their enemies. Those of our nation, then hard by Barby, never heard of this
Ignis fatuus: this, indeed, was upon our Twelfe day; and yet, I believe nothing
of this Theophania, these divine apparitions.

Something there might be in it: diverse of our nation of Captain Dowglasse
Company, lying that night at Rosenberg (within sight of Barby) for the guard
of the baggage; set, by mischance, a Gentleman's house and another, on fire:
which is likelyest to be the fires, imagined.

January the seventh, does Pappenheim draw out of Magdenburg: He forsakes
Magdenburg.
not as my last quoted Author delivers, for that he had news of the Duke of
Lunenburgs threatening to besiege Wolfenbuttle: for (plainly) neither this Duke
nor his Brother, had as yet any one man levied. Pappenheim and Manfeld having
concluded, first that the town was not to be maintained; and secondly, that
the whole country was more to be considered, then that one ruinated City;
they had now resolved upon leaving of it. Pappenheim had done what he came for,
and what should he stay there, longer? Having therefore charged all the goods
he came thither for, upon his wagons; he sends them onward with his Foot,
toward Wolfenbuttle. The ordnance which he had resolved to carry along with
him; it seems he wanted horses for: seeing 18 of these were found standing
upon the market place; with their harness or traice cut; after the
draught-horses had been put to them.

Out of Magdenburg, carried he these forces. Of Colonel Breuners Regiment, 10
Companies, or 1500. Of Marquess William of Baden, 8 Companies, or 650. Of
Cratz his Regiment 5 Companies, about 150. Of Goltz his Regiment, 500. Besides
these, were 3 troops of horse; one, of Manfelds own guards; and the other 2
of Crabats: but all so weak, that those 3 could not make up a hundred. In all,
2900: 1000 of which, he again put into Wolfenbuttle.

Pappenheim was gone almost 2 days, before the Lord Marquess or Banier had
notice of it. The Pappenheimers brave the Swedish.
Whilst his Foot and Baggage, were marching away; some troops of his horse
made a Brave upon the Swedish before their Quarters. A fair Compagnia there is
betwixt Saltz and Kalbe: and a hill in it within half an English mile of this
latter. Upon that, did some of them make a muster of themselves; stood still,
and gazed upon the English and the Scottish: whom my Lord Marquess now
commanded to be drawn out into Battaglia; Banier likewise having sent over
some 6 or 7 troops of Horse and Dragooners. Two hours, they stood looking
thus one upon another: without exchanging so much as one bullet, between them.
The Pappenheimers, it appears, meant not to make a business of it: but did it
only to amuse their enemies: either whilst their Foot and baggage, might get
the more time to march away; but march away without doing any thing.
or that their other fellows might, in the mean time, plunder some of the
neighbor Dorps, undisturbed. After 2 hours, these Horse marched off quietly;
and followed after their Army unto Wolfenbuttle.

Pappenheim leaving Magdenburg; did not commit that spoil and barbarism, upon
the town, as was reported. Part of the bridge (some say) he burned: though
others say it was burnt before. Some boats and mills also in the river; and blew
up some of the Works. Of ordnance, he left 18 (as was said) upon the market
place, 19 he drowned in the Elb; 2 he blew up with gunpowder, and left above 40
upon the walls. Three hundred Quintalls of gunpowder (each Quintall being 100
pound weight) he left behind him; which had it not been concealed from him:
he would, surely, have put fire unto, or have carried away with him. A world
of Match, was there left; and of corn, pease and oats, great plenty, And all
this was found in it, when as upon the Monday, after Pappenheims going; my Lord
Marquess entered it. The General Baniers Army, My Lord Marquess enters
Magdenburg.
staid about Kalbe, till Duke William of Saxon-Weymar came into those parts to
join with him, to pursue Pappenheim: and my Lord Marquesses men, till toward
the end of the month, that they went toward Halberstate, He and Banier, part
companies.
Their way lay Westward; by Egelen, 16 miles; thence to Gruningen, 12 miles:
whence 6 miles further unto Halberstat; where they staid above a quarter of a
year for the guard of the town and country; He going to To the King of
Sweden.
till such time as they were taken on by Duke William: as in the Kings Story
we have told you. From Halherstat, upon the first of February, went the Lord
Marquess toward the King of Sweden: with whom the eleventh of the same month
he arrived. His Lordship (as I have heard Sir Jacob Ashley tell, who in that
journey waited upon him) was very graciously entertained by the King: a
concluding argument, that what his Lordship had undertaken, was very well
accepted: The King of Sweden (besides his freedom of language, wherein he used
not to be sparing, against whatsoever had displeased him:) had a Spirit,
withal, so highly mounted above all dissembling, that it scorned to speak or
to look, booty.

The Count of Pappenheim being arrived at Wolfenbuttle, about the eleventh or
twelfe of January, Pappenheim goes from Wolfenbuttle.
he leaves the luggage brought out of Magdenburg, in this strong City; and
1^00 or 2000 men with the Lord of Glein, to defend it. This town, was
sometimes the Court and Residence of the Dukes of Brunswick: until Tilly of
late years, had taken it from the King of Denmark: and thrust Duke Vlricke
thence; by the unrulynesse of an Imperial garrison. For the Duke perceiving he
had no command over his subjects, by reason of the garrison: so soon as ever
he had consented to the Diet of Leipsich; he pretending to go a hunting, went
to reside in Brunswick town; and never since that time, returned into
Wolfenbuttle.

About the middle of the month, the Count of Pappenheim sets forward into the
country of Lunenburg: whose eldest Duke Christian of Zella-Lunenburg; is now
heir apparent unto the childlesse Vlrick of Brunswick, before-named. Before his
going, he sends to the Imperial town of Brunswick; 7 English miles down the
same river of Onacre, with Wolfenbuttle, to the Northward. His demand was, to
be by that City furnished with a Viaticum, or proportion of provisions for his
journey. This being a very strong town, which the Dukes of Brunswick, (though
often they have attempted it) could never make themselves Masters of: had the
courage to deny him this motion.

Now marches he up into Lunenburg; and of that Duke he demands contribution;
toward Lunenburg.
and that his strong town of Zel upon the river Alre, should take in a
garrison from him. There be 5 Brothers of these Dukes of Lunenburg (as I hear)
and all unmarryed except Duke George. The eldest, I have before named: The
second Brother, is Duke George; the man now coming upon the stage of war;
for which purpose he was at this instant at Hamborow, about his Bills of
Exchange, and getting up of monyes To Duke Christian was Pappenheim said to
write his letters, to this purpose. That he should send Commissioners to him,
Writes to Lunenburg.
to agree upon his contributions: labor to hinder the levies of his brother
George: and if he could not that way prevail with him; he should either
arrest his body and keep it safely in Zell, or else send that and the men he
had begun to levy, into his Army. Some speak of Pappenheims threatening to
besiege Zell: but this the Duke (perchance) would not be much afraid of: his
town being very near as strong as Wolfenbuttle. To be brief, the Duke
excusing himself, and compou^ds with him.
that he had no power over his brother, agreed with Pappenheim to give him
40000 Dollars monthly contribution. This was the Dukes cheapest course; for
he well knew that Pappenheim could never stay to take up the first payment of
it: Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, the Landgrave of Hessen, and the General
Banier, the Duke understood to be all at this instant coming against
Pappenheim; so that he knew he could never be able to stay in his country,

But for this, Pappenheim had the best of Lunenburg: for that he had already
nestled himself in the Freyheit, (or Freedom) the strongest part of the Dukes
country. His way to it from Wolfenbuttle, was to Steinbruck, on the river
Fuse, 18 English miles from Wolfenbuttle. Thence passing by Hanover, 30 miles
further, he settles himself at Betterlo in the Freyheit; 10 English miles from
the river Weser. A place it is, to the North of Hanover; having a pretty strong
castle by it: both round encompassed with 2 woods, the 2 rivers Aller and
Leine; diverse ditches and Morasses; Avoiding out of the country,
so that there is but hard coming at it But here could he not stay above 5 or
6 days; for that hearing by this time of the General Todts taking of Wismar,
and his coming (or about to come) over the Elb, to the defense of the Bishop
of Bremen, and Dukes of Lunenburg: as also of Duke Williams, Hessens and
Baniers approaching, on the other side upon him: he fearing to be driven up
into the middle betwixt them; makes with all speed toward the strong town of
Hamelen upon the Weser. he passes beyond the Weser
He had a good mind (it appeared) to have lived with his Army till the
Spring, in the Lunenburgers country: but fore-dooming, by the preparations,
that these winter-moneths might prove hotter to him then the Dog-dayes: that
was the reason that he by Hamelen passed over the Weser, to Quarter himself in
a quieter country.

And it was time for him, to get Hamelen upon his back: upon which, his enemies
would else have been. We told you before of the coming of 300 Imperialists
under 7 Ensigns out of Damitz: these, at this instant, coming out of
Helmstat, (where at his going to Magdenburg, we told you he had left them)
toward Hamelen to join with Pappenheim; 300 Imperialists defeated.
were met withal by a Partee of 150 Horse of General Baniers; and cut all in
pieces, or made turn to the Swedish party. The reason that facilitated this
defeat, was, for that they thought themselves so far from enemies, and so
secure in that neerenesse to Pappenheim; that they marched without burning
matches. This town of Hamelen is seated upon the Eastern and Brunswicker
side, of the famous river of Weser: betwixt it and the mountains. Pappenheims
march thither, lay directly to the Southward, through the Counties of Hoy and
Schawenburg. Passing the Weser at this Hamelen to the South, and Westphalian
side of it: Pappenheim going to enquarter his Army beyond the Weser.
he in the end of Januarie, strikes up to the Westward, into the County of
Lemgow: for there and in the neighbor Counties of Waldeck, Lip, and
Ravensperg his purpose was to have lodged his divided Army; and to recreut it
by the Spring time, with new levyes. He had not been gone a full week, but
that his Commissary-Generall Lirchenfelt, sent him advise from Hamelen; that
Duke William Weymar, the Landgrave of Hessen, and the General Banier, were all
conjoined about Hildesheim and Calenberg: is sent for back to Hamelen.
some of their troops being within a days march of Hamelen. This causes
Pappenheim to countermarch: and to draw out the garrison, which he had lately
thrust into the town of Lemgow, and to put it into Hamelen to strengthen it.
Leaving him, for the present, about Hamelen, Rintelin, and those other many
good towns upon the Western bancke of the Weser: let us go back, awhile, to
bring his adversaries into the Cockpit to him. Todt, Bremen, Lunenburg, William
Weymar, Hessen, and Banier: all 6 were now coming against or upon poor
Pappenheim; and yet he shifted among all of them: yea not shifted only, but gat
now and then, the best of some of them.

The General Sir John Banier, after that Magdenburg was taken some order for;
and a small garrison left to defend and help the poor people, Banier,
which from all the parts of their banishment, began now to return homewards
to their own City: advances to join himself with Duke William of
Saxon-Weymar. This Duke having Commission from the King, to recover the towns
in that corner of the Lower Saxony; next unto his Duringen, Magdenburg, the
river Weser, and the land of Hessen: sets out from Erfurt about the tenth of
Januarie, to march thitherward. and Duke William.
His course layfull Northward; where first he comes to Mansfeldt; the chief
town of the County of that name. Thence (as I find) he marched to Quedlenburg:
an Impropriate Abbey, now belonging to a Lady Abbess, a Protestant. Thence
advances he to Osterwick in the Bishopric of Halberstat, 40 English miles due
West of Magdenburg: and there, about the two and twentieth of January, does the
General Banier join with him. This Osterwick, is just 20 English miles short
of Wolfenbuttel, join forces.
upon a branch of the same river with it: and was the General Baniers direct
way, to go after Pappenheim.

They being thus conjoined; send first of all their Partees up and down the
country toward the Weser: both for scouring of the coasts thereabouts, as
also to make the Landgrave of Hessens passage, the easier to come unto them.
And now it is, that Baniers men defeated 300 of Loebels Regiment: which Page
118. we told you were going out of Helmstat toward Hamelen. And this Hamelen
(belonging of right unto the Duke The town of Hamelen, belongs half unto the
Duke of Brunswick, and half unto the Bishop of Hildesheim: but of late days,
wholly unto Brunswick: who also was Bishop of Hildesheim until these last wars:
in which it was vrung away from the Duke, and given unto the Bishop of Cullen:
who is also Bishop of Liege, Munster, and Paderborn: Duke of Westphalia,
Angaria, etc. Marquess of Franchimont, etc.
of Brunswick) these 3 Generals thought at this time to have besieged: but
besides the great raynes, and low situation of the place, (which rendered it
un-approachable) Pappenheim (as we told you;) did even now thrust more succors
into it, out of Lemgo. Hereupon, do the 3 Generals divide their forces: the
Landgrave of Hessen setting him down to the siege of Goettingen, (a town
sometimes the Duke of Brunswicks, lying upon the river Rhuma, 14 or 15 English
miles to the East of the river Weser.) and Duke William and Banier, going to
the siege of Goslar, an Imperial town betwixt the Bishoprics of Hildesheim
and Halberstat, 40 English miles to the North-East of Goettingen. But before
we tell of these sieges; we must step a little aside to the
South-west-ward, to fetch the Landgrave of Hessen into the Country.

This Prince, having received intelligence, that the towns which he had lately
taken in the Bishopric of Paderborn, (as in the former Story of his Actions
we have told you) did now upon his absence with the King of Sweden, The
Landgrave of Hessen comes against Pappenheim.
and the coming of Pappenheim into Brunswickland and toward the Weser, (on
the West and South of which, Paderborn is) refuse their promised contributions:
he in the end of December, taking leave of the King; makes that wayward with
his Army, to recover them. Before the middle of Januarie, he had reprised
Warburg: whereinto Pappenheim had newly thrust a garrison of nine hundred. The
town he took by Storm; and all that resisted, dyed for it. Thence advances
he to Stathagen: which terrified by the former example, yields to him. And so
does Volckmarsen; with some other Strengths thereabouts, of smaller
consequence. Having again thus scummerd over the frontiers of Paderborn, he
passes the river Weser and besieges Goettingen; as we before told you. To the
relief of this town, Some Pappenheimers defeated.
when Pappenheim upon his coming to Hamelen, sent some troops; they were
defeated by some of Duke Williams and Baniers Horse Partees, that scoured up
and down the Country.

But Pappenheim was not long unrevenged for this: for that in the beginning of
this February, having gotten notice by a Boore, how that Colonel Laus
(Laurence) Cag a Swede; and Sergeant-Major-Generall, was with 3 new and weak
Regiments of Dragooners, of about 1300 men, lodged near unto Hoxter and Corvey
by the Weser; some 20 English miles to the South of Hamelen: he hastens
thitherward to defeat them. He had before this, taken a Swedish Leiftenant,
whom he kept prisoner with him. Being ready to march, in the morning before
daylight; Come, up, (say the Pappenheimers to the Leiftenant) you must along
with us, Pappenheim cuts off 1500 Swedish Dragooners.
to the throat-cutting of your Countrymen. And indeed they were as good as
their words: for that Pappenheim falling into their Quarters about 12 a clock,
(which was the usual hour, that he still observed) he cut in pieces the most
of these Dragooners, or forced the^ into the river and Morasses: where it was
easy to kill them, that were first buried.

The Ensigns of these Dragooners, Pappenheim made a glorious flourish withal,
at his return again to Hamelen: and all to magnify his victory. Pappenheims
craftynesse.
It Was a notable ingenious crafty General, this Pappenheim: for having thus
cleared Hoxter; he would send his men along the Wesers side, betwixt Hamelen,
Munden, and Hoxter; who should go over the bridges, and so come round about
again. And thus did some one Regiment walk the round, 2 or 3 times over; and
all this was to make show, as if every one of these Regiments had been new
forces comne to him, out of Waldeck; and to make a noise of a great Army, among
the Boores, that the Swedish Generals might hear of it, and be terrified.

But for all these cracks and flourishes, and his giving out himself to be 10
or 12000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, when he was not above 10000 in all; yet durst he
not appear in Campagnia; nor go very far from the bancks of the Weser: so
that the Swedish Generals, went thorough, well enough, with their 2 sieges.

Goslar taken by Duke William and Banier;
The town of Goslar, is Imperial; and the Magistrate there, was altogether for
the Emperor: other garrison then of the town, I find none in it. There needed
no streighter a siege, then the blocking first; and the presenting of the
gross of the Army before it, afterward: for the Magistrate sent to compound
for 10000 Dollars with the Generals; and received 1000 of Colonel Mitzlaffs
regiment, in to them, for a garrison. From hence, goes the Army unto Northeim;
a town upon the river Rhuma, some 12 English miles short of Goettingen.

This is a town of no garrison, nor resistance: for that the General Tilly
had heretofore dismantled it; with other towns.
and slighted down the Fortifications. This were they comne unto before the 20
of this February. Then take they in Northen; midway betwixt Northeim and
Goettingen. In Quarters about this last town, had the Landgrave laid this
whole fortnight: not so much, to offer any battery to it; but so to block it
up, that he might withal have an eye to Pappenheim. But now was the siege
begun, in good earnest, Colonel Carthaus commanded in the town; and his
garrison was some 900: good store of small pieces he had besides; with
victuals and ammunition to have held out longer. The Swedish bring forward 2
several Approaches: and after 2 breaches, they cause the town at both these
places to be stormed. This whilst the Swedish are in good earnest about to
do; they cause false offers and Sealadoes to be made show of in other parts,
Goettingen taken,
the more to divert the defendants from their breaches. The town is by force
entered; and Carthaus with his officers flinging down their Arms, are taken
prisoners: and the houses plundered. Here were above 100 Field pieces, Mortars,
and Sling pieces, made prize of: 7000 weight of musket bullet; with powder,
match, and ammunition proportionable. Ericksburg castle (a very strong place,
belonging to the Bishopric of Hildesheim, so named of Duke Erick of
Brunswick, the builder of it) is likewise yielded upon composition, For the too
sudden rendering of this Fort, with Ericksburg Castle.
was Captain Wolff of the Regiment of Blanckhart; by Pappenheim afterward
imprisoned. Upon the taking of this Castle; did the towns of Pain, Haselrode,
and Duderstat, upon the North side of the Bishopric of Hildesheim, come in:
which a Captain of Blanckharts Regiment, now yielded; thus all was clear on
that side, even to Lunenburg, Bremen, and the Elb stream. By the winning of
Goettingen also, are the other smaller towns, Duderstat brought in with little
trouble; which lies betwixt that and Duringen. and the whole country cleared.
And thus was all that you see in the Map of Brunswick and Magdenburg
(excepting Duderstat and the town of Wolfenbuttle) becomne Swedish: even from
the Upper Saxony on the East side; unto the river of Weser, on the West side
of the Country: as also North and South from Duringen unto Lunenburg, and the
Middle Marcke of Brandenburg.

And this was done by the 25 of our February: Duke William and Banier, sent for
unto the King.
about which time Duke William and the General Banier were sent for unto the
King of Sweden: even then upon his march into Bavaria, Banier (as I take it)
set forward a little before Duke William: and he recovered up unto the King, by
the tenth of March following. The Duke staid something longer, (...) along the
Dukedom of Lunenburg, by his old Quarters at Betterlo: beyond which, he passes
the river Aller, leaving Zell upon the right hand of him. into the Bishopric
of Bremen.
But he forgate not by the way, to pay himself some of those 12000 Dollars
monthly contribution; which the Duke of Zella-Lunenburg, at his former being
in these parts had promised him: as Page 117 of this Fourth Part, we have told
you.

And now is his purpose wholly for the delivery of the town of Stoade, by the
Elbs side in the Bishopric of Bremen: his own uncle Bicknicker (as I hear)
was now Governor in the town; who with almost (if not full) 4000 men, were by
this end of this April, blocked up by Otto (or Achatius) Todt; and General
Major Lohausen, with the Lunenburgers forces. But before we speak of this
service let us leave our Pappenheim upon his march thitherwards: and go back
to fetch up Todts Story, to show how he came into these quarters.

General Todt comes into Lunenburgland.
We told you Page 106 of this Book, of his coming to the relief of the
Bishopric of Bremen: and hither let us now fetch up himself and forces. His
march from Wismar which he last took (by which all the Dukedom of Mecklenburg
was cleared) lay to the Northeast, to the Elb-ward, quite through the said
Duchy. On the Mecklenburger side of the Elb, toward Hamborow, is there a
little cantlet of land, called the land of Sachsen or Saxonland: the country
(as I take it) of the Dukes of Saxon Lawenburg. In this land, were Todts
Regiments a while enquartered: which staid not long there: but passed about
Lawenburg over the Elb, and were drawn to Bardewick in Lunenburgland, Todt
himself going into Lunenbung; about 10 or 12 English miles from Lawenburg, and
4 or 5 from Bardewick.

His Army consisted of Swedes and Mecklenburgers; and of some English and
Scottish Regiments: Duke George of Lunenburgs men, after a while coming also
to him.

Of Sir Thomas Conwayes Regiment, himself, his Leiftenant-Colonell Steward,
and 300 soldiers; were upon the fifth of November cast away on the coast of
Norway: Sir Thomas Conw^y drowned, and his Regiment landed.
the other 5 Colors with about 700 men; arriving upon the seven and twentieth
of the same month, at Warnemund by Rostock. The Sergeant-Major over these 5
companies, was Captain Thomas Grove, who now commanded them. And all these
about Christmas after, had order to march to Wismar. That being rendered (as
Page 105 we have told you) Todt and Lohausen with the Swedes and
Mecklenburgers; in all not above 4000 at the most, made have toward Lawenburg
on the Elb, some 50 English miles distant from Wismar. On Newyeares day at
night, the 5 English Colors (who marched by themselves) were at Sarnine in
Mecklenburgland. Wednesday January the fourth, they marched and met the three
Scottish Regiments. Thence on Sunday to Hagenow; whence to Boitzenberg on the
Elb; and so crossed the Elb at Lawenburg, whence they went to be enquartered with
the Army in Bardewick; a very fine town (and sometimes a rich one) before
spoken of. To this town came some of the Lunenburgers forces.

About the time of that Sir Thomas Conwayet 5 Ensigns came to Warnemund; Sir
Frederick Hamiltons, and the Lord Forbesses Regiments join with the Army.
did 5 of Sir Frederick Hamiltons Colors land also. They were Scottish and
Irish people: amongst which was 1 Sir Fredericks own Company; 2. Coninghams,
Leiftenant-Colonell: 3. Troops, Sergeant-Major: 4 Gibsons, and 5 Flemmings,
Captains. The other 4 Ensigns that belonged to this Regiment, were landed
other where; and came not, till summer into the Army. The Lord Forbesse had
also his Scottish Regiment there: himself being taken prisoner, coming
betwixt Luckstadt and Hamborow, and carried into Wolfenbuttel; where he yet is.
Neither English nor Scottish Regiments, had any fixed Arms, as yet: which in
plain English phrase, is; They were not yet fully Armed.

However, half armed, or unarmed, as they were; Sergeant-Maior Groves with his
English, and the 2 Scottish Regiments; were after some 16 or 20 days lying
about Bardewick, commanded toward Boxtehude. The town is belonging to the
Archbishop of Bremen; and lies upon the small river Essa, within 4 English
miles of the borders of Lunenburg; the Elb it self being within 8 miles to the
North; and Hamborow almost as near it, to the Eastward. It Is a stronger town
then Stoade: and there was a good garrison now in it: Boxtehude beseiged,
a place besides it is, of very good consequence; for that it is the Pass into
that which they call the Old land, in which Stoade stands. The General Todt
with the rest of the Army, lay now at Hornburg; a pretty Fleck or market town,
some seven English miles to the Northwest of Boxtehude, that was now
beleagred. At this Hornburg was the Hoff-Quarter (or Head Quarter) for that
this is also another Pass, into the Old land aforesaid: by which, Stoade was
on that side also straightened.

especially by those of our nation.
The English and Scottish lay some 10 days at first, an English mile off from
Boxtehude: with unfixt Arms, for a great part, and without powder or bullets.
After this, they were sent to lie at a place called the Old Cloister, which is
within a quarter of a mile of the town, to the Southward. Some few Dutch
companyes there were, enquartered upon the Old lands side betwixt the town and
the Elb: but they were the English and Scottish that had the most to do in the
beleagring.

In the time of this seige, upon Doctor Salviue advertisements before given to
the King, Todt is sent for away by the King, and Sir Alexander Lesly comes to
the Army.
of the General Todts misbehaviour in the Army; had his Majesty sent away for
him: and Sir Alexander Lesly was commanded from the Lord Marquess Hamiltons
Army, by the King of Swedens Commission; to come and take charge of Todts Army,
with the Style of Sergeant Mayor General Sir Alexander being now comne to the
Old Cloister, (aforenamed) and going about to take view of the Boxtehude;
within 3 or 4 days after his first coming; was short from the town into the
instep of the left foot. He being thus disabled for the commanding of the
Army, and carried off, unto Hamborow; Todt; for the time, was to do all
again: who being shot,
Lohausen (a Colonel with one leg) being then made Sergeant Major General.
And this order continued, till that Wolff Hendrick Baudissin (native of
Lusatia, and commonly called Bauditz) was sent down to be Leiftenant General;
Baudissin is sent to take charge of the Army.
and Tott now going away, Duke George of Lunenburg became General of the Army.
But Boxtehude was first taken; and Pappenheim gone again, ere Baudissin came
to the Army.

To return to the siege. There were 3 several Batteries by this time, gotten
up against the town: whereof 2 upon the Old cloister side, and a third upon
the other: from all which the Swedish Canon played every day into the City. Nor
were the besieged, altogether idle. Having advertisement by the Boores, that
the English and Scottish Regiments, were not half armed, and but raw soldiers;
200 of the town Horsemen; one night sallyed out upon their Quarters. They fell
out with a very great clamor and noise making: and were comne within 20 paces
of their very Guards. Those of our nation that had Arms, stood their ground: A
Sally repulsed.
and 2 troops of Horse were quickly at hand to second them. It Is said, that some
of the Irish ventured upon the salliers horsemen, with their skeynes or swords
only: and did some piece of execution upon them. However, the leader of the
sallyers was there shot dead and fell; his men forced to retire: being after
some skirmishing, beaten into the very Ports of their City. Another night,
they fell out of the town again; and set fire upon the Scottish Guardes: and
had they adventured but a little further, they had put the Quarters into a
terrible confusion. But even now they were persuaded in again.

The siege went on in the mean time, and the Canon from all 3 Batteries did
their duties: faggots and storming ladders were also made show of; nor yet
would these offers fright out the besieged. Full 3 weeks, there was misery
enough endured by those of our nation without the town: about the end of which
time, upon the fourth of March; the besieged (as it were for pity of our
Countrymen) yielded; Boxtehude yielded.
and marched upon good conditions into Stoade. Boxtehude being thus taken, our
English having done the chief of their service there; were offered to garrison
the town: which they gladly enough accepting of; the 5 Colors were put into
it. Here lay they 3 weeks: Sergeant-Major Grove being Governor. The General
Todt having a purpose to put in a Swede (a servant of his) to be Governor over
Groves head: The English being put into the town, were by Todt commanded out
again.
he being a high spirited Gentleman, that could not endure to be rewarded with
such an affront for all his services: the English colors were commanded out,
and a Swedish Leiftenant-Colonell (not Todts man) put in to be Governor, with
5 Ensigns.

Thence were the English sent to block up Stoade; about which, the rest of the
Army were quartered up and down in Dorps; the snow not then suffering them to
lie in open Quarters. But this served the turn well enough: Todts purpose
being, Stoade blockt up.
but to block it up at a distance; victuals were so scarce with him, that he
should not otherwise have been able to have kept the Army together, in one
leaguer. This town is seated upon a small riveret called the Zwing, about 2
English miles from the Elb: a skonce being betwixt it and the City. The land
on both hands of it, is low morasses: Causeyes running al along thorough them.
The country on the North of it, is the Keydinger land, (vulgarly called the
Land of Kayne) and that part to the East and Southward, is called the Old land
of Stoade. There was a garrison of almost (if not altogether) 40^0 men in the
town. Pappenheims own kinsman being the Governor. Here had the Besiegers
exercise enough: the Besieged daily falling out into their Quarters. Sometimes
did they affront their Quarters, with mighty Partees, of a full thousand:
otherwise, with 2 or 300 Horsemen, or more, with musketeers behind them. Thus
would they give a Camisado, beat and fire a Quarter, now and then; and so in
again, never standing to it to make good any thing. And thus went on the
business, all this month, and the next: Todt having neither purpose nor
power, to attempt more upon the town; the garrison (plainly) being near as
strong as his Army: especially after the taking of Bremersford; which next
followed.

In the end of April, whilst Stoade was blockt; was this town of Bremersford
besieged by a Regiment of the Archbishop of Bremens. At this town, whilst the
Bishop had it; was his Palace and place of Residence. The besieged were hard
put to it for provisions; for all which they had taken a desperate oath, that
they would never yield the town, but to the Kings Army. Bremersford taken.
The General Todt being advertised of this resolution; sends away Sir
Frederick Hamiltons Regiment, under the command of his Leiftenant Colonel
Coningham; to take in the City. The besieged no sooner saw his Colors fly,
before their Walls; but they presently entered into a Parley. The Bremers
Colonel hereupon, being jealous of his honor, privately and presently, made
tender unto them of better conditions: whereupon they immediately concluded,
and marched out every way like soldiers into Stoade.

No sooner was this done, but there came news instantly unto Bremersford; that
Pappenheim with 9 or 10000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, was coming, and within 10
hours march of them: and indeed this town was directly in his way, to
Stoade-ward Command was now sent from the General, that the Regiment should
hasten away to Boxtehude, and deliver up Bremersford, to the Bremers Colonel.
The Regiment being most Irish and Scots, used to wading and night-marching:
came flouncing thorough the Bogs and By-places, and recovered safely into
Boxtehude; notwithstanding the enemies drums, were all the night within
hearing.

This was about the end of our April. Pappenheims march was from Hamelen and
Nyenburg upon the Weser, along to the Northward, through the Bishopric of
Ferden, and the edge of Lunenburg, and then between the Fennes of Bremerland.
Leaving the river Zwing upon his right hand, and crowding in between
Bremersford and Harseneld cloister; Pappenheim enters Stoade.
he thrust himself into Stoade City. He was, indeed, though not so many as
he gave out himself for; yet much about 10000 Horse and Foot: which with the
Towne-garrison, was far too strong for Todts Army. He therefore now gave way
to him: marching to Boxtehude and through it, to get all his own Army to a head
for resistance. Pappenheim was in Stoade, before the Swedes imagined he could
have been: himself giving them the first assurance of his being there, by the
shooting off (in a military bravery) all his Ordnance.

He being now in Stoade, had the passage into the Keydingerland, Cutts off
Leslyes Regiment.
(to the North of him) open. There was the Regiment of Major General Leslyes,
and 4 Companies of Colonel Monroes of Obsdell, enquartered, to block up Stoade
on that side. Upon these now falls Pappenheim, cuts them off all; takes 19
Colors, and Major Leslyes own Ensign amongst them: Of those that were taken
prisoners; Officers were made prisoners to Officers, Captains to Captains;
and so forth: and notwithstanding that the Pappenheimers had spare horses enough,
(for that they took a breed of Mares out of the Land) yet made they their
prisoners to trott on foot at their stirrops, like their Horse boys.

Now did Pappenheim cast about to get into the Old land; both for the pillage
of the country, and to get the Elb clear, if it were possible: and withal to
exercise Todts people, whilst he provided to be going. The Boores being now
up in their own defense, about the skonce; and some Dragooners and other
soldiers being amongst them: Pappenheim supposed the action more faiseable, to
beat through Hornburg and Todts Army there: Offers to force Todts Army.
then through the Boores, Causeyes and Morasses. This Hornburg, though it were
well seated for a Pass, yet was it but a small Fleck, until some new cast up
Works, had now well fortifyed the passage. Upon this, now falls Pappenheim;
and upon this he so thunders with his Ordnance, that he beats all down before
him. And yet here was good opposition made unto him, and by some Scottish too
of Sir Frederick Hamiltons Regiment: amongst whom, Captain Gibson was said to
have behaved himself bravely: Here was Major General Lohausens horse shot
under him. The General Todt perceiving the town not to be maintained, gives
order to have fire put to it, and retreated with his Army to a great work he
had between the town and the Old land: lying upon a water. This was
maintained by a Forlorn hope, left for the defense of it, until the Army
retreated through the Old land to Boxtehude-ward. This done, the Forlorn hope
came off safely. The town of Boxtehude being not large enough to entertain
Todts whole Army, he marched through it and laid them in Dorps, till he had
occasion to draw them to a head again.

Pappenheim being thus defeated of his passage into the Old land by Hornburg,
and put into Stoade again: he the third of May forced his way through, by the
skonce aforesaid. There his Crabats were seen prancing and pricking up and
down, along the Causeyes, coming almost to Boxtehude. He gets into the Old
Land:
There being but small relief for them to be had ( Todt had taken order for
that) they set fire upon the Country. Just as highway thieves will beat those
travailers, that carry no money about them. But all this, could he make nothing
of: Todt had all the country about him, the Elb and the way to it was shut up,
so that there was no relief that way to becomne at. The town of Stoade, was
not to be maintained by him, because his Army could not be maintained by it.
The way back again was full of Passes and Streightnesses, But is feign to
quitt that.
so that there he might be coopt up and starved, should he stay so long till
the power of the country could have time to come down upon him. And especially
was there a Pass at an old mill; by the Fennes and the old cloister: and
there, had Todt had the stomach to it, he might have hazzarded to have kept
Pappenheim in the Coope, a fatning. But he durst not, he was far too weak:
loath to hazard the Army, and his own credit, which he had gotten in
Mecklenburg-land: for that Pappenheim being made desperate by stopping up, must
needs have strugled like a tied Tiger, to have gotten loose again. What could
the old Shephard do with the Lion, that killed his Lambs, after he had gotten
him into his house; and then knew not how to tie him? So was it now with Todt:
for whom it was far better to let Pappenheim come out, and be so rid of him:
who he was very sure, c^uld not stay long by him, in a devoured country. Some
blame Todt for this; affirming, that he might have pinfolded Pappenheim, and
have starved him: though others labor to excuse him, by the former reasons.
However, Todt staid not with the Army, after this, but was commanded away to
Rostock: and so to the Kings Army.

Pappenheim not able to stay in Stoade, provides for his departure: resolving
to take the garrison, the baggage, victuals, and Stoade after it.
and ammunition out of it: for which (as at his coming to Magdenburg) he had
brought a many empty wagons along with him. Being ready to leave the town, he
calls the Magistrates before him and demands 6000 Marks contribution of them.
They going about to levy the monyes, came again and tendered him 5000: with a
solemn protestation, that the whole estate of the town, was able to bring up
the sum no higher. Pappenheims Nobleness to those of Stoade City.
Pappenheim seeing their poverty, and their good wills; nobly delivers them
their monyes back again, with the Keys of their City: only exacting these 2
conditions from them: first, that they should look well to the sick and
wounded soldiers, which he left behind him; and secondly, that they should
keep the City, 3 days after his going. And this said, he the sixth of May,
finally quits the town; desperately (shall I call it) or valiantly? in the
night adventuring along by the Old cloister near Boxtehude: even through these
dangerous Passes, and close by Todts Army Being (quietly let go, he retyres
first to Rodenberg, and so to Ferden, He goes toward Wolsenbuttel,
and thence the way that he came, into Brunswickland. All this, had he done
bravely.

He was, indeed, at Stoade, in some distress, especially of victuals: there
lay 2 Swedish ships in the Elb, right against the mouth of the Zwing; to
stop up all provisions from coming from Hamborow or Luckstadt, by water. And
yet was Pappenheim streightlyer blockt up, then that; he wanted money to have
bought any provisions, that might have been brought to him: enough, I mean,
to keep the town withal. Going out of Stoade, he carried all the course,
black, Rusck bread, that he could get: yea and took the very lead off some
Churches, to make Provant bullets of. Some Pieces of ordnance he took from off
the walls, to carry with him: blew up the side of a Port, and away he went.
Whither he had made any private overture of delivering Stoade (for money) unto
the King of Denmarks hands, I know not, though I have read of it: and of some
letters besides, which the Syndicus or Recorder of Stoade should be taken with,
as he was going to Luckstat, which should contain some secrets of
corresponde^cie entertained by the King of Denmark, that way. Those that write
so, affirm this private correspondencie to have been begun, presently after
Pappenheims coming out of Magdenburg: and that to be the nearer to put men
into Stoade, the King of Dermark should have surprised Friburg upon the Elb, by
some forces sent thither out of Luckstat. Sure it is, Some correspondencyes
betwixt Denmark and Pappenheim.
that the Danes did intercept this Friburg, and that the Bishop of Bremen (in
jealousy least his Coadjutor the Prince of Denmark, should become his
supplanter) had sent the French Colonel Dumeni from about Ferden (where he
then lay) either to reprise it, or to keep the Danish forces from coming
further. This Dumeni (a Colonel of Dragooners) was the man, that had done most
in these lands, before Todts coming: and he now going toward Friburg with the
Bishop of Bremens forces, did (as I find it written) kill some 40 Danish, and
take 160 prisoners, that sallyed out of the Castle upon him. However, March the
thirteenth following and in the night; did 2000 Bremers people, in white Frocks
or shirts, give a Camisado upon the Castle: which they stormed, and killed 300
Danes in it. This was thought likely enough, to have made a breach betwixt the
Kings of Sweden and of Denmark: as if these Danes had been slain by the
Swedish. Some will also make Pappenheim so witty, as to contrive the Danish
surprising of Friburg, foredooming that the Swedes would never suffer them to
enjoy it, but rather go by the ears with them. But the General Todt excused
himself that he had no hand in it, but that it was only done by the Bishop of
Bremen: and so Pappenheims fine plot failed. He being in distress in Stoade,
and not able to put it over to Denmark (which he had rather have done, then
the Swedes or Bremers should have had it) is feign to leave it as we told you.

Being thus gone clear off; I wonder (says he to Major Leslyes Ancient,
which he had prisoner with him) that your men follow me not? were I behind
them, as they are now behind me, I would bring up their Reere for them, I
would fetch them up, to die for it. His order was, that if any of his men
stragled upon the march, but a musket shot, he was sure to have horse sent
after him; and either killed or hanged: and this to prevent running away, or
giving intelligence to the enemy.

A Swedish garrison put into Stoade.
Stoade being thus deserted, Colonel Creitbon a Germane was put into it with
his weak Regiment: being not above 160 men, under 7 Ensigns. And the
substance of these Relations, concerning Todt and Pappenheim: (with some of
those that follow) have I learned from diverse Gentlemen present in the action:
and I hope I have made right collections from them.

In the beginning of May, and whilst Pappenheim was about Stoade, came Duke
Francis Albert of Saxon Lawenburg, with 2 weak Regiments (one of Horse and
another of Foot) to join with the Swedish about Boxtehude. And now after
Pappenheims going from Stoade, went the General Todt away, and Wolff Hendrick
Von Baudissin took the charge of the Army, as Leiftenant General to Duke
George of Lunenburg: whom in Todts place, Baudissin takes charge of the Army,
the King had made General. The Duke himself, was also now near at hand with
his forces: who joined with Baudissin a little after this about Hanover and
Hildesheim. His Commission was, to succeed Todt, to clear the streams of the
Elb and Weser; with the towns of the Lower Saxony: toward the Weser,
therefore, (after Pappenheim) was the march directed.

Baudissin advanced from about Stoade and Boxtehude, due southerly unto
Bremersford: and from thence to the town of Bremen upon the Weser, about 6
Westphalian leagues, or 30 English miles from Bremersford aforesaid. Through
Bremen by the way, I hear that Dumeni was sent to take in Wildshusen in the
land of Oldenburg some 15 or 16 English miles to the South West of Bremen.
Thence the march lay along the Weser, into the Bishopric of Ferden: within 2
English miles of which town, the Army encamped. Here they staid about 3
weeks, or till the beginning of June. Pappenheim was not yet far enough off,
for them to go faster: whom though they followed, to see that he should take
as few towns as might be, and not fall through Brunswickland into Duringen: yet
were they not overhasty to come too near him, for besides that they were too
weak for him: they had not Commission (perchance) to fight with him. In this
time was there a Bridge laid over the Weser; for that they thought to have
besieged Nienborg. But this purpose altered. He follows Pappenheim.
Thence goes Baudissin along to the South Eastward; betwixt the rivers of Weser
and the Leine, which falls into Alre the river of Ferden. On this Leine, is the
good town of Hanover; about 40 English miles from Ferden. Hither, now comes
the Duke of Lunenburg, with about 5000 men in 4 Regiments; whereof one of Horse
and another of Foot, were his own: the other 2 of Foot, were led by Petan and
Marrad (or such like names) both Colonells. So soon as the Duke of Lunenburg
was comne to command in chief; Lunenburg comes to be General.
the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg took occasion to leave the Army, and went up
(after a while) to the King of Sweden. To this Hanover, came Sir John Caswell
also; with Commission from the King of Sweden, to be Colonel over Sir Thomas
Conweyes Regiment: the 5 colors whereof, were by this time wasted away to
three hundred. These were joined (by and by) with Sir Frederick Hamiltons
Regiment: which twoe from henceforth marched in one Brigade together.

Thence goes the Army to the good town of Hildesheim, the chief of the
Bishopric of that name: 5 hours journey on foot from Hanover, to the
Southward, and upon the river Innerste, which falls into the Leine. About this,
the Army Quartered themselves in Dorps: till the town had agreed with the
Duke of Lunenburg. The agreement was soon made; for that the town was very
courteous to the Army. Hildesheim accorded with him.
The Lutherans in the town, condiscended to give him 10000 Dollars
contribution, and out of the Papists, were 30000 wrung, which they paid one
part in plate and 2 in ready money. With this contribution, had the whole Army a
months pay, (or Lendings) part in plate and part in money: as the others gave
it. The town also entertained the 2 Lunenburgers Regiment of Petan and Marrad,
into their City. They sent the Army Provant Bread and Beer also: with many
other courtesies.

The day after the Army came to lie by the town, did the Duke of Lunenberg
take in Steurwold Castle, a good strong piece about an English mile to the
North of Hildesheim Pappenheims leaguer was now within some few miles of
Lunenburgs; so that there were daily skirmishes betwixt commanded Partees of
both Armies. And now let us fetch up Pappenheim: He in his march off, having
been about Ferden; sent unto Zell in the Dukedom of Lunenburg, where he heard
the States of the Low Saxony, to be then assembled. Part of their
Consultations, then were; how to continue their wars for the clearing of
their Circle from the Imperialists; to reconcile the differences betwixt the
King of Denmarck and the Hamburgers; and to confirm the King of Swedens
Commission unto the Duke of Lunenburg and Baudissin; Pappenheim sends to
terrify the States of the Lower Saxony.
for the Generallship and Leiftenant-Generallship of their Circle. To them
Pappenheims message now was; An advice to return unto the Emperors devotion,
and to break off with Sweden and with Lunenburg: to relieve his Army, and to
casheire their forces: otherwise, he would come upon them with his whole Army,
and force them to it.

But notwithstanding that they either sent him no answer or a denial; he could
not now stay to make good his threatenings: for that he was by the Elector of
Cullen solicited, to make have against Clein Iaacob the Landgrave of Hessens
Leiftenant, who had lately taken Brilon and some other places, in Cullens
Dukedom of Westphalia: where Boenighausen was too weak to resist him.

At him, now goes Pappenheim: for now lays he a bridge over the Weser, which
he still carried about with him. Leaving then the Count of Gronsfelt, with part
of the Army about the Weser, near Hamelen and those parts: himself with the
residue, passes toward Hessen. where he first recovers Munden upon the river
Werra, from the Landgrave.

Thence falls he like a storm of Hail and Lightning, into the Landgraviate:
He falls into Hassia.
with fire and sword destroying all before him. Up the river Werra he goes; to
Witzenhausen first, and then to Allen-Dorff: spoiling all in the way, and
plundering the 2 towns. Then turns he Westward, toward the town of Cassel;
the place of residence for the Landgrave: whose Father (the good Prince
Maurice) being dead about our Lady day before, and his active son William,
now in Mourning; gave Pappenheim the easier opportunity to take him unprovided.
But he now seeing occasion of more sorrow; changed his mourning Blacks, into a
black Corslet; and arms for resistance. The Boores of Hassia, (becomne half
soldiers by these continued wars) they start up too, and stop up the
passages of the Country. Pappenheims Vantcurriers making a show of themselves
before the very gates of Cassel; were there encountered with a Horse-Regiment of
Colonel Dalwicks; that now fallyed out upon them. The Pappenheimers had made
their brave, so near to the very town, that the Ordnance from the walls, were
let fly amongst them. Here it is said, that Colonel Lohn that brought them on,
was taken prisoner, and some 60 Horsemen slain upon the place: He is put off.
the rest being feign to retreat from Dalwick; to whom they left one Cornet
behind them. Pappenheim (I hear) had promised the Archduchesse Isabella, that
he would take this Cassel: but was feign now to go without it: the town being
one of the strongest of all Germany.

All this had Pappenheim done, to make a diversion: and to oblige the Landgrave
to recall Clein Iaacob, out of the Elector of Cullens countries of Paderborn
and Westphalia. He had purposed, also, to have fallen into Duringen; which at
Allen-Dorff he was very near unto: the Werra, East and West, dividing this
Hessen and Duringen. But both these purposes, he was now diverted from: by a
Currier received from the Count of Gronsfelt, concerning Lunenburgs and
Baudissins falling into the lands of Brunswick and Hildesheim. This made him
faces about to the right; and to go toward Volckmarsen: After which having
taken Volckmarsen,
which the Landgraves forces had also in possession. To relieve this, 14
Hassian troops of Horse, being now sent; and having taken up their Quarters
upon a woodie hill near the town, in the night time to slip into it: they were
discovered and surprised by the Pappenheimers. Of these, were 200 said to be
slain, and as many prisoners: with the loss of 9 Ensigns, 5 Field-peeces,
and all their baggage. The town was yielded presently upon it; after which,
Pappenheim goes to Warburg upon the river Dymel and frontiers of Paderborn; 6
English miles to the North of Volckmarsen. Hither now calls he those new
forces, which had been levied for him in that Bishopric: with the Counties of
Lip, and Ravensperg. Thence in company of the Count of Gronsfelt (for whom he
had laid a bridge over the Weser, betwixt Hamelen and Hoxter) passes he the
river Weser again: with 55 Horse Cornets (say some) advancing directly toward
the Duke of Lunenburg; He goes against the Duke of Lunenburg.
at that time about Hildesheim. About 4 or 6 English miles from this town, and
as much from Kalenberg, he about mid June sits down with his Army, to expect
the next benefit of occasion.

The Lunenburgers suspecting, that Pappenheim would shortly visit them in
their Quarters: they after 4 or 5 days drew out of the villages, and
entrenched upon the Southern side of Hildesheim. And indeed Pappenheim was not
long a coming. For Lunenburg having sent the Swedish Colonel Laus Cag with
1400 men, to take in Kalenberg: Pappenheim displanted him. This town is seated
upon the river Leine, He relieves Kalenberg,
about an hour and halfes going to the West of Hildesheim. Whilst Cag was
here busy about his Approaches, Pappenheim marched, and came toward him:
whereupon he was feign to break up his siege, and make his Retreat to
Hildesheim: so that the town was not taken, till after Pappenheims going out
of the Country. This was done, about the middle of June: at which time there
were daily skirmishes between the Armies, the Lunenburgers looking every day
for Pappenheim to come to beat their Quarters. Now was the Army mustered, and
reduced; some weak Colors broken, and put to make others stronger: diverse
Regiments were also put together, to make one complete Brigade of. The whole
Foot forces, were after this, drawn out in Battaglia: Lunenburgs Army drawn
into Battaglia.
where there were found 6 complete Brigades or Battaglions. These were marshald
(as a Herald would say) 3, 2, and 1: or into a Van, a Reere, and a Reserve. In
the Van or Front; were 3 Battalions. First the Duke of Lunenburgs own Brigade,
which had the Right Wing of the three: Secondly Lohausens, which made the
Battle: And thirdly Colonel Grave (or some such name) a Swede who had the left
Wing. ^n the Reere, were only 2 Brigades. The first which made the Right Wing,
was of the Scottish nation; made up of the 3 weak Regiments of my Lord
Forbesses, Colonel Monro's, and Colonel Robert Leslyes; who commanded it. In
the left Wing of the Reere, was the Brigade made up of the English and Scottish
nations; under Sir Frederick Hamilton and Sir John Caswell. The Reserve, or
Brigade behind all: was commanded by the Swedish Colonel Cag aforesaid. All
these, together with the Horse (not now drawn up) might really make up some
9000 men: which though they were able to march no more, yet they went for
16000. His numbers.
This is the Arithmetic of the Wars: to use Substraction from the country
people, and Multiplication of their own numbers.

June the twenty eighth being Thursday, the Alarm was brought into the
Lunenburgers leaguer: Arm, Arm, Pappenheim is coming. That night he came,
indeed, to the other side of Hildesheim. At this time, the English and Scottish
Brigade had the Watch, or Guard: and it was verily believed, he would have
fallen into the Trenches. But this he did not: for having cast up some
Batteries, in the hill of Moritsberg; and mounted about 8 pieces, close by the
town: he did no more then only give them 20 or 30 Canon shot without atte^pting
any further With all this, he did not much more hurt, then kill 2 hoggs in the
street; as the townsmen confessed. Pappenheim affronting the town of
Hildesheim:
But they having their Ordnance ready mounted; thundered so upon his pioners,
and those about the Ordnance; that they killd him 40 or 50 people. Some
affirm, that his men were that day in mutiny; and cried for Gelt Gelt: falls
off again.
and that this was the reason he gave no more on; neither upon town nor
leaguer. However, he that night dismounted his Canon, drew off his troops; and
marched unto Kalenberg: where for 5 or 6 days he entrenched. All that time,
were there daily skirmishes betwixt Commanded Partees, from both Armies: but
this held no longer, and goes to Maestricht.
for that Pappenheim being now envited to relieve Maestricht, made have
thitherward; and so utterly (for the time) left this Country: rasing his
works before Kalenberg.

In Pappenheims absence; was the Count of Gronsfelt left with some few forces
about Westphalia, on the other side the Weser: Gronsfelt left in Westphalia,
who by lightning the garrisons in the Bishopric of Paderborn, and those
parts, came afterward to have an Army too strong for Baudissins; after that
Lunenburg was parted with him. But of this, by and by, in its order. Pappenheim
directed his march to the South Westward; going first to Groenaw, 12 English
miles from Hildesheim and due East of Hamelen. Hence goes he to Poll, on the
Westphalian side of the Weser, 14 English miles South of Hamelen: and here
having passed the Weser, he faces about to the left, all along the Weser; and
so to the Rhine-ward.

Pappenheims Army being thus marched out of Kalenberg; (at whom let us turn
down a leaf, till we again meet them) the Swedish had present notice of it:
and some of their Horse fell into it, so soon as ever the Pappenheimers were
out of it. Yea before Pappenheim himself was: who being something amorous, and
staying in the town after his Army upon such an occasion; might there have
been taken prisoner by the Swedish: had they either known him, or of him The
Duke of Lunenburg purposing to remove, gives order to dismantle Steurwold
Castle; whereupon, July the twelfth he rises from about Hildesheim: and leaving
his 2 Regiments in the town, The Duke of Lunenburg beseiges Duderstat.
he marches with the rest of the Army toward Duderstat. This town, is in the
very Southern corner of the land of Brunswick, in the little Country of
Eischfelt; about 50 English miles from Hildesheim. Pappenheim had left these
troops for the defense of it Of Breuners Regiment, 350: of Reinachers, 300: of
Furstenbergs, 250: besides 200 new levied men, and 400 Horsemen. Before this
town, was much good service done on both sides: the Lunenburgers, labored
upon their Approaches, and the Besieged upon their sallyes; where many a brave
man was killed. Among the rest was Francis Beton, Captain Leiftenant to Sir
Frederick Hamilton, slain with a bullet of a sling piece, in the shoulder. The
Besiegers at last, brought their lines almost cloase to the walls, and were
ready to storm: which the townsmen (then in want and mutiny) July 24
prevented; by sending out a Drum, giving hostages, Takes it.
and entering into a Parlie. And thus was the town yielded: diverse of the
soldiers, taking pay of the Duke of Lawenburg. Hence were all the Ordnance,
victuals and ammunition taken; and the works slighted and dismantled. After
this, some strong Partees being sent abroad into the Country of Eischfelt;
persuaded the Boores (something at that time in commotion) to go home and be
quiet. And thus by the end of July, was all that corner (excepting Eymbeck)
betwixt Brunswickland, Duringen, and the Weser; reduced into good terms
again: whom, after Duke William of Saxon-Weymars departure; the coming of the
Count of Pappenheim, (like a storm among the waves) had wrought high; and all
to be-ruffled into a foame of fury.

Those parts being well shut of Pappenheim; the Duke of Lunenburg being
solicited by the Brunswickers: has a design upon the strong town of
Wolfenbuttel. Hereupon, August the first, is the whole Army divided, for 2
several ways and expeditions: Baudissin with 3 Brigades making toward
Paderborn; and the General Lunenburg with the other 3, toward Wolfenbuttel.
For now they thought to have taken in all the Country, Lunenburg and Baudissin
part the Army
at once: and that so soon as ever they showed but their Canon; any town
would yield, presently. But they were deceived. Lunenburg coming near the
town, there were 2 weak Regiments of the Dukes and Towns of Brunswick, sent
to join with him. One of these, were Dragooners; but not yet furnished with
horses: and the other was a Foot Regiment. Hither also came a Scottish Regiment
under Colonel King: the Regiment was not wholly there; for they were not above
7 or 800 men: but these that did come, were held as good men as any in the
Army. By these, was Duke George made up some 7000 strong, Horse and Foot
together, or near upon it: and with these, began he now to block up the
town. Three several Quarters he laid about it: his own, Sergeant-Major
Lohausens, (which was something near the town) and the Brunswickers. They
made neither Approaches nor attempts upon it; their purpose only being, to
block and starve it. The first night of their coming before it, The Duke
bl^cking up Wolfenbuttel;
the town Horse by the Governor Baron Gleiners appointment; fell out to burn
up the next Dorps and villages, and to spoil what they could; that their
enemies might have no shelter nor benefit of them. It chanced, that one Erick
(or George) Anderson, the King of Swedens Commissarie for the Army, and Major
Lohausen, seeing these Boutefeu's and fire-carryers, and supposing them to have
been their own men; rode up to them, to chide them in the Kings name. The
Commissary having thus run his head into the noose, by this mistaking, and
betrayed himself in the Kings name: was there taken prisoner in the Emperors
name. Lohausen escaped narrowly, and that by the means of his Pages
discovering the toil, they were gotten into.

The Duke, the more to incommodate the town; derived away the stream that
drove their Watermills: but that would not do it.

It so fell out, that Leiftenant General Baudissin being about Paderborn, and
finding himself too weak to encounter the Count of Gronsfelt; (whom he then
heard to be coming against him) wrote unto his General Lunenburg, to desire
some aid from him. Hereupon is Lohausen sent, with those that lay in his
Quarter: who coming too late to succor Baudissin; turned short in, and went
into Goslar. Whilst he was gone from Wolfenbuttel, in the night September 24,
are 1400 Horse sent from Gronsfelt; who thrust themselves into the City: the
Duke of Lunenburg not being able to forbid them. They being thus gotten in;
1000 of them, and as many Foot of the garrison, falling out upon the
Brunswickers Quarter: beat that, take 9 Ensigns, and send the men packing.
And as much (to tell the troath) did they to Duke Georges Quarters: is beaten
from it by Gronsfelt.
for they turned him going too; and so finally freed their town from blocking.
Hereabouts (sometimes in the field, and sometimes in Quarters in the towns,)
lived the Duke of Lunenburg and his Army: till that in October after, they went
to join with the Elector of Saxony about Torgau: a little before the Battle
of Lutzen. Turn we now after Baudissin.

We left him ready for his march from Duderstat (where the Army was divided)
unto Paderborn. Before which, he sent a Colonel with his Regiment unto Eymbeck:
a good town some 26 English miles to the Northward. Baudissin sends to take in
Eymbeck:
Here was Colonel Goltz left Governor, by Pappenheim; who was resolved to give
his General a good account of it. The Swedes thinking presently to have the
town yielded, find their hopes deceived: for that the Eymbeckers so far
resolved to resist; as that they took down the spires of their steeple and
planted Sling pieces upon them: but his men are repulsed.
with which to shoot down into the Swedes Quarters. Thus were they feign to
return again, with having only seen the town: which all that had seen it,
could not.

From Duderstat to Paderborn, lay Baudissins march to the Westward; and he had
some 60 English miles thither: in which march, he twice or thrice crossed over
the Weser. August the twelfth, he marched by the town; and the next day turned
he back again, and sat down before it. The English and Scottish were at
first sitting down, assigned to an old Cloister, where there was good wine and
Being: but that being thought too good a Quarter for them; there was a trick
used to get them out of it. Baudissin beseiging Paderborn,
An Alarm was brought to them in the night, and a command to rise and march: so
that having had a scurvie journey of it all that night, and the next day till 4
a clock; there were 4 or 5 Trumpetters then sent after, to countermand them
back again: after which they were put into a worse Quarter. The garrison was
1500 strong within, and Colonel Westphalen was their Governor. The Approaches
were from several Quarters begun; and Baudissin with the Duches, was gotten
within a stones cast of the walls: the English and Scottish being not much
further off. It was wet weather now; and that much hindered the Besiegers:
besides which, the town garrison sallyed night and day, and shot very
fiercely; especially upon the Duchess Quarters and Approaches. In these sallyes
and defenses, were thought to be lost near a 1000 men of Baudissins: and yet
that which worse was, the news of the Count of Gronsfelts coming, is raised
by the news of Gronsfelds coming.
was brought so fresh and truly into the leaguer; that the eighth day of the
siege, and the 21 of this August, was Baudissin enforced to levy his own
siege, and hasten back to Corberg; a day and halfes march from Paderborn

Hither did the Army arrive the 23; and there staid 2 or 3 days, to get some
contribution out of the country. Hence prepared they to remove the 26. Here
did Bauditzen in the corne-fields, draw up his small Army into Battaglia:
hourly expecting when Gronsfelt would have marched up to encounter him. At this
time, was there a Hollands Ambassador and a Swedish Commissarie, gone from
Baudissins leaguer; who had like, unawares, to have been taken prisoner by the
Gronsfelders: but escaping back again, they brought too sure news unto
Baudissin, that Gronsfeld was marching night and day to surprise him. And he,
indeed, having lightened all the garrisons, that were furthest from the danger;
and being re-enforced with some new Recreuts: had thus gotten up an Army too
strong for Baudissin, and was now marching to have fallen upon him, so soon as
he had heard of the Duke of Lunenburgs parting with him. But he advanced no
further at this time, till the Count of Pappenheim was comne up again; Klein
Iaacob coming to join with Haudissin;
whom he presently peec'd in withal.

And at this time, had Klein Iaacob with 2 or 3000 Horse and Dragooners, lately
conjoined himself with Baudissin: having in the way had some bickering with
the Gronsfelders. has some skirmishes with Gronsfeld.
This little valiant man, is native (as I hear) of Mompelgart, upon the edge
of Burgundy: which belongs unto the Duke of Brunswick.

He being joined, Baudissin marched presently toward Hoxter upon the Weser.
Some 2 Dutch miles short and to the West of which, is there a Pass at the
town or Fleck of Brakel: which the Gronsfelders being already possessed of;
there fell out some rencounters for the clearing of it. Klein Iaacob having the
honor of the first charge, was put to the retreat: whereupon two Dutch
Regiments of Horse that should have seconded him, ran quite out of the field
to Hoxter. Then came it to the Fins or Both Armies, (of the Swedes and
Imperialists) usually call these Finlanders Horse, by the name of Hackapells:
and that from the word Ha^kapell, which they use when they fall on. It
signifies Knock them down for they look for no Quarter, to give or take any.
Hackapells turns to go on; of whom there being but 4 troops, yet showed
they a far better resolution. So well they seconded little Iaacob, that the
fight was restored and the better gotten of it: the Gronsfelders, finally,
being beaten from the Pass, and that with the loss of one Cornet, and the
leaving of ^ field pieces behind them The Pass being thus cleared; Baudissin
with the Army goes on to Hoxter: where he arryved about August the twenty
seventh.

This town having at this time no forces in it, yielded at the first summons.
Here laid he a Bridge over the Weser: by which, after he had lain a while on
the Westphalian side, (on which the town stands) he passed over to the other
side: and as he had fortifyed the town on the other side, so he now fortifyed
a Camp or Works on that Brunswickers side: which he daily relieved from the
town and leaguer. Baudissin going to lie at Hoxter,
About this Hoxter he lay, till the ninteenth of September following; upon
which day by 8 a clock in the morning, Pappenheim (who was now returned from
Maestricht and conjoined with Gronsfelt:) first showed his Vantcurriers on the
Westphalian side of Hoxter. is forced to dislodge by Pappenheime
About 12000 men, was he believed to have then been: which was almost double
unto Bandissins number. He, therefore, first of all, had commanded his Horse
over the river, to the Dorps on the other side where the leaguer was: so that
the Count of Pappenheim at his coming, found none there to do any spoil
upon. That day, went the Ordnance off on both sides, over the Weser: the town
wall was also guarded with the Scottish musketeers of Sir Frederick Hamiltons
Regiment, and 100 of Forbesses: as the letter of that Gentleman testifies, who
says that he that day commanded upon the wall.

Baudissin thus entertained the time; till he could send away his Baggage and
military impediments, before hand unto Munden: whither in the evening, was he
enforced to make his retreat, having quitted both town and leaguer. And
indeed it was high time for him to do so; for that the Weser was in 2 places
fordable, above and below the town; by which had Pappenheim (as that night he
would) have comne over; he had cut the Swedish Army all to pieces.

Baudissin leaving some Dragooners behind to break the Bridge, marched off:
whose departure was discovered because his Ordna^ce were no more heard of. He,
thus being unable to recover up to his General the D. of Lunenburg (Pappenheim
being between) he was feign to retire himself toward Munden, and the
Landgrave of Hessens country. And this way did Pappenheim well know to follow
him: so that having that night, passed his Horse over the Weser; their
Vantguard by the morning had overtaken Baudissin; and brought up his Reere for
him. This was September the twentieth: by break of day which morning, had his
horse fetched up those Swedish Horsemen that mannd the Reere, Pappenheim pursues
Baudissin, and skirmishes with him 20 miles together.
to make good the Retreat to the Footmen. Baudissins advantage was, that he
was already entered into the woods: so that sending some musketeers from the
Van into the Reere; they from behind the trees so galled the Pappenheimers,
that their horse could not come up to charge the Army of the Foot forces.
However, Pappenheim thus pursued, and Baudissin in this posture retreated; for
above 20 English miles together; skirmishing all the way and sighting. Plainly,
there was good service done on both sides, Pappenheim did very much spoil upon
the Swedish; and cut off all the sick and tired men, that could not so fast
follow. For all this, the Finnish Horse having the Reere, took 2 Cornets from
the Pappenheimers: who still pursued, till Baudissin had gotten Munden on his
back; at which time he sounded the retreat, and gave it over. Most of the
Swedish Dragooners paid for it; and so did Pappenheims men too: there being
1000, perchance slain upon both parties.

From Munden the 21 and 22 of September, did Baudissin march to Cassel in
Hassia: for other place he had not to go unto. In this land crossing
uncertainely up and down, backwards and forwards: Baudissin falls into the
land of Cullen:
he took a resolution to fall into the Bishopric of Cullen: his purpose
being to make a diversion; and to oblige the Elector to recall Pappenheim. Now
therefore advances he through the Dukedom of Berg, on to the Rhine: near which,
October 19, he takes in the strong Castle of Siburg, upon the East banck of it
right against Bonn. Then takes he in Lintz, and Andernach, on the other side of
the Rhine: this last, being upon the very frontiers of Triers Country. taking
towns and castles in it.
Then winnes he Draconfelt, a very strong Castle upon a high hill: so named
(say the Country people) from S. George his killing of the Dragon. The hill
though very high, yet was it commanded by another, hard by it; neither hills
nor Castle, being defended as they should have been. This service was done by
the English and Scottish Brigade: and here was found good plenty of provisions.
December the third, was the Army mustered at Konickswinter: and December the
tenth, were the English, Scottish, and Irish Brigade, reduced. December the
eleventh, was Dutz taken, right against Cullen: but December the twelfth, they
were by the Ordnance from the town of Cullen; again beaten out of it. But of
these things slightly: because beyond my time of the Kings death; and for that
I could come at no particular instructions. There was a Iournall of these
Actions, brought into this Land; but it was not my good fortune, nor my
Readers, to light upon it. I confess I might have enlarged my self out of Le
Soldat Suedois: had I known where to have trusted him.

The Count of Pappenheim, having thus chased away Leiftenant General
Baudissins part of the Army; turns now against General Lunenburgs Division,
before Wolfenbuttel: for within 4 days of Baudissins retreat, were the 1400
Horse thrust into the town; as has been before recited. And now turns
Pappenheim (who might do what he pleased) against the town of Hildesheim:
upon which, he had before vowed to be revenged. Being set down before the
town, he plants those 9 Ensigns which had been taken from Lunenburg and the
Brunswickers at Wolfenbuttel; Pappenheim besieges Hildesheim:
upon one of his Batteries, next the town: which he caused them to understand
were Baudissins Colors; and that he had utterly overthrown him. This he did,
to put the townsmen out of all hope, of being that way relieved. Here sat he
down September 26: where battering the townsmen with big words, as well as
the town with his great Ordnance; he had already cowed and daunted their
courages: whereas their town might have held out ten times longer.
Pappenheims Approaches and his Batteries; so terribly puzzled the honest
Burgers; that they began to listen to a Parlie: feign would they have made
their own conditions; had not their enemy known well enough, he had to
deal with those that would yield to any thing. Pappenheim continuing stout,
peremptorily made proffer to them of these 5 Conditions; which he vowed he
would not alter from.

1. First, that out of his mere favor and grace to them, and takes it by
composition.
he would at present burden their town with no greater a garrison, then of
2000: which according as he had occasion, he would draw out and lighten.

2. That they should give him 200000 Dollars, present contribution: in
consideration whereof, he would give order, that strict military discipline
should be observed by his Soldiers: whom he would forbid plundering.

3. That the Lutheranes should still be left in the free exercise of their
religion: and be enforced to alter nothing in it.

4. That the townsmen should have free leave, either to go or stay; as they
pleased.

5. That there should, for the time, be a cessation from shooting on both
sides: and yet should he be suffered to work on still in his Approaches, and
to bring forward his Lines even to their very Ports; until such time as they
should be set open to him.

Upon these most dishonorable conditions, was the strong and excellently well
provided town of Hildesheim; the last day of September, yielded up unto the
Count of Pappenheim. You have here no mention, of any conditions for soldiers
marching out; for indeed there was none, but the towns ordinary garrison now
in it: for notwithstanding that the Duke of Lunenburg had left 2 of his
Regiments there, at his going thence to Duderstat; yet had he drawn them out
again, at his late going to Wolfenbuttel. At this easy taking, of so mighty a
strong, and well provided a City, Pappenheim himself could not choose but
wonder: Hildesheim was much easier then Maestricht to him. Being master of it,
he used it thereafter: Cowards (he knew) would endure any thing. Now gives he
order, to have all the townsmens plate laid hold of; and carried into the
Statehouse: and that to make present down payment, of the 200000 Rixe Dollars
agreed upon. A very great quantity of victuals and ammunition, he causes to
be taken out of their Magazines, which he sent into Wolfenbuttel. This was
the place, that he was most careful of: for besides that it so curbed and awed
the neighbor Brunswickers; it was a sure retreat for himself, upon all
occasions.

Having settled things in these parts, where no business, and scarce a
considerable enemy appeared: he was in this beginning of October commanded
from the Court of Vienna, to march up to his Generalissimo the Duke of
Fridland. Pappenheim leaving the Count of Gronsfelt about the Weser,
Leaving, therefore, the Count of Gronsfelt in these parts, to look to the
Duke of Lunenburg; and the Count of Merode being sent, a little after this,
toward Cullen, against Baudissin: himself with the greatest and best part of
his Army, being some 8000 real men: marches up into Misnia.

His march lay altogether through Brunswickland, to the Southward: the rivers of
Leine and Weser, being upon his right hand. Into Duringen he first comes; a
rich, and enemy country to him. All the better; such rich and weak enemies,
had he a desire to deal withal. marches up himself, to join with Walenstein.
Having passed by Duderstat and the Country of Eischvelt; the next good place
to that, in the very edge of Duringen: is the great town of Mulhausen; famous,
sometimes, for the Diets of the Empire: Presenting his Gross before this,
together with the terror of the name of Pappenheim, and the example of
Hildesheim: it yields to pay him 80000 Dollars. Thence sends he 3 troops of
150 Horse, unto Isenach; a stronger place, and more out of the danger: as being
15 English miles to the South of Mulhausen. Being denied here, these Horsemen
plunder Creutzberg in their return; a little town some 5 English miles to the
North West of Isenach, toward Mulhausen.

From Mulhausen he advances due Eastward unto Thomasbruck: and there he gets
contribution. Thenstat, He fetches contribution out of the towns of Duringen.
an opener town, some 11 miles further; he causes to be summoned: and whereas
the townsmen could not so suddenly bring up the demanded contribution; the
Pappenheimers hang up 3 of the chief Burgers upon a tree: and who being half
dead, they cut down again. Gebesen, he also fetches money out of: and sends
to the City of Erfurt, that if they would have their Country towns spared,
they should send him 20000 Dollars. Duke William Weymar lay then (sick) in the
town, with some 3000 men: so that Erfurt not fearing their own walls, either
sent him nothing; or else contented him with 2000 Dollars, raised out of their
Boores, who were in the danger of being rifled. Hearing, now of Duke Bernards
being already on this side the Duringer Waldt: he marches away to Budstet; and
so along to Merseburg: as Page 110 of our Third Part, we have before told you.

THE ELECTOR OF SAXONIES PROCEEDINGS IN LUSATIA, AND SILESIA: After their
former putting out of Bohemia by the Duke of Fridland.
HOw the Saxon forces under Felt-Marshall Arnheim, had in the end of May 1632,
been forced out of Bohemia: you may please to take notice of, by Page 232, of
our Second Part. The loss of this Kingdom, will not altogether appear to be
so dishonorable; if the multitudes of Walenstein be considered, which were 4
times their numbers. Since the match has been made more equally, the Saxons
have not only collard with the Walsteiners, out overthrown them and have
shown the world, that the loss of Bohemia was not cowardice, so much as
negligence in them yea in these after wars, have they given us a better
account of their diligences.

The Imperialists falling into Lusatia:
Don Balthazar di Marradas being left chief commander of the Militia in
Bohemia, by his Generalissimo; now thinking the fortune of the wars to be
turned, and the dice to run all on their side: hopes of as good a hand of it
in Lusatia, as Walenstein lately had in Bohemia. Whilst, therefore, his
Generalissimo recovers Egra from the Saxons; Don Balthazar is sent to take
Lusatia from that Elector also: so great a spite had Walenstein unto Saxony.
About June the sixth, does Don Balthazar first set out some troops, to fall
through Silesia, into the 6 towns in the Upper Lusatia, which joins East and
West, with Silesia. First recover they Gorlitz upon the river Neiss which lies
next unto Silesia: take Luben and Bautzen,
and the town making no resistance, because not able; has no wrong done to
it. Then also take they Zittau, Luben, and what they pleased.

The Elector of Saxony perceiving, that if he suffered this, the wars would
be brought through Lusatia into his Misnia: calls his Army together at Dresden:
and sends Arnheim with them into Lusatia. He came both time enough and strong
enough, to rescue Bautzen; the chief City of the 6: before which, the
Imperialists being newly settled, are feign to rise again and retire the way
they came into Silesia. Upon Luben now falls Arnheim, a little town; but an
indifferent strong one: this being kept by some 700 Imperialists, which are
recovered by Arnheim.
was taken by assault by the Saxons; and the most of the garrison put to the
sword, for so long resisting. A many of these 700, were Crabats, indeed, who
having done too much mischief to look for Quarter, became the more obstinate
in the rendering.

Now comes the Elector of Saxony unto Bautzen; to whom, whilst Arnheim and the
Army repaired, other Imperialists came and reprised Luben; serving all the
Saxons that would not turn to their party, as Arnheim had before used their
fellows. About the 25 of June, the Elector returns to Dresden again; and
Arnheim (his great Orator) with him: at which time the Army is drawn to the
Frontiers, and Colonel Loeser with his Foot Regiment and 500 Horse, is laid
along the Elb betwixt Prin and Dresden; Some offers of a treaty, diverted.
for the guard of the Electors Castle and person, against all sudden
Cavalcadoes. The occasion for the Electors going home, was the coming of a
kind of Ambassador from Walenstein, with the noise of some peaceable
Propositions. The King of Sweden, also, to prevent all such private parlies,
had already dispatched the Palatine Augustus of Sultzbach (who dyed in the
employment) and one of the Counts of Solms; unto the Elector: who under the
pretense of directing him in the Militia: should keep him firm unto the
Party.

The peace was turned into silence; for the Propositions were misliked:
whereupon the Elector musters once again within a league of Dresden: where he
lays a Bridge over the Elb, and sends the second time into Lusatia. By this
time was Colonel Buckersdorff. Mentioned Page 95, of our First part.
already upon his march, with the Elector of Brandenburgs forces: who staid but
for Major General James Magdugall: who being borne in Sweden of Scottish
parents, is by the Swedish usually called Dubalt, as he shall by us, hereafter)
that was to bring on the Swedish, now taken out of the garrisons of Pomeren,
and some others newly landed. These were to fall jointly into Silesia, by the
Oders side: so that Arnheim with them, was likely hereafter to be strong enough
for the Imperialists.

Upon Arnheims second coming, the Imperialists abandon Luben, and retire to
other of their fellows at Zittau; 4 English miles to the South of Luben
Thither follows Arnheim, and there besieges them. Arnheim beseiging Zittau.
They sally upon his Approaches: and he there kills above 100 of them. The
Saxons making themselves masters of a great Work, before one of the Ports; by
that get to lodge themselves in the Suburb: and from thence they set the town
on fire, by heaving in Hand-granadoes. Now did Don Balthazar set himself to
relieve Zittau: and whilst he sent 2 Regiments to entertain skirmish with the
Saxons: 5 other troops thrust themselves into the town. After these, came Don
Balthazar himself; with the Imperial Army: of whose approaching Arnheim
being aware: is forced to rise by Don Balthazar.
raised with all speed his siege of Zittau, and retired himself unto
Hoierswerd upon the river Spree; 2 days march to the North of Zittau. This was
the safest place for him: for that it was toward Silesia, which way Dubalt was
now coming with his Army.

And now came Dubalt, indeed, and with him Prince Vlrick of Denmark: upon whom
the Duke of Saxony was to bestow Colonel Bindthauffs Regiment; who had been
slain in the Battle of Leipsich: and not that only, but his daughter too;
Dubalt comes into Silesia, to join with Arnheim.
as was believed. Dubalt and Buckersdorff, having mustered 9 or 10000 men at
Franckford upon the Oder; advance upwards along the northern banck of that
river, unto Great Glogaw; one of the best Cities of Silesia. It is a Dukedom:
the title whereof had the Emperor lately bestowed upon Walenstein, for
recovering Prague from the Duke of Saxony. In the town, was a garrison of 6
troops of Horse, and ten Foot Companies: over whom, was Colonel Goetz left
commander: he who sometimes burnt down Paswalck in Pomerania, as Page 59 of our
First Part we have told you. Dubalt (to be brief) about the tenth of August,
forces both town and Castle: and compells Goetz to retire into the Cathedral,
which had a good Fort for the guard of it, and good Works round about it: the
Fort alone, having some 5 or 6 pieces of Ordnance upon it.

Goetz having done his devotion in this Church, and having against his will
been made a Churchman: could have been contented to have robbed the Church
of himself, (now its Patron,) and have stolen away over the Oder. But there
was the Saxon Colonel Kalckstein enquartered, with his Regiment of Dragooners.
Goetz thus put to it, was feign to treat upon conditions of rendering: for all
which, he could obtain no other but the selfsame Articles, which his
Generalissimo had sometimes given to those of Prague: which was, to march out
only with their swords, without Arms, Drums, or Colors,

Great Glogaw having thus changed her master, They take Great Glogaw,
though Walenstein would not lay down his Title: the Swedish and Saxish
Armies, being able together to make up some 14 or 15000 men; think themselves
strong enough to attempt upon the country. They first send to summon Sagan,
another of Walensteins Dukedomes, about 20 English miles to the West of Great
Glogaw: which together with its neighbors Neustedlen, Prunka, Sprottaw and
Freystad, in that rich country, betwixt the Oder and the Bober; were feign to
give entertainment and contribution unto the Swedish. and draw the neighbor
towns to contribution.
From hence, at this time, was Colonel Kalckstein with some 1800 Horse and
Dragooners, sent toward Steinau upon the Southern banck of the Oder, about 18
English miles to the North East of great Glogaw aforesaid. This is the Pass
betwixt Glogaw, and the city Lignitz: and it has a Bridge over the river,
with a good Fort before it. There lay one Imperial Cornet and 4 Companies of
Dragooners, Steinau Fort taken by the Saxons.
for the guard of it. This did Kalckstein surprise: with some boats in the
Oder at this Bridge, with good Merchandise in them.

Thence advances he Southwards toward Lignitz, which has a particular Duke of
his own, a Lutheran. The place is between 2 small rivers, 10 miles from the
Oder. Here abouts, some forces making opposition; Kalckstein cut off betwixt 20
and 30 of them; and took 100 more; which became his soldiers, Kalckstein
having given advertisement to Arnheim and Dubalt of the posture of the town;
and that it depended upon it self, without having any Imperial garrison in
it: Arnheim presents his Army before, and sends to know the Dukes pleasure,
whether he pleased to be Imperial, or would declare himself Swedish? Lignitz
both Duke and town, accorded with Arnheim.
The Duke seeing an Army at hand, which were likely to call to him for an
answer: professes himself their friend; and that he and his town should give
free passage and relief unto both Swedish and Saxon Armies. This profession,
was the safeguard of the town, and an advantage to the Protestant Armies: some
of which now going into the town, and enquiring whither there were any of the
enemies goods there or no: found 4000 pair of provant shoes there, and some
other necessaries provided by Colonel Goetz for his Regiment.

Arnheim having only lodged 1000 musketeers in the town; sends back the
greatest part of his Army toward great Glogaw; Arnheim advances against the
Imperialists,
himself with some Cavalery and field pieces, advancing toward Goldberg: a
Fleck some 14 English miles to the South of Lignitz: whereabouts some
Imperialists were now assembled. Having notice upon his march, that they were
retired thence, and gone to Lemburg upon the river Bober, toward the frontiers
of Lusatia; and that Don Balthazar was there himself with his whole forces:
he faces it about toward great Glogaw, retyres from them.
to join again with Dubalt, who was busied in fetching contribution out of
the country.

Here at Lemburg was the whole Imperial Army, (which might be some 12000
strong) now rallyed together: there were the Counts of Mansfelt and Schaumburg,
with Sergeant Major General Schaffgotzy, and the chief Officers of the Field.
They having notice of the Duke of Lignitz being accorded with Arnheim, and of
his retyring to Glogaw: apprehend a present resolution to fall upon Steinau
Fort again, Don Balthazar recovers Steinau.
so to cut off the Pass to Lignitz. This they effect fortunately enough: for
that there was as little opposition there made against them, as had at the
former taking been against Kalckstein. This done, Don Balthazar thinks to
advance toward Great Glogaw: hoping to find the Swedish and Saxon Armies, not
yet comne together, but busied about the Country; and so to fall in amongst
their Quarters.

But therein they were deceived; for they had not advanced one league and a
half, but they had the Alarm brought home to them; how that both Arnheim and
Dubalt were already marched, and within a league of them. Upon this news, Where
the Swedes and Saxons coming upon them,
Don Balthazar counter-marches to the Pass at Steinau: the nearest and the
safest strength, which he thereabouts had the command of. Behind this town and
in it, they made Alt; and there sat they down with their Army. Upon Saturday
August the seaventeenth, came the Swedes and Saxons before Steinau; and took
up 2 several Quarters before it. Dubalt with his Swedes and Brandenburgers,
had a sandy hill before the enemies Leaguer, and upon that, getting up 2
Batteryes and 20 pieces of Ordnance: he cruelly with murdering shot etc.
thundered both upon the town, and the Imperial Leaguer. Arnheim, he charges
upon their Horse Quarters at the same time: first rout their Army:
and Dubalts Cavalery falls upon another flanck of them: who being now much
distracted by the raking of Dubalts Ordnance through their Battalions; their
Horsemen after a charge or two, took the rowt upon it, running Eastward
toward Schweinitz, and Breslaw; some 4000 of their Foot, having thrust
themselves into the Fort. In this fight, (as I find 2 several writings for)
were some 2000 Imperialists slain: there might perchance be half so many; and
hardly more, for that they stood not long enough to it. Chase there could be
none; for that the Imperialists having first sent away their ordnance and
baggage toward Breslaw, took care enough to burn Steinau bridge behind them.

Now does the Protestant Army lay seige to the Fort, and to them in it: which
the next day Aug. nineteenth, they falto to batter upon. It Is written that Don
Balthazar himself, with the Cou^ts of Schaumberg and Mansfeld, besides other
Grandees of the Army; were now within the Fort: but I think they had too much
wit to coope up themselves in a Counting House. This ill luck they had, that
the fourth day of the seige, within the Fort, some of their powder took fire:
and the town fell into a flame by Dubalts shooting. Diverse therefore here
miscarried; Schaffgotzi was shot in the shoulder with a musket, and the rest
saved themselves either by getting over the Oder, or by boats down the
stream of it. Colonel Goetz was coming to their relief, but meeting the
news of All Is lost, and then recover Steinau.
he retired to Schweinitz. Don Balthazar and the rest recovered to the walls of
Breslaw; whereabouts the Army began to come to a head again. And thus upon
Friday August the twenty fourth, was the Pass and Skonce of Steinau, again
recovered from the Imperialists.

The day before this, was Kalckstein sent out with 10 Companies unto
Neiumarckt; a pretty town betwixt Steinau and Breslaw: They take Nieumarckt,
and 15 English miles from this latter. Kalckstein sending for the Magistrate,
demands entrance: and he desiring respite; Kalckstein showed him 4 pieces of
Ordnance. That bunch of keys opens all the gates, and let in 5 Companies to
lie there in garrison. and Kant.
With the other 5, went Kalckstein unto Kant; 8 English miles due South of of
Breslaw: which durst not but seem freely to admit of 3 other Companies. Thus
was Breslaw blocked up, both upon the North East and South quarter of it.

By Sunday noone August the twenty sixth, had the Imperial Army gotten up to
Breslaw; before the Oder gate where they were marshalled. These reported, how
shamefully they had been beaten out of the Skonce, with the loss of some
hundreds, as also of 6 pieces of Ordnance and Schaffgotzi's silver wagon, to
the value of 2 tun of gold in it. Toward evening, the Army was commanded to
the long Bridge; over which they marched, and, upon a fair Triangular piece of
ground betwixt the wood, the water, and the morasses; they encamped. A place of
mighty advantage; which had but one Avenue to it, And pursue the fleeing
Imperialists unto Breslaw.
by which it might be assaulted. Here they gave out themselves to those of
Breslaw, to be 14000: but 10000 or 11000 is a fair allowance. The next day
came the Swedish and Saxish Vantguard unto Lissau, a town and Castle within
English miles of Breslaw. Thence advanced they toward Breslaw, in pursuit of
the Imperialists.

Being comne within half an hours march; a Squadron of Crabats encountered
them: who were presently put to the retreat. Presently after, 300 of them
turned back again; by which time 2 troops of Swedish were comne into the
Sweinitz meddow called the Fair bird, within musket shot of Breslaw. Now the
Crabats called to the citizens on the walls, to assist them by shooting at the
Swedish: which they refused. Hereupon, 300 Crabats fell upon the 150 Swedish:
whom they put to the retreat. These being reenforced, came on again; but the
Crabats keeping close to the Sweinitz port, Some skirmishes being made by their
vantcurriers,
the Swedish durst come no nearer for fear the town should have given fire
upon them: for which indeed there was order given. Now the Swedish looking to
get between the Crabats and their camp; they discovering it, made have
thitherward. They gone, there was a very fair Coach espied by the Swedish:
which offered to come into the City: and this they fell upon and took. There
was one Leiftenant Colonel Kurtzsh in it, and 20000 Dollars. The town shot at
them; at which they shaking their heads, ran away with the Booty: not so
much as offering to return a bullet again.

About 6 at night, the whole Swedish and Saxonian Army appeared; with their
great Artillery only, and no baggage. Being comne within half an hours march
of the Imperial Leaguer, they ranged themselves into Battaglia; advancing with
their Canon playing before them. Six fair Regiments had order to attack the
Imperialists in their Leaguer: the whole Army follows, and beats the
Imperialists over the Oder.
which they, with bravery enough, maintained for an hour and half; being then
constrained to forsake that most advantageous situation, to set fire upon their
quarters; and in have to retire themselves, baggage, and ordnance, over the
long Oder bridge: which in 3 places they put fire unto. This had they not done,
they had been all undone: and all this (says mine Author) I my self saw with
mine own eyes, from the top of St Elizabeth's steeple.

By 2 a clock on the Tuesday morning August 28; they fell too 't again; the
Swedish putting hard for it, to get over the river: which the other with all
violence, forbad them. About 10 a clock, Prince Henry Wentzel of Bernstad, the
Baron Donaw, and 2 other privy Counselors of the town, that were Military
Commissaries to the Emperor; went up to the walls: to take view of the
skirmish; Baron Donaw (in my hearing (says my Author) thus began to the
other 3, I pray let us try the cast of this piece of ordnance, A device of
Baron Donaw's to make the Swedish fall foul with Breslaw.
and let us see how far she will range her bullet: but the Counsel would
not consent to it. He seeing none that contradicted: sent for an old Gunner,
Imperially affected in the town; and bids him to traverse the piece upon the
Swedish, and give fire: which being done (himself having helped the Gunner) he
laughed heartily: rewarding the fellow with a Ducate and a thank; saying This
is the first, in Gods name; This said, he goes to his Coach, and so to the
Counsel Chamber. The townsmen understanding of this shot, all in fury run
to their city Colonel the Lord of Sawish: complain to him of the Baron
Donaw, and all to rail at him. The Colonel shutting his doors at them, they
made Alarm upon it: in great multitudes flocking to the Captains of their
several Wards first, and then to the Statehouse. There called they for the
Baron, the new Gunner, their This Baron being a Protestant first, and then an
Apostata; was sent by the Emperor to Breslaw, to be his Commissary, for the
deforming (reforming I should have said) of the Protestant Churches in Silesia.
Being insolent in his office, and becomne odious; he would tell the people he
did that to save them.
Savior: and do the Magistrate what he could with persuasions, they would
there stay his out-comming. About one or 2 a clock, comes a Ritmaster with 3
troops of Horse from the Swedish Army, to demand the townsmens purpose in that
piece of ordnance: which had killed a Leiftenant Colonels horse under him, and
3 soldiers. The Magistrate desiring respite for his answer, till the morning;
the Ritmaster fairly retired: some townsmen first telling him, that it was
Baron Donaw's doing. By this, were the townsmen starck mad, resolving to have
torn the Baron in pieces; had not 2 Lords privately brought him off in their
Coach; set him privately down behind the Cathedral: whence at midnight he
was shifted out of the City, unto his own Castle of Warrenberg: 32 English
miles to the North East of Breslaw: whence he escaped to Vienna. Hence was he
sent into Poland where he raised some thousands of Cosacks, with whom he
returned into Silesia.

By this man's indiscretion, had this fairest City of Silesia like to have been
undone; by his offering the first act of hostility against the Swedish: who
were all this day in hot skirmish with the Imperialists. Wednesday morning, they
begann again; the fight continuing till 8 a clock: at which time was shooting
given over on both sides. The reason was, for that the Imperialists, at that
instant, retired to a place called Clarworder, not far from the Oder: leaving
some troops to maintain the Bridge; notwithstanding. The Imperialists retire
a little.
Toward evening, the Imperialists sent diverse of their best baggage-wagons,
with 4 great pieces of Ordnance, (each drawn by 20 or 24 Horses) and a goodly
Mortar, to be taken into Breslaw: for fear (as the messengers said) least the
Imperial Army in their retreat, should be forced to leave them to their
enemies. The gunnes were taken in; for that the city could answer for them:
they having lent more pieces then those, unto the Emperor. As for the Baggage,
they would not meddle with it: for fear the sheltering of enemies goods,
should occasion a quarrel with the Swedes and Saxons: who had yet done no
injury to the townsmen.

That night was there command given through the City, that every Burger upon
pain of losing his Freedom; should meet the next morning at the Statehouse.
There and then, were these 5 demands made, from Don Balthazar and the Imperial
Army.

1. Whether the City would stand firm to the Emperor?

2. And serve his Army with victuals and Ammunition?

3. In case the Army should not be able to maintain it, (as they feared)
against their enemies: whether they might have the favor to retreat into the
City?

4. Whether they would grant passage to the Army, through the town?

5. And if their Army were put to the retreat, whether the City would favor
them with their Ordnance from the walls, and so afford them their best
assistance?

The Cities answer was.

1. For the Emperor, they were resolved, as they were obliged, to live and die.

2. Victuals and Ammunition for the Army, they could not spare them: because
that little they had there was need enough of, in so populous a City. And yet
if they could be assured, how their town should be maintained against the
Swedes and Saxons; they would afford whatever they found their Magazines able
to spare them.

3. As for the retreat of the Army into their City; that might they by no
means afford them.

4. As for leave of marching through their City; that could they not imagine
how it could be convenient either for the town or Army: for that seeing they
must likewise afford the same favor to the Swedish; they should thereby bring
their city into a most eminent danger.

5. As for favoring them with their Ordnance from the walls, until they should
have made their retreat far enough; that were far less expedient for them.
And therefore they would entreat the Army to consider, how much inconvenience
must needs be drawn upon the City by it. For whereas the Swedish had hitherto
offered no hostility; either unto the City or any belonging to it; they had no
reason to provoke them first of all: which if they should do, they should
never be able to give an account for it to posterity. This courtesy they
hoped for from the Imperial Army; that if the Swedish should offer to assault
their City, they would the^ be ready to relieve it. The town having thus
handsomely declined, rather then denied these demands: the Imperial Officers
all abashed at it, repaired to their leaguer.

About noone the same Thursday, came there a letter unto the Magistrates, from
the General Dubalt: full of good language and profession. Therein was the
sincerity of his Majesty of Swedens purposes expressed: Dubalt writes to the
City.
full of desire to relieve all the oppressed; concluding all, with a desire of
victuals, for thanks and money. Victuals were denied: for all which, those of
the Suburbs came into the town to buy: which they plentifully went and sold
unto the Swedish. Now come the soldiers to St. Nicholas gate: and close under
that, they bring their wagons to be sheltred. The most part of the Imperial
Army in the mean time, forsook their own leaguer, and retired into that
Suburb on the other side of Breslaw called Elbing: the Swedish in the mean
time continuing their assault upon those left at the Oder, and strive to force
their passage over it. Friday the last of August, betimes in the morning, the
rest of the Imperial Army brake up, and came before the Oder gate; and so
retired into the said Suburb. Here staid they not full 2 hours: The
Imperialists flee.
but in great have retired themselves, some North Eastward to Namstau; others
North Westward to Auris: whence it was thought they would have gone out of the
country. About noone the same day, came the Swedish rushing into the said
Suburb of Elbing, having by boats gotten over the Oder. Here made they havoc
of whatsoever the Imperialists had left behind them, but doing no wrong unto
any of the Breslawers. Just then was news brought, that other Swedish had
slain 200 Imperialists, taken Colonel Rotstall prisoner, with 300 horsemen
more, at Olaw bridge; 16 English miles to the South East of Breslaw which were
there set to maintain the Pass over the river Olaw, which falls into the
Oder at Breslaw.

Saturday morning September the first, the Citizens of Breslaw were to meet in
the Statehouse: and there to declare themselves, whether they would admit the
Swedish and Saxon Armies into their town: make an accord with them: or
otherwise run the hazard of hostility? And thus far my Breslaw Author,
has been my Intelligencer.

Those that had taken Rostall at Olaw bridge aforesaid; were of Arnheims Army:
who whilst Dubalt was thus employed about Breslaw; was with the most of his
own Saxon forces, other where taken up in the Country. And he having
understood that the Imperialists had another Bridge over the Oder, right
against Olaw aforesaid: thitherward goes he about August the twenty sixth, to
force that; and that way to come at the Imperialists. Arnheims Actions.
His having done this; forced the Imperialists so soon to quit their Breslaw
leaguer, as has been before said. Hearing this Bridge to be maintained by
Colonel Rotstall and 400 musketeers; hither sends he Leiftenant Colonel Dahn
with 600 Horse and 500 musketeers. He getts the pass at Olaw:
Now whiles Rotstall stays too long to burn down the Bridge, there was he
taken and his men defeated. August the 29, comes Arnheim to repair the bridge;
and Colonel Eckstadt with 15 troops of Horse, 300 musketeers, and 2 pieces
of Ordnance, is sent to hinder him. To stave off him, is Leiftenant Colonel
Schidner sent, with some of Kalcksteins Dragooners: by whom is Eckstadt forced
to retreat into a wood, a little from the Oder. August 31 comes
Sergeant-Major-Generall Schaffgotzi to help Eckstadt hiding himself in the
said wood, to be ready to cut the Saxons in pieces, so soon as ever they
should have passed over. That night Arnheim having finished his bridge, was
ready to have put over his forces: but hearing in time of Schaffgotzi's
coming, follows,
forbeares it. All that day and night, had the Saxon Ordnance so thunderd into
the wood; that so soon as ever Schaffgotzi heard Arnheims bridge finished
(whom he suspected to have been strong enough to have adventured over) he with
all have took the rout at it, leaving 2 pieces behind him. August 2 at night,
and overthrows Schaffgotzi:
Arnheim passes the bridge; sending Dhan and Enhusen with 450. Horse to fetch
up and entertain the Imperialists; whilst himself should be comne up to second
him. There were 1200 Imperialists said to be slain, the rest put to flight,
and Eckstadt with many officers taken. This was in the way betwixt the Oder and
Namstaw town, 13 miles from the Oder. Hence did Schaffgotzi retire to
Kolischen: and his men to their fellows about Opelen. Arnheim had now his way
open unto Brieg; the Duke whereof is a Calvinist, and elder brother unto the
Duke of Lignitz. To him, does Arnheim propound the example of his brother:
Accords with the Duke of Brieg:
which, after a while, the Duke follows. His town is upon the Southern banck
of the Oder 24 English miles to the South East of Breslaw: and his conditions
were, to take an oath to the King of Sweden, and to the 2 Electors of Saxe and
Brandenburg. Arnheim pursuing his fortune; brings the country as he goes,
under contribution: fetches in the 2 fair towns of Grotka and Monsterberg,
South of Brieg: and September 18. takes Niesse 24 miles to the South of the
Oder. Thence goes he over the Oder at Brieg; and comes upon that part of the
Imperial Army, then assembled at Opelen upon the North of the Oder. From
thence he ferrets them, to the other side of the river again; Drives the
Imperialists over the Oder ba^k again;
even to the towns of Troppa and Iegersdorff, upon the frontiers of Moravia.
Heither, in October, was he to have marched; a panick fear now every where
possessing the Imperialists: but at this instant did Walstein make such foul
work in Misnia, and is recalled into Misnia.
that the Elector was feign to send for his Arnheim home again And there he
staid with his Master, till after the Battle of Lutzen.

Dubalt is all this time in treaty with Breslaw: a town worthy to be waited
upon. In the mean time, his people lose no opportunity, in taking the towns
about the Country. Toward the end of September, a Ritmaster of his, with 8
Horsemen only in his Company, gets by a wile into the Baron of Donaw's very
strong Castle of Wartenburg: Dubalts men surprise Wartenburg:
who being in, found means and opportunity to let in their fellows. October
the third, did Breslaw accord with Dubalt: yielding to maintain those 600
Foot, and 1000 Horsemen which he already had about the Cathedral. This Church,
is (it seems) in the Suburbs: and there had Dubalts men been enquartered, all
the last month; having fortifyed it and themselves round about it. Dubalt
would gladly have put 2 Companies into the town; but of that, the Citizens
excused themselves; as having entertained no strange garrison, and he brings
Breslaw to accord with him
these 300 years. The getting of this fair town, was a great work; and done
handsomely. And now did Dubalt dispose his people into their winter quarters,
in the villages round about it: so that what was done after this, were but
slighter rencounters, and by Commanded Partees. And thus have the Saxons with
help of the Swedes and Brandenburgers; Putting his Army after that, into their
Winter Quarters.
made the reckoning in Silesia, to pay the last years shot in Bohemia. And so
leave I the wars in those parts, in a most prosperous condition for the Saxe
and Swedish. God send peace every where: which were we at home enough sensible
of the blessing of; we would in thankfulness acknowledge it, to be more
glorious then Victory: and the most happy subject in the world, for a noble
History.

And to this place for a conclusion, have I reserved the Character of his
Majesty the King of Bohemia: and that because I have mentioned his death page
76. of this Fourth Part, which was November the 19. and for that I was
ambitions to finish this Part, as I did the former, and to crown it with a
King.

THE CHARACTER of the King of BOHEMIA.
LEast our latter ages should want examples, what God can do to great men, or
how he sometimes exercises good men; was this Prince set up: even He, the
greatest of the best Religion, of all Germany.

The life of this good Prince, was a strangely counterchanged mixture of
fortunes; a Tablet, of diverse countenances. His entry into the Electorate, was
glorious; his beginnings, happy; his virtues, respectfull; and such as
deservedly attracted all the eyes and courtship of Germany, upon him. The great
allyances which he had contracted, his high parentage; his mighty Supportments,
both within Germany, and without it; the considerable eminency of his House,
his Estate, and the body of confederates, principally depending upon his
directions; together with the hopefulnesse, that other Princes and Peoples mo,
had of him: these were the fair eminencies that differenced him from other
Princes; and these were the procurers of his election to the Crown of Bohemia.
An election, indeed, banefull, (for the time) to his person and House; yea and
to the whole repose of Germany: all which, ever since that time, has felt the
dire effects of the lately-preceding Comet: as having been deeply imbroyl'd
in an universal war; which has overrun, not the better part alone, but all the 4. corners of it. A war, that has for these 14. long years, continued
with such stomach fullness on both sides; and been infamed with the ravages
and overturnings of so great a part of the Estates and Provinces of the Empire;
as are like to carry the marks and scarres of it, yet for a many ages.

And notwithstanding that this Prince, both by himself and the potentest of
his Friends; has left no honorable means unattempted, for the quenching of
this Skarre-fire: yet has he found such obstinate and fatal oppositions, from
time to time; such rigide stiffenesses, in the contrary party; yea such a
counter-bandings from day to day; and those increased too, upon the
fortunatenesse of their good successes: that all the mediations of the greatest
Kings, have been rejected; and the Prince himself bandited for these many
years, yea and dispoiled of his possessions. And yet again, when he saw
himself just ready to take Seisin again of his own country, and to bid
farewell to his afflictions: even then, just then, found he his hower-glasse
run out, and his period concluded upon.

The calamity of this Prince, has been taken up for a Theme by a many
licentious tongues, and unlicensed pens; to declaime against him: they
grounding themselves upon the success and bad condition of his affairs, to
make judgment of his managing the^: taking leave most outragiously to detract
from him, with an unmanerly and ful-mouthd liberty. Those that neereliest
before knew him; confess him, indeed, to have been unfortunate: but could not
devise, which way he came to deserve it: yea they believe withal, that there
is not a spirit to be found, how well mounted and fortified soever it be; that
could have borne the Cross with a better tempered moderation, then he had done
his sufferings: and do admire that patience of his, which was indeed most
eminently remarkable in him. Most true it is, that a many excellent virtues of
this Prince, have not only been over-clouded, but have also been oppressed,
by the unlucky weightinesse of his infelicities: and yet have so many others
broke forth, and beamd out from him; as might have been sufficient to have
dazeled the owle-eyes of Envy, and bungd up the mouths of that malignitie and
mis-speaking; with which he has continually been tongue-smitten and
persecuted. His House, his Extraction, his Kindred, his Allyances; together with
his personal good qualities, even these ought of duty to command forbearance,
in those Satyricall and mercenary spirits; who are still provided of Common
places, both for Panegyricks and Invectives: which they make serve their turns
according to the times; to make show of their own queint wits, even with
disparaging of great Princes: whose highness of Birth alone, should be enough
to make such people know their distances. There is an honor due to Princes, of
what side soever they be: yea and an Apology for this very Gentleman: who
though too too grossly undervalued he were, in these his misfortunes; yet was
ever well respected by those that best knew him, even in the lowest declination
of his disgraces. Highly honored he was by a most ample testimony of that
solid judgemented Prince, the King of Sweden, upon the offer of variety of
occasions: who was sometimes enforced to moderate that thirst and pursuit of
military honor in him; and otherwhile professed himself to be so inveigled
(as it were) by the sweetness of his Conversation, as to engage his promise to
him (many a time) to r'impatriate and re-estate him again in his place of
honor; with a request to him to manage his life so, as might be best for the
improvement of the public, and the comfort of his friends, and those about him.

The Subjects of this good Prince, may have plentiful matter of consolation,
from that most heroical, and masculine spirited Princess, his Queen; and
from that sweet and numerous Issue, which he has left behind him: which
promises them an entire affranchisement, one day again; and the resetling of a
Family so many ways considerable, as is one of the first and ancient lie
descended, of all Europe. A Queen, who for her beauty, and virtues; demerits
to be made no less, then what she was borne, or Crowned: and who for the
unexampled bearing of these varied afflictions, deserves to be made more, then
there are yet Titles for. An Issue so fair; and for their numbers, such a
blessing: as were not only prepared by God, for a present Comfort to their
widowed Mother: but, (which their own excellent towardliness, gives pregnant
hopes of) for the raising of their own fair Family again; and engrafting the
Palatine branches, into most of the great Houses of the Empire.

The Reader (I hope) will not take it amiss from me, that I have done that
right, unto so great a Prince; which in all duty and conscience I felt my self
obliged to. A Prince, who has these many years been the Butt of misfortunes,
and of the insolences and insultations, which, of course, follow upon them.
And this have I done, so much the more confidently; for that this Prince has
had the honor of alliance, not only with other great Kings; but also with
mine own gracious Sovereign. Truly all persons of honor, ought of right to
esteem themselves interessed, in the chary conservation of the honors of
their equals; and however otherwise diversely affected, yet should they all
join to rescew one another from malignity; and to palliate their disgraces,
with their very Crowns and Purples.

FINIS.
The Index to the fourth Part.
A.
ALsatia, what Towns the Imperialists had in it, before Horns coming. 39 Horn
comes into it. 47
Altringer falls into Hessen. 81 Arnheym cleeres Lusatia. 157 Raised from
Zittaw, by Don Balthazar. 158 -- Advances against the Jmperialists. 160 --
Pursues the Imperialists from Olau bridge. 168 Chases them to Meravia. 169
Recalled into Saxony. ibid.
B.
BAnnier besieges Magdenburg. 108 -- His fear of Pappenheym. 110 -- His men
cut off 300. Jmperialists. 118 Ioynes with Duke William. 119 Sent for unto the
King. 123 Baudissin takes charge of Todes Army. 137 -- Left with half the Army
by the Duke of Lunenburg. 145 In vain besieges (...). 147 Beats the
Gronffe^^ers at Brakel. 148 Raised from Hoxter by Pappenheym. 148 Retreates
into Hessen-land. 149 Falls into Cullen-land. 150 Benfelt, the siege of it. 55
-- Taken. 64 Made over to the Strasburgers. 66 Claymed by Lorraine. 67 Bernard
Weymar, draws out the Army in the Palatinate, against the Spanish. 4 -- goes
to relieve Spiers. 10 -- strengthens Manheym and Wormbs. 11 -- goes to the K.
of Swed. 12 Discontented, and the causes of it. 28 Brandenburgers come with
Dubalt into Silesia. 158 Bremen Bishop rysess 106 Bremersford taken. 133
Breslaw the great fight before it. 163 Refuses to succor the Jmperialists. 166
Accords with Dubalt 170 Bretten in the Palatinate taken by Montecuculi. 40
Brieg Duke, accords with Arnheym. ^^ Brunswick Duke, thrust out of his own Town
by Tilly. 116 Bulach maintains Benfelt. 57
C.
CAssel, Pappenheym put off from it. 140 Coblentz, the Spaniards thrust a
Garrison into it. 29 The Rhynegrave takes it from them. 31
Colmar taken by Horn. 74 Commissary General of the Cavallery, what Office.
6,7 Cordova, to come with a second Army into the Palatinate. 2 Cannot get over
the Mosel. 11.14
Cullen Elector his fear of Horn. 32 -- obteynes a Neutrality. 34

D.
DAmitz taken. 104 Diete of Hamborow, 97 Director of the War, the K. of
Swedens Title. 87 Donaw Baron, his trick used at Breslaw. 164 Don Balthazar,
reysc^ Arnheym from Zittaw. 157 Recovers Steinau. 160
Defeated at Steinau. 161 and before Breslaw 167 Flees before Arnheym. 162
Dubalt comes into Silesia. 157 Routes the Jmperialists at Steinau. 161
and again before Breslaw 167 His demands to Breslaw 167 Brings it to accord.
170 Duderstat taken by Lunenburg. 144
E.
Emden Count, leads a Spanish Army into ye Palatinate. 2 Denies Spiers unto
Marquess William. 13 Forced to quit it. 14
Emperor sick. 54 -- his second son a Bishop. 80 -- His missing the Bishopric
of Magdenburg, was the destruction of that City. 107 English Regiment joins
with Todt. 127 English and Scottish Regiments besiege Boxtchude. 128
F.
FRanckendale rendered. 76 French, come with an Army toward Triers. 15 Enter
it. 16
Fulda Abbey accords with the Landgrave. 80 Furstenberg Count, his poor estate.
53
G.
GO^ttingen taken by Duke William. 122 Goslar taken by Duke William. 122 Glogaw
taken by Arnheym. Gr^^^^burg taken by Horn. 33 Gram treates about yielding of
Wismar. 102 Yields it. 105 Taken Prisoner for breaking his conditions. 105
Gronsfelt left by Pappenheym about the Wes^r. 143 Relieves Wolffenbuttle. 146
Reyses Baudissin from Paderborn. 147 Beaten from the Pass of Brakel. 148 Left
again about the Weser. 153
Gustavi-Stadt, the new Town built by the King of Sweden at Mentz. 11
H.
HAckapells, a Nickname given to the Finlanders 148 Hagenaw yielded to the
Swedish. 75 Hamburgers refuse to join with their neighbor Princes in a league.
102 Hamelen Town to whom it belongs. 120 Pappenheym thereabouts. 119
Haubald made Governor of Manheym. 11 He takes Stolhoven. 48 and Obernheim. 50
Hildesheim Town accords with Lunenburg. 138 Taken by Pappenheym. 151
Hirschfeld, the Emperors Son is Abbot of it. 80 Accords with the Landgrave 8^
Horn, comes to command the Army in the Palatinate. 19 Advances into Triers
Country. 30 Takes Trarbach and Grafenburg. 33
-- and Veldentz. 34 Returns into the Palatinate. 4^ Reyses the siege of
Wiseloch. 43 Defeates 1000. Imperial Horse. 45 Pursues Monte Cuculi. 45
Obteynes passage of the Strasburgers. 46
Helps the Wurtemburgers to take Offenburg. 51 Besieges Benfel^. 55
-- Takes it. 64 Takes Schletstat. 71 And Colmar. 74 Marches up into Bavaria 77
Hornburg, Todt, encamps at it. 128 Pappenheym offers to force it. 133

I.
Jesuits of Schletstat, Conjurers and Poysoners. 68
K.
KAlckstein takes Steinau Fort. 159 and Nowmarckt and Kant. 162
King of Bohemia comes to Franckford. 62 Dies. 76
King of Denmark, some jealousies between him and the K. of Sweden
reconciled. 136 Kirchberg taken by the Spanish 2 recovered. 26
Klein Jaacob joins with Baudissin. 147 skirmishes with Gronsfeld. 148
Knitlingen in the Palatinate burnt by Monte Cuculi. 41
L.
LAndgrave of Hessen his Story. 78 -- he cleeres Hirschfeld. 80 -- takes
Fritzlar. 81 Cleeres his Land of the Jmperialists. 82 Advances into Paderborn.
83
-- and into Westphalia. 84 His Letters to the Elector of Cullen. 85 Paderborn
and Westphalia accorded with him. 88, 89 He goes to the King of Sweden. 90
Leopold Archduke, dies. 54 Lesly Sir Alexander, comes to take charge of Todes
Army. 128 -- His Regiment out off by by Pappenheym. 132 Letters of Tilly to the
Protestants of the Lower-Saxony. 98 Letters of Count Furstenberg. 53 of the
Landgrave to Cullen. 85
Lignitz Duke accords with Arnheym. 159 Lower Saxony, the actions in it. 91
Lucas Cagro, defeated. 6 Lunenburg Duke, made General in place of Todt. 138 --
his Army. 141 Takes Duderstat. 144 Devides the Army and goes to Wulfenbuttle.
145 Beaten up. 146
Lusatia, the actions in it. 155
M.
MAgdenburg the Story of it. 106 The L. Marquess Hamilton and Banier besiege
it. 107 Brought to a Treaty. 109 Relieved by Pappenheym. 110 Forsaken by him,
and entered by the Swedish. 115
Markelsheim taken by the Rhynegrave. 67 Marquess Hamilton lands in Germany.
107 His way to Magdenburg. ibid Unwilling to go from the siege of Magdenburg.
110 Refuses to flee over the Pass to Banier. 110 Goes up to the K. of Sweden.
116
Marquess William of Baden, demands Spiers from the Spaniards, and is denied.
13 Left in Spiers. 15 Forsakes it. 35 Ioynes with Ossa and Monte Cuculi. 39
Made general in Alsatia. 52 Metternich Governor of Heidelberg. 25 the chief
man in the Palatinate. ibid. besieges Wiseloch. 42 Levies his own siege. 43
Monte Cuculi comes into Alsatia. 39 Seases the Strasburgers Towns. 40
Adva^ces into ye Palatinate. 40 His design upon Spiers. 41 Burns Knitlingen.
41 Two of his Regiments defeated by Horn. 44 He flees over the Rhyne. 45 Ioynes
with Metternichs 3. Regiments in Alsatia. 46 Goes into Bavaria. 52

N.
NEwburg Duke, treates a Neutrality. 34
O.
OFfenburg taken by Horn. 51 Olan bridge won by Arnheym. 168 Ortenburg Castle
surrendered to Horn. 52 Ossa busy in Alsatia. 1 the good order he had taken in
Wurtenburgland. 37 and 38 R'allees with Baden and Monte Cuculi. 39 Summons
Strasburg. 40 avoyds out of Alsatia. 52
Oxenstiern Chancellor pursues the Spaniards of the Palatinate. 17 Concludes a
Neutrality with the Elector of Cullen. 34 Goes with an Army to the King. 35

P.
PAderborn, the Landgraue^ actions in it. 83, etc. He summons the Gentry, 88
Palatinate, the Spaniards come into it. 2 Forsake it. 17 The State they left
it in. 22 etc
Pappenheym, set out by the Leaguers. 111 How he made up his Army. 111. 112
Enters Magdenburg. 113 Forsakes it. 114 Goes into Lunenburg-la^d. 117 Passes
the Weser. 118 Recalled by his Co^missary. 119 Cuts off 1500. Swedish. 121 His
craftiness. ibid. Comes into ye field again. 124 Marches into Bremerla^d. 126
Relieves Stoade. 134 Cuts off Lesly's Regiment. ib. Offers to force Todts army.
133 Forsakes Stoade. 134 Thought to correspond with Denmarks. 135 Falls into
Hassia. 539 goes back against the Swedish. 141 Affronts the^ by Hildesheim.
142 Goes to Maestricht. 143 Puts Baudissin to the retreit. 149 Takes
Hildesheim. 151 Marches up to Walenstein. 153 Takes Towns in Duringen. 154

P.
PHilip de Sylva, General of the Spanish in the Palatinate. 152 Returns into
the Low Cou^tryes. 16
Protestants how miserably used by the Leaguers, etc. 85 Protestant Princes of
the Lower Saxony, their Diet and Levies. 97, 101
R
Rhinegraue goes against the Spaniards. 4 Defeats 1400. of them 6 Pursues them
going out of the Palatinate. 18, 19, etc. Beaten of from Kirckberg. 26 Takes
Coblentz. 31 His Name and Family. 56 Blocks Schletstat. 60 Takes Marke^sheim.
67 Left by Horn in Alta^ia. 77
R^st^ck rendered to the Duke of Mecklengburg 92
S
SChafgotzi overthrown by Arnheim 168 Schletstat blocked up. 60 taken by Horn.
71 The Jesuits there, Coninrers. 68
Scottish Regiments join with Todt. 121 Silesia, the Actions in it. 158
Simmern taken by the Spanish. 3 recovered. 26
Spaniards come with an Army into the Palatinate. 2 Their Story. Jbid. Loose 5.
Cornets to the Swedish. 3
-- 1400. of them defeatted 6 They advance toward Spires. 8 Don Philip de
Sylua ioynes with them. 8 They take Spiers. 9 Forsake it 14 Return out of the
Palatinate. 16 The Rhinegraue forces them to the Retreat. 18, 19 Their Losses.
21 They put a Garrison into Coblentz. 29 Forsake Triers. 31
Spiers taken by the Spaniards. 9 Forsaken by them. 14 Marquess William takes
charge of it. 15 His garrison forsakes it. 35 Entered by the Swedish. 36
Steinau Fort taken by the Saxons. 159 Reprised by the Impialists. 160
Recovered by Dubalt. 161
Stoade blockt up by Todt. 130 releiued by Pappenheim. 132 Entered by Todt. 136
Stolhanshe helps to beat the Spanish. 5 Strasburg refuses Ossa. 40 Gives
passage to Horn. 64 Engaged in the siege of Benfelt. 57

T.
TIlly writes to the Protestants of the Lower-Saxony. 98 Todt takes Wismar. 10^
-- goes to Lunenburg. 126 Encamps at Hornburg. 128 Takes Boxtehude. 130 Sent
for from the Army. 128 But stays upon another occasion. 129 Goes from the Army.
Trarbach taken by Horn. 33 Tryers Elector, entertaines the French. 16 Troubles
the Spanish in their retreat. 21 Differences betwixt him and the Palatine. 23
Well pleased with the Swedish. 33 The Spaniards forsake his Country. 31 Horn
advances into his Country. 30

V.
VJrmo^t yields up Rostock. 9^ -- in vain besieges Halberstat. 96 Pistoll'd at
Cullen. 124
Volckmarsen taken by Pappenheym. 140
W.
VVArtenburg Castle surprised by 9. of Dubalts horsemen. 169 Westphalia
Dukedom, the Landgraves actions in it. 84 The Conditions offered it, by him. 88
William Weymar, comes against Pappenheym. 119 Takes Goslar. 122 and
Goettingen. 123 Go^^ back to the King. ibid
Wiseloch the siege of it. 42 Wismar, the continuation of the siege of it. 102
It Treates. 103 yielded to Todt. 105
Wurtemburg Dukedom, the Orders sent by the K. to it. 36 What Towns the
Jmperialists had in it. 37. 39 The Administrator arms. 39
-- causes Monte Cuculi to retire. 41 Ioynes with Horn. 47 His actions in
clearing his own Country. 49 He besieges Offenburg in Alsatia. 51 Takes Towns
about the Bodensee. 62

Z.
ZElla-Lunenburg Duke, co^pounds craftily with Pappenheym. 127
FINIS.
Place this betwixt page 150. and 151. Our Cutter has made the Ordnance too
long, and to lie too far into the River. The Hole also marked with R, should
have been on the right hand of the Bridge.

diagram


