THE HISTORY OF the present Wars of GERMANY.

A SIXTH PART.

Gathered out of the best Intelligences, and reduced into times, places, and
actions.

Briefly Brought down from October last past, to our Lady day 1634.

LONDON, Printed by THO. HARPER, for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1634.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, the continuation of this our German Story had come forth
immediately upon our Lady day, but that we expected (for the more perfecting of
the same) certain papers from beyond the Seas. For the more delight of the
Reader we have in this Part observed this method, we have drawn each
Commanders several actions to its own proper head; therein observing both time
and place, and paralelling their actions together, as near as we could
collect, giving to each side what to them belongs. If we have failed in any
thing, impute it to our want of better information. If either side can, and
will hereafter supply us with better intelligence, we shall willingly embrace
it, and give due satisfaction. If what we now publish you shall well accept
of, we shall then be encouraged to continue this History, and give you ere
long something more.

The Contents of the Book.
CHap. 1 The History of Duke Bernard Weymar, page 1 Chap. 2 The History of
Gustavus Horn. page 21 Chap. 3 More of Gustavus Horn, and the Palatine
Birckenfelt page 29 Chap. 4 The History of the Rhinegrave, with the actions of
Alsatia page 49 Chap. 5 The taking and reducing the City of Hagenaw with the
Castle of Aubar page 58 Chap. 6 The continuation of the Rhinegrave page 72
Chap. 7 The actions of the Landgrave of Hessen page 83 Chap. 8 More of Hessen
and Kniphausen, and something of the Chancellor Oxenstiern, and his
Propositions for a Diet. page 102 Chap. 9 The Conclusion and Articles agreed
upon at Halberstat page 124 Chap. 10 Of the affairs in Silesia, and of the
Generalissimo ( the Duke of Fridland) his death page 134 Chap. 11 Of the
Elector of Saxony and Arnheim page 159
THE HISTORY OF DVKE BERNARD WEYMAR.
CHAP. 1.
AFter the taking of Regensburg, was Colonel Ros sent to take in
Burlengenfeld; Ros sent to take in the Fort of Burlengenfeld.
a Fort of the Duke of Newburghs, three leagues above Amberg, in the upper
Palatinate; this being done about November 20. he found 21. Pieces of Ordnance
in it: Chamb, Nabpurg, and Weyden, were about that time also recovered, with
other places, Deckendorff; namely upon the Danuby, toward Passaw. Duke
Bernards head Quarter was at Albeng, Nov. 24. to make way (it seemed) for the
Boores of over Ens in Austria; he labored to open all the passages, and had
already opened those upon the River Iser. But the Town of Passaw, and
Walenstines sending forces thither, defeated the Boores conioyning with him.
Toward the end of the month, a revolt was attempted in Strawbing, near unto
Regensburg, which Duke Bernard took in soon after Regensburg, whereupon 18000
barrels of salt, diverse of the chief revolters, and the best of the town
riches, were removed unto Regensburg, Nov. 28. 200. imperially-affected
Regensburgers, and 60. Friars, were sent out, to go for Ingolstad: diverse
Friars were also kept in arrest, till those Protestant Regensburgers, which are
prisoners in Bavaria and Austria, are released. Donawstauff Fort, having some
while been besieged by the Dukes forces: more troops by this time were sent
against it. December. 1. the Duke came into Regensburg to reside. December. 3. the
Regiments of Stenbock and Ros came to him out of Franconia. Now the Duke
disperses his Army into several places of Bavaria; for their winter quarters,
about Klingen, diverse of the Bavarian Boores meeting with a partee of
Imperialists, and mistaking them for Swedes, killed 200 of them. Some believe,
that the Boores knew them to be Imperialists, and that being discontented with
their quartering amongst them, The discontent of the Boores of Saltzburg.
they at other times knocked down diverse straglers of them. The Boores of the
neighbor Bishopric of Saltzburg, were now also discontented with Althringer,
who had already sent some troops through Munchen and Wasserburg, to lie upon
the Saltzburgers. About the middle of December, Duke Bernard went by boat,
under the wooden and stone bridge, to view the under and over Werth, and gave
order for the building a powder Mill. December. 27. he went to Kelberin and
Bergen, to meet privately with the Palatine Birkenfield, and Gustavus Horn.
And December. 29. he was again to return to Regensburg. Toward the end of
December. the Imperialists of Donawstauff Castle, by laying a Ship bridge over
the Danow, sallied out, and intercepted thirty or forty Wagons of Salt, going
to Regensburg. Notice was given of this Salt convoy to the Danowstauffers by
some Papists of Regnesburg, which treachery being discovered, they were
examined, and some arrested: thirty Friars thereupon with as many servants,
were sent away to Ingolstadt. The Bishop of Regensburg also was constrained to
quit his house in the town, and to lodge at the golden Star in the
Corne-market; those of Donawstauff want water within the Fort, which whilst
they are feign to fetch at the Danow, many of them become like Pitchers, which
go so often to the water, that at last they come broken home.

The Fort of Donawstauff thus being not able to hold out, Donawstauff rendered
to D. Bernard Weymar.
nor to be relieved by John de Werth (who now attempted to make some diversion
of Duke Bernards Forces by appearing about Deckendorff, toward Austria) was
feign to come to a composition, and to surrender. Duke Bernard being thus
master of it, and considering that it would require a perpetual care, charge,
and garrison, to keep it from those of Ingolstadt, resolves to ruin and
demolish it. For which purpose it was begun to be undermined, which in February
after was effected: So that the Fort being blown up, the other buildings in
the small town were set on fire Ferbuary 14.

In the mean time (that is, in the month of January) did the Duke send his
Captains abroad against other places in Bavaria: Colonel Kerberg (a Swede)
was commanded toward Hohen Aldach a strong Cloister, Hohen Aldach a strong
Cloister, taken.
near unto Kendorff in Bavaria, which was kept by a Lieutenant Colonel and
100 soldiers; Kerberg surprised the place, slew and took prisoners the most
of the Bauarians, but the Governor escaped. Since this, by a fire that burst
forth, Hohen burnt
was the Cloister quite ruined, and the Swedes enforced to quit so strong a
place, which was the key to all those quarters of Bavaria. The Boores which
were risen in the lower Bavaria and the Bishopric of Saltzburg, were
indifferently well quieted by this time, but at the first sight of any
soldiers that should offer to enquarter themselves among them, they would ring
out their bells, and assemble together to resist them. And thus indeed the
Boores of Saltzburg did about the end of January, when as they enforced two
Regiments to retire with some loss, that volens nolens would have thrust
themselves upon them. About the 20 of January Duke Bernhard, for the case of
Regenspurg, and the refreshment of his own people, sent 100 Cornets of Horse,
and 148 foot Companies to be laid in garrison in the towns of Franconia.
Great store of all manner of provisions were taken order for to be sent into
Norimberg for the making of a magazine in that City.

A defeat given the Sweds.
In the end of the month, did John de Werth, with his Imperial Leaguers and
Bauarian forces, gather together about Deckendorff about 3000 strong, Horsemen
and Dragooners; where he fell unawares into the quarters of the Swedish. The
chief spoil he did, was unto the Satlerish Regiment, which indeed they did
great harm unto. The Regiment of Kerberg they likewise assaulted, but the
greatest mischief which they did to that was, the spoiling of their baggage,
and the taking prisoners of some of the Officers. This happened in the time that
the most of the Swedish forces were gone out of Deckendorff upon other
employments. At which time this John de Werth was known to be going upon
another way toward the relief of Weyden in the upper Palatinate; which
hearing to be taken by Vitzdumb, he all on the sudden turns with his Horse and
Dragooners upon Deckendorff. Having done the aforesaid spoil, he retired in
good time, for that the ways were hilly. In the mean season did those few
Swedish Horsemen and Dragooners that were in the town, get them to their Arms
and Horses, and in several partees made out after their pillagers. Colonel
Berekhefer with one Company had the fortune to light upon John de Werths
Regiment, The Sweds recovery of their former loss.
consisting of a 11 Companies, all which he wholly rowted and dispersed. Some
prisoners they took, and 200 well mounted Horses, all which were brought into
Deckendorff. According to the relation of some prisoners, John de Werth
himself received a dangerous shot, whereof some (though falsely) supposed that
he died. At the same time the Sergeant Major of the Satlerish Regiment brought
back 3 of John de Werths Ritmasters, 3 Lievetenants, 2 Cornets, and above 80
prisoners, which were all sent into Straubingen: In both these conflicts were
full 300 Imperialists slain, the Bavarian Colonel Schwartz taken prisoner,
and the most of the Swedish baggage recovered.

Duke Bernard in the mean time being at Regenspurg, was busied in fortifying
the City, in this very beginning of February, setting upon the fortification at
the Hoff and the Drawbridge at the stone Bridge. By this also was the
Lieutenant Colonel Waldan sent by the Duke to besiege the Castle of
Falkenstein, which belongs to the Colonel Haslanger: who together with
Colonel Sbnetter, that was Governor of Ingolstadt, was lately taken prisoner
about the Castle of Wilsburg in Franconia, and now in durance within
Regenspurg. In this Falkenstein Castle lay some troops of Haslangers, which
much molested the neighbor Country with their boothalings. Therefore was it
besieged, and about the first of February were some Ordnance and Petards set to
Waldan, then lying before it, with all violence to hasten the conquest of it.
By this means was it in a few days brought to a composition, Falkenstain taken
by the Swedes.
wherein was much Ammunition and other provisions taken. It was resolved that
this Castle should be demolished, like as that of Donawstauff had bin served.
The Bavarian Boores in the Market towns hereabouts were now up in arms, and
did some shrewd turns now and then unto the Swedish: but most especially were
they strong and troublesome in the fair Market town of Kitringen in the
Forest; which when the Swedish summoned, they would by no means surrender it.
Kitringen taken by the Swedes.
Hereupon it was feign to be taken by assault, in which the Boores throats
were cut, and the town burned. In this mean time was Duke Ernestu of Saxen
Weymar, younger brother to Duke Bernard, gone from Regenspurg to Wultzburg upon
the Main in Franconia; whither he was come by the 10 of February. He had been
convoyed thither by a Regiment of horse, with which there were other Regiments
to conjoyne that lay thereabouts; who were all to keep their Rendevouz at
Hasfurt. The intention was, that they should block up Forcheim in the
Bishopric of Bamberg.

About the tenth of February went Duke Bernhard from Regenspurg unto
Straubingen to put all things therein good order. Before this time did Duke
Francis Albert of Saxon Lawenburg arrive at Regenspurg: he came from Pilsen in
Bohemia, where Walstein then lay, to whom he had been employed by the Elector
of Saxony, D. Francis Albert, negotiates for a peace.
to treat upon those Articles of peace which the Emperor and Walstein had
propounded unto him. There he came now to tender unto Duke Bernhard from the
same Walstein. General Arnheim was also expected to be sent to Leutmaritz in
Bohemia, which was the place where the treaty was appointed to be held; At
which Walsteins self was purposed to be present upon the sixth of February,
which was the time agreed upon, by which Duke Francis Albert was to have
returned again to him, with Duke Bernhards answer. They at Regenspurg
supposed, that Walsteins first proposition was to have a cessation of Arms for
three months, till the treaty of peace might go forward, There might indeed
be some color for that, Because that the Lord of Hoff was with some Swedish
forces about the Town of Eger upon the frontiers of Bohemia: whose General
Major Corvile did about this time certify Duke Bernhard that he had a hope
within eight days to take it. What ever Duke Bernhards answer was unto his
Cousin Francis Albert, himself did in the mean time go forward with his
preparations. For now causes he his Ship bridge to be carried down the Danuby,
which was to be laid over at Olderhausen. All the Army likewise that was to be
enquartered about Regenspurg were warned also to draw together and to march: At
Waldmunshen also, Schonsee and other places many hundreds of Wheelebarrowes,
pickeaxes, shovells and Iron bullets were made ready, and all for some warlike
expedition. Febr. the 19 did the blew Regiment with 5 pieces of Ordnance march
out of Regenspurg, Duke Bernard himself following after, who was that night to
lodge at Schwandorff. In Regenspurg was General Major Chog, (a Swede) left for
Governor. After the blew Regiment did the Berghauerish Regiment of Horse march
through Regenspurg, And the black Regiment was laid into the City in stead of
the blew one, which heretofore had been the Garrison to it. Now was Duke
Bernards Army said to be 15000. men, if there be no mistaking in the figures,
and his way was toward the Upper Palatinate, and so unto Bohemia to see what
Wallenstein intended; who being very eager of the peace had sent 13 posts in a
few days space unto Regenspurg to Duke Bernard. Within a few days, Thirteen
posts sent from Walstein to D. Bernard. Walstein murdered.
and as the Duke was then upon his march, had he news of Walsteins being
murdered: For which reason he hasted by all means to get into Bohemia before
the confusion among the Imperialists should be appeased. In the mean time
Colonel Dubatell had good success in other parts of Bavaria where he took
three indifferent strong places, Three towns in Bavaria taken by the Swedes.
as Forth, Eshelcham, and Newkirchen, in which he found above 4000 quarters of
Corn, 30 pieces of Ordnance, much ammunition and other good provisions. Which
done, he Febr. 12/30 arived again at Regenspurg.

By this was Duke Bernhards maine Army gotten to Nappurg in the way to Egra.
Himself with 3000. Horse going before unto Weyden. To this Weyden (which is a
good place of importance) he came Feb. 20/30. whence he dispatched the
Colonels Rosse and Karpfen with a good strength of Horse toward Egra to listen
how businesses were there carried. About Turschenreyt did these two Colonels
light upon Colonel Corpus with his Regiment of Crabats, Colonel Corpus an
Impedefeated.
whom falling upon unawares they put them to flight, killed 300. and took 200.
prisoners, and about 600. well mounted horses. By the 25. of Febr. were these
two expected again to be back at Weyden, where the report was, that the
Crabate Corpus himself should have been slain in the late conflict. Duke
Bernhards Foot arrived at Weyden Febr. 22. And now was order given for better
fortifying of the town. For now he thinks best to provide for the securing
of this upper Palatinate where he now was. Hereupon he desired of the City of
Norimberg to send in some provant bread, and Ammunition to the Towns of
Herspruch and Vilseck lately taken by the Birckenfelders. He gives order also
unto Clous Hastoort (a Swede) to lay a Swedish Garrison into Sultzbach: For
that the Imperial Garrison of Amberg had threatened to pillage that City, and
that the other Towns were in danger of John de Werth and Gallas.

From Weyden did Duke Bernhard send a strong partee toward Danaw: 3000.
Birckenfelders he also sent toward Forth with whom Dubatell was to join from
Regenspurg. This town being lately taken by this Dubatell, was now again
besieged and taken by John de Werth who passed the river Iser in Bavaria 6000.
strong, as it was reported. This Forth was taken the day before the Swedes
came, Forth taken by the Imperialists.
and John de Werth having put a garrison into it was retired with the rest of
his Army. The Swedes supposing the enemy had retired for fear of them, and
that the Town had not been taken, Dubatells Lieftenant-Colonell going too
near the walls was shot in the arm, of which he afterward dyed. This so
enraged the Swedish that they burnt down the Town: but being not able to
master the Castle on the sudden they retired unto Duke Bernhards army unto
Averbach. For the Duke, at the same time that he commanded the Birckenfelders
toward Forth, went with his own Army into Kemnath in the beginning of March;
which Town imediately yielded upon composition, Thence went he toward
Averbach aforesaid, fully now resolving to besiege the Town of Cronach, in the
Bishopric of Bamberg.

Whilst this was there a doing, John de Werth, and the Duke of Bavaria, took
the opportunity of the absence of Duke Bernard, and began to make some menaces
about Regenspurg. Straubingen therefore in doubt to be besieged, labored might
and maine upon their new fortifications. The Count of Thurn, and Colonel
Kevenhiller, being their directors. These two came from Straubing, into
Regenspurg, March 4. who were followed the next day by the black Regiment,
which was thence forward to be enquartered in that City. It was doubted John
de Werth, with 6000. men, as was reported, meant to go against Abensperg and
Mewstettlein, and that for his assistance, there were great preparations of
Boats and ships made in Ingolstadt, whither the Duke of Bavaria was by this
time arrived.

Deckendorf and Falkenstein burnt down by the Sweds.
The Swedish therefore perceiving that the Town of Deckendorff was not to be
maintained, burnt down the gates, and forsook it. The Castle of Falkenstein,
which belonged unto Colonel Haslangar, they for the same reason demolished and
levelled all the out works of the Castle of Werth, The outworks of Werth
demolished.
bringing the soldiers out of both of them into Regenspurg. Ketheim being an
indifferent strong Town, had a stronger garrison laid into it. In Regenspurg
was there likewise an exchange of prisoners taken on both sides: Colonel
Schnetter the Governor of Ingolstadt was set at liberty about the 10. of
March, and suffered to return into his government. As for Colonel Haslanger,
he was sent into Norimberg, whence he was to beesent into Frankford on the
Main. The Bishop of Regenspurg also some few days before this was sent to be
kept in Norimberg.

Cronach besieged by D. Bernard Weymar.
Duke Bernard is all this beginning of March, upon his way toward Cronach,
which strong town had for a long time been the very den of thieves and
robbers, to the great molestation of the whole Country. The trained bands of
the Marquess of Brandenburg, Bairrent, (next neighbor to the Bishopric of
Bamberg) were now also sent against Cronach with Duke Bernards Forces. From
Coburg and Schwemfurt also was there much Ordnance and Provant bread carried
toward the Dukes Army: But the Cronachers being confident upon their own
walls, and the strength of their friends in Bavaria (who would be able as they
hoped to divert their enemies) were resolved to defend their Town to the last
man. Hereupon they not only gave no courteous answer unto Duke Bernards
summons, but a braving and a despightfull one. They also killed him some 50 men
upon a sally; among which, were one Lieutenant Colonel, one Sergeant major,
and two Captains, and hurt him above 2 hundred.

About this time was to be the funeral of the Duke of Saxen-Coburg, Uncle
unto Duke Bernard: at which solemnity, Duke Bernard of necessity was to be
present, as being Heir unto the deceased: and at this funeral he was about
mid March, when as it was given out that he should have been killed before
Cronach.

In his absence the siege went not on with such carnestnesse; yea the Duke
himself perceiving it more necessary for him to look to other places now
endangered by the enemy, The siege of Cronach raised.
of his own accord he raised his siege of Cronach about the 20. of March,
retyring with his Army betwixt Averbach and Norimberg. For this Averbach by
which Duke Bernard first passed unto Cronach, Averbach taken by Vitzdumb.
was in the mean time taken by General Mayor Vitzdumb, and the Birkenfeldish
forces being by a furious battery constrained to yield upon discretion.

The Imperialists being indifferently well pacified in Bohemia, after the death
of Walstein were (during Duke Bernards absence) now fallen into the upper
Palatinate, where they had burned Weydhausen into ashes, which had resisted,
and began to recover one town after another, which Vitzdumb and Duke Bernards
self had lately taken in: Straubingen likewise (by Regenspurg) was by this
time also hard besieged by John de Werth and the forces of Bavaria. The Swedish
Colonel Berghaver who defended the town, was resolved to maintain it to the
last man: and he about the tenth of March had 400 hand Grenades, and some more
soldiers sent unto him from Regenspurg. About the 18 of March did 6000
Bavarians present themselves before it, 4000 more being rumored to be coming
out of the upper Palatinate. March 21 by 8 in the morning did the Bavarians
begin their battery; 11 pieces of greater Canon they had now mounted, and beat
the town in three several places. Three several assaults did the Swedish
beat off bravely: but before the fourth came, the Townsmen had appeared for the
besiegers against their own soldiers, and constrained them to hearken to a
composition: and thus upon Saturday March 22, were the Straubingers enforced to
yield upon Articles; the chief of the Agreement being, Straubingen taken
again by the D. of Bavaria.
That the Swedish Horsemen should march out on foot; and the foot go out with
no other arms than their Muskets only. But neither were these conditions kept
with them, for that as they were marching forth of the town, the perfidious
enemy fell to charge them; yea, and contrary to the accord made, they took all
such of them for prisoners who refused to give up their names to serve under
them.

The Duke of Bavaria pillaged not the town, for that the Burgers were all
Papists, who by flinging of letters over the walls, had both discovered the
weakness of the garrison to the besiegers: and invited them after three
repulses received, to fall on again. The Duke of Bavaria and John de Werth
went not at all to besiege Regenspurg, as it was supposed they would have done;
but sending their Ordnance and carriages down the river Danuby, and so into
the river Iser; they quit Straubingen again, and retired with all speed to
Lanshut in Bavaria, for now was Duke Bernard loose from his siege of Drouach:
and Horn was upon his march into Bavaria.

Chamb taken by Gallas
In the mean time Gallas his troops being as hard the siege of Chamb in the
upper Palatinate, in few days took the same.

Turn we back now to the Palatine of Birkenfelts Army in the upper Palatinate.
After the taking of Weyden by the Lieutenant Vitzdumb, the Imperial garrison
of Amberg, had a purpose to have recovered Vilseck. Hereupon in January 29.
Febr 8. came 18. of their horsemen to the Gates of the said Vilseck, with a
counterfeit Swedish Pass or Certificate. But the true Swedish within the
Town, suspecting some such matter, gave fire upon them from the walls,
insomuch that they were feign to retire from the Gate into the Field. After
which there came one troop of Ambergers after another into the field, and
presented themselves 400 strong. By which those of Vilseck perceived what
ascowring they had escaped. The Swedish horsemen issued out of the town to
skirmish with them, with the loss of one Sergeant that was taken prisoner: The
Ambergers afterward retired also into their town. They still keep a Count of
the Swedish partee there in arrest; as also two Ritmasters, and one Captain
Lieuetenant. But Lieutenant Dyvell, with other officers and soldiers before
taken by them, were sent home freely by them. The said late taken Sergeant was
dismissed too: Febr. 7/17. on which day he came to his own fellows into
Sultzbach. He reported that the Imperial garrison of Amberg was 1000. strong,
horse and foot, of which the half part longed for the coming of the Swedes
before the town, for that they would presently give up their names to serve on
their side.

From Weyden went the Colonel Vitzdumb to siege Kemnath, which (as one writing
says) he had also taken by the 2/17 of Febr. The Fort of Waldeck made him a
very strong resistance, The Fort Waldech taken by the Swedes.
beating the Swedish twice from their walls; but the place was at last taken by
maine force, and all the soldiers put to the sword that were found in
resistance. From thence the Birkenfeldish forces went toward Averbach where
the Imperial Garrison marched out against them: but because they were not
above 50 strong, they were all put to the sword except 15 that escaped. Thence
went the full march toward Nappurg where their store of Ordnance lay. And the
soldiers longed very much till they might go before Amberg. It should seem
(if our writings be true of the former taking of Kemnath) that this town of
Kemnath was again taken by the Walsteiners, when the Birckenfelders were gone
from it. Sure I am, that Duke Bernard did with some ado take it afterward.
Presently upon this was Walstein murdered: upon which occasion Duke Bernard
came into this upper Palatinate; For which reason the rest of the
Birckenfelders actions are referred to the Chapter of his Story.

And now as an Appendix unto Duke Bernards actions may the siege of the Castle
of Weisenburg be added; both for that it was done by his directions and a part
of his Army; as also in the Neighborhood of Bavaria, where himself was, and
of Overland, where his Felt Marshall Horn warred. The place of this Wilsburg
Castle is by the Imperial City of Weisenburg in the Bishopric of Aichstat,
and very edge of the Circle of Franconia. It had been some months blockt up
by the Swedish Colonel Sperrentter, and the Count John of Hessen, the troops
lying at and about Weissenburg, a mile beneath the high placed Castle: which
the Author of the Swedish Intelligencer in his second part tells you to have
been sometimes attempted by the King of Sweden: nor has it since his time
been gotten in, several small encounters, ever and anon passed about it, but
I come to the chiefest and the latest.

Aichstat taken by Hessen.
On Monday January 27. the Landgrave John of Hessen took in the City of
Aichstat, in which (a mong the rest) lay 60 Musketeers, 40 Dragooners, and 60
Crabats that had been sent thither out of Wilsburg. The Town was taken by
assault, and therefore all these put to the sword, excepting the Crabats, who
gat up into the Castle. This was imediately besieged, and was then hoped it
could not hold out long: In such manner also our Writer then comforting
himself concerning Wilsburg Castle. But this piece being the chiefest pass to
all that Country, the Imperialists had more care of, and put hard for the new
victualling of it, protecting at one and the same expedition to have recovered
the town of Aichstat, to have surprised Weissenburg, and supplied Wilsburg.
Out of Ingolstadt therefore and the Garrisons of the Bishopric of Bamberg and
Bavaria they draw near upon 4000 adventurers for the feats aforesaid,
Colonel Schnetter the present Covernour of Ingolstadt and Colonel Haslanger
led them, and 300 of the Boores had they provided with their Hatchets and
Teames of horse to serve them in removing of the trees about Witsburg which the
Swedish had cut down and laid a cross to hinder sallyes of horse and all
sudden supplies to be carried by Cart to it.

Early in the morning Febr. 3/13 do the Imperialists come about their
business, and whilst the Boores were busy in removing of the trees aforesaid
Schnetter with his soldiers falls upon the Swedes of Weissenburg. At Helft did
the Imperialists cut of the Swedish Sentinels some thirty men in all and so
came forward to the Town. By which time Captain Simon Rammell
Lieftenant-Colonell unto Sperreuter; and the Landgrave John had gotten some
Horse together dispersed before in many quarters. With 700 Horse they fall out
upon the Imperialists, with whom they began the skirmish till their own foot
forces would come in to second them. In the mean time did the Boores get open
the passage in the woods and on horseback made shift to get in 15 wayne loades
of victuals into the Castle: Schnetter having notice that the chief of his
errand was now dispatched, and for that the Swedish began to press so hard
upon him, retired to wards Aichstat. The Landgrave and Rammell followed, and
within a league of Aichstat withal their forces overtooke and charged them.
Three hundred Dragooners and Musketeers they presently cut in pieces and took
800 prisoners. Colonest Schnetter and Haslanger taken prisoners.
Amongst which prisoners were the Colonels Schnetter and Haslanger which were
after sent unto Duke Bernard at Regenspurg. The rest of the Imperialists fled,
leaving two pieces of Ordnance, four Ensigns, and the most of their baggage,
together with four Captains, four Ancients, A great defeat given the Imper.
one Ritmaster, and one Lieftenant, and 25 wagons of Ammunition.

This was a great victory for that these forces were supposed to be of the
bravest of the Imperial Regiments of those parts; which the Weissenburgers
were the gladder of for that they had by this means gotten so many good
prisoners, as might ransom their chief Citizens heretofore carried away
captive by the Imperialists; The Landgrave John perceiving the Town of
Aichstat likely to be a bad neighbor to them should the enemies at any time
surprise it, as they now intended, burnt it quite down to ashes; A pitiful
prevention! which it had heene far more humanity to have defended than to
have destroyed. The Imperial prisoners paid their own ransomes and had money
to boot by taking pay under the Swedish.

In the end of February did Colonel Sperreuters Horsemen fly out upon Heydeck
where they brought all the Friars and the Jesuits. In the beginning of March
had those of Ingolstadt another resolution for the victualling of Wilsburg
Castle, upon Satturday; therefore March 8/18 did they again attempt it which
was by Sperreuters Horsemen in Weissenburg both discovered and prevented. These
sallying out upon the Imperial Convoy killed one Lieftenant-Colonell and
eighteen soldiers, taking some sixteen prisoners and fourteen Wagons of
provision.

And this is the state of Wilsburg Castle, which is likely enough so long to
hold out as Ingolstadt in Bavaria, and Cronach and Forcheim in the Bishopric
of Bamberg are able to relieve it.

THE HISTORY OF GVSTAVVS HORN. CHAP. 2.
WHilst Feria and Altringer being hindered in their design, to fall into the
Dukedom of Wertenburg, marched leysurely back again toward Bavaria, about
the middle of Novem. and about the 21. sat down at Hufingen, and Donaw
Estbinging. Gustavus Horn enquartered about Weylar, and the diocese of
Horneberg, whither he had come from Offenburg, near Alsatia, and through the
Kitzinger valley. Novem. 19. his head Quarter was at Retweill, and Altringers
at Donam Esthinging. Horn desired the Wertembergers troops to join with him,
that at next rising of the enemy, he might fall upon their marching. Feria and
Altringer perceiving Horns neerenesse, rose; and whereas their intent was to
have wintred in Wirtemberg land, they now make toward the Danow, which the
pass at Dutlengen. Novem. 21. Altringers hend quarter was at Miskirking, some
of their struglers, and others that could not march so fast, were cut off by
Horn: and Nov. 23. Colonel Brinck, and Colonel Wrangle, being sent out by
him, cut off 300 Musketteeres that were dispersed about the Dorps, to get in
victuals. Horn with the maine of the Army, stayed for the Rhinegrave Otto
Lodowick, that with both their forces, they might take their way through the
Elbinger valley toward Riethlingen on the Danubie, to pursue the enemy.

A thousand of Altringers men cut off, and he like to be taken.
The Rhine-graue being come, both the Swedish Generals passed Danubie in the end
of the month: and the Rhine-graues horse regiment falling upon some of
Altringers, about Weissenhorn, Botzheim, Dietenheim, and Brandenburg, cut off
near 1000. enemies. And had not two Boores given warning to Altringer,
himself had been surprised at Dietenheim, as he sat at table, whereupon he
fled, leaving his victuals all behind him.

In the beginning of December, both the Rhinegrave, and the Palatine
Berkenfelt, met at Vlus: whence they went to Weissenhorne, where Gustavus Horn
then held his chief quarter. Every day the Swedish cut off some Imperialists,
and one day took a pragmaticall Jesuit of Ingolstadt, who undertook to espy
and survey the country passages of advantage concerning which intention of his,
the notes and instructions being found about him, he was hanged up with his
fellows, at the Pfallinger passage near Reitlingen. In the mean time, while
Altringer and the Duke de Feria advanced, Horns army braued their rear, but
they would not accept of battle: howeuer now and then were two or three
hundred straglers cut off at a time; and at Reutlingen, a whole foot company
yielded to the Swedish, and took pay of them, and in the next town to it,
were a troop of Crabats surprised, and the Ritmaster with his Liefetenant
taken prisoners. A troop of Crabats taken.
Herereupon some few of those Crabats that escaped, giving the alarm to their
maine Army that then lay at Munderkingen and Emerkingen, the Catholic Generals
being assured of Horns coming to Renthingen, rose with all haste, and went
toward Bavaria. Hereupon did Horn follow them upon the other side of the
Danubie, which is on the Wirtenbergers side: for that he doubted by the enemies
offering to repair some Bridges betwixt Vlm and Munderkingen, that they
purposed to pass again the Danubie. Horn to prevent this, march something
befere the enemy from Ehingen, as far as Erbach: by which the enemy
perceiving himself to be waylaid every where, turned from the Danuby, toward
the River Iller, where at Brandenburg, he caused the Bridge to be repaired;
intending there to pass over toward Wurtenberg: Of this, Horn having notice,
sends out two strong partees of horse, one of the Rhine graves regiment,
commanded by Mayor Goldstein, the other under the command of Colonel Wutenberg,
with order to pass over the Danubie to disturb the enemy. One of these
Commanders passed over at Vlm, and the other at Erbach, and both hasted toward
Brandenburg. Two hundred Imprialists slain, two Ritmasters taken, and two
slain.
At Weisenhorn, did Goldenstein rout 200. horse of Aldtbrandini and Gonzagaes
regiment, who came to fetch away a company of their own Dragooners that lay
there. Two Imperial Ritmasters were then slain; a young Lord Fugger (who was
a Ritmaster, and had lately given out Patents for new levyes) and Mayor
Vernemont, were made prisoners. Colonel Wutenberg on the other side of the
Iller, in the Village of Mangen, fell upon some Crabats, killed 60. and took a
Ritmaster, and had he bin stronger, (for he was not above 200) he had done
more spoil. This was upon the fourth of December. In this mean time, did Horns
Army of foot, pass the Danubie at Erbach, and his Cavallery march all night
toward Brandenburg; hoping there to have surprised the enemy in their passing
of the River Iller; but they being terrified by what Wutenberg had done to
their Crabats, durst not now pass over at Brandenburg, but marched away to
Egelsee, and there went over the Iller. Horn passes the Iller after Feria,
and cuts off 200. of his reere.
After them did Horn send out some horse, who cut off some 200 of their rear,
that had not yet passed the River. After that, did all Horns foot pass the
Iller too, and marched into Weissenhorn, where he made his head quarter, and
his horse he inquartered about Memingen and those places: December. the sixth very
early, his Army brake up to follow the enemy: but having notice that they were
gone toward Kauffhauren, and gotten into the aduantagious country of Algow; he
returned back to Weissenhorn. Wutenberg was again sent out, who in the
Village of Apfeldrang, defeated some more of Gonzaga's regiment, and had
surprised a troop of Crabats in the next village, had they not run away very
manfully. The Catholic Generals are now glad to make toward Bavaria: into
which by the river Lech, they enter at Schonga and Fnessew: having (as is
believed) scarce brought away the third part of their Army; Spanish, Italians,
Germans, and Burgundians. Horns people were supposed to have killed 600
Crabats in a few days, Feria brings scarce a third part of his army alive into
Bavaria.
and so many of the Duke de Feria's men dyed by the way, by frost and famine:
that betwixt Vlm and Bibrack, were found 1000 dead carcasses. Some prisoners
reported likewise, that some horse regiments were not above 30 strong, for that
their horses being dead, their men were feign to go on foot Before that Feria
and Altringer parted from Raufbauren, they left that town with Kempten and
Memmingen, very well garrisoned: after which they passed the Lech upon the 8 of
December. Then goes Horn and the Palatine Christian of Berkenfeld, from Gunsburg
to Lawgingew and Dillingew. Wedle dispossesses two Regiments of the
Imperialists.
The Imperialists being now gotten into Bavaria, Colonel Wedle was sent from
Augsburg, with two regiments of horse, and one regiment of Dragooners against
them. He going toward Landsberg, December. 9. dispersed two regiments of them:
but the main of their Army coming on, he retreated without harm taking.
Feria and Altringer part.
Now does the Duke of Feria part from Altringer; whom leaving in Bavaria, he
goes with his weak Spanish and Italians, to take up his winter quarters in
Tyroll. Altringer, as it appears, kept himself a while about the banks of
the Lech: for marching at his first entrance, with part of his Army toward
Dachaw, he returned eftsoons toward Furssen. Gustavus Horn and Birckenfeld in
the mean time, take up their quarters in the Bishopric of Aichstat; and
about Ostingen, Nordlingen, and those places on the edge of Schwabland toward
Bavaria. A little before this, was the Rhinegraue gone from Horns Army back
again toward Alsatia, where new troubles were created. Altringer after a
week or two, sought to have his winter quarters in the Bishopric of
Saltzburg; which the Boores (so well as they could) resisted. About Christmas
time, did Gustavus Horn send part of his Army toward the upper Palatinate, to
keep Wallenstein from joining that way with Altringer and Feria.

It Is further written from Franckfurt by letters of the 13/23 of January, that
whereas Gustavus Horn and Palatine Berkenfelt, were with a great part of their
forces about the upper Palatinate, that Duke Bernard was to come and join with
them, for the clearing of that Country. Altringer in the mean time, is still
scuffling with the Boores of Saltzburg, and to hinder Weymars and Horns
joining; he and Walenstein threaten to besiege Regenspurg, but that is not much
feared. Altringer since this, has laid about Landshut and those places: and
has had a months mind to break into the upper Palatinate: but Horns sending
in Forces, has prevented him: and Major General Vitzdumb bath there recovered
diverse places from the Bavarians. As for Gustavus Horn himself he made again
to the Frontiers of Schwaben toward Bavaria, and Novem. 28. Old Style,
himself, lodged in Vlm: at which time his foot had their head quarter at
Ouer-Rottingen, and his horse at Weissenhorn, whence they are going to besiege
Bibrach.

The Duke of Bavaria in person has some whiles layne at Brauna in the further
edge of his own Country: whence be would very feign have gone for fear of
intercepting, but that the Estates of the Country entreated him to stay,
fearing a confusion, which his flight and absence might put his subjects into.
The Boores of Saltzburg have lately defeated Altringers Regiment of
Furstenberg, and pillaged the baggage of Colonel Salis: to restrain whom, the
Duke of Bavaria was feign to send some Regiments. It Is written out of Schwaben,
January 9. that the Duke of Feria dyed at Munchen, and indeed his body was
afterward carried into Italy: The death of Feria.
and his Army decreaseth very much, because diverse have been slain, and
others do sterve daily with frost and hunger. And out of Schwaben again, Ian.
12. No man here doubts of the death of the Duke of Feria.

In the upper Palatinate about the beginning of the new year, did
Generall-Major Vitzdumb recover the Town of Sultzbach; where were 11 Soldiers
only left by the Bauarians. Sultzbach taken.
Amberg the chief City of the upper Palatinate has a good while also expected
to be besieged, and for that Colonel Illo was rumoured to be coming from
Walstein out of Bohemia with 6000 men to relieve it and the Country: Vitzdumb
therefore leaving Sultzbach well provided with 8 troops of Horse and 300
Foot; made haste to take in Hirschaw, Vilseck and Averbach. He set forth from
Sultzbach January 8 but it was the 11 by that time he could get to Vilsech; for
that the ways were so durty that their carriages could march but slowly, and
they were enforced to leave two Demi cannons behind them.

Vilseck taken by the Swedes.
In Vilsech was there a Bavarian ancient only with 18 soldiers, who making
some show of resistance, when he perceived the Castle gates blown open, and an
assault prepared, yielded. The Friars and chief Citizens went to Hirschaw,
which was defended by another Ancient and 40 Musketeers of Amberg; And these
offering to resist Vitzdumb at his coming, 38 Citizens sons ran together
upon the Ancient and compelled him to lay down arms and agree with the
Swedish. General Major Whal who is Governor in Amberg was now sending 300
Dragooners and 2 Wagons of Ammunition to the relief of this Hirschaw, but the
town was taken before their coming, and the Dragooners with their Wagons
taken by the Swedish.

Whal has entertained some more forces into Amberg sent unto him from
Rottanberg and Forcheim, and expects from Walenstein to be relieved.

CAP. 3. More of Gustavus Horn and of the Palatine Birckenfelt, that is, The
Action of Horn in Schwabland after his return from the frontiers of the upper
Palatinate where he left the Palatine Birckenfelts forces.
THE suspicion growing stronger that Walstein when he should come into those
parts would carnestly attempt Norimberg, was one of the reasons for Duke
Bernards taking in of Regenspurg, and of the sending the Palatine Christian of
Birckenfeld with the half of Gustavus Horns Army into the upper Palatinate.
Had the King of Sweden had but time enough, when he conquered the rest of
Bavaria, to have taken in Regenspurg, Walstein the last year could never have
coopt him up about Norimberg, nor could the Generalissime there have lain, had
he not bin Master of the upper Palatinate. The safety of this most considerable
City therefore is the cause why Duke Bernard of Saxon Weymar (who is now
General for the Crown of Sweden of that which sometime was the Kings army)
went and took it: And the Feltmarshall Horn went about to take those parts of
Schwabland, betwixt the Lech, the Danuby, and the Bodensee, where Altringer,
Ossa, and the Duke of Feria lately left some garrisons. At which time the
Palatine Birckenfelt was (as aforesaid) directed into the upper Palatinate.
What the Colonel Vitzdumb (who in the Palatines absence had the leading of the
Forces) had there performed by the 11 of January is before told you. He going
from Hirshaw, attempts next unto Sultzbach belonging originally to a younger
brother a Protestant) of the Catholic Duke of Newburg. This Town making some
resistance, was with the loss of 4 men only taken in January 13/23 for that
for all their great countenances at first the Garrison came timely enough to a
composition. Thence went Vitzdumb to Newburg in the Forest: where finding more
opposition, he (though with some blood of his own party) was put to it, to
take the town by maine force: Newburg taken by assault.
For this obstinacy, the resisters were in danger to have had the law of Arms
passed upon them, had they not yielded at the mercy of the Conquerours. The
Imperial Captain that lay in it having but 120 men with him. Upon the 14/24
of January stood it out till some Cannon shots were made upon him, and the town
gotten by a Petard blown open and entered by his enemies; nor would he so give
it over, for having a slight Castle to retire unto, thither he withdrew
himself and his companies. At that now go the Brunswickfilders, threatening to
hang every man of them if they presently yield not. Thus when the Imperial
Captain might have yielded upon Souldierly conditions, he holding out but a
very little longer was feign to yield at mercy; laying down both Arms and
Ensigns, to have their bare lives saved. This was no such strong piece to make
such a stir about, had not the Captain been desperate; seeing one of the
Counts of Pappenheim who now lay in it with his Regiment bad for his better
safety retired himself into Parckstein, a league beyond this Weyden.

Vitzdumb in his marching toward this last taken town, had lighted upon
General Major Whal, Governor of Amberg, who was abroad at that time in his
Coach, attended by 40 horsemen, to view some pass or other of the Country. The
place of meeting is named to be the high Warth, near the new mill: where
Vitzdumb having an inckling of his being to come that way, had reasonably
enough dressed a fine Ambuscado for him. Whal with his troop coming now in
sight, there are 18 Swedish horsemen let fly upon him: against these he sends
out his 40, who being trained into the Ambush, are there for the most part cut
in pieces: Whal himself was feign to quit his Coach, and get upon horseback:
in doing of which a Swedish horseman had gotten him by the arm, to have made
him prisoner, but that some three or four Dragooners rescued him. Thus fled he
into Amberg, where he expected within two or three days to have been besieged;
but the season presently fell so snowy, with so extreme a frost after it, that
no good could be done against him on the sudden, it being reported for the
hardest winter that has these many years bin known in Germany.

The report was, that Prince Philip Lodwick, Administrator for the young
Elector Palatine, did a little before this time, send unto the Duke Bernard,
the new Swedish General, requesting to have these new conquered towns of the
upper Palatinate, restored unto his cousin according to promise and agreement:
Unto whom Duke Weymars answer was, that the whole country was not yet
recovered, which when it should be, then should it altogether be restored. In
the mean time was there sufficient store of provisions sent daily into
Norimberg, which seemed about this time to be more threatened out of the air,
then from any land enemies. Writings report of many strange apparitions in the
air, over and near unto this City, mentioning among the rest, the spectacles
of several dead carcasses and funeral processions, to their great terror and
affrightment.

We left the Lord Feit-Marshall Horn at Vlme, January 8. old style, whence
upon the 11. in the morning, he set forwards toward Bibrach: 40 Pieces of
Ordnance, and much ammunition being sent after him. His head quarter he took
up at Over Summerding, or Simaringen, as others write it, where he still lay,
Ian. 15. being unable to do any thing toward the siege of Bibrach, by reason
of the great frost and snow. Besides which hinderance, Altringer upon the
suspicion of Horns intention, for Bibrach had with all speed sent in some
troops to that towne-ward thereabouts, to make good the chiefest advantages of
the country.

Horns lying thus at large, and un-engaged upon the siege of any place, made
the whole Country in amazement, and the strong town of Lindaw, especially upon
the Bodensee. The Governor Konig (it appears) being a suspected person to
his partee; there was a pretense made for the outing of him under color of
strengthening his garrison. Upon New years day, therefore does Colonel
Vitzthumb (an Imperialist) go from the neighbor Bregents with 100 soldiers,
to put into this Lindaw. Konig refuses to admit them, and thereupon does
Vitzthum draw out an Imperial commission to arrest him. He thinking to resist,
his soldiers forsake him, and repair to their general Court of guard upon
the market place. And thus Konig not able to resist, nor escape, was there
clapped up in irons, and together with his wife, carried to Ebrach in Tirol; his
officers with four Citizens, being for his sake likewise arrested. The
opinions of the Country were diverse upon this action. Some gave it out that
Konig had intended to kill Ossa; others, that he had correspondencie with the
Duke of Rohan, concerning the surrendering of his City: and some again, that
he was only arrested for a matter of money, which was owing to the Imperial
Pagador or Paymaster. However the matter was so ill taken in the town, that
the new Governor was feign to disarme all the Citizens, for fear they should
have beaten him out and his Garrison, and have opened their Ports to Rohan, or
the Swedish Felt-Marshall.

Horn perceiving no good to be done upon Bibrach, draws off his troops
toward the Neighbor river of Danuby enquartering his people for the time
about Reit^tling, Simeringen and those places Taking a resolution at this time
to try whether he might part asunder the new-come Imperialists, that so he
might lie the quietlyer afterward in his winter quarters. He goes toward them
with the most part of his Horse forces. January 15/25. That same night toward
evening he came to Waldsee betwixt Bibrach and Ravenspurg, whence he sent some
to Middle Bibrach. Here was the quarter of four Imperial Horse troops,
although the most of them had the day before been commanded into Bibrach.
Those that were left behind were assaulted by the Swedish, and some of them
there killed: 2 Ritmasters and some Horsemen yielding themselves prisoners.
Little Bibrach taken by Horn.
Hereupon the same night was the small Town of middle Bibrach taken, and in it
2 Quarter Masters with the Major of the City of Bibrach.

At Waldsee had the Swedish Felt-Marshall intelligence that the Quartermaster
of the Gronsfeldish Regiment had lodged the same night at Reutta; yea and had
made quarter within the same town. Hereupon the Lord Marshall goes with the
Avantgard toward Reutta, surprised the Quarter and about 200 Horsemen in it,
took all the officers prisoners together with some Horsemen, causing the rest
together with some Boores to be put to the sword. By the prisoners here he
understood, how that there had been six Regiments newly come out of Bavaria
over the Lech at Schonga into those parts of Schwabland, and that four of them
were Dutch Regiments commanded by John de Werth, and two of Crabats, over whom
Colonel Luyrs was chief Commander, and that these six together with the
Vitzthumbish Regiment, and that of Konigs which had layne all this while in
this Overland, were now enquartered at Vberlingen, Ravenspurg, Leutkirchen,
Isne, Wangen, and the Villages near about them toward the Lech and the
Bodensee. His Excellency hereupon sends Colonel Plato with all speed with his
own and Colonel Cratzensteins Regiment to go with their Horse toward
Ravenspurg to surround and coope up the Imperial Regiment that lay in it
until himself could come up to them with the Foot forces. Himself at the
same time rode back to Waldsee unto the rest of the forces; From whence he
dispatched the General Major Rostein with a strong partee unto Leutkirchen
where Colonel Konigs Regiment lay, and Colonel Kanofsky he sent to Wangen
where the Pleskewish Regiment of Crabats lay. These Colonels had order that if
they sped well, they should then conioyne their forces together at Isne; where
Vitzthumbs Regiment then lay, and together to try whether they could destroy
that Regiment also. All these three Colonells had very good fortune. In
Ravenspurg, against which Colonel Plato was sent, lay the Imperial Colonel
Kesseler with the Regiment of Granichfield, and some of Cronbergs that newly
escaped in thither. Plato keeping them in for a while, and Horn himself
coming upon them with his Foot: Ravenspurg taken by surprise by Horn
this Imperial City of Ravenspurg was then taken. Kesseler being thus
surprised before he could provide for defense, was forced to accept of such
terms of composition as the Swedish Marshall would allow him. Great riches
were found in the Town, Kesseler himself was made prisoner, Great riches in
the Town taken, and 300 Imperialists turned Swedish.
together with two Counts of Zeil and their Ladies. So also were the Abbot of
Wissenaw, the Baron of Vlaw, a Lord of Middle Bibrach, the Provost of the
Town, a rich Jesuit with a great sum of money about him, together with 2.
Ritmasters, 3. Lieutenants of horse, 1. Cornet, 4. Quartermasters, and other
chief persons. Three hundred Imperial Soldiers now turned unto the Swedish.

Colonel Kanoffsky that was sent to Wangen (another Imperial City) had as
good fortune also upon the Plesknowish Regiment of Crabats whom he there
surprised. The Lieutenant Colonel he took prisoner, besides some other
officers, and some horsemen, the rest being put unto the sword. Thus was the
whole Regiment so destroyed, that few of them escaped. The Imperialists of Isne
and Leutkirchen hearing the Swedish to be abroad, fled out of the Towns
toward Kempten and Bavaria, before General Major Rostein who was sent against
them, could come where they were; nevertheless, hearing which way the birds
were flowne, he cast off his Hawks after them for pursuing them, even to the
very gates of Kempten, he slew and took prisoners about some thirty or forty of
them. Of all these three Regiments thus wholly ruinated, there was not one
Ensign gotten, for that the Imperialists meaning but to winter in those parts,
and to prevent Gustavus Horns wintering places, had sent their Colors
beforehand into Lindaw, to be kept there in that strong Town, as in a place of
safety. And all this was done, namely, three Imperial Regiments ruinated, the
rest put to flight, and the Country of Overland, which they late possessed,
Overland Cleared of Imperialists, with the loss of three whole Regiments of
theirs.
cleared of them before or about the 24 of January. After this did John de
Werth return over the Lech into Bavaria again, where finding no safe wintring
place, he went over to Deck^^dorff beyond Regenspurg, which is toward Austria.
General Altringer also passes from about, over the river Iser, and so also
crosses Bavaria to go toward Austria, for that there being some discontents
betwixt him and the Duke and subjects of Bavaria, there would no quartering be
allowed him.

In the pursuit of this victory did Gustavus Horn make himself master of these
towns, namely Reutta, middle Bibrach, Ravenspurg, and Wangen, the two last
being Imperial. Wangen, Leutkirken, and Isne taken
Wangen was taken by assault; Leutkirchen (another Imperial City) yielded upon
composition; as Isne did also. Thence the Swedish march directed toward
Vberling on the other end of the Bodensee, contrary to Wangen and Lindaw. In
the way the Swedish were said to light upon some Imperialists that were
carrying a golden Image into Constance, which they took for booty Horn made
his head quarter at Ravenspurg, where he still was the 8 of February. Before
which time he had sent to Ausburg for some of his Commanders, being then
believed to have some great enterprise in hand; which was supposed to be
intended against the strong town of Lindaw upon the Bodensee, some few leagues
beyond Wangen. All this business the Governor of the said Bibrach
understanding, was minded (as is reported) to have burnt down all the villages
about the City, for prevention of the Swedish lodging in them. But this he was
persuaded against, by the much entreating of Major Brandenburger.

John de Werth (as it is said) thus making toward Deckendorff, was also there
beaten off with some loss, as you shall hear the actions of Duke Bernard
Weymar. As for General Altringer, he also was disabled (about this time) for
not being so active as otherwise (perhaps) he might have been, by some
accusations now laid against him. And the speech then was, that he either
actually was, or was in danger to be put out of his Generalship. The
presumptions for this report prevailed so far, that Colonel Reinacher was
voyced to succeed him in the Command. One of his enemies was said to be the
Duke of Bavaria, and the accusation, for that he had been cross unto the Duke
of Feria. For whereas the design of Ferias and Altringers armies was, to
maintain the places in the Empire not yet taken by the Sweds, to recover what
they could, and to open the passage toward the Low Countries: Altringer (it was
objected) envying the glory of it unto a stanger, under whose greater title,
and the name of the Spanish Army, his own actions should be overclouded, he
had never well accorded with the projects of the said Duke, and had dealt but
somnolently and improvidently in the business. By which negligence and bad
correspondency the design had not only been defeated, but the corpus and body
of a brave Army ruinated. Altringer sent for to Vienna to clear himself.
Hereupon was Altringtrer sent for into Austria: where I find him at Vienna,
Feb. 12/23. and it was the beginning of Mar. ere he could clear himself of
the allegations, and be dispatched to his charge again in Bavaria. In his
absence John de Werth commanded. The General and Commissary Ossa was about
this time said to be in disgrace too, and to be arrested in Inspruck in Tyrole.
The Citizens of Lindaw also were mightily now discontented with Colonel Vitz.
dumb, who had sent 100 of their chiefest Citizens, prisoners after the former
Governor Konig into Bregentz, where they were all hard examined concerning the
aforesaid objected correspondency with the Swedes or French men. These
distractions gave Gustavus Horn a hope to get in Lindaw, and to determine to
move toward it: but the Townsmen were presently curbed, and Gustavus Horns
hopes prevented by the receiving of some new come Italians into his Lindaw.

Moerspurg taken by assault.
Before the 20 of February, they write from Ausburg, that he had taken Moerspurg
upon the Bodensee, near unto Vberlingen, where the most of the Garrison were
put unto the sword; and that his men beat the Campagnia, and roaved up and
down as farrre as the gates of Lindaw. The neighbor Marckdorff belonging to
the Bishop of Constance, he put a Garrison into. Vberlingen was held blockt up.
Kempten had bin summoned by his Trumpet, upon Febr. 11/25. And Lindaw,
Constance, and Bregentz, were all in equal suspicion, which should be first
fallen upon.

About Febr. 26. he had his head quarter at Stockach upon the North-west end
of the Bodensee toward the Danubie, and the land of Wirtenberg. The passage,
fort, and bridge of the town of Stein, upon the Rhine, (which hereabouts
runs through the Bodensee, and so goes to the Westward) was now said to be
delivered up unto the Swedish Marshall by the Protestant Switzers.

The Imperial town of Pfullendorff, upon the Northern side of the Bodensee
or Lake of Constance, he put a Garrison into, Horn prevails much by the
Bodensee.
and so scowred the Coast up and down all along the Lake side (which is 40
miles long) toward Bavaria and the Lech, that he cut off all passages and
intercourse betwixt Kempten, Memmingen, and Lindaw; so that they of Lindaw were
feign to have all their provisions come to them upon the back side through the
Lake or Bodensee out of Switzerland. And thus near Italy did this Gustavus
advance the terror of the Swedish Arms, even to the very frontiers of Tyrole,
and of Switzerland, one, at the South-East end, and the other on the South side
of the Bodensee. By this also was he gotten near unto the Rhinegrave to whom
upon occassion, he might march up, and receive succors from him. The
Protestant Switzers were now his friends, as appears by their rendering up the
Fort of Stein to him, and they had now a good Army of 6000. or 8000. (15000. I
find it written) in a readiness; so that there was nothing enemy unto him on
that side of the Lake, but the town and Bishopric of Constance, who being in
league with the Catholic Switzers, they perchance might unseasonably have
been provoked by Gustavus Horns meddling too far that way. And especially
now that the 7 Cantons of the Catholic Switzers had some difference with the
other 6 Cantons of the Protestant Switzers, as having lately joined in League
with the Spaniards. Besides all this, there were 2500 new Italians come through
Tiroll, into this Constance and Lindaw.

In the end of February did our Swedish Felt-Marshall receive a good strength
of new raised horse into his Army. And there was need of them, for the
Imperial Colonel Luyrs who had before commanded the Horse which came into
this Schwabland with John de Werth, together with him had (as you have heard)
been beaten out with him, did now again begin to appear upon the further
side of the Country, all along upon the Schwabland side, between the Rivers
of Iller and the Lech at Fuessen, namely Frenlaw, Kempten, Mundelheim, Frenten
and other places.

To take order with these his Excellency, the Felt-Marshall, sent command unto
Colonel Rostein, who then lay at Waldsee, something near unto them, to go
against them, who being now sick dispatched away his Regiment and the Baron
Hoffkircks against those about Fuessen. Hear the success in the Letter of the
said Frederick of Rostein, dated from Waldsee, March 8/18.

Consulting earnestly with my self how the four Imperial Regiments that were
enquartered about Fuessen, which were commanded by Colonel Luyrs, might be
assaulted and surprised. At last I sent against them the Lieutenant Colonel
of Hoffkirks Regiment, together with mine own Regiment and Lieutenant
Colonel, my self being then so weak, that I was not able to go along with
them. Besides this, the enemy at that time also began to appear about Isne.
Four Regiments of the Imperialists surprised and ruinated.
The Lieutenant Colonel which I sent against them, invaded their Quarters an
hour before day light, where he sorely ruinated the four Regiments, and took
the Colonel Zuyrs, with many officers prisoners, putting a great many to the
sword. It chanced that some 600 of them having been abroad that night, were by
that time this execution was done, now returning toward their Quarters: These
being met withal by some that escaped, and certified how matters went with
their fellows, were about to retire back again; but our forces also hearing
where abouts they were, made out after them, overtooke and killed the most of
them. Thus were there not above 50 or 60 which were better mounted then their
fellows, that escaped killing or being made prisoners; and perchance these had
not so gotten away neither, but our men were too weary to pursue after them.
All the Imperialists that lay thereabouts, are rowted by this means. As for
Ensigns, they had none to lose; as having at their first coming into the
Country in January before, sent them into Lindaw, where if they please, they
may make use of the Colors in stead of Flagges, to put into their Ships and
Boats upon the Bodsea. To morrow we shall go against Bibrach, to besiege
that Imperial City, in which lie 1300 men in Garrison. And thus were these
four Imperial Regiments, who now came again to seek their Quarters in this
Overland or upper Swabland utterly disappointed and dispersed; so that the
Coast being thus cleared on the backeside, as far as the gates of Lindaw, and
on the foreside to the banks of the River Lech and Bavaria, there remained no
more to be done in Overland, but the taking of Bibrach, Memmingen, Kauffbeuren,
and Kempten, and to these now turns our Field-Marshall. That he was to go
against Bibrach, March 9/19. you heard by the former letter, the taking
whereof, and the manner of it, as also some more particulars of the ruining of
the four fore named Regiments, you shall with best assurance, receive out of
his own Letter to Duke Bernard, dated March 16/26.

Your Excellency has understood out of my former Letter, how that for many
considerations, Horns ^^^ter to D. Ber. Weymar.
but especially for the promoting of your Excellencies design, I had laid
siege to the City of Bibrach, my purpose in it being to divert and hinder the
enemy in Bavaria from coming upon the back of your Excellency. For this
purpose did I command two several strong partees toward the Lech; both of
which (God be thanked for it) became very succesfull. The Lieutenant Colonel
Pesbick, whom I sent to surprise the enemies Regiments at Frenten, performed
his charge most successefully: For he not only quite ruinated the four
Regiments of Kesler, namely, Gronsfield, Luyrs, and Konig, but moreover, has
taken Colonel Luyrs prisoner, together with the most of his Officers, and many
common soldiers. This Colonel Luyrs was the man that had the command of all
the Cavallery, which had been sent by the enemy into Swaben. Colonel Plato
was also sent unto Mundelheim, to surround the Crabats Regiment of Budiani in
it, and to hold them so long coopt up till the foot forces might be come up to
him, as also the Ordnance which I had sent for unto Ausburg, might be brought
to him. Plato had very good success, for the town he took in by assault, and
put some 300 that lay in it to the sword. The Lieutenant Colonel he took
prisoner, together with many other officers: although a many other birds so
soon as they received this alarm at Mundelheim, had taken their timely flight
into the Imperial City of Kauffbeuren.

For performance now of my foresaid purpose and design, I upon this day
seventhnight (which was the 9/19 of this month) dislodged from Ravenspurg,
arriving the next day before the town of Bibrach, together with the troops
which I led along with me. The same night I began my approaches, and the next
day after, I gave summons unto the City. I profferred unto Colonel Stralsoldo,
Governor in the town, a fair agreement, but he would not hearken unto it,
saying he was resolved to defend his town to the uttermost. The third day I
got my Ordnance to me, which sooner I could not, for that the ways were so
deep and durty. The Ordnance being mounted, I battered the town so long, till
I first won the Breastwork from the enemy, and had made a saultable breach
into the walls. This done, the foresaid Colonel then sent a Trumpet to me,
together with some Protestant Citizens, to desire a reasonable agreement of me;
which was, that himself might march forth with all his forces. The Trumpet
moreover then signified unto me, that if his Colonel might not march forth
freely, that he would defend the town to the last man. And that first of all he
would burn and blow up all the Prostestant Citizens which he had already
locked up into the Town house, and into a Cellar. Notwithstanding all this, for
that I supposed the Governor would never offer to deal so barbarously with
the poor innocents, and for that he had already denied my first good offer,
and especially indeed for that I had a mind to ruin the said garrison, I
refused to grant him any such agreement, propounding again to him, to yield
upon discretion. After all this, when as all things were now ready for the
assault, and that the troops appointed for the scaling were already now
advanced toward the Breach, the Evangelicall Ministers, together with diverse
women, came forth of the town, making a most pitiful cry and entreaty to me,
signifying it would cost all their lives, for that the Town house was already
undermined, and the Mine filled with powder, and that they certainly cxpected
to be blown up immediately. Out of commiseration therefore to those poor
people, I offered another agreement unto the Governor, propounding to have
Host ages sent out unto me. This he then did, so that the next morning I sent
in the Articles of agreement in writing to him, wherein I granted to him to
march out freely, though with no other weapons than their swords only. To leave
all their Colors behind them, upon a promise to be co^vayed into Ingolstadt
upon these terms, he the same day marched forth. Of all this whole garrison,
which was the Regiment of the said Colonel Stralsoldo, consisting of to
Companies, together with 300 commanded men of the Archish and Goish Regiments,
in all 1500 men of foot, and one troop of Horse, there went none away with
their Colonel but his Lackey only, and some few Officers. All the rest of them
took service of us, to which they were no ways constrained, but did it
willingly. Thus fell it out better for us, than I could have imagined, for
which we have great cause to thank God Almighty, and beseech him to continue
his favor and fatherly affection toward us.

A punctual letter. Gustavus Horn surely makes his pen with his sword, for
that he writes with the same pulse and spirit with which he fights, and is
equally happy in either of them.

It Is written from this Bibrach March 1^/^8, that after taking of their City;
the Felt-Marshall went toward Kempten, Kempten taken by assault.
the head town of the Bishopric of that name in the very edge of Swabland
toward Bavaria. It Was then supposed that the town could not hold out long
against him; for that victuals and all other provisions were very scarce and
dear within the City. And indeed he has since taken Kempten, which town by
assault March 20/30. And whereas the Imperial Colonel with his Garrison had
retired themselves into the Castle of Burckhalden, both place and men were
enforced the next day to yield upon Composition. These were the 5 Articles of
Agreement.

1. That the soldiers should march forth Souldier-like, that is, with their
Swords and Muskets, And the Colonel have leave to take three Wagons of
baggage along with him.

2. The Colonel shall restore all the Swedish prisoners together with those
Soldiers that had run from their Colors, and that he should not forbid his
own Soldiers to take service on the Swedish side, if themselves had a mind to
it.

3. The Colonel should leave some certain hostages behind him till such time
as those Protestant Citizens should be set at liberty again without ransom
which had thence been carried Captives.

4. All pretenses whatsoever which the Colonel might make against the City
should be annulled and acquitted.

5 His Excellency, the Felt-Marshal should Convoy the Colonel into Aicha near
Ausburg.

And these good terms was Gustavus Horn the willinger to afford, both for
that he was desirous to lose no time, and also because the rumor went of the
Duke of Bavariaes coming to relieve it.

Toward his Country now goes Horn, but the Bavarians not desirous to abide
it, retired from Straubingen, which they had even now taken back again unto
Landshut whence the Duke last came when he went to Ingolstat. Of which in Duke
Bernards Chapter.

THE RHINEGRAVE: With the Actions of Alsatia and about Vdenheim or
Philipsburg: With the coming up of the French Forces.
ABout the midst of November, the Duke of Feria withdrew his Forces out of the
upper Alsatia; himself and Altringer purposing to have their wintering in the
Dukedom of Wirtenberg, according as order was given out from Wallstein and the
Emperor.

Feria and Altringer thus gone out of Alsatia; the Rhinegraue his Regiment set
out after them upon Monday following, within a while conioyning with Horn
again, until that Feria and Altringer were gone over the Danuby, and about
parting. Both Swedish and Imperialists had left such Towns as either of them
had in possession in Alsatia well enough garrisoned. In the mean time, about
the end of the month, the Imperial Garrisons of Hagenaw and Elsas-Zabern,
make out 500. Soldiers, and 1000. of the Country Boores to take in
Buschweiler, a town in the said Alsatia, but belonging to the Count of Hanaw;
four Canons the Imperialists carry with them, and a mortar Piece: Summoning the
Town, they are refused by the Hanawish trained bands within, being encouraged
by a Swedish Lieutenant newly come into the Town to raise Forces. Some shorts
are made against the walls, and some Grenades shot and flung into the Town,
though with no great operation; their Petars did most damage, by force of
which, one of the gates was blown open: Against that the townsmen cast up a
trench of earth or Vau-mure. Hereupon the Imperialists sent in a Drum, with
Articles of agreement, if the Town would yield to them; but the Conditions
were impossible, for that the whole Imperial contribution was now demanded,
which (according to the imposition) was behind-hand since last Easter. This if
it might not be satisfied, man, woman and child were threatened to die for it.

The Town Counselors and Lieutenant perceiving themselves not able to resist
these threatenings, condescend to pay what they were able, and send out some of
theirs to be Hostages for it.

Betwixt this and the time of payment, certain Swedish Horse troops (both
unawares and unexpected) under the command of Abel Moda were heard of to be
coming to the rescue, Buschwiler happily relieved by the Swedes.
whose approaching the besiegers not desirous to abide, forsake Buschweiler in
all have, only carrying the poor Hostages along with them. The Town is now
better provided for, as also its neighbor Ingweiler, some troops of
Meckle-burgish horse being put into them.

This news being sent unto the Rhinegraue, some of his Horse had order to put
into Oberkirk, (three leagues from Strasburg) for prevention of these
Hagenawers.

By this time also were the French forces come up to Lutzelstein, within six
Leagues of Strasburg, and they also had an eye to those Imperialists. For now
had the French King given order to the Martial de la Force, to march up into
the Bishopric of Tryers, to hinder the joining of the Spaniards, in the
country of Luxenburg, with the Duke de Feria. The marching of these French
forces, was one of the causes for Altringers and the Duke of Feria's former
quitting of Alsatia.

Before this time had the French King consented unto the conclusion with the
Crown of Sweden, and the confederate Protestant Princes, made at Heilbrun: to
whom he now promised his assistance.

Another cause, for the sending up of his army toward those parts of the
Rhine, was, to take the Town and Castle of Vdenheim or Philipsburg into his
protection; according as the Lord of it, the Bishop of Spyers (Elector of
Tryers) had desired. The cause why these French forces could not effect this,
was, for that this Philipsburg had a long time been besieged by the
Rhinegraues forces.

By the 11. of December was the French army come as far as Landaw and
Germersheim, in the edge of the Palatinate; and the same night diverse of their
officers lay in Spyers City.

The 12th. day, a part of them marched toward Heydelberg, but did nothing:
They were presently received into Buschweiler, Ingweiler and Nieuweiler, the
Count of Hanaw putting his Country into the French Kings protection.

The 8. of December those Imperialists of Elsas-Zabern, went again toward
their consorts of Hagenaw, and the next day some Ordnance followed them; what
they did we hear not.

The Imperialists of Brisack, about this time, making out 700. Musketeers and
4. troops of Horse under Colonel Eisher, laid siege to Kentzingen, in the
Kentzinger dale toward Wirtenberg.

These Brisackers also took in the Castle of Litchteneck, Lichteneck taken by
the Imperialists.
even but a few hours before the Rhinegraue Otto Lodowick's coming: This was
about the 20. of December, by which time the Rhinegraue having parted from
Gustavus Horn, was again passed the Rhine to look to the business of
Philipsburg and Alsatia. He had 18. troops of Horse, besides Foot forces;
and his coming was so sudden, that Eisher with his Brisackers, were feign to
thrust themselves into Endingen, not being able to recover back again into
their own Garrison.

Diverse of Eishers soldiers were overtaken and killed by the Rhinegraue; who
sent for some Ordnance with all speed, to be brought from Hochburick to
batter Endingen. The town, as Lichtentck Castle likewise, came presently to
composition; and the Garrisons at their coming forth, enrolled themselves
under the Swedes service.

The Rhinegraue presently upon this, went to Strasburg and Erstein, with the
most part of his Forces, which for a while were laid in Breysgaw about
Emmedingen: The rest he immediately sent into the upper Alsatia. About Christmas
time he passed the Rhine again, by the bridge of Strasburg, to go against the
Imperialists of Hagenaw, Elsaszabern, and Brisack, who often came abroad
together. In his way he found some 100 Boores, who had undertaken the keeping
of a passage: But they were quickly either slain, or scattered. Some of the
Rhinegraues troops had a long time lain before Vdenheim, to block it: Over
whom Colonel Smidberger commanded. November the 21. The Vdenhemers or
Philipsburgers issued forth lustily upon Smidberger, seeking to get by him into
the Country for Provisions; a sign they within wanted it: By the middle of
December, Smidberger (to prevent the French) had pressed nearer upon the Town,
and made a siege of it; and being encouraged by the neighborhood of the
Rhinegraue, he had by Christmas time, put them harder to it. The besieged (the
week before) to show they had some courage yet left, sallyed forth, both ^orse
and foot, and skirmished two hours with the Swedish; Being at last put to a
plain flight; the Swedish followed them so hard, that they got into the
fisher-houses by the Rhine's side, hard by the Fort: But the Ordnance from the
walls presently beat them out of it. Upon this, the town accepted of a parlie,
which was about Christmas time. The agreement being in a good forwardness, was
presently broken off again by the beseiged. Heere-vpon the last Saturday of
the old year, was Captain Tobias de Bulaw commanded to assault the
Custom House; in doing of which, he put 15. keepers of it to the sword, and
took the rest Prisoners. He went about to set the house on fire, but it would
not kindle; insomuch that the Swedes believed verily, that there was
Witchcraft in it. To hasten the siege, were more forces called. The Town
treated again, making proposition to render the place up to the French forces:
But Smidberger having had a long Winter siege of it, would not give the honor
of taking in of the Town to such as had taken no pains about it. The town
seeing no remedy, concluded upon the third of January, new style; to yield up
unto the Rhinegraue. The conditions were, Vdenhelm or Philipsb^rg rendered to
the Swedes.
to march out upon the fifth with colors flying, full arms, drums beating,
bullets in the mouth, double matches burning, two pieces of Ordnance, four
barrells of Powder* a sufficient Conuoy, and 30. Wagons for the Baggage and
sick Soldiers. Some hindrance there was in it; so that they marched not out
till the thursday following; yet in the mean time did the Swedes keep the
watch in all the ports of the Castle. Letters from Franfurt relate, that the
Philipsburgers at their coming sorth, did the most of them take pay of the
Swedish. So soon as the conditions were agreed, the Rhinegraue commanded an
inuentory to be taken of all the goods in the Castle, to find out by that
means such as belonged to those that had fled in thither. Good store of wealth
was found in it, but small quantities of provisions; for the besieged had
already eaten up 100. Horses; and the Italians had made venison of Dogs and
Catts flesh. The Articles or Conditions
The Clergy had liberty to go where they pleased, the Citizens had
protection without ransom paying* all privileges were confirmed; Prisoners on
both sides released, and freedom of the Popish religion tolerated, both in
the Castle and country belonging to the Bishopric of Spyers. As the
Imperial garrison (which were about 800. men, under 7. Ensigns) were about to
march out; they the wednesday before, grew very much discontented: For so soon
as 300. Swedish were come in to take possession, the Imperialists fell to such
a mutiny, that they care the Ensigns from the staves, and would needs have
pillaged their own Gouernonrs and Captains.

But Smidbergers Regiment, with some other forces, coming into the Town,
appeased the tumult, and took the tome Ensigns. The 700. Imperialists
hereupon turned to the Swedish; Don Piedra, 7. Captains, 4. Lieutenants, and
some other Officers and few Soldiers remaining only constant to their party.
These went to Spyers, where they obtained leave to stay some few days, as
being afraid to go into Brisack, (whither by agreement they were to have
marched) being in doubt that the Town will shortly be besieged by the
Rhinegraue: Colonel Bambergers Wife therefore was conuoyed from Vdenheim unto
Spyers, January 6. new style, with 8. Wagons; and her Husband to Heilbrun 4.
days after: So uncertain are the Imperialists of those parts which way to
betake them. Whereas those within Philipsburg or Vdenheim had in the beginning
13000. quarters of Corn, some 100. quarters of meal, and 1500. loads of Wine,
they had no more left at their rendering but bread for one week, and 12.
bottells of Wine, Smidberger now found many fair Pieces of Ordnance in the
Castle, reasonable quantity of Ammunition; 26. Bells; 13. Chests of goods
sealed up, which belonged to Colonel Metternick, sometimes Bauarian governor
of Heydleburg; with which the Swedish will make merry. The Castle was with all
speed refurnisht, and the battered Works made up again: Those of Colonel
Smidbergers Regiment have the keeping of it; And the Sunday after there was a
Sermon of Thanksgiving; and Te Deum sung.

It is written out of Alsatia, January 3.13. that so soon as the Count of
Salm, who is Deane of Strasburg, and State-holder; which is Vicar or Lord
Deputy of the Lands of the House of Austria in Alsatia, (whose usual
residence was in Elsaszauern) heard of the taking in of Philipsburg, and of the
Marshall de la Force his drawing down that way with his French army, and that
the Count of Hanaw-Buschweiler had consigned the protection of his Country to
him; that despairing of strength sufficient to resist both the Rhinegraue and
the French, he resolved to leave Elsaszauern and Hagenaw well garrisond; and
attempted, with the rest of his little army, to retire himself into Burgundy
or the Franche County; which how he was prevented in, may appear by the
following French Relation.

The taking and reducing of the most important City of Hagenaw, and the Castle
of Aubar, (in Germany) under the obedience of the King: By Mounsieur the
Marshall de la Force, General of his Majesty's Army: With the Articles agreed
upon by the one and the other Partee, with the Count of Salm.
MOunsieur the Marshall de la Force, General of the Kings Army in Germany,
being at Saint Auan with his Majesty's troops, had intelligence that the Count
of Salm was in Hagenaw, and that he was deliberating to put himself into the
field with his troops for to march toward the Franche County. Upon this
advice, this prudent General gave speedy order throughout the Army, for all
things necessary to oppose himself against the designs of the said Count de
Salm, and to impeach the effect of his enterprises. To this end the said
Marshall writ to the Rhinegraue, (who held part of the passage on that side,
with the Swedishs forces) giving him advice of the Count of Salm's proceedings:
And the better to hinder the execution of them, aduising him to keep firm,
all the passages of his quarters; in such sort, that no enemies troops might
in any case whatsoever pass by him. All this the said Rhinegraue performed
withal diligence.

At the said time also, the Marshall gave order also to his son the Marquise
de la Force, to divide the army with him; giving him the charge of Marshall of
the field in the said army; and to march toward the said City of Hagenaw, for
to stop up, and cut off the passages on that side. And for to effect this, he
gave him these forces which follows,

Of Caualry: The Master of the Camp, his troop, The Count of Guiche, his
troop, The Marquise de la Lucerne, his troop, The Baron de la Fert'e, his
troop. Lansac his troop, The troop of Colonel of the Blocquiers, The
Marquise of Terrail his troop. The Baron of Crossonneir, his troop, The Count
of Vattimont his troop.
Of Infantery: The regiment of Navarre, The regiment of Piedmont, The regiment
of Hauquincourt, The regiment of Menillet, The regiment of the Blocquiers.

The Marquise de la Force, not degenerating from the valor of that great
Captain his father marched valerously with his troops day and night, directly
to Bacara, preferring the service of the King, above the discommodities of the
waters and unseasonableness of the weather, which he endured day and night all
the march through.

Being arrived at Bacara, (the pass by which of necessity the Count of Salm and
his troops must come to put in practice their design) the Marquise dispersed
his Foot into all the passes, and made his Horse continually to scowre up and
down the coast, the better to discover all such as should pass by those
neighbor places.

The Count of Salm being advertised of the ariuall of the Marshall de la Force
with his troops, and of the proceedings which he used, to impeach his
passage: Now seeing himself discovered, and that by this way he could not
effect his designs, he resolved to write to the Marshall de la Force, to
obtain of him some agreement concerning the liberty of his passage: His Letter
was by one of his own trumpeters brought unto the Marquise his son, who
seeing the superscription of the Letter to be directed to his father and not to
himself, would not engage himself to take any ouerture of agreement, but
delivered back the Letter to the same trumpet, without yielding to his demand
made by word of mouth to him.

The trumpeter having no order to pass further, returned to the Count of Salm,
acquainting him with the resolution of the Marquis de la Force, and how that
he advanced continually to assault him. The Count considering the great danger
which might happen to him upon so furious an approach, returned quickly and a
fast pace sheltered himself in a little Dorpe called Rovure (between Hagenaw
and Zauerne) fortifying himself the best he could possibly: Hoping that in
case of necessity he might be quickly succored by the Imperial Garrisons,
which were in Hagenaw and Zauerne.

During the time that the Rhinegraue made good the passes on his side the
Marquise de la Force advanced valourously within a League and a half of the
Quarter of the Count of Salm, whom he hemed in so well on all sides, that he
berest him of all hope of being relieved from the Cities of Hagenaw and
Zuauerne, which were within two or three leagues of his Quarter.

The Count now seeing himself in all the necessities of the world, both out of
all hope to be relieved, and no ways able to resist them, and that the said
Dorpe into which he was now forced for his refuge, was stripped bare of
Victuals, and all other commodities by the Swedes to furnish the besiegers of
Hagenaw; he dispatched a Trumpet toward the Colonel of the Blocquiers (which
was the nearest to him) with a bit of a Letter, which consisted of nothing but
complements of all sorts, and of prayers that by his means he might come to
some agreement; The Colonel of the Bloequiers could not determine any thing of
himself, concerning what he desired; but sent with all diligence toward the
Marquis de la Force, who was returned to Bacara, after he had once established
and taken order for to hold besieged the said Count of Salm, and his troops;
to make them the sooner to come to composition: To the request of the Count of
Salm, this answer was returned; that he should send the Breuiat of that which
he desired, by some persons of credit, to whom he should give power to
determine of the one and the other party, the Articles which should be
propounded, to this the Count of Salm readily condiscended, as being now hard
put to it.

It was then concluded (Monday the 30. of January last) as follows. That the
Count of Salm should deliver the City of Hagenaw, and all the fortifications
of the same to the obedience of the King, into the hands of Marshall de la
Force.

That the morrow being Tuesday, January 31. the Imperial troops which were in
Garrison in the said City, should march out the same day in the morning; and
leave the place free to the French Troops.

That the Magazins of Arms and Ammunitions should be delivered, and put into
the hands of such persons as the Marshall should please to name, to take
possession of them.

That the Garrisons which were in the Castle of Aubar, near Zauern, should
depart the same day.

And whereas the Marquis de la Force had now all the authority of his Farher,
he promises to the Count of Salm, to give him free passage into the Franche
County; which he desired.

The which Articles were the said day the 31 day of January, sealed by the one
and the other party.

About eight a Clock the same morning, there marched out of the City of
Hagenaw, 6. companies of Foot, and 4. of Horse of the Emperors Troops; which
were in Garrison in the City: And about ten a Clock after, there entered the
Quarter Masters of the French Army: And incontinently upon that, 2. French
Regiments which took possession, and made themselves masters of the Ports and
principal places of the said City.

Mounsieur the Marquis de la Force entered about two or three a Clock, after
dinner, with a number of Gentlemen, and his Horse troops; where he was
received with a very good entertainment by the inhabitants, who all cried in
their language, God save the King.

Upon the finishing of this treaty, Mounsieur the Marshall de la Force made
good the promise of the Marquis his Son, and gave passage to the Count of
Salm for to go (as is said) into the Franche County: Nevertheless he was
conuoyed along through the Lands possessed by the King, by the Regiment of
Navarre, and Auquincourt, and two Troops of Horse.

Concerning the City of Zauern, distant 4. Leagues from that of Hagenaw: The
Garrison which is in the same for the Duke of Lorraine, upon the Summons by us
made, has demanded 4. days respit for to give advice to his highness. This
Citte cannot hold out (as it is reported) the Castle of Aubar, which commands
most of the said City, is under the obedience of the King: And he has in it
2. French Companies.

Thus the City of Hagenaw, which in War seemed able to resist all the forces
that would aduenter themselves against it, came into the power of the French.

And this is a matter of very great consequence: For that the French grow very
strong in those parts, by having this Town, and the Count of Hanaws country:
By this is Lorraine hemed in on that side, and the edge of Germany open to
them: And had they gotten Vdenheim too, they had been great masters upon the
edge of the Palatinate.

Thus have you already heard what the French Nation has reported of this
action, in honor of their own Nation. But whereas the author of that
relation has quite left out the Rhinegraue, as if his part had bin no other
but the blocking up of some passages (and that by the Marshall de la Forces
direction too) we shall now afford you a more punctual story of the same
business received from a better hand, and delivered from an abler judgment:
From a Gentleman, I mean of the Scottish-Gensd'armes, or completely armed
Horsemen and Men at Arms, then having their share in the action, as part of
the French Army.

From St. Blayse January 5./15. 1633.
Upon Friday 1. 13. of this present January 1633. advertisement was brought to
our General the Marshall de la Force in his Quarters at St. Auan (12 leagues
beyond Metz) that some Imperial troops were marched out of Hagenaw with 4.
Pieces of Canon, toward Zauern, A French League is 3. miles English, and a
German League of the middle sort (which is most commonly used in Mapps and
Stories) is 4. of our Miles.
which is a place in the edge o^ Lorraine and Alsatia, belonging to the Duke or
Lorraine; but in the Emperors name kept by the Count of Salm, who there recided
as Governor of it: This being in the way ot the French Army; and the Marshall
de la Force, having received order from the Court not to suffer any of the
Emperors Forces to get ooting in Lorraine, which upon the late Treaty was
under the Kings protection; the Marshall was the more obliged to look to it.
For this reason sent he his son, the young Marquis de la Force with the
Foore Regiments of Navarre, Piedmont, Hauquincourt, Menillet, with 8. troops
of Horse unto Lore, where the Scottish Gensd'armes were then enquartered, with
order also to take them along with him, which he did: Upon Sunday being the 5.
were some spies sent out to make discovery of the enemies forces and
intentions, who were then appointed to meet the Army by midnight vpvpon
Monday at Freiburg, which was a long march from Lore aforesaid: The Spies made
their observations very punctually, and brought certain intelligence to the
Marquis, that the enemies exceeded not 2500. Foot with five Troops of Horse,
and that their intention was to pass either into Luxemburg, or into the
Franche County; And that they had bin constrained to forsake Hagenaw, for
scarcity of Victuals; for that the garrison there had found themselves
ouercharged by the feeding of them, they being left there by the Duke of Feria,
in some disorder as he passed that way out of Alsatia into Germany. Upon this
intelligence, it was disputed among the French, how many ways there were by
which the Count of Salm might get into the Franche County: The young Marquises
order being to cross that part of his design, whilst his Father the Marshall
lay with the body of the Army betwixt him and Luxemburg. It was discovered
that they had three ways to go, one by Zauern, another by St. Blayse, and the
third through Alsatia; which last passage was sufficiently stopped up by the
Swedish, who lie thereabouts in Garrisons. Hereupon it was resolved to march
toward Blamont, some 8. Lorraine leagues from Nancy, upon the road of
Strasburg; it being within half a League of the Zauern way, and not so far
siom St. Blayse, but that the French could reach it as soon as could the
Imperialists. Friday night which was the 10th. the French arrived at Blamont,
where finding no quarters, and provision for entertainment, they the next day
removed a League off to Baccara with intention to remain some few days there
for refreshing of their horses, and for returning of their Spies, which they
looked not for until the Tuesday after. Upon Sunday January the 12. about
noone the Spies came, bringing certain intelligence with them, that the enemy
having heard of the Frenches intention to stay at Blamont, had put themselves
upon their march, upon Saturday in the very beginning of the Night, to go
toward S. Blayse, and could not fail of coming to it before Monday in the
evening. Hereupon was order sent abroad into all the French quarters to march
presently toward Badenwiller, and that the Baggage should be sent unto
Baccara, to be guarded there altogether. This was instantly put in execution,
and the whole troops were upon their march by two a Clock after dinner. At 4.
they came to Badenwiller, where new order was given for holding on the march
unto Raon-Sur plain. At 6. a Clock they entered the Hills* and Woods, which
continued until within half a League of Raon, where by 9. a Clock they
arrived. The French having there fed their horses, march thence again
continuing until midnight, all through the Hills and Woods till Monday
noone, the 13.23. By that time had they reached St. Blayse, where they light
upon diverse of the Imperial Auant Curriers which were come thither to take up
lodgings for the Army against night; They being taken prisoners, confessed
unto the French, that the Count of Salm, whom the French then sought for, was
then with his Army at Rhode, a Town about 2. Leagues off; and that certainly
he would by so ne of the peasants be advertised of the Frenches being at St.
Blayse, the town belonging to the Count aforesaid; so that it was not to be
expected, but that upon these tidings, the Imperialists would presently counter
march toward Zauern, and thus indeed it proved; for that within an hour of
the Frenches coming to St. Blayse, the Imperialists marched away with all
diligence, but without any Baggage.

And thus did the young Marquise de la Force perform the business he came
thither for; which was the hinderance o^ the Imperialists going into Lorraine,
or through it into the Franche County; of which he the same day fent
aduertisment to the King.

This punctual journall and relation, is thus seconded by another from the
same gentleman, to a friend of his in England, and dated from Hagenaw the 21.
of Ianuar^ old style.

The French, having upon the 13.23. of January, driven the Imperialists back
over the mountains Zavern, upon the 17.27. they were set upon in their
quarters, by the Swedish of Alsatia under the command of the Rhinegraue, who
chased them into a castle, but half a league from Zauern called Aubar, and
that with the loss of some men, and a part of their baggage.

The 18.28. came there a messenger from the Count of Salm unto the Marquise de
la Force, with offer to surrender the aforesaid Castle of Aubar into his
hands, together with the Town of Hagenaw, and his retention to the Citadell of
Zauern, upon condition, to be safely conducted through Lorraine into the
Franche County.

Upon the 19.29. two hours before day the Marquise de la Force, marched with
the Regiments of Navarre, and Hauquincourt with six troops of horse and the
Scottish Gensd'armes, who altogether having passed the hills, came two hours
within night, to a quarter within half a league of Zauern. There stood the
French embattailed all that night, which was occasioned by an Allarum given by
the Swedish, The Swedish not well pleased with the rendering of Hagenaw to the
French. The Castle of Auber r^ndred to the French!
who were then encamped within a league on the other side of the Town* and
were something now displeased, for that Hagenaw was to fall into
French-singers, which Swedish were feign for all that the next day, to behold
the Castle of Aubar received bv de la Force so the King his Master, and the
Count of Salm with his whole troops to be conducted hard by their quarters,
and betwixt the two Regiments of Navarre and Hauquincourt to be conveyed over
the hills into Lorraine, for the Franche County. The French troops of Horse
stayed in the quarters a while, to go forwards toward Hagenaw. The Count of
Salm being gone, the Garrison of Zauern were summoned by the French to take in
the Kings troops, Zauern rendered to the French.
because of the Count of Salm his resignation of the Fort thereof, which he
lately had commanded for the Emperor.

But they of the Town holding for the Duke of Lorraine, desired 6. days
respite for their answer, that is, until their Princes pleasure might be
known, or the Cardinal of Lorraine (his brother, at leastwise) the Duke
himself having indeed left his own Country.

The French granted them 4. days liberty, marching immediately to a quarter
within two Leagues of Hagenaw; thither they arrived late at night, after 39.
hours hard march; horse and man being all that time fasting.

January 20.30. was the surrender of Hagenaw capitulated, Hagenaw rendered to
the French.
after which the Town was entered.

The 22. were the French to return back to their last quarter, and then to
go onwards to Zauern, to know their resolutions.

And thus far these two accurate Relations of the Scottish Gentleman, by the
end of whose former letter it appears further that Mounsieur de Harpaiou was
heretofore left about Philipburg to receive in the Town under the French Kings
protection: And that about the midst of January he still was about it: But the
Swedish who had taken in the Town, would by no means consent unto his
entering of it, until they should from the said French King, receive some
valuable consideration and composition, for their late pains and charges in
the siege and reduction of it.

By comparing of the French Relation with these two latter ones, may the truth
and circumstan- of the action be collected.

THE CONTINVATION of the Rhinergraue.
The French Army after this, fell into the Dukedom of Lorraine, The French
block up La Motte.
blocking up the strong and high seated Castle of La Motte; and the rest of
the Duchy they totally not long after subdued under the obedience of the French
Crown. The Duke of Lorraine having by Treaties as well as Arms, been enforced
the year before to make over his Country into the French Kings hands, had now
quitted the government of it to the Cardinal of Lorraine his brother, (who now
married a wife) and was himself gone toward Germany with a small Army, in
aid of the Emperors. The Cardinal Duke of Lorraine also, was not long after
made a French prisoner in Nancy, the chiefest City of Lorraine, whence he
escaped.

To hasten the subduing therefore of Lorraine, did the Marshall de la Force
march with all speed into it, leaving the Rhinegraue Otto Lodowicke in Alsatia
to grapple there with the Imperialists, the Count of Salm, and the new come
Duke of Lorraine, with the French Garrisons now put into Hagenaw, Zabern and
Reichshofen, had the Rheinegraue so good correspondency, as emulous Captains of
strange Nations, that are of the same side, use to maintain one with another.

The great Town of Strasburg also, about the beginning of February, sent some
deputies of their own, together with Mounsieur de Lisle, the French
Ambassador, to treat with them also, upon terms of amity, and good
neighborhood.

The Duke of Lorraine, about the time of the former surrender of Hagenaw, was
upon his coming into Germany, not to meet with de la Force, but seeking
another way to avoid him; he was not reported to be above 700. strong, both
horse and foot; and with these he passed the River of Rhine at Newenburg,
staying some few days at Bintzheim the upper Marquisate.

His intentions were either to get thorough the walled Cities (as they called
them) to the strong Town about the Bodensea, or Lake of Constantz, or else
over the Gottharde Mountains into Italy, upon Saturday therefore January 25.
February 3. he sent his Ambassador into the City of Bassell in Switzerland,
desiring that State to grant him free passage through Rurheim: This being with
good words denied him, he thereupon took the higher way through Kensach, and
so to Rhinfelden.

January 30. the said Duke, all unlooked for, presented himself with 200.
Horse, conducted by the Count of Lichtenstein, by the City of Basell,
supposing his own presence to be more effectual to the obtaining of the
before desired passage, but being the second time denied, he marched on the
other side toward Sieuertz, to conioyne with the rest of the ImperialI forces
under the Count of Salm in Alsatia; de la Force being by this time gone out of
the Country, into Lorraine, as is aforesaid.

About this time fell there out a dissension between the Imperial Garrison of
the sconce of Hunegin which lies close upon the North-side of Basell; some of
these Imperialists going out a plundering, fell upon some sheep and small
cattle, and some loades of Wine belonging to the Townes-men of Basell, with
whom before that they had no emnity: The Citizens hearing of it, immediately
gave order to their Lieutenant Colonel Zornleim with 200. Musquetires, and 50
Horsemen to pursue after them; he does so, ouertakes and surrounds them;
kills some, takes 8. prisoners, and recouers all the Booty; this done, the
said Lieutenant Colonel commands presently to let fly some Pieces of Ordnance
out of St. John's Bullwarke, against the fort of Hunigen, the Governor of which
Fort nor understanding the meaning of it, hung out a white flag of parley, and
sent to desire to know the reason of the Towns shooting at him, he was
certified what his Soldiers had committed, wherein he excused himself, as
being done without his priuitie: This may be noated both to show the terms of
Neutralitie (or something like it) which the Switzers City of Basell bath with
the Emperor; As also to give you to understand how near in those parts the
Emperor has any Garrison.

All this time is the Rhinegraue busied in taking in of places in the upper
Alsatia, where he had by this time very far advanced into, beyond Colmar,
and those parts where Gustavus Horn left conquering the last year, even some
5. or 6. Germane Leagues to the South-west of Colmar, as high up into the
Country as the height of Basell, though some 5. or 6. Leagues distant to the
West of it; There took he in the Towns of Sultz, and Gebweiler, Sultz and
Gebweiler taken by the Rhinegraue.
and nearer to Colmar he drove the Castle of Ruffach unto a composition; after
he had taken the City by assault: This was done by the beginning of February;
In Rufach he took prisoners the old Earl of Lichtenstein, together with many
other Officers, and good booty, among the rest a Mule laden with plate, as also
the Coach of Herman Marquis of Baden, and his young son in it; the Lady
Mother hardly escaping over the Rhine; Above 500. common Soldiers of Rufach,
gave up their names to the Rhinegraue, but the Boores were all put to the
sword, within a week or 10. days space (about this time) were there a full
1OOO. Imperialsits cut off in several places thereabouts, the partners also of
Ensisheim, and those parts to the Eastward, being called up with all speed to
Danu and Sennen upon the South of Sultz and Gebweiler, to stop the Rhinegraues
passage any further to the South-Westward: After them did the Rhinegraue
pursue, making himself Master of the forsaken Ensisheim, which stands upon the
River Ills toward Basell.

By this time was the Duke of Lorraine conjoined with the Count of Salm, who
having gotten all the Imperialists of the Country together, marched now with
great confidence against the Rhinegraue; To whom were some few also sent from
Strasburg, and such other Neighbor places as could best spare them: All these
together could not make him above 2000. men in Field; in the day of the
succeeding battle, the adverse partee were full 6000. men, horse and foot,
who made no other account at all but to hembe in the Rhinegraues small number,
and to cut them all in pieces; And now did the Imperialists assemble their
strength together about Danu aforesaid, being said to be 7000. men, that is to
say 1000. Foot, and 500. Horse, of the Count of Salmes own; 300. Foot and
600. Horse of the Duke of Lorraines, whom some writings make mention to be now
in Burgundy in person, leuying more forces, and others make to be present in
the following battle of the Lorraine Colonel Mercyes regiment, there were
6oo. and out of the Garrisons there abouts were drawn 500. more, the rest of
the Imperial Army were Boores, and country people; These were drawn
together about mid February; about which very time the Colonel Esher marched
out of the strong Town of Brisack, upon the Rhine; who led along 500.
Soldiers, and 1200. Boores gathered out of the Brechler-valley, Elsacke and
Seiswaldt, not leaving above 400. Soldiers for the guard of Brisack, his
expedition was said to be intended toward Waldkirck, and afterward to
assault Kentzingen, in the Kentzinger-valley, in the edge of Alsatia and
Wirtemberg, so to open if it might be the passages of the Forest
Schwartzwaldt, that succors might come through the Dukedom of Wirtemberg
again into Alsatia, and to divert and employ for the time the forces of the
Rhinegraue, for by this time had the Emperor thought to have laid it on
thereabouts, and to have recovered his own Lands, and his sons Bishopric
in Alsatia; To this purpose about this time was there a Captain (native of
Tirole, and Reich by name) come with a Post directy from Viena to Brisack, with
a strait command in the Emperors name to the Field-marshall Shawenburge, to
betake himself into the field; immediately hereupon did shawenburge cause 12.
Pieces of Ordnance to be made ready to march, which he meant to take along
with him: This Captain (as it was given abroad) made promise that John de
Werth should come into those Countries with 1500. horse, and 3. Regiments of
Foot, who should try to break through the Schwartzwaldt over the Mountains:
And for the better show of the truth of this intention; there was some store
of prouant bread at that time sent into Fryburg: The Captain also related, how
that the Emperor was very much altered with the loss of those Countries of
Alsatia (which as he said) his Majesty would by no means forsake, or so give
over; He said moreover, that he would strain himself to maintain Silesia,
and his own hereditary Countries, and that he would conclude an honorable
peace with the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, but as for the rest of the
Empire, he did less regard it; for seeing they had been always disobedient
and cross unto him, he would find means well enough to keep them under;
perchance indeed it was the meaning of John de Werth to have broken through
into Alsatia, seeing that he two several times appeared in Overland which was
the way out of Bauaria to it; both which times were his Troops and purposes
defeated by Gustavus Horn; as you may read in the chapter of his Story.

By the end of February, did the Count of Salm, suppose himself to be strong
enough, to have wrought his will, upon the Rhinegraue, especially, seeing he
could not on the sudden be assisted with his own forces from other parts of
the Country: which the Imperial parties, now gone out of Brissacke, put to the
defensive; upon Sunday therefore March 2. 12. the Lorraines and the
Imperialists 6000. or 7000. strong, set upon him, that was little above 2000.
and betwixt the Town of Sennen, and the Dorpe of Ochsenfeldt, about two of the
clock in the afternoon; they thought to have surrounded him.

A great victory obtained by the Rhinegrave.
It Is written, that the Rhinegraue, by a desperate charger, beat quite through
his enemies, and forced his own liberty. At which time assuming a new
courage, from his experience of the possibility, to pierce die Enemies, he
returned again upon them afresh, and utterly, with small loss of his own
party, defeated them. The Generals of which Victory, are thus reported out
of the Conquerors own writting, thus divulged by another hand, to whom the
Rhinegraue himself writ it.

From Colmar, March 3./13. 1633.
BY this occasion I give you to understand, that within this hour, his
Excellency, the Rhinegraue Otto Lodowick has sent me a most welcome letter
by his own Trumpet: how that yesterday in the afternoon, about two of the
clock, his ExcelIencie lighted upon the Enemy, about Sennen, whom by Gods
special help and assistance, he immediately, and without any considerable
loss of our forces, has utterly routed and dispersed. The old Earl of Salm,
that was Vicar at Zabern, the Marquise Bassompier, General over the Lorraine
forces, with the Colonel Mercy, he took prisoners; Colonel Philip a
gentleman very much esteemed amongst the Loraines, was shot and killed by a
horseman, of the Rhinegraues life Regiment. The most part of the horsemen, has
he put to the sword, or taken prisoners: diverse Ensigns and Cornets were
obtained, together with all their Ordnance. The foot forces he pursued
thorough the Vineyards, which he is still in chase of: the rest of the
Officers, and Commanders, that are taken prisoners and slain, he will
certify me of, by the next occasion: thus far out of the Rhinegraues own
letter.

Other writings inform us, that those three great Prisoners, were brought into
Colmar, and Colonel Philip, was shot by one that knew him: that there were
slain full 2000. men upon the place, whereof very few of the Rhinegraues: the
reason of the suddennes, and greatness of the victory was, for that the foot,
so soon as ever they perceived their horsemen to be routed, they took flight,
and thought to have saved themselves in the Vineyards: nevertheless they were
pursued thither, and cut down, and the Italians especially, who obtained no
quarter. And whereas 800. soldiers, took conditions of the Rhinegraue, and
whereas the baggage of the defeated was thrust into the Town of Sennien, that
is now hard blocked up. The Duke of Lorraine was supposed to be gotten into
Dann, others imagining, that he retired amongst the 2. Regiments that fled from
Brissack. After this, the Rhinegraue sent his own life regiment with the
Nassawish, who cut off a great many of them, and brought back 600. more
Prisoners; which is a very great victory, and especially considering the odds
of 3. to one, and that the enemy presumed to hew him all in pieces: I here was
presented 10. Cornets, and as many Ensigns unto the Chancellor Oxenstein, upon
March 27. when he was at Francford.

The Castle of Befo^t and Altkirch taken by the Rhinegraue.
Presently upon this did the Rhinegraue send the Bohemian Colonel Schaualitzki,
to take in waldshut, one of those which they call the waldt Cities; This is a
passage above Bazell, and the Colonel performed it happily; The Rhinegraue
himself also in the pursuit of his victory, took in one Town after another
in Alsatia, among the rest the City of Befort, together with the Castle
Brimtraut, and Altkirch, and the Fort of Hunnigen, close by Bazell, yea the
whole Bishopric of Bazell was brought under contribution; This was done
within 10. days after the victory; About which time there was 5. troops of
The Rhinegraues, of Zillards Regiment, set over the Rhine not far from
Bazell, who surprised and cut in pieces a troop of Imperial Horses, which
they found in a near Market-towne together with some others, insomuch that
they sent back above 100. Prisoners into the sconce of Hunnigen: At
Rhinefelden were diverse Rhine Ships, already laden with Victuals and
Ammunition, to have been sent down the River unto Brisack; But the
Imperialists were feign to unload the Ships again, because that the passage
was already blockt up by the Swedish, sone o this provision they
notwithstanding sent by land thither.

Some writings relate of another great victory which the Rhinegraue should have
gotten since the former, and 6. Ensigns in it, but these Ensigns might rather
be gleaned up in the several smaler defeates, then in any one great Conflict
that we have particular of.

And thus had the Rhinegraue by mid March advanced his Conquests as far as
the City of Bazell; at which Town (being Protestants, and Well-willers to his
proceedings) I find him now in person, and that there he passed his Army over
to Rhine-bridge to go toward Brisack; This very st ong and most considerable
Town of Brisack had the French offered many treaties unto, to surrender up
into his protection, but the Imperial Governor had wit enough to refuse it;
And now do the two Rhinegraues go several ways with their Armies, the
Rhinegraue John Phillip marching against the Waldt Cities; and our General the
Rhinegraue Otto Lodowicke advancing along the Rhines side, and Eastern bank
of it toward Brisack, which stands on the same shore of the Rhine to the
North of Bazell; Otto Lodowicke goes to Newenburg by the way on the same side
of the River with Brisack.


The Actions of the Landgraue of Hessen, and his Lieutenant General Molander:
As also of the Swedi^h Field-Marshall, the Lord Dod^ Baron of Kniphausen.
THe Catholic Leaguers having made a new Confederation betwixt them. And in
the Cathedral Church of Cullen, with great solemnity and laying their hands
upon the Golden-Fleece, new sworn this Confederation: Then did their new
raised forces march out of Cullen; They put over the Rhine unto Deutz, whence
they went into westphalia, to join with Boninghausen.

These Leaguish forces made the first show of themselves upon the River of
Roer, near which Melander lay, upon the other side of a bridge, which the
Hassians for preuentions sake, but lately had burnt down.

This was about the middle of November; At which time the Eelt-marshall
Kniphausen lay with his forces about the River Lip, some two leagues from the
River Roer, near the Duke of Newburgs Land of Berg: As namely at Lune, Werne,
and those places.

Lieutenant general Melander, with half the Hassian troops, lay to watch the
River Roer: and to hinder the conjunction of those of the Bishop of Munster,
with Colonel Schellhammer, who was the man that now brought the new Army from
Cullen.

Werle taken by Melander.
The Hassian Lieutenant Melander, upon the 11. of November, took in Werle:
which upon the coming o^ these new Leaguers, he fortifyed after the modern
fashion. For he had found good store of Ammunition in it: that is to say, 12.
tons of gunpowder, 7. barrells of Musket bullet, a good quantity of Iron
bullets for field-peeces; half a barrel of hand Grenades, one great one,
some sheafes of Arrows, some chaine-bullets, 7. brass pieces, and 3. broken
ones: 4. of Iron, and 5. Chambers, besides a great quantity and provision of
meal, fruits, and other necessaries.

Amoenenberg taken by Hessen.
About this time, was the Landgraue himself, before Amoenenberg, which after
much battery, and burning part of the Town, with flinging in of fire-workes
and grenades, was taken.

Boninghausens garrison in it, being forced to yield upon composition. This was
done about the middle, or toward the 20. of November, and the garrison being
12. ^oote Companies, and one troop of horse, they marched forth upon the 19.
with bag and baggage. But for that Boninghausen, at his former inroade into
those parts, had carried away some Hassian Officers, which he still kept
prisoners: therefore were some of his now kept under arrest by the Landgraue,
till the others should be released.

November 21. old style, did Melander make himself master of the liberty of
Roerort upon the river Roer, and enquartered his people in it, and in the
Country betwixt the Rivers of Roer and Lip. And by that time, Hamm Soest and
Lip taken by Kniphausen.
had Kniphausen taken in all the places about Hamm, Soest, and Lip, and made
his quarters in that Country.

The chief Landlords thereupon assembled at Dortmund, to consult what
contribution to give unto him. Upon this news, was Boninghausen costrained to
a retreat toward Cullen: And the Duke of Neuburg went from Cullen to Bruxells,
to desire aid and counsel from the Spanish. Kniphausen and Melander followed
Bonninghausen; and Melander gave summons to the Town of Duisburg; which Town
pretending to be under protection of the Hollanders, they were commanded within
10. days to bring certificate of that; or else to take in Garrison.

The Swedes pursued the retreat upon Boninghausen, as far as the Country of
Berg, some of them: And others unto Andernach, near the Rhine, who attempting
upon that Town, were beaten off in the night time, about the end of November;
on which very night had Boninghausens men an enterprise upon the Findland
Colonel Stalhansh his quarters, who lay on the other side of the River Roer,
with 12. troops of Horse, and some Dragonners.

The Boninghusers put over the Rhur at Wenigeren, with most part, or all their
horse and Dragonners: Colonel Lohe being sent with 600. horse to assault
Stalhansh on the back also. The Boninghausers being come up to the first watch
of Stalhansh, a Finland Rit-master, who guarded there with 60. horse, took the
alarm upon their coming, and charged the foremost of them: two troops he
routed and put to the sword, himself in the conflict being deadly wounded. The
Boninghausers supposing Stalhansh himself had been there with all his
Regiment, immediately thereupon retired; as upon the same fear Colonel Lohe
also did on the other side. Boninghausen recollecting his men thereupon, and
encouraging them to fall on again, by vowing his own readiness to live and
die with them, could not for all that persuade them to their danger again;
Instead of which, they now cried out for pay and money, and he that last
received means at Cullen let him now fight. Thus went they over the Roer
again very much discontented, crying on all hands for their winter quarters.

Boninghausen before his retreating from about Raedu^rmwalt Schwelen, Rems
heil, Wermerskircken and those places about Sollingen had left 7. Cornets of
horse to burn down the bridges at Hattungen and other Towns upon the Roer,
that their euemie might go the further about, ere they could pursue them.

After this, they came toward Dusseldorp upon the Rhine; which made the
Country people much afraid, wishing these friends of theirs further off them.

But of this fear they were discharged, for that Boninghausen marched back
again presently; and sent some up into the Bishopric of Munster in
Westphalia, whither Felt-Marshall Kniphausen sent after him.

Hildesheim besieged by Lunenburg.
The great Town of Hildesheim in Brunswickland, wherein there was an Imperial
Garrison, had some while now been besieged by the Duke of Lunenburgs forces,
and some of the Boores of the Country. The Horsemen within it toward the end
of November, sallying out upon the Boores quarters, fowly ruinated and burnt
them; but the Lunenburgers Hors-men made the salleyers to retire presently.

The Earth was so hard frozen, that the besiegers could not work as they would
have done upon their approaches: Howeuer November 27. the besieged were beaten
out of a mill without the Town, which they possessed; and all things were so
prepared for an assault, that the Townes-men sent an Officer to Colonel Chlern
at Munden, for his directions how to behave themselves in the surrendering of
the City.

The Landgraue of Hessen about this time was come before Bracken in the
diocese of Paderborne, whereinto Colonel Paul Daube with 300. men was
retired, which town he shortly brought into obedience.

The Town of Munden sallying out, give a great defeat to the Brauneckish
Regiment.
The Imperial Garrison of Munden, in the mean time fell out upon the
Brauneckish regiment about Vffelne, which they so utterly defeated, that they
carried away 7. Ensigns and 500. horse back with them into Munden.

Felt-Marshall Kniphausen toward the middle of December, went into the Dukedom
of Westphalia, and presented his army before the Town of Saltshoten, belonging
to the Elector of Cullen.

Hither also came the Landgraue of Hessen: but because upon the taking of the
Town there was some treachery used by the besieged, and fury enough and too
much by the conquerors, which has been taxed of cruelty by those of Cullen,
you shall have the manner of it related by order of Kniphausen.

The manner of the Siege, and taking in of Saltzkoten, with three Letters
Concerning it.
Paderborne, December 13./23. 1633.
SIR I here give you to understand that so soon as the Lord Felt-Marshall
Kniphausen had intelligence how the Imperialists under the leading of
L'Eremite, and Tauben, having first defeated Colonel Seakireken, with his
Hassian Regiment in the Town of Brilon, were now advanced to Brackel in the
Bishopric of Paderborn; his Excellency the Felt-Marshall having notice
likewise of the Hassian General Major Dalwigs being ready to march up into
those parts after them, with a good part of the Caualry, he also with some
Horse-troopes and Draggoners advanced up thither-wards, hoping thereabouts to
light upon the Enemy.

But having advice now brought him that L'eremite, having first of all drawn
the Colonel Osterholt with his 5. companies unto him (which The said Osterholt
had new leuyed in Brackel) were both together again retired toward the
mountains; his Excellence upon the desire of the Landgraue of Hessen, would
not let slip the fairness of opportunity.

In the mean time, therefore that Colonel Stalhansh was a coming up to him
back again out of the Land of Marck; he put on resolution by all means to
tempt out the Enemy into the field, and to come out of the mountains and
lurking corners; The best way to do this he supposed to be the besieging of
Saltzkoten, one League distant from Paderborne.

The Garrison within the Town consisted of 340. Foot of Colonel Westphalens
Regiment, which had heretofore done spoil enough in the Country thereabouts,
both in their march and Countermarch.

The Felt-Marshall hereupon the 19. 9. of the same December, took his first
view of the said City, immediately preparing to assault it. The next day were
the Ordnance planted against it, and the Commander and Governor within the
Town, by these Letters summoned to Surrender.


THe Commander in the City of Saltzkoten may sufficiently, by his own
understanding, make judgment of my maine intention in thus near approaching
unto himself and Garrison: His own estate moreover, and the case he
presently is in, himself cannot but be sencible of; How, namely, he is at
present left in a lonely place; where, besides the feebleness of his walls,
there is no relief to be expected from him; nor will I conceal it from him,
how that he is already environed with a Swedish Army-royall, and that another
Hassian Army is even now hard at hand to come against him: And therefore do I
now desire him to resolve himself upon these points of War:

Whether he has not had honor enough in it, that I have not only caused the
Canon to be planted, but have already played with them likewise upon his Town?

Or whether he desires to see more Forces brought against him?

Or whether to have a Breach shot in his walls before he would surrender?

To which extremity if he suffers it to come, I then assure the Commander and
his Soldiers, that I will make such an example of them, that he shall have
cause enough given unto him, how in time to bethink himself, in good time to
deliver up the Towns Keys unto such an Army so well furnished with Artillery:
And this I thought good to let him understand; His answer whereunto I will
expect by this present Trumpeter, unto whom (according to the custom of Wars)
I desire you to give pass and repasse freely.

Given in the head quarter at Verneburg, December, 10. 20. 1633. His Majesty's
of Swedens appointed Felt-Marshall, Dodo, Baron of Inhausen and Kniphausen.


The Towns answer.
To the Illustrious and Noble Lord Dodo Baron of Kniphausen, Lord Lutzburg,
Bergum, Jnnelt, and Vpplewert: By his Majesty, and the Crown of Sweden
appointed General Felt-Martiall.
YOur Letter of the 10. 20. of this month, was safely delivered unto our
hands, by this bearer the Trumpeter, and the Contents thereof we have
seriously considered: whereupon we here send this our answer unto you; which
is, That although we be somewhat far off from our Army, yet nevertheless,
have we Sufficient signs and assurance given us, in very good time to be
relieved. For this cause do we hold our selves obliged, seriously to consider
upon our oath, and to maintain this our Town so long as possible we are
able. At this moreover we rejoice, that so renowned a Cauallery is already
presented before our Town; And that more are coming after: As also that there
be Articles of agreement already propounded unto us, and these firmed with his
Princely Eccllencies Seal manual. That the Lord Felt-Marshall has vouchsafed
us a Salve with his Canon, we have not been able to withstand it. But as for
showing so much honor unto him and to his Army, as to present the Town Keys
to him, we entreat him to spare us at this present: For whereas we have no
greater thing to loose then our honors and good names, we should in doing
otherwise, endanger both of them; especially, seeing at this present time we
are not reduced to the necessity of coming to a composition. We are therefore
resolved to do our best; Both our selves and soldiers fully being purposed to
defend our selves unto the uttermost of our abilities, until our succors may
come up to us. And thus we take our leaves, being otherwise very ready to do
our best service unto the Lord Felt-Marshall and all his Cauallers.

Zaltzkoten, December. 11./21. 1633. Elmerhus of Nihusen, Captain and
Commander of the Town. John James of Stotzingen, Governor.


Upon receipt of this Letter, the Felt-Marshall kept his men quiet all this day,
expecting with patience a more considerate answer from them; as also whilst
the Landgraue of Hessens Army might be come up nearer to him. In the Evening
was order given by the Felt-Marshall for the mounting of all his Canons; which
by break of day next morning, December 12.22. began to play. The whole Army
likewise, horse and Foot, was presented in Battaglia, before the noses of the
besieged: And that it might plainly appear how unwilling he was to have the
matter brought unto extreamities; His Excellency the said Felt-Marshall, so
soon as he perceived his Canon to have made the breach, saultable for the
avoiding of Christian bloodshed, once again sent into the Town; as in this
Letter following.

I Understand by the Answer of the Commanders and other Captains, which is
yesterday received, that the City Saltzkoten resolved to hold out until their
reliefes be come up to them. Their humors in truth I must very well approve
off; but I would have them withal to understand, that there was no such thing
as reliefes to be expected. For mine own part, I would give 1000. Ducats to
their Armies, that they once had but the courage to show their faces, and to
present themselves before Saltzkoten; seeing both their Armies, yours within
the City, and your reliefes without, should by Gods assistance find
breake-necke entertainment enough from us. What you mean by the agreement by
you mentioned I understand not. But if you forthwith conclude not upon a
reasonable agreement with me, there shall no composition be ever again
offered: And of this let you and your be well assured, as God lives. But if
your pleasures be to see more Forces, you may easily obtain that favor, but
to your own ruin it will prove, for that you shall not have so much as any
hope of mercy ever after it. And thus by this present Trumpet you shall send me
your direct and categoricall answer, and withal, grant free pass and repasse
unto him, withal according to the custom of Arms.

Given at the head quarter at Vrneburg, December. 11.22. 1633. By his Majesty and
the Crown of Swedens appointed Felt-marshall, Dodo, Baron of Inhausen and
Kniphausen.


This Trumpetter did the Commander Nihausen detain above two houers in the
Town: Whereupon was order given to his Army by the Felt-Marshall, that every
man should do his uttermost.

The Trumpeter being at last dismissed, and he after his coming out, giving
Summons to the Town by sounding o^ his Trumpet: The Commander sent out his
Drum after him to excuse his own delay unto the Felt-Martiall: His pretense
for it was, that he must first call a Council of War of all his Officers,
that he might be able to answer the better for himself hereafter, for all
these his behauiours.

Hereupon was the same Trumpet dispatched back again, to signify to the
Commander, how that his Excellency would loose no more time; and therefore
must the Commander now absolutely declare himself, whether or no he would set
open his gates presently? Upon the coming of this messenger to the gates, the
Governor John James Stotzingen, desired conference with some Officer of the
field of the Swedish partee; Upon which news, the Felt-Marshall sends his own
Sergiant Major to him. A cessation of Arms being commanded upon it: The
Governor coming forth of the Town vnro the Swedish Mayor, tells him that
his Commission was personally to treat with the Felt-Martiall; and in the
mean time is the Trumpet detained in the City.

By this time was his Princely Excellency the Landgraue of Hessen, come to his
own Troops before the Town, whose opinion was, that the best way were to go
to the House of Verneburg (as being the head quarter) and there in writing to
set down the agreement, and that in the mean time, the truce should be
continued: Whilst this was a doing, the Citizens and Soldiers of the Town,
inuit the Swedish Soldiers to a cup of their own Beer; telling them that
very shortly they should be good friends together.

The Swedish and Hassian Soldiers giving credit to their fair inuitation,
approach unto the very gates, and there drink with them. His Excellency
hearing this, gave command unto his Officers to keep their Soldiers well
together, and to take heed of coming too near the gates of an enemy, and to
shun all occasion of confusion.

The Officers hereupon going to perform their charge, and to bring off the
Soldiers; A Captain of the Dragonners, was by a Citizen shot through and
through the body; Those of Saltzkoten deal treacherously with the Swedes.
At which instant there was such hot fire given upon the unarmed Swedish (both
horse and foot) that a great many were then wounded, and a many more killed
right out upon the place; Yea, the besieged not contented herewith, were so
impudent as to revile and give base words unto those whom they dealt thus
treacherously with, saying; Thus must the Heretic Swedes be fetched over,
this is the way to handle them.

News being brought of this Barbarism unto the Landgraue and Kniphausen, just
as they were setting down the Articles of Agreement; They were not to be
blamed if they were thoroughly enraged to see such a cheat, and affront put upon
them.

Immediately hereupon, they both riding to their Troops, gave order to let
fly their Ordnance, and to make the breach wider, and that their whole Army
should turn into it.

To perform this were the Soldiers now most eager, not only out of courage
and hope of Booty, but to revenge withal the death of their fellows and
comrades, thus basely murdered. But before the Soldiers fell on, there was
another Trumpet sent into the Town, to desire them to leave shooting till the
Swedish might fetch off their dead and wounded fellow Soldiers. This would not
the besieged hearken unto, but answered with their Muskets again, and an
hideous shooting.

But so soon as they by and by perceived the Swedes and Hassians to be
falling in among them, and without mercy eagerly to have begun the execution,
then they caused one Drum to beat a Parlee here, and another there: Then
could they hang a white Flag and a Hat in the mouth of their breach; and then
on all hands they could cry for quarter, and for mercy. But now were the
Victors ears as close slopped, as the others had been heretofore: For by this
time had the Felt-Martiall lead on, and encouraged his people to the Assault,
put them into the breach, and had given them this watchword, Thus Fortunate.

And now did both Citizens and Soldiers think how to save themselves; some
leaping over the Town Walls on the further sied, others getting into the
Church, and turrets of the Gates; but so there could but few escape away, and
the most of them were put unto the sword.

The Governor of the Town (who went upon two Crutches) having hid himself in
the Church Steeple, was upon promise of a great ransom taken prisoner by a
Lieutenant. But it is believed verily that the Landgraue will put him upon a
Martial Court, for the trial of his life; to see whether he had behaved
himself in this Action according to the Law of Arms, or not; For assured it
is by those prisoners that were saved, that he had not above half a Tun of
Powder left to hold out the Town withal; so that he had neither reason, nor
policy with him, to be thus obstinate, but has to answer rather (and that
very deeply) for so much bloodshedding, and for the destruction of such a
City.

Saltzkoten set on fire, and then taken.
A little before the assault had been given, was the Town set on fire, by
heauing and shooting in of Grenades in two several places; which burned so
fiercely, that had the besieged been never so well provided and resolved to
have holden out, yet had they never been able to have stayed in the breach,
the heat of the burning City was so vehement. And this has added unto the
obstinacy of the besieged.

By this fire was the whole Town (excepting some few houses) quite consumed
unto Ashes, and the whole provision of Corn spoiled.

The Salt-coates, or Salt-houses from whence this Town had her name, and did
get her living, were not at all touched by the fire. The most part of the
Soldiers found good booty both in the Houses, and under ground, so that they
could be contented to have such a day every week.

That Evening did the Landgraue and the Felt-Martiall draw off their Troops,
causing them to stand the whole night following in the open field, in
Battaglia: The reason for which was, for that the Governor of the Town had
very confidently given it out, that Boninghausen would be there that night to
relieve him. But this proving false, the Victors next morning marched again to
Paderborn, leaving a small garrison only in Saltzkoten to keep those few
houses that are yet standing: And now was the whole Bishopric of Paderborn
quite freed from Imperialists.

CHAP. VIII. More of Hessen and Kniphausen, and something of the Chancellor
Oxenstiern, and of his propositions for a Diet.
As also of Boninghausen, and the new Spanish Army of Celada.
MVch complaint was made amongst the Catholics of Cullen, concerning the hard
Usage and burning of Saltzkoten, which belonged unto their Elector, as a Town
of his comendam Bishopric of Paderborn. The ordinary Auisoes also printed at
Cullen, Number 1. and 2. to make the Protestants more odious; had invented I
know not what miracle of a Cross, which was repaired again by some of the
Hassians, with the cruelty of Magdenburg, and of the dead Protestants, then
cast into the Elbe, who contrary to the course of Nature, swome up the stream
with hands foulded up and erected. The Catholic tholike Miracle-monger, was
also put in mind of the late cruelty used by his Partee at the taking of the
City of Munden, situate upon the River Fulda and Weira; And to justify the
burning of Saltzkoten, the former Relation divulged, with the Letters to it.

Saltzkoten being thus taken, Kniphausen and Stalhansh made toward the City of
Warburg, whereabouts were some of Boninghausens and L'eremites men, as if they
had come so far to relieve the lost City; these retiring upon the coming of
the Swedish Kniphausen, intended not to follow them, leaves the Landgraue of
Hessen to look to them, and to those parts; And at the Town of Huxter,
passes the Weser into Brunswick-land, with 14. Regiments. Now the intention
was to take in the great City of Hildesheim, which had sometimes been weakly
blocked up by the Lunenburg and Brunswick forces.

To go the roundlier to work with that siege, was the Finnish Colonel
Stalhansh reported to be sent away with some 2000. horse, and 1000 foot,
which if they should prove too weak to force Hildesheim then was Gonrtzen (the
second man of the army unto Kniphausen) to follow with other 4. Regiments. But
Stalhansh went not forwards, for that he went back to the Landgraue. And
whereas the Garrison of Hildisheim had toward the end of December, fallen out
into the neighbor Bishopric of Osna, and had pillaged Quackenburg, Padburg,
Bramshe, and other places thereabouts; against these in person aduanceth
Kniphausen. And at this Town of Osnaburg I find mention of him January 9.19.
where the belief then was, that he would very shortly set forward against
Hildesheim: The Garrison of which Town, upon his coming upon them retired
home with all speed unto their Quarter.

As for Stalhansh he either went not at all to Hildesheim, or else was quickly
countermanded; for the Lord Chancellor Oxenstiern, general director of the
war, having been at Erfurt and Duringen, to meet there with the great
personages and Ambassadors of these parts and Princes, to prepare them for the
appointed Diet at Franckford, to be held the first of March follow-this Lord
Chancellor going from Erfurt January 14.24. toward Hall and Magdenburg; by his
direction was Stalhansh sent back to Erfurt: And there (as the Letters from
thence assure) was he with 7. regiments arrived, a few days after the 20th. of
January: What his design was the said Letters could not guess. And by that
time was the Lord Kniphausen himself gone before Hildesheim in Brunswick-land,
the fiege whereof, he hoped in a short time to bring unto perfection.

Oxenstien^ns propositin to the diet of Halberstat.
About January 25. was the Lord Chancellor Oxenstiern at Magdenburg, to attend
there upon the States of the great circle of the Lower Saxony, who January 27.
were to begin their diet at Halberstat, whether the Lord Cancellor repaired.
The Chancellors maine proposition to them was to come into the union of
Heilburn, with those 4. Circles of the Empire which had leagued there together
the last April, and acknowledged the Prince Palatine for elector. The intended
diet of Franckford was also to be a general one for all the Protestants, and
would the lower Saxony give a good answer, it would be a fair induction to
the Electors of Saxony, and Brandenburg to come in also. Saxony had not
appeared at Erfurt as was expected, but Brandenburg was said to have given
contentment.

But whereas it was reported that Saxony was unwilling to have the Lord
Oxenstiern to continue the Office of Directorship, and that himself began
again to hearken to a Treaty with the Emperor, the fear was, that either it
would put off the diet of Franckford until the first of May following, or else
that the backwardnes of so great a Prince, would be a great hinderance either
unto the dispatch or good resolution which was expected from it, whereof we
shall speak more hereafter.

To return to the Landgraue of Hessen in the Bishopric of Paderborne: The
Swedes being thus passed the Weser, the Landgraue presently gave summons unto
the Country of Lip, commanding in particular the Deputy of the Town of
Lipstat to appear before him, and to treat about receiving of a tolerable
Garrison from him. They pretended Neutralitie, and he pressed for their
Categoricall answer the next morning. Whereupon on Wednesday, Lipstat
surrendered to Hessen upon composition.
December 18. he aduanceth from Paderborne Town with his own people, and some
Swedish led by Stalhansh. That night he presented himself on both sides of
Lipstat, and made himself Master of a Port or two: Whereupon after summons
given, and a long dispute about Neutralitie, they were feign to admit of
conditions, and the next day received the Landgraue into their City. That day
did Melanders Regiment light upon a horse troop of Colonel Wendles, where
killing the Lieutenant and Cornet, they took some 30. Prisoners, and 40.
horses.

Here at Lipstat the Landgraue stayed some days to treat with the Towns of
the Mark, as Ham, Sorst Lunen, and the rest whom their Lord the Elector of
Brandenburg was willing for a time to put under the Landgraues protection; And
by the putting in of Hassian garrisons into these towns is Munster quite
blocked. This was concluded about the Christmas holy days; Stalhansh in the
mean time assaulted some of Bonninghausens forces, and drove them into
Wipperfurd; and about this time the City of Lemburg in Westphalia was taken by
the Swedish. Others of Boninghausens people in the mean time, fell upon
Patherg, and Bernighausen, on the Country of Walbeck to fetch from the Earl
thereof, the remainder of the old contribution, Boninghausens advantage was,
for that Hessen was at that time to the further and lower parts of the
Country, but he having notice of it, sent some good forces to encounter them,
besides which there were four Regiments of Horse and Foot to defend the
Country, besides the Trayne-bands.

In the end of December, the Landgraue sent messengers to the Town of Brielon,
with whom it was agreed to turn out the Imperial Garrison in the Town, and
to take in a Hashish. To take possession of this Town, was the Horse regiment
of Nassaw sent, and two weak foot companies, December 27. These marching
along sent their Quartermaster toward the Town before them: Him the
Imperialists light upon, and by him learned the strength and purposes of the
Hassians, whereupon they divided themselves into two Ambushes, disposing of
them in the Gardens before Brielen, and the other into the Forests. The
Hassians mistrusting something by the not returnihg of their Quartermaster,
part themselves immeditely into 4. bodies, and so advanced. That diuison which
was to go by the Gardens were let fly at by the Imperial ambush, who so
readily returned their fire, and lead again to them, that with the loss of
some lives, and 30. Prisoners, the rest were chased into Brielen. Of these
prisoners did the Hassians learn out the other Ambush in the forest, and that
they were two strong for them; retreating thereupon, two companies of theirs
were set upon by the others and beaten, many of the Hassians there lost their
liberties, and one Ensign: The others 2. companies that went another way,
heard nothing at all of this bickering, but returned safely to their appointed
rendeuous with 14 prisoners of the enemy.

In the end of December, or beginning of January, went the Landgraue himself
back into Hessen, being at his Palace of Cassel to entertain the young Baron
Oxenstiern, eldest son unto the Chancellor who was come thus far onward of
his way to go Ambassador into England. There was a French Ambassador also
coming to the Landgraue, with offer to make him first Marshall of France, and
12000. French crowns yearly pension. These the Landgraue accepted of, yet
upon condition not to serve the French King a against the Protestants.

The Landgraue being thus absent, and Kniphausen gone far enough off, then
begin the Imperialists to peep abroad again. Osterholtz, Paul Daube and
Ermite, about the 22. of January comes out of the Bishopric of Munden, with a
purpose to recover Ibaderborne, but being beaten back by the Garrison in it,
they went toward Warburg, where finding no Hassian Garrison, they pillaged the
Town, and took all the provisions along with them, going into Flota upon the
river Weser, where they sat down. Boninghausen also about the same time put
abroad again; He understanding of 9. companies of Hassians then lying in the
Town of Ruden, in the Bishopric of Cullen, and close upon the Bishopric of
Paderborne, thought unawares to have surprised them. January 29. very early in
the morning, from about the river Roer he falls upon them of Rinden, but they
having notice of his coming, prepared so well to entertain him, that they
killed him 300. men, and took 200. prisoners. Amongst the rest was La Molli
said to be slain, a man of great esteem. Boninghausens friends of Cullen
(who write this) suppose, that if he had led on his troops presently, and not
kept them so long in the frost, the enterprise might have taken his effect.
From thence went Boninghausen back again toward the Roer, enquartering at
the Towns of Iserlon, Altena, and Aeusperg. Boninghausen kept to these parts,
both to prevent the Hassian Lieutenant general Melander, who lay now upon the
Bishopric of Cutten, some few leagues to the left hand of him, betwixt the
rivers Roer, Lip and Rhine; he there expected also to have some 7. regiments
of the Spanish Marquise of Celeda to come over the Rhine to him, which having
been levied about Cullen with the King of Spaines money, had layne some time
already in the Country of Luxemburg: But they could not so soon be gotten
over the Rhine; for want of money, (as some write) they were also uncertain
which way to be led, either to join with Boninghausen, or to fall into the
Westerwalt by Franckford, or upon any other place, where there was least
appearance of opposition.

About the end of January, had the Imperial or Leaguish Colonel Grimberger,
Governor of Andernach, a design of retaking the Town of Roroert upon the
Rhine, before taken by Melander; but his coming was not so sudden as to
surprise the garrison; who very ill entertained him and his people; himself
they deadly wounded, whereof he shortly after died at Ordingen: This was a
valiant Gentleman, and his loss very much bemoaned at the court of the Elector
of Cullen. In his place was Captain Pafman made governor of Andernach, by the
said Elector. Presently upon this did the Imperialists which had been turned
pout of the garrisons of Hagenaw and Zabern, by the Marshall de la Force, come
to the River of Mosell, sending for entertainment under the Bishop of Cullen.
These also, together with some others cashiered by the Duke of Lorraine, were
said to be appointed to be joined to Boninghausen. The report at Cullen now,
was, that Count Wolff of Mansfield was there expected, and that he was to be
General over Boninghausens forces, and of the 7. Regiments of Celada; which
last, at this time were no nearer to fassing the Rhine then about Reymbach; and
the Horse troops about Munster-Eyfell in the edge of Luxemburg; nor were they
very hasty to go further, for that there were some Swedish drawing together on
the other side the Rhine. To requite Colonel Grimbergers former visit of the
Swedish and Hassians in Roeroert; they about the first week of February put
over the Rhine, and surprised 25. horsemen of the Elector of Gullens own life
guard, whom they carried away prisoners with them. The 12. or 14 of February,
the 7. Celadish Regiments were come to Meienfeldt behind Andernach; to which
Town diverse flat-bottom'd Boats were come together from Boune and Cullen, to
transport them over the Rhine. The Marquess of Celada was now treating with
the Culleners: His 7. Regiments were now said to be 1600. Horse, and 300.
Foot, to which were added those of Zabern and Hagenaw, 5. Companies;
consisting of 300. a piece, were also to be sent from Cullen after them. To
confront them, were the Hassian troops drawn together about Geissen. And now
was the Protestants diet of Franckford, which was first appointed to have begun
the first of March, put off for a while; not so much for fear of these 7.
Regiments, as because the diet of the lower Saxony, and the treaties which the
Electors of Brandenburg and Saxony detained the Lord Director Oxenstiern for a
while, yet about those parts. About the 24. of February, the 7. Regiments
passed over the Rhine; and of the way they took, we shall speak by and by.

The Hassian Lieutenant Melander, in the mean time took in the City of
Essen, betwixt the Rhine Lip, and Boer, notwithstanding the Boninghausen was
so near to him: this was in the beginning of February. After which, that the
Imperialists of Dorken, in the edge of the Bishopric of Munster, had
surprised the Castle of Raeswelt, and taken the Swedish Commissary Dorhorff in
it: He passed the River Lip at Dorsten, to go against them; for the
hinderance of their further progress in Munsterland; upon this did Colonel
Ketelar Governor there for the Emperor, assemble all his forces together to
oppose him. The Imperialists of Munster also, about 2000. strong, sallyed forth
Northward, and plundered the little country or Lord-ship of Steeneford; which
belonged unto the Earl of Bentheim.

In the mean time went the Felt-Martiall Kniphausen, to hasten on the siege of
Hildesheim; before which it is said that he arrived, January the 22. it was
written from the Neighbor town of Hamelen upon the Weser, that Duke George of
Lunenburg, who had till then been General over that Army; did at that time
give over and surrender unto Kniphausen.

And whereas the Catholic Leaguers at Cullen, had appointed their Colonel
Paul Daube to go to the relief of Hildesheim, he durst not pass the River
Weser to do it; but retired again from Flota, into the Bishopric of
Paderborne.

By mid February, had Kniphausen made himself master of one great Rauelen
before Hildesheim; and was said to labor hard about drawing the water out of
the town ditch.

By this time, the Imperialists in Munster and Weydeburg, took the House or
Castle of Ludinhausen from the Hassian: In which action they lost Captain
Bergun before it, together with 200. men; which Bergun was sometimes Governor
in Osnabrug. This Osnabrug being the chief Town of the great Bishopric of
that name, which ioynes with ^he Bishopric of Munster upon the North, was now
^n possession of the Swedish; yea and the Lord Gustaueson, Natural Son to the
deceased King of Sweden; was by this time enstalled Bishop of Osnaburg. The
solemnity of it was performed upon Wednesday, January 29. the Lord Resident
Diechman giving him possession. The Gentry and Commons of the Bishopric then
also took their oaths to him, and the next day was the first Evangelical
Sermon preached in the Jesuits College.

Boninghausens people in the mean time, were feign to range about the
Earldom of Waldeck for their victuals: and some of them about Mid February,
hoping to pillage Brenna, lost 12 men before it. Attempting upon
Mengerickhausen, they were worse used: loosing a Ritmaster among the rest, who
was slain: by a stone thrown from the Townewall upon his head. Boninghausens
head quarter was still, Febr. 23. about Arusperg upon the Roer; where he had
now lain a whole month together: The Imperialists under Eremite and
Osterholtz, now fall in with Boninghausens rangers to plunder the said
Earldom of Waldeck: yea, Eremites people had like to have pillaged the Earls
own Castle of Aeolfe. Others fell upon the Town of Roden: but the subjects
every where beat them from their walled places. But by that time that the 7
Spanish Regiments of Celada, were set over the Rhine at Andernatht, a great
part of them under the leading of Colonel Roveroy, marching North-East-ward
through the country of the Westerwaldt, fell likewise into this Country of
Waldeck; where they pillaged all the Western side and middle of it, for 14 or
16 miles about. So that in this Country about this end of February, lay the
most part of the Leaguers forces: which North and South is contiguous with the
Land of Hessen: Out of which Hessen, there came 3000 or 4000 men, into the
Westerwaldt by the principality of Beylsteim, to confront them. Another part of
these 7. Spanish Regiments, put themselves Southward, into the Bishopric of
Triers, to recover that from the French and Swedish. They took their way to
the river Lh^n or Leau, but the Swedish break down all the Bridges, to hinder
their passage.

The French Governor of Hermansteyne, sent 800 men unto the Swedish Commander
Laenstein, to succor them against the Spanish. And whereas the Swedish (which
were but 200 strong in the town of Limburg) supposed themselves too weak to
maintain the place, they therefore for the time surrendered it up unto the
French, who were better able from Hermansteyn, to maintain and succor it. The
Spaniards coming before this Limburg, fell to assault the bridge, but the
French gave so fierce fire upon them, that they were constrained to retire
again, without doing what they came for: Hence retur^^d they over the Rhine,
into their former quarters in Lawemburg. The other 4 Regiments likewise, that
had done so much mischief in Waldeck, being not able to get further, either
into Hessen or Paderborn: were enforced to retire again toward Cullen: to
conioyne with whom, Boninghausen was said to march Southward from the River of
Roer, clean through the land of Berg, in the beginning of March. About this
time Boninghausen, indeed, came toward them with 1500 men as far as
Wipperford, upon the river Wipper, but he did not yet march up to them.

He being gone from about the Roer; some Hassians of Melanders men then lying
in Hattingen, upon the same river, March 12/22 sally out upon some which he had
left behind him: and slew 50 men, and gate Booty some 200 Horses. Now were 1500
fresh men, together with 2 great fire mortars, and 2 other pieces of Ordnance,
sent from Cullen to the 4 Spanish Regiments: with which they after a while laid
siege unto the town of Sieberg, on the River of Sieg not far from the Rhine:
against Boun, almost. March 19/29 betwixt 3 and 4 in the morning they struck
up the Alarm before the gates of Sieberg: but the Swedes within having notice
of their coming, beat them off again. Other Sweds and Hassians also coming
down upon them, which had made them to retire out of the Earldom of Waldeck:
they were saine to put over the Rhine again, into the Bishopric of Cuilen.

In this mean white was Marshall Kniphausen, at the siege of Hildesheim: but
he leaves his command there, about the beginning of March, or end of February:
and resignes his army: notwithstanding which, the siege is continued by Albert
Vssler Lieftenant of the Horse, and by General Major Stolhansh: Colonel Gonig
also, after a while, was sent with 3000 men to re-enforce the siege of
Hildesheim; and General Major Leslie as the report was, should succeed in the
Felt-Marshals place unto Dodo Kniphausen. Some new Swedish, out of the Marck or
land of Brandenburg, were about mid March, sent against Hildesheim: the
Garrison whereof was so strong, that they were able to sally out still: Turn
we now to the Hessians.

Melander, being in Munsterland in the mean time, sends out the Ritmaster
Motzpach with two troops of 150 Horse, to discover out some loose Companies of
the enemies. He brought word home again, that Colonel Schwartzburger was at
that time enquartered in the small City of Brackenfeld, with five troops of
Horse, and 80 Musketeers. A short resolution was thereupon taken, to assault
him; which was done so succesfully about the 6 of March, that the Hassians slew
one Lieftenant Colonel, one Captain Lieftenant, and some other Officers, with
many horsemen and soldiers. Three cornets, and some prisoners were brought
away, with about 300 horses. The Colonel himself, with the rest of his
Officers and Horsemen fled, but the Hassians had not time enough to pursue
them; contenting themselves to have thus ruinated so great a part of the
Regiment. March the 7 went Melander toward the town of Werne, upon the river
of Lip; where there lay some 60 horse and 200 foot of Boninghausens. Upon the
Heath before the town did the Hassians draw out into battaglia; which the
Boninghausens perceiving, betook themselves to their heels and horses
immediately, and forsook their garrison. After them, was the Count of Hanaw
sent off, by Melander, who overtaking them the same night betwixt Herbaren and
the City of Munster (whither they thought to have escaped) killed Captain
Shenking, with many other Officers and common soldiers: He likewise brought
away 70 prisoners, two Lieftenants, two Ancients, and a good booty.

About the 10 or 12 of March did some 140 Companies of the States of the Low
Countries soldiers, led by Pinsen, come up the Rhine, and landed betwixt
Rhineberg and Orsoy; marching presently into Hammecken betwixt Wesel and
Dinxlaken. This was close at the back of Melander; and gave great offense
(says my Writer) at the Court of Cullen, that the States should give any
assistance unto their enemies the Hassians, which were in the Bishopric of
Munster.

Melander after this, clearing some other towns about the river Lip, went and
besieged Dulmen, a good strong town, about two leagues North of the river
Lip, toward Munster City. This made all the Leaguers and Imperialists to
look about them. Gelehn that was Governor of Munster, he makes toward it;
and so does Boninghausen, and the four Spanish Regiments; all were said at
Cullen, to be a going to the relief of Dulmen. Gelehn marched first of all into
the Bishopric of Osnabrug, to stay for Paul Daube and Eremite with their
forces; that so they might go the stronger against Melander. The Swedish
Commissary General Erich Anderson, having now intelligence about the 13 of
March, how that Gelehn was at that time in the little City of Melle in the
Bishoprik of Osnabrug, with 800 Musketeers, and 400 Horse; and that the troops
of the two other Colonels were enquartered in the villages next unto Melle; he
went out himself with a good strong partee to surprise some of them. He fell
upon those that lay in the village called Rimsel; which he so surrounded, that
but a few of them escaped: above ^30 men (but the most of them Boores) he had
the slaughter of, and obtained 250 horses, with a good booty, Gelehn in the
mean time marched away by a narrow passage; in which the Swedish were not able
to hinder him, for that their foot forces could not get to it time enough. The
Swedish Horse nevertheless, skirmished with him, though they could make
nothing of it. Hence went Gelehn over the mountains toward Werendorff, two
leagues to the East of Munster; whence he prepared to go to the relief of
Dulmen. The four Celadish Regiments began also to march against Melander,
March 22; after they had 10 days of provant bread sent them from the City of
Cullen; the most of which they sold again for half the worth, pretending they
had enough to do to carry their own weapons.

Upon the 20 of March, about the town of Munster, the Hassian Colonel Merode,
surprised the Quarters of the Imperial Colonel Eremite; of which he
dispersed four Companies, and took three Cornets, with the most part of there
horses. The same Letters that write this from Hervorden, affirm withal, that
they then (March 23) received it from all places, how that there had lately
happened an encounter betwixt the Hassians and Imperialists about Munster, and
that the Hassians obtained the victory, and had taken Colonel Osterholtz
prisoner. But of this (say they) we expect the confirmation.

Melander for all these petty victories, perceiving their whole strength to
come upon him, was feign to raise his siege of Dulmen, toward the end of
March, and to retire himself into the Bishopric of Reclinhusen, betwixt the
Lip and the Roer, which had been his former Quarters. Hereupon they write
from Cullen, Apill 3/13, that Boninghausen had by that time taken in the towns
of Paderborne and Rogen again: and that he was marched 16000 strong to the
relief of Hildesheim. The same letters also affirm, that Melander, Stolhansh,
and all the Hassian forces, were conjoined to go against him.

Of the Duke of Newburg
And whereas something has been before spoken concerning the Duke of Newburg,
(a Prince Palatine by birth, whose house of residence is at Dusseldorp at this
time; near unto the place of the wars now last spoken of) it shall not be
from our matter to bring in him into the action. And this will also be the more
pertinent, because of the late mention of these Hollanders, which landed about
Rhineberck, and went to lie in Hammecken.

This Duke of Newburg hoping to obtain Neutrality from the Swedish, was very
secret in his proceedings. It was by some supposed that he had accepted of the
invitation of the Catholic Princes of the German League; who offered him to be
Generalissimo of their forces. And that this title (upon confidence perhaps, he
had in the Duke of Feria then coming into Germany) after he had solemnly
accepted of, yet upon the thriving of the Swedes and Hassians above in Germany,
(and especially, seeing that after the Duke of Feria and his Army were come to
nothing, and that the strong and most important town of V denheim or
Philipsburg in the Palatinate was taken; and the French marched up into Germany)
upon all these considerations, it is believed, the Duke of Newburg fell off
again from his Generalissimo-ship, and sent no soldiers along, either with
the Culleners, or the 7 Spanish Regiments. He was afraid, withal, of the
Hollanders: with whom he had Neutrality for his lands in the Dukedom of Cleve.
And whereas he had suffered some of these new levied Spanish forces, to quarter
in this his Country, he sent an Ambassador unto the States to excuse this, as
no breach of the Neutrality; because though the Spanish nation be enemies to
the Hollanders; yet were not these very Spanish forces, intended against them.
The States answer was said to be to this purpose: That they saw the Duke of
Newburg was a good hospitable Prince: and therefore they will send him some
guests too. Therefore (it is said) that Pinsen went up to his Country, with
forces: who had instructions from the Lords the States, to have an eye unto the
Dukes leuyes and motions. They also sent their Ambassadors to him, to disarme
again: and to give over his levies. For notwithstanding his Neutrality, both
with the Swedes and Hollanders; yet gave he out Patents for the leuying of
12000 men: yea and imposed contributions upon his subjects, proportionable to
the maintenance of those numbers. Yea he had already, in the beginning of
February, made some Musters; and baked provant bread. Thus much also he put
his subjects unto; that such as were not able to pay for others, must serve
personally. The Lords the States thereupon, sent their 2 Ambassadors, (the
Lord of Arnheim, and Ripperoda, as their names are written) about midd
February, to advise him to disband his new forces; and those especially which
he had levied upon Spanish pay. His answer was, That he did it to secure his
Country against the Swedish: to which their replye was, That they would be his
warrant for it. And whereas, all this notwithstanding, the Duke continued his
levies: then did the States send up their Pinsent, in March following, both to
have an eye to him; and to be near at hand with his land of Cleve; upon the
least breach of the Neutrality, or ayding of their enemies. And this, (for the
general) is the present estate of the Duke of Newburg: who arms, and yet does
nothing: who would feign aid his fellow Catholics; pretends to fear the
Swedes; does actually fear to offend the Hollanders: and therefore, (openly)
dares not aid the Catholics.

Of the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Director, Oxenstiern.
And now for the Lord Director Oxenstiern: Of whose preparations for the Diet of
the Lower Circle of Saxony, first: and then for a more general Diet of the
Evangeliacalls to be held at Franckford, afterward: we have before said
something in the title to this Chapter.

This Circle of the Lower Saxonye, is one of the potentest, and most
considerable, of all the Empire. The Princes, Cities, and States, of it, be
most Lutheranes* It contains, the two Archbishopricks of Bremen and
Magdenburg: the five Bishoprics of Hildesheim, Lubeck, Swerin, Ratzenburg, and
Schleswick. Of secular Princes, these be the chiefest. The King of Denmark, for
these lands here, which be of the body of the Empire. The Dukes of
Saxon-Lawenburg, of Brunswick, of Lunenburg, of Mecklenburg; and of Holstein;
with the Counts of Roffayn and Delmenhorst. Of free Cities and Hanse towns,
these five, Hamborow, Mulhausen, Northansen, Goslar, Rostock, and Gottingen:
besides those of the Bishops and Dukes before mentioned. All these be States of
the Circle; and of their Land-dayes or general Diets.

That those of this Circle had before leagued together (excepting the town of
Hamborow) and had raised a joint army for their own defense, which was
commanded by the Duke of Lunenburg; the author of the Swedish Intelligencer
has told you in his second part. The Union, therefore, which the Lord Director
now desired in this Diet, was not a strengthening of their own league only;
but to bring them in to agree with the Crown of Sweden, and the Union of the 4
Circles; made last year in the Diet of Heilbrun: The place of the Diet, was
Halberstat: and the day of the beginning, was January 27, February 6. These
were said to be some of the first Propositions, to be consulted upon.

1. In what manner the Circle might be brought about, to the Heilbrunish
conclusions.

2. How the Army might be raised for their own defense, in case of
necessity, against the enemy.

3. What recompense and thanks should be given to the Crown of Sweden.

4. How there might be a streighter confederation made among the Protestant
Germane Princes; so that they might be able best to defend themselves and
succor one another.

THE CONCLUSION and Articles agreed upon at Halberstat the 17/27 of February,
1634. betwixt the General Ambassador and Rixchancellour of the Crown of
Sweden, Axel Oxenstiern, and the Protestant Princes, Peers, and Cities of the
Circle of Lower Saxony.
BE it known, etc. Whereas the present Princes and States, and also the
Counselors, Ambassadors, and Deputies of such as could not come themselves,
of the Circle of Lower Saxony, being upon weighty and urgent reasons and
motives, here assembled, have carefully and ripely considered, in what great
danger, disorder, and extreme ruinous condition, this famous Circle has been
in for this longtime; and moreover, taken it into especial consideration, how
their adversaries have in their-possession and power diverse chief, strong, and
well fortified towns; and withal do still continue their great leavies and
preparations for war, both within and without this Circle, bending all their
endeavors wholly to conquer this Circle* and to make the same the seat of
war, thereby to hasten the undoubted oppression and ruin of all the
Evangelicall States and Religion; Therefore they could not do otherwise, but to
think and to resolve upon Christian, honest, excusable, and by all Laws, but
especially by the Statutes and Constitutions of the Roman Empire, permitted and
approved means, whereby the said States might recover what hitherto both
against God and the humane Laws, has been taken and with holden from them;
and withal redress and deliver their poor oppressed and distressed subjects
from the miseries and calamities which this great while they suffer: defend and
maintain them from all wrong, unlawful force and power; and thus leave
behind them to the posterity, a true testimony of the dutiful care they have
for the glory of God, for the preservation of the true Religion, and of the
liberty of their Country, and their own protection, and of their friends.

1 And accordingly having in the name of God, well considered and maturely
weighed the first, second, third, and fourth Article of the proposition, they
have found it very necessary, to make before all things among themselves, the
Princes and States of this Circle, a true, faithful, and unfeigned conjunction,
confederation, and union of their Counsels, Minds, and Arms; And therefore as
they are already bound together as united members of the said Circle, according
to the Constitution of the Empire; so now by these presents they do conjoyn and
bind themselves together in the firmest sort, to stand and to keep faithful
together, and none to forsake the other, but willingly to spend together their
blood, goods, and lives; and withal patiently to undergo and suffer together,
what prosperity and adversity the war usually does afford.

2 And calling to mind how the Circle of Upper Saxony (as their nearest
neighbors) has always kept a good correspondence with this Lower Circle,
They do think fit with all possible speed to invite the same to the like
streighter conjunction and union, not doubting, but the Elector, Princes, and
States of the said Circle, will not dislike, but rather approve of this well
intended care, and resolution; and as they hitherto (to their immortal honor)
have done, so hereafter they will assist the Evangelicall affairs, advancing
the same with an unanimous and constant counsel and assistance: and to the
same end shall also the Evangelicall States of the Circle of Westphalia be
invited.

3 Whereas it cannot be denied, what the daily experience more than sufficiently
does witness, namely, that it does much concern all the Evangelicks to join
and frame by their good intelligence, love, and conjunction, one body together;
and withal to direct all their intentions, counsels, actions, and affections,
to one and the same end: Therefore the Princes and States of this Circle of
Lower Saxony, have concluded to enter into a Christian, most just, and
reasonable confederation, alliance, and conjunction with the four confederate
Upper Circles, and withal with the renowned Crown of Sweden, and instead
thereof, with the Chancellor and authorized Ambassador of the said Crown in
Germany, the Lord Axel Oxenstiern, Baron, etc. And they intend to agree and
conclude about the manner and conditions of the said conjunction, at the next
intended meeting or assembly at Franckfort.

Mean while, because the Catholic league and her adherents are not idle, but
still laboring and endeavoring with their uttermost power, to go on in their
warlike preparations, and to advance their bloody designs both within and
without the Empire:

4 Therefore it is agreed and concluded, to prevent and avoid the extreme danger
which hangs (as it were) over our heads, and also to free and assure this
Circle from further peril, that forthwith there shall be raised and brought
together, the eighteen times double Roman army, amounting to the number
expressed in the last Matricular book of the Circles: and to this effect,
assignation, and order is to be given for the leavying both of the Recrewhes
and other Regiments, unto every member of this Circle: And concerning the money,
it is also agreed, that there shall be paid monthly into the common treasure of
the Circle, the contribution contained under the title of the twelve times
double Roman army.

5 In consideration whereof, all other subsidies and contributions, promised and
agreed upon in former particular alliances or treaties, are to cease, all
exemptions be taken away: and also all troops both of horse and foot, now
enquartered in the Dominions of the Princes and States of this Circle,
especially in the Earldomes of Hohn and Reinstein, are to be withdrawn without
any exactions, except the foresaid assigned Regiments of the new intended army;
Item the towns of Muhlhausen and Northausen are to remain in the liberties of
the Circle, and be henceforth freed from the impositions laid upon them by the
orders made at Erfort.

6 The general direction of the said army, having been presented unto the Lord
Rixchancellour: his Excellency both upon the earnest instance of these States,
and out of the affection he bears to the Evangelick affairs, has accepted
thereof: and upon his advice, the most illustrious Prince, George Duke of
Brunswick and Luneburg, has been named and appointed General; and the Right
honorable John Banier Knight, Counselor of the Crown of Sweden, Field
marshall of the said army. Other particularities touching this matter are
referred to the said assembly at Franckfort.

7 And that in the mean time all things might the better speed, a reasonable
equality observed, none more than his neighbor charged or troubled, and all
mis-intelligence removed; there is presently established a Council of this
Circle, carefully to observe, provide, and take order in all that shall be
done, that it do tend and turn to the good of this Circle, and of the common
cause: And particularly, that in all the marchings, passings, and enquarterings
of the forces, the fittest times and places be observed, all misbehaviours and
unrulinesse avoided, and punished; all possible and equitable equality kept:
And therefore no State or member of this Circle shall be bound hereafter to
receive or give passage or quarter to any troops, without express order from
the said Council of the Circle: and whenever any such passing and
enquattering shall be requisite, the States and members of the Circles shall
then first be advertised by the said Council, the better and in good time to
provide all necessary victuals and other things.

8 Particularly it is found most necesary, that henceforth there be not
suffered any superfluity of baggage, nor visctualers horses, the same being
most prejudicious and combersome to the expedition and army, and most harmfull
by reason of the forage: and thefore the Council of the Circle is well to
consider and resolve to reform and use the Lord Directors advice and help in
the same.

9 There are appointed certain towns for the Magasins, and the treasure or
contributions; and withal there has been made a consent and agreement by the
States for the gathering of all needful and requisite provision of victuals,
ammunition, and other things; wherein every one will not fail to do his duty:
and for the receipt thereof there are now named a general Treasurer and other
officers for the said corn, money, and munition.

10 The Law of war, and whatsoever concerns the same, shall not serve against
any amongst the confederates; but whatsoever shall be taken or gotten from the
enemy at common expenses, and by general assistance, not belonging either
properly or by reason of treaty or alliance unto some other State, and where
other Evangelick States have no right nor intrest in, the same shall be
converted to the common good and use of the war.

11 It is also agreed upon and concluded, whatsoever the Evangelick States of
the neighboring Circle of Westphalia, whether they be Cities, Towns, or
Dominions, Castles, or houses of Noblmen, shall pay and be obliged to
contribute unto this war, wholly intended for the common good, and for the
deliverance and defense as well of the said Circle of Westphalia, as of the
States of this Circle of Lower Saxen.

12 Item, whatsoever shall be recovered and gotten, whether by way of
contribution, conquest, or other advantage, from the enemies countries; that
the same shall be brought into the Treasury established for this Circle,
whereby the same may be releeved: as also the quarters that shall be gotten
from the enemies by our said army, shall ease and supply those of this Circle.

13 Whereas unevitable necessity has enforced this Circle to lay siege before
the City of Hildesheim, and to block up both the strong town of Wolfenbuttel,
and other places lying on the Weeser; therefore, according to the sessing and
appointment made of the necessaries thereunto belonging, every Prince and State
of this Circle is to pay his quo^^ or portion with all expedition; and deliver
or send without miss, the said imposition and assignation for the maintenance
of the Regiments employed in the said siege, as long is it shall last.

14 Forasmuch as it will be needful, and does much concern the desirable
general conjunction and alliance of all the Evangelick States (which is to be
hoped and looked for at the said universal assembly at Franckfort) principally
to think and conclude upon a conformity and equallity. Therefore the States of
this Circle of Low-Saxen do esteem it both behoofull and necessary, to
commumunicate, advise, and conclude about all these most important and weighty
matters, that the fittest resolution be taken in whatsoever shall be thought
good to do, to change, to amend in, or to add to this conclusion.

15 And because this arming is by our enemies enforced upon us, and only
undertaken by us for our defense and safety, and especially for the recovering
and reestablishing a Christian, honest, and assured general Peace in the holy
Roman Empire: Therefore upon mature deliberation of the fifth Article of the
Proposition, the Princes, and States, and Deputies here assembled, have been
very glad to understand, that his royal Majesty of Denmark, etc. does intend
to reassume and take again in hand, and go on in his former laudable
interposition, and Treaty of Peace; and for the same reason, it is desired that
both the present Princes and States, as also those that are absent (being
advised by their Ambassadors and Deputies) do carefully consult and
communicate their opinions together about the manner, means, and assurances,
concerning the said desired Peace; that with the more hope and success they
may thereof sufficiently open their minds unto and confer with the rest of
the Evangelick Electors, Princes, States, at the said general assembly at
Franckfort, whereby may appear both their great inclination to a good peace
and quiet, and also their grateful affection toward the Crown of Sweden, for
the great merits and deserts in Evangelick affairs.

16 And forasmuch as the house of Holstein and the City of Lubeck have neither
been invited, nor present by their Deputies at this assembly of this Circle; it
is concluded that the conclusion thereof shall be dispatched unto them by the
present Princes and States, who do not doubt, but that they also will not
refuse to contribute, cooperate, and to pay their due portion (according to the
Constituons) in this most dangerous condition and perilous state of this
Circle.

Lastly, the Princes and States of this Circle of Lower Saxen, do here
unanimously attest and protest, that this their conclusion and resolution,
taken by them upon urgent occasions and reasons, is not meant to offend or
trouble in any wise any Evangelick Elector, Prince, or State; much less to
prejudice or hinder any of them in their Soveraignties, Principalities,
Highness, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Rights, or Justices; and particularly, the
holy Roman Empire, or the fundamental Laws, Rights, Constitutions, or other
wholesome and laudable Conclusions and Orders of the said Empire or Circles, or
the dignity and pre-eminence thereof.

In witness whereof, the present Princes, States, and Ambassadors, and
Deputies, and Counselors of this Circle have signed and confirmed this Act
with their own hands and seals. Given at Halberstat the 17 of February. 1634.

The Diet being ended, with this good conclusion, namely to raise 22000 men,
whereof it was said Lunenburg should be General, and Banier Feltmarshall, the
Lord Director went from thence to Stendel, to meet with the Elector of
Brandenburg, who went from his Court of Berlin on Thursday February 6/16
toward the same Stendel, to treat with the Director. This Elector likewise had
already sent his Chancellor Gotz, with other Deputies, onwards to the future
Diet of Frankfort on the Main. It Is said that the Elector agreed very well to
the Diet of Halberstat and the Lord Director. From thence went the Lord
Director homewards toward Franckfort, treating by the way at Wittemberg, with
the Elector of Saxony; whereupon Arnheim sent some Regiments to join with Duke
Bernard. Thence went he to Erfort, and so to Franckfort; where he was
pompously entertained, March 24: and on our Easter eve, the Diet took his
beginning. There was the Landgrave of Hessen in person; with many other Princes.

OF THE AFFAIRS IN Silesia, and of the Generalissimo (the Duke of Fridland)
his death. CHAP. X.
WHereas it will not be amiss (we hope) to bestow here some few leaves or
lines on the lamentable death of him, who by the actions of his life has
oftentimes afforded us many a discourse. Therefore we will present unto you a
short view, of what past a little before, at, and after, the murder committed
on the person and friends of that great Imperial Generalissimo, the Duke of
Friedland; as things coadherent to what we treat of.

About such time as the Duke of Friedland pretended a peace with the Swedes and
Princes of the Union, (whereof we have spoken in our fifth part) certain
Letters written at Vienna in Austria Sept. the 13 were intercepted, by which
not only the end of the Treaty of peace in Silesia, but other plots, and
counsels of the Popish party were also clearly discovered. The tenor of which
letters was as follows;

P. P. I have privately learned by some principal Officers, that as long as
the chief commanders in Silesia and Saxony are Masters of the field, the
Imperial army is secure from danger. For by our promises and late devised
treaties of peace, we have already gained more then we could have done with
20000 soldiers, which puts us in hope that the blessed Mother Mary, will
both be present with us, and further us in our designs. For the forces of the
Duke of Fridland, by these actions, are not only much increased, but the
Heretics are also so troubled, and divided amongst themselves, that now they
will scarce trust each other, but every man looking to his own private ends,
gapeth after his own peculiar gain, his own particular pacification, like so
many snarling Curres, snapping each at other. The Swedish government, begins
to be so odious to the Heretics, that it is no question but like a ship
without a Pilot, they will quickly split upon the Rocks, and lose themselves.
The Elector of Saxen (as things now stand) will much promote the business. The
King of Denmark will attempt the destruction of Swedland, and persuade the
other Princes to his opinion. The most Christian King shall shortly be sent to
his grave, and his brother advanced to the Kingdom. The Catholic King will
give the Hollanders more then their hands full; his Plate-Fleete returning
yearly laden with treasure from the Indies, and the King of Denmark has
raised the Custom in the Sound, the Elve and Weser, to the great offense of
the people, which yet he intends to continue, and by all means assist our
party.

Into the County of Tyroll, and the Country of Swaben, the Duke of Feria
joining with the Bavarians, shall first take the places near the Danube, and
then break through the Dukedom of Wirtemberg into the Palatinate, to disperse
the scattered handfulls of the enemy there, and deliver the Duke of Lorraine.
The Duke of Fridland with one part of his Army shall invade Thuringia,
Franconia and Hessen, with the other, passing the Oder, the Elue, and the
straights of Upper and Lower Saxony, shutting up the passages after him, shall
bring these parts to his subjection. It is almost incredible, how happily our
counsels go forward, and with what earnestness, our Pensioners weary of the
Swedes, prosecute their intentions. The heavens at last, will take away these
troubles, better things will follow, that after the conquest of the Heretics,
we may render thanks to all the Saints.

N B. The Elector of Cullen, supported with the help of the Spaniards will not
cease, till he have restored the whole Country of Westphalia, with the other
Bishops into their former estate. This is our general peace, one Sheapheard,
one Sheepfold, and one Monarke.

Thus much said those intercepted letters. But how the said last treaty betwixt
the Duke of Fridland and Arnheim did proceed, and how on a sudden it broke off
to the great confusion of the protestants in Silesia, that you have understood
formerly, in the latter end of the fifth part of our German History; Where even
as the unexpected breaking of that false treaty did almost break the neck of
the protestant army and affairs: So the unlooked for taking of Ratisbone brake
the neck of the Duke of Fridlands prosperous proceedings in Pomerania and
Silesia; for the advises that were brought of the loss of the said City, made
Fridland to change his mind, and forced him to speed his march back again
toward Bohemia and Austria, Where Duke Bernhard caused great fear. But the
year being far spent, snow and frost did freeze Fridlands further designs;
Who having, by the sending of 4 Regiments into Passaw, assured that passage and
country to the Emperor, retired himself to Pilsen; Where, instead to assault
others, he was assaulted (and almost carried away) by the gout.

Notwithstanding this sickness, was Friedland careful enough to give and
receive dispatches, and to advance the Emperors service. About the beginning
of January last, the troops which he had left under Gallas and Shafgotz in
Silesia, took the town of Wartenberg upon composition, but contrary to the
same, they took and detained all the Swedish garrison prisoners there. Some
few days after they also took by assault the town of Namslaw. But least the
Swedes might be blamed of unthankefulnesse, in not requitting those
new-yeeres-gifts, which the Imperialists in the said two places had bestowed on
them: Therefore Colonel Transtorf, commanding the Swedish troops that lay in
St. John and Sanda, sent some troops of Dragoons and other horse toward
Zedlitz (about 3 leagues from thence) there to visit the enquartered
Imperialists under Colonel Hesenburg. This Colonel being advertised of the
Swedes coming, drew his troops together, and with some 4 companies came out
or the town into the field, where meeting too soon with the said Sweds, he
was in the beginning of the skirmish slain by a bullet, whereby the Sweds got
the advantage, that they put the Imperialists to flight, and slew of them about
200. The like new-yeers-gift did the Swedish Garrisons of Oppeln and Brieg
bestow on the Imperial troops that lay enquartered in the places near about
them; Whereof in the space of 14 days by diverse visits they overthrew 14
companies. This befell betwixt the tenth and five and twentieth of January last.

And about the very same time, Friedland, who hitherto had always played both
the Fox and the Wolf, well to serve his Master, could not escape the trap,
which envy and slander had laid for him at the Imperial Court.

But because the causes of his disgrace and death, by several relations, are
made as different, as diverse are the affections of the relators: We therefore
(without any partiality) will here impart unto you some of the one and the
other party. The first taken out of Mercurius Gallobelgicus, lately come over,
says thus.

Friedlands Story and death.
THe Duke of Fried. hitherto with all care and faithfulness had both opposed
the Swedes and to his power promoted the welfare of the house of Austria, yet
could not avoid the informations, and accusations of some malicious persons,
for some there were, The Duke of Friedland is suspectea of treason.
who charging him with suspicion of treason, as plotting the destruction of the
Austrian family, not only persuaded, but also prevailed with Caesar to remove
him from his office and to appoint another General; all which was to him
discovered not unseasonably. Therefore having called his Colonels, and prime
Officers together at Pilsen the 22 of Ian. he showed them, that now he would
relinquish his place of General, not concealing the reasons which moved him
thereunto. But at the earned request of the Commanders, and Officers he altered
his mind, adiourning the Abdication of his Office, until he got means to
satisfy his soldiers, they again by writing assuring him, that they would
still attend him with all faith and diligence, that they would omit nothing,
which should be for the benefit and safety of himself and the army* that if
need required, they would spend their blood and lives for him, and punish them
as tra^tors, and perjured persons, which should forsake his party, and do
otherwise.

The relation of which proceedings being brought to the Emperor by the
adversaries of the Duke, The Emperor absolveth his soldiers from the oath of
fealty to the Duke of Friedland
who left out no argument of exaggeration to make the thing more odious, He
presently by a proclamation affixed to the Gates and sent to the principal
Officers of the army, absolved the soldiers from the oath of fealty made to
the Duke, and commanded them to yield their obedience to Mathias Gallas the
Lieftenant* General, till there was another General ordained, under penalty
of an heavy punishment to them, which should do otherwise, proclaiming also a
pardon to all them which at Pilsen had obliged themselves to the Duke if they
would return to his obedience, two only excepted, whom he had understood, to
have been principal agents in this rebellion.

A Proclamation against the D.
The former Proclamation against the Duke was seconded by another, the purport
and effect whereof, was as follows: That he doubted not but that it was
sufficiently known to all the Colonels, Officers, and all the soldiers of
what rank soever, to what honors and dignities he had advanced, what benefits
he had done to the Duke of Fried. and contrariwise, what pernicious
conspiracies the 12 of Ian. the Duke had made against the house of Austria,
persuading the principal Commanders of the army, to subscribe to the
combination. But now since this confederation was of no effect, ipso jure, he
by this present proclamation did nullify and annihilate it. And that whereas
he certainly understood, that the Duke gaping after his Empire, and Kingdoms,
did traitorously devise the destruction of him and his family, and strive to
draw the Officer* of the army to his party, he was now resolved to cashiere him
of his Office, and did therefore will and command, that the whole army, should
give their obedience, to Matthias Gallas, the Count Altringer, Ballhasar de
Marradas, Francis Octavius Piccolomini, Rodolph Collorede, and their under
Officers, and obey their commands.

By this Proclamation thus published, the Duke easily perceived the danger
which hung over his head; for avoiding whereof, he resolved to join with the
Evangeliacall party, and not only undertaketh a treaty with Francis Albert
Duke of Saxon Lawenburg, the Saxon Field-Marshall, but sends his Chancellor
also to Christian Marquess of Culmbach, who upon admittance spoke as follows.

The D. determines to take part with the Evangelicall party.
Although the Duke of Fried. as it is evidently known to all men, neglecting
his own profits and private occasions, only endeavors to settle a peace in
Germany and to put a period to the late bloody wars, he has now to his great
grief understood, that (his faithful offices hitherto done, altogether
unrespected) he is enviously accused, and with cunning calumniations traduced
in the Emperors Court, that his soldiers are enjoined no longer to be under
his command, and that Gallas is deputed to his office and charge; who with his
accomplices, labor to take the Duke prisoner, and bring him captive to Vienna;.
Yet nevertheless he not desisting from his first determination of
establishing a peace, would desire the Marquess first to nominate the time,
and place, when, and whither he himself might come with a small retinew, for
conference, and afterward if he would send any man to Egra, whither he knows,
Arnheim and Duke Bernard would both come, he would further declare his
intention, and then, when he had spoke with the Marquess himself; he would
give a meeting to the Chancellor of Sweden and the French Ambassador, with
whom he would consult for what was to be done afterward.

A little time before Francis Albert Duke of Saxen Lawenburg, at Ratubon had
informed Duke Bernard of Fridlands intention, desiring him without delay to
post to Egra, Fridland himself also by his letters, and some Curriers, urging
him to make haste thither with all his army But Duke Bernard not thinking it
wisdom to believe him easily, who had formerly deluded others with fair
pretenses; though his forces were ready, yet still provided against all
casualties, and made no expedition thither, until the unexpected murder of the
Duke and his followers was openly known and divulged.

The Duke of Fried. and some of his followers slain at Egra.
For when the Duke of Fridland Febr* 14, with the Camp marshall Illow, the
Counts Tersky, and Kinsky, Butler a Colonel, Newman a Captain of horse, and
other officers, guarded with 5 troops of horse, and 200 foot, were come from
Pilsen to Egra, John, Gordon Lieftenant to Count Tersky, then Governor there,
and Walter Lesley Captain of the Court of Guard, both Scots, and Butler, who
was afterward of their combination conspired to murder them, because they
understood they would turn to the Evangelicall party, which they thus
effected, Febr. 15. The conspirators invited Illow the Fieldmarshall, the two
Counts Tersky and Kinsky Newman Captain of horse, and 3 other officers to
supper in the Castle, who suspecting no evil came accordingly. But supper
being done, at the time appointed by the conspirators, betwixt nine and ten of
the clock, the number of the Guard, both in the Castle and Market place was
augmented with a new supply, and the upper gate of the Castle being opened (no
man observing it) there entered suddenly a company of Irish Muskeriers,
Dragoons, which served under Butler, who presently enter into the chamber where
the guests were still suspecting nothing, and with their swords drawn, cry out,
Who is for Caesar, who? Gordon, Butler, and Lesley return this acclamation for
an answer, Long live Ferdinand, long live Ferd. and drawing their swords, stand
aside. This done, the Irish fall upon the two Counts, Tersky and Kinsky, Illow,
Newman, and the rest, so impetuously, that Illow and Kinsky were instantly
slain: Tersky who was reputed to be fortified by enchantment, as careful of
his safety, flies into another room, but there was shot, and dyed; Newman
deadly wounded, crawled into a Storehouse, and there fell down dead. The
attendants of the slain were purposely carried to another room under color of
supper, which made this massacre the more casie for the conspirators, of whom
Gordon and Butler were chief.

When these murders were done in the Castle, Gordon had charge of the Castle,
and Lesley of the Court of Guard. But Butler with the Captain of his
Musketeers, and twelve Harquebushers, and many other which followed him, set
upon the Dukes lodging, where breaking up the gates, and wounding the
Cup Bearer in the shoulder, as he was bringing his Lord a Bowl of Beer, the
Captain with his partizan runs the Duke through standing in his shirt at the
table, who not speaking one word, fell down and gave up the ghost. Thence the
Dukes corpse was carried into the Castle, and they which were slain, were given
to be pillaged by the soldiers, who left them not so much as a ragge besides
their shirts. A wonderful tempest without ceasing, lasted all the time of the
massacre, the very firmament (it seemed) detesting such execrable villainies.

And yet this Butchery was not intended to be done at Egra only, but at Prague
also many of the principal Officers who adhered to the partee of Fridland,
were slain, and many captivated. Then Piccolomineus having gotten into Pilsen
by a wile, having slain the Captain of the Garrison, because he favored the
Duke of Fridland, took in the town, and subjected it to Caesar.

Thus much relates Mercurius of this matter: now we will give you what soon
after this execution was published thereof at Brussels, whereof the title is:

The later, truer, and more particular report of what past from the 14 of
Febru. until the end of that month, concerning the rebellious and traitrous
Albert of Walstein, late Duke of Fridland etc. FREIDLANDS STORY AND DEATH.
IN the year 1634. in the month of February, Fridland being at Pilsen, sent
order to all the Imperial Forces to be present on the 22 of that month with
Arms and Baggage on the White hill near to the City of Prague, and there he
intended to make them to take an oath, and swear to acknowledge none but him,
and afterward to make his entry into Prague, and be crowned King of Bohemia,
and whilst he should be busied in making this assembly of forces, and his
rendezvous, the enemy should enter into the Kingdom of Bohemia, there to join
with him, and effect his designs. And believing that the said soldiers were
already at the appointed place, to wit, on the White Hill, he sent the Count of
Tertzki his brother in law from Pilsen, to prepare all necessaries; take
possession of the said City of Prague, and to take the charge over the
Garrison, which consisted of two Regiments of infantery: Tertzki being arrived
three leagues near the town, understood the Emperors soldiers had order not
to suffer any to enter, nor to receive any body, or command from Freidland, and
that they had already sworn to his Imperial Majesty; for which cause he
returned toward Pilsen, and advertised Freidland thereof, who answered him: Our
designs are discovered, since neither Gallas, Altringer, nor Piccolomini come,
and that the Regiment of Deodati marches toward Budweis. And therefore he
commanded those Regiments which were about Pilsen, and on the borders of the
enemy, to wit, the Regiment (of a thousand dragons) of Colonel Butler an Irish
man, the Regiment of Cavalry, of the Count of Tertzki of 600 horse, and the
Regiment of Iules Henry of Saxen, 600. horse more, leaving the said Dukes
Regiment of infantery in the said City of Pilsen; and caused the Lieutenant
Colonel to swear that he would never deliver the place without his order,
and that the Artillery consisting of 70 Pieces, with all the ammunition, should
be ready to march whither, and when it should be commanded. And in case the
Imperialists should come and besiege the said Town of Pilsen, that he should
set the ammunition on fire, and nail the Ordnance, and then render themselves
upon composition. Thus Freidland took his journey toward Egra, with the
aforesaid Regiments, where his two best Regime^ts of foot did expect him; the
one of the said Tertzki, whose Lieutenant Colonel Gordon a Scotchman, was
lodged in the said town; the other of Colonel Preiner, without the town.

Mean while Colonel Butler considering apart with himself how he might do
a worthy service (with the Officers of his Irish Nation, on whom he most
trusted) both to God, to the Emperor, and to the house of Austria and a
public good to all Christendom, to take the said Fridland prisoner, and so to
send him to his Imperial Majesty: on the other side considering the great
difficulty of such an attempt, because he trusted no other Nations, he did
delay his enterprise until he came to Egra, where he imparted the business to
the said Gordon, Governor of that Town, who was his great friend; as likewise
Gordons Sergeant Major named Walter Lesley, foreseeing all the peril which
threatened them, for as much as Fridland himself had formerly informed them,
that the King of Hungary would go into the field against the Emperor his
Fathers will, with intention to take the chiefest forces of the Army; and that
therefore he was resolved to assist the Emperor; that he had yet ready money
enough to leavy 30000 men; and likewise that he expected the enemy, for his
succors, praying them to remain with him, and that he would largely
recompense them, showing them thereupon a letter of Frances Albert Duke of
Saxen. They having heard him thus discover his treason, secretly met together
and joining with them the Sergeant Major of the said Butler named Robert
Giraldine, an Irishman, and these Captains Walter d' Ebrox, Dionysius
Macdaniel, Edmund Bierk, and Captain John Braun, who had order to keep and
watch the streets, and let none go out of doors, whilst they made the
premeditated execution, having first sworn to one another, to perform it or
to dye, choosing amongst them a Sergeant Major and two Captains; to wit, the
said Captain Robert Geraldin, with order to go with a certain number of Irish
soldiers, to the house of Illo, and Captain Dionysio Mac-daniel with twenty
Irish men toward Fridlands; Captained d' Ebrox with other twenty Irish
soldiers, to Tertzki's and Kinsky's lodging, who were lodged together, not
trusting any other Nation, nor the soldiers of the Garrison. Afterward
considering that so many separations might occasion some uproare or tumult in
the City, they deliberated to invite to supper into the Castle these four,
Tertzky, Kinsky, Illo, and Tertzki his Captain of the Guard, who heretofore
had bin Secretary and Chancellor to Fridland, named Newma^. And as indeed they
were invited by Sergeant Major Lesly in the name of Coll. Butler, and of
Lieutenant Colonel Gordon, so they all came in a Coach, and being at Table at
the dessert, those three Captains entered, who had undertaken that execution,
causing the said Irish soldiers to come also in, two and two, three and three,
and in greater number together, till they came to the number of forty, as well
Officers, as soldiers, and amongst them was one Spanyard, passing through the
Guard of the German soldiers, who was at the Castle gate, trusting the Dutch
Lieutenant would let them enter without contradiction, who notwithstanding knew
not to what end they came, because they had all their Arms and Muskets hid.
Some amongst them went to keep the second gate, and others in diverse places to
make themselves masters of the Castle, if there should arise any noise or
tumult at the first gate. Sergeant Major Geraldine took eight soldiers,
Captain d' Ebrox 12, and Dionysio twenty to keep the said first gate (if it
should be need) and presently to kill the first that would go forth. Then the
said Sergeant Major entered with his men at the one door (for there were two
doors to go into the great room) and likewise Captain d' Ebrox came with
his twelve soldiers into the other; When the said Sergeant Major standing with
his men under his door, said, Live Ferdinand; and the said Captain answered,
And the whole house of Austria: whereat they at table being troubled, arose and
went to take their swords, but Butler and the others who supped with them did
kill Kinsky and Newman; and Illo thinking to defend himself, was also presently
slain. Tertzky fled toward the door, where he met Captain Dionysio with his
men, of who^ craving quarter, the Captain asked him the word, and he answered
Fridlands watchword, which was, S. James: To which the Captain replying, that
for the present that word availed nothing, but only that of Austria, whereupon
he with his men environed and killed him. Some servants of the dead men would
have defended their Masters, and came with naked swords and hurt two soldiers,
but two of the said servants were presently killed; whereupon all was appeased
in the Castle.

After this execution finished, Sergeant Major Lesley went toward the gate of
the city to let in 100 drago^s, with two Irish Captains, and a Scotch one,
whom he trusted, to keep the streets, and not to suffer any soldier or Burger
to go out of their houses: That being done he went toward the Guard on the
Market place, and there gave order that they should not move out of their
places, although they heard some noise, and he remained with them, keeping
watch, being of the same Regiment, until Fridlands execution was finished, who
was not lodged in the said Castle. To his execution went Colonel Butler,
Sergeant Major Geraldino, Captain Debrox, and Captain Dionisio. Lieutenant
Coll Gordon, keeping watch in the Castle, until they returned from the
execution. And going toward Fridlands house they heard a great noise of the
cries and lame^tasions of Tertzky and Kinsky their Ladies, who had already
understood the cause of their grief from a Page. Which the said Colonel
hearing, presently commanded the Captains to hasten and finish the service of
his Imperial Majesty, and divided them; appointing Captain Dionysius to go
to the Market place to Sergeant Major Lesley, and to cause him in the Colonels
name to command the rest of the dragons to go watch and guard the streets, for
it was time; and to bid Captain Debrox to go to Fridlands quarter, who was up
and at the window, hearing the cries and lamentations of the said two women:
and because the house had diverse doors, Colonel Butler commanded Giraldine to
place about it Guards of his Nation, that no body should get out. The said
captain Debrox going up, the Colonel staid below, and captain Dionysio
returning from the market, was by Colonel Butler presently commanded to go up
to assist at Fridlands execution, and take heed that he did not escape, because
the chamber had two doors. Being gone up, he found both the chamber open, and
that captain Debrox had already fulfilled the execution, having heard the body
of the Traitor Fridland fall to the ground with a great noise, who had been
killed with a Partisan, in this manner. When Debrox went up he found two
servants of his chamber, whereof the one asked him what he would have? saying
further, that his Highness rested, and that they must not make a noise: whom a
soldier presently thrust through, which caused all the other servants to fly
away, leaving his Highness al alone. The said Captain advancing to the door
of the chamber, which was locked, with his foot quickly opened it, and found
Fridland right against the door in his shirt; to whom he said, Thou Traitor to
the Emperor, now thou must dye: to which he answered nothing, and was thrust
through with a broad and two edged Partisan; and as he was falling an Irish
soldier, as tall as a Giant, named Nielcarf, embraced the body, to cast it
down out of the window, but the Captains who were present, would not consent
thereto, but having wrapped it up in a Table Carpet, caused it to be brought
down and laid into a Cart, and carried to the Castle. Afterward the Colonel
went to the Chancery, where he seized upon all the Papers, leading a good Guard
there; as likewise in Illo's lodging, and in the Fridlands Chamberlaines
lodging, (the Baron of Shaffenberg, brother to him that is prisoner at Vienna.)
At last they all retired, after this execution, into the Castle again, where
Lieutenant Colonel Gordon was with his Guard: And to the^ came also Sergeant
Major Lesley, who during Fridlands execution, kept watch in the Market place.
This was done on Saturday the 25 of February this present year, 1634.

The next day being Shrove-Sunday, the gates of the Town of Egra remained
locked up, not any one being suffered to go out; and the aforesaid Officers
held counsel what would be most convenient to be done, because they trusted
not the soldiers of the Garrison, nor the Burgers: at last they resolved to
bring in one hundred Musketeers more, with the Officers of Colonel Preiner's
Regiment, who stayed all the said day in Arms, with bullets in their mouths,
and burning matches.

The 27 of February (being Monday) Colonel Butler, accompanied by some others,
went out of the Town, and conferred with the Officers of the Count of Tertzki
his horse Regiment, telling them what was past, and asking them whether they
would be faithful soldiers to his Imp: Majesty: who answered unanimously,
that they would live and dye in his service. That being done, he went with
fifty horse, as well of his own, as of the said Regiment, to descry somewhat
of the enemy about Egra, on the Frontiers, but he returned the same day,
without learning any thing.

The 28 and last of February went out a troop of Dragons, and of Cavallery,
with a Lieutenant, to hear news of Duke Frances Albert of Saxen, or some
other enemy: and having met with the said Duke, a League from Egra, with his
train of servants and two Trumpets, thinking to come (as he had done
formerly) with all assurance to Fridland his great friend, of whose death he
knew as yet nothing. The said Lieutenant asked him by the way, What would you
say, sir, if Butler should sent you prisoner to the Emperor? Whereat he did
but laugh being ignorant of the business, but they seazing on his person,
visited his Coach, searching for papers, where they found some, with letters of
importance, which they delivered to the said Colonel Butler. And the said Duke
seeing them remove* his baggag told them, they should at least leave him some
linen to change himlelfe. After this visit was done they brought him to Egra,
and put him into the hands of the said Butler, who had already sent with
letters to his Imperial Majesty Captain Dionysio, particularly advising him
of the execution performed on the persons of Fridla^d, and his Accomplices; but
seeing that they had brought him the said Prisoner, He sent to recall the said
Captain Dionysio* (who was not gone very far off) that he might jointly carry
news to his said Imperial Majesty of the taking of the person of the said
Duke Frances Albert of Saxen, field Marshall General of the Army of the
Prince Elector of Saxen, who plotted the Treason with the said Fridland.
Captain Dionysio being come, Colonel Butler who was at table with the Prisoner
Duke said, You may tell his Imperial Majesty, that we have here the bird in
the Cage, that you likewise have seen him with your eyes, that for fear of
delay I did not write of that particular, and that I send him the letters which
you have.

The names of the Persons who have been Conductors and Actors in this
execution.
Colonel Butler. Lieutenant Collenel Gordon, Governor of Egra. Sergeant Major
Walther Lesley. Sergeant Major Robert Geraldino. Captain Walther Debrox, who
killed with his hand Fridland. Captain Dionysio Macdoniel. Captain Edmund
Bierke. Captain John Braun.
Names of them that were killed.
Fridland. Tertzki. Kinsky. Illo. Newman. Two of the Colonels servants. One of
Fridlands servants.
Thus having given you a double relation of that renowned Generalissimo the
Duke of Fridlands death, we leave him and pass over to those with whom he was
said to have too familiarly treated.

CHAP. XI. Of the Elector of Saxony and Arnheim.
Saxonies constancy to the Protestants.
ABout November 16.26. does the Elector send his Lieutenant General Arnheim
out of Misnia, toward Franckford on the Order, in the edges of Silesia and
Brandenburg; which Wallstein had lately recovered.

Thereabouts does Arnheim defeat 300. Horse, and blocks up the City.

November 15. does Buckersdorff, who is general for the Elector of
Brandenburg, recover Coppenick in Brandenburg-land. The Counts of Tertzki, and
of Mansfeld, are within Franckford on the Oder; a company of whose, being now
abroad, are defeated by the Saxish Colonel Forchawer, with 50. of his
Horsemen. Arnheim now had 11. Regiments of Horse, and 9. of Foot, with him;
but nothing near complete ones. November 22, old style, he comes in sight of
Franckford; and about the 26. he began to besiege it: To help forward which,
he had 16. Canons sent him from Custrine, by the Elector of Brandenburg.

Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, came likewise with some forces to help Arnheim;
About November 31. the Brandenburgish supplies being at hand too. Moreover
there were 3000. new Swedes arrived at Wolgast in Pomerland, which came out of
Prussia; 3500. more, being then at Piritz in the said Pomerania. Arnheim
sending half of his Army to take in the strong City of Landsburg, toward
Polonia, with the rest, intends the siege of Franckford. He sets up 1000.
burning marches upon sticks in the night season: Which the besieged taking for
men, shot all night at. In the mean time, Arnheim on another side, casts up
two Batteries; Sommoned the Town the next day; and is refused: Thereupon he
passes the Oder with two regiments of Horse, to the Towne-bridge, which he
hoped to master: But the Imperialists sallying out, put him to the repulse. He
perceiving the Garrison to be very strong, and the frost so hard, that his
people could not work the earth for Trenches or Approaches: He was feign to
raise his siege upon the 10th. of December.

Those that were sent against Landsburg, did only beat a conuoy going into
the Town: And perceiving the same inconveniences which Arnheim did, they could
not besiege it. Arnheim hereupon, goes to the Elector of Brandenburg, to get
order for Winter quarters for the Army, intending after the frost, to go
against Franckford the second time.

About Christmas, part of Arnheims Army went homewards toward Dresden, The
rest being quartered in the Towns of Brandenburg.

In the end of December, does General Mayor Lesle send Colonel Crakew out of
Berlin with 500. Horse, and 2. Foot Regiments; who cut in pieces 10. foot
Companies, and one Cornet of Imperialists, coming from Landssperg toward
Franckford, and took all their Ensigns from them.

And now does the Elector of Brandenburg, and the two Dukes of Mecklenburg,
begin to make new leuies; being sure of the Elector of Sazonies constancy.

The General Bannier likewise, has a great strength of Swedish in the lands
of Pomerland and Mecklenburg.

Arnheims Army being now in the Winter Quarters, part in their own Countries,
and part in mark of Brandenburg; Arnheims self goes also home to Dresden: For
thither unto his master the Elector of Saxony, had the Emperor now sent about
the propositions of a peace. These having some time been consulted of at
Dresden: Arnheim goes to Berlin, the Elector of Brandenburgs Court, with them,
and his masters resolution: Where he arrived January 29. and was lodged in the
Palace, The speech then went at Berlin, how that Arnheim would deliver up his
charge, and return with his forces yet left in those parts, unto Misnia.

There was a resolution now it seems, that the Elector of Brandenburg should
go to the City of Brandenburg, and Arnheim with him; whilst the Elector was
to go to Stendel to the Lord Director Oxenstiern. And he, it appears, by
hastening or the resolution of the diet of the lower Saxony, more then half
spoiled the two Electors, further listening to a peace oF treaty:
Notwithstanding the Duke Julius of Saxon Lawenburg, had frequent excess to his
Cosen of Saxony, with new propositions from the Emperor.

In this mean time (that is, about January 22.) did there more Imperial
forces thrust themselves into Franckford on the Oder: Yea 600. Crabats more,
arrived at the Neighbor little City of Cotbus, which like Crabats indeed,
disturbed all the Country with their pillages.

There was believed to be some wants in Franckford on the Oder; but their long
keeping of the place, showed it to be otherwise. In the beginning of February,
those Swedish forces which at present were in the Duke-dome of Pomer-land,
under General Banniers Charge, part of which were but lately come over out of
Sweden, begun to move: A list also was given out of their numbers; And of the
several places they were to be distributed into, for their Winter Quarters,

A List of the Forces that came out of Pomerania, in 60. Companies strong, and
shall be enquartered in these Countries.
IN the Earldom of Querfurt, two Companies. In the upper and lower Diocese,
three Companies. In the Principality of Seaburg, three Companies of
Findlanders. In the Principality of Gruppenhagen, eight Companies of West
Goths. In the City of Brunswick, four Companies of Axlandes. In Eysfield, two
Companies. In Northausen, two companies of Suddermanlanders. In the Dukedom of
Weymar six Companies. In the Dukedom of Altemburg, two Companies of Wallds.
In Eysenach, Gotha, and the Earldom of Hohenstein, some Companies of
Plestners. In the upper and lower Earldom of Schwartzburg, five Companies.
They now also write from Leipsich, that the whole Saxon army was now again,
February 8, enquartred about the Marcks of Brandenburg; but they staid not long
there: By this time was the Colonel Bem (and du Verge with him) tried by a
Martial Court at Setin in Pomerland, where it was believed they would hardly
get off with their lives; for having surrendered up Landsberg last year unto
the Wallsteiners, before there was necessity.

By mid February, are the Saxon forces recalled out of the land of Brandenburg;
and the Wars in those parts, against Franckford and Landsberg, were to be
pursued by Lieutenant General Banniers, and Sergeant Mayor General Leslye.

And now (as they write from Berlin) do the Swedish forces, together with the
Pomerish, and the Mecklenburgish trained bands march strongly against
Landsburg; this is much stronger then Franckford; although there were said to
be but 300. men in it, and 1700. in Franckford on the Oder.

In the end of February were 8. Field-peeces which stood in the Castle of
Berlin, and belonged to the Elector of Saxony, sent homewards toward Misnia,
together with the rest of the Saxon Forces; so that Arnheim had now no more to
do in the land of Brandenburg.

After Wallsteins murder, the Emperor has better hopes of making peace (or of
doing himself good with the show of it) with the Elector of Saxony: About the
13th. of March, therefore comes Duke Frances Julius of Saxon Lawenburg, from
Vienna unto Dresden.

For all this treaty of peace, the Wars went forward in the mean time.

On Saturday, March 8.18. a Partee of the Elector of Saxonies own life
regiment, fell into Bohemia, out of which they returned the Wednesday after.
They had killed 70. Imperialists there, and brought away a booty of 500. head
of Cattle: And still (say these Letters of Dresden) do our leuies go on very
strongly. For by this time were the Ambassadors as the lower Circle of Saxony,
arrived at Dresden, with the resolutions of the Diet at Halberstat: They passed
through Leipsich March 6.16. and there coming was seasonable enough, to
prepossesse the Elector of Saxony against the Spanish Ambassador Paradies, who
was to come to him from Vienna; for whose admission (it appears) Duke Francis
Julius of Lauenburg had made way for; And now the talk of Peace began to be
something turned: The noise now was of Arnheims preparing to send 7. or eight
Regiments to Duke Bernard Weymar, and of his own personal going to speak
with him.

They write from Berlin at this time, that 12000. new Swedes and Finlanders
were now arrived in the Dukedomes of Mecklinburg and Pomerland, and that more
were expected daily.

The news of this, too, would something drown the whisperinges of the peace
treaties.

Add to this that the Elector of Brandenburg now made some great preparations
to go himself into the field: The town of Landsberg was by this time so
straightned, that by the 10. of March it began to hearken to a Treaty: But it
appears that then it came to nothing, it held out so long after; and whereas
there was a conuoy of Men and Victuals, now a coming to the relief thereof;
it was beaten by Lieutenant Colonel Vorhawer, about March, 13.23. who took
40. of the Conuoy Prisoners, and obtained much provisions: About this time do
8. Companies of fresh Soldiers put themselves into Franckford on the Oder;
whom the Country supposed to be of the factious of the Wallsteiners, for that
they attempted nothing by their sallyes against the Country people: But now
was this Town resolved upon to be blocked up too: 800. Swedes which then lay
on the other side of Spandaw, were to be employed against it. To whom were 12.
Companies of the Brandenburg new levied Fores to be conjoined.

Of the Saxon forces some were now sending toward Egra in Bohemia, where
Wallstein had been murdered: And othersome were marching toward Duke Bernard.

Those within Franckford now build Forts and works in the Vineyards; and
against Landsberg, is Verhawer employed to block it up, near Liar, which till
this time had not been done, but only by watching it with Partees: For this
service were the Ordnance and Ammunition shipped up the River Oder, General
Bannier, about mid March sends Colonel King with 3. regiments, to hasten on
the siege of Hildesheim in the land of Brunswick, after that Kniphausen had
given over his charge there; these were some of those Swedes, that were come as
far as Spandaw, and were to go for Landsberg or Franckford, but they turn
the other way in all haste, being accompanied with those Horsemen that lay in
Brandenburg, Britzen, Bolitz, and Sarmond.

Upon the Tuesday March 11.21. some of the Swedish then lying in Pomer-land,
set forward toward Landsburg: Marching first to Stargard and Arnswald, where
the Earl Casper of Eberstein, with Colonel Proke, then kept their Rendezuous;
within a day or two, did the General Mayor Lesle follow them to carried a
strong Bridge of Cables and Shippe-reapes along with him, he was to besiege
Landsberg; which town if it could be taken, Franckford could not long hold
out, and then should the Swedish of all those parts of Brandenburgland, go
into Silesia.

Of the Saxon business, they write from Dresden; That Arnheim bad spoken with
Duke Bernard; and before the end of March, was returned again to Dresden: That
there were 12000. Saxon forces (all strong and lusty bodies) there inquartered
about Leispsich, and those places of Misnia; and that all the Saxon forces,
were to keep their general Rendezuous at Targau, upon the 10th. of April,(of
which they reported) that some should go to Duke Bernard, some be sent toward
Lusatia, and others stay upon the frontiers for the safeguard of the Country.

At Dresden, they daily consulted concerning the going on of the Wars: Where
they made ready great store of Grenades.

A 1000. Horse, with 3000. Musquitires, were in the end of March, sent toward
Chemnitz, who as it was thought should also go to take in Bautzen* in Alsatia.

They write out of the Country likewise, that the Imperial Ambassador, Duke
Francis Julius of Lawenburg, received but a slight answer, concerning his
hopes in peace making.

In Brandenburg-land, toward this end of March: these were the Actions. About
the twentieth of the Month, did young Colonel Buckersdorff, surprise 200.
Imperialistes, in the little City of Seklen, whom he put unto the sword. In
another Markett Town, the same day, he surprised Colonel Wins, taking 700.
horses from him, and put the Soldiers to the sword. Wins himself escaped
narrowly. And thus in one day, did young Buckersdorff make prize of about 300.
horses.

By this time, were the Swedish gotten so near to the walls of Landsberg,
that the besieged offered to come to an agreement; But whereas they desired 4.
days Cessation of Arms upon it, the respite was denied them.

Where upon, after an hour and halfes parliance, the besieged, began again to
discharge their Ordnance; but the besigers were gotten so near them, that
their great shot could do them little injury.

And thus they write out of the neighbor Country, of Newmarke.

March 23. or April the 2, new style. and again April 7.17. It is certain,
that Landsberg, is taken by the general Major Lesle, to whom the Ditector
has given comaund over Kniphausens Army: but he will not take it upon him
till he has first spoken with the said Rix Chancellor, to know in what case
the Army stands.

The Swedes are now going against Franckford on he Oder: And as soon as that
is taken, all the Swedish shall march into Silesia.

FINIS.

