THE SVVEDISH DISCIPLINE, RELIGIOUS, CIVIL, And MILITARY. THE FIRST PART, IN
THE Forms of Prayer daily used by those of the Swedish Nation, in the Army.
Together with two several Prayers, uttered upon several occasions by that
pious King; which GOD immediately heard and granted him. The second Part, in
the excellent Orders observed in the Army; whereof we here present you the
Articles, by which the Soldiery is governed. The third Part, in the Kings
Commission for levying of a Regiment: his Order for drawing up of a private
Company; of a Squadron; and of a Brigade: with his manner of Enquartering a
private Regiment; and of an Army Royal: unto which is added the best manner of
building and fortifying of a Town of War. All, in five several Figures
expressed and explained. Last of all, Is the famous Battle of Leipsich, in two
fair Figures also set forth: and now this second time more fully and
particularly described.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for Nath: Butter and Nich: Bourne. 1632.

TO ALL GENTLEMEN PRACTITIONERS AND Lovers of Arms, in all the Cities and
Corporations of the Kingdom.
GENTLEMEN;
THat which I here present you with, is a Military Argument: the fitter for
Military men therefore: whose Exercise and Delight, is in the fair practice of
peaceable Arms. This is my best hope, that it may be favorably accepted, for
that my Theme and my Patrones are so well suited. So should every thing be,
about a Soldier. I do it not upon any vain thoughts or presumption, to teach
you new ways: a many of you, and your Leaders especially, are so curious I
know, and so skillful, at least, in the Theory of a Soldier, that you need not
my Book for a Master in this kind. It Is meant for your Recreation: to put you
into Discourse now and then: and to testify withal, mine own private
respects both to your Persons, and of your Practice; that's the purpose of it.
And truly very fit it is, that some body in the general name, should
encourage your Exercise with an acknowledgement, how much your Country is
beholding unto you: what though you have not for your Countries cause as yet
resisted unto blood? nor in the open field done duty against a foe? what
though the fair Arms that you put on, be for ornament rather, than for
defense? yet is your Military skill and dexterity at your Orders, Motions,
Postures, and Handling of your Arms; as much (perchance) as many an old
Leaguerers that has. That our Age and Nation are so happy in a still and
gentle peace; as neither do we stand in need of your valors; nor have you
your selves any great use of your own courages: blessed be the Lord of Hosts
therefore, who has not dealt so with any Nation. That here is no sword drawn
in our Kingdom, but that of Justice; and that of Honor sometimes, which is
gladly stooped unto with a bended knee; we are to thank our royal Sovereign
for, who is so studious of our quiet. And under the favor of the first sword;
may we all be ever happily protected: and to the gracious stroke of the
second sword, I could wish with all my heart, that all your shoulders that
deserve it, were submitted. Valor and courage I assure my self you would all
show; should but your Country require your service: and did she so, you should
be among the first and the best men, that her safety must rely upon. That the
Kingdom has by this means, the more that are enabled to defend it; is partly
owing unto your forwardness: and that there is a new Militia every year
reered up, and a continual supply of a Military breed of Practitioners; is to
be ascribed to your example. I know you much honor that miracle of Soldiers,
the King of Sweden: and by that time you have read this; you will find more
cause for it Here in the First part, shall you find him Religious; in the
Second, Just: and in the Third, most Sufficien for an every way accomplished
General: Devotion, Justice, and a martial excellency, make up his Discipline.

Farewell Gentlemen, and be pleased to accept of this, and of the good will and
service, of the namelesse Author.
Ad Gustavum Adolphum, Regem Suecorum.
O Quem te memorem, clarorum maxim Regum?
Quaeve feram meritis nomina digna tuis?
Romulus auspiciis, forti probitate Camillus,
Pelides animis, consilio Pylias:
Impetu Alexander, praesenti pectore Caesar,
Scipio militia es, Hannibal ingenio.
Omnia seclorum superas miracula; quotquot
Graecia post genitis, Roma vel ipsa dedit.
Astraeam Marti solus, sanctumque feroci,
Concilias; ferrum legibus, arma togae.
Quod si grassantes pergis prohibere tyrannos,
Pressaq, servili solvere colla jugo:
Exemplo si parta novo sua cuique reponis,
Et, repetens raptum, nil rapis inde tibi:
Si populos, victor, trahis in tua jura volentes,
Et domitos, aucta reque Fideque, beas:
Teutonis assertis merces tibi Thracia cedat,
Lustratae Fidei Roma Minerval erit:
Nascentem indigitet, pugnanti militet ether,
Astra canant belli classica sacra tui:
Pressorum vindex, inopum Tutela, piorum
Angelus, ac reducis Signifer esto Dei.
At vos, O sontes gladium sperate Tiranni,
Quem socij vibrant, Christus, et hic Gedeon.
The Same in English
OH! whom may I thee style, most glorious King
Or to thy worth what names can worship bring*
A Romulus in conduct may thou be,
Camillus in unconquered honesty.
In courage thou art great Achilles peer,
In counsel Nestors, far from Nestors year:
In th'on-set Alexander, one would deem thee,
In constant valor, Caesar I esteem thee.
In martial skill a Scipio thou art,
An Hannibal in stratageme and art.
All Wonders thou exceed'st of elder age,
Which Greece, or Rome, has left upon times stage.
Mars with Astraea thou alone do crown,
Fury with Faith, Sword with Law, Arms with Gown.
If thus the ravening Tyrants thou repress,
And galled necks from slavish yoke release:
If (justice strange!) thou part the rescued prey,
To each his own, purloyning naught away:
Of foes if willing Subjects thou create,
By conquest bettered in their Faith and State;
Let Thracia be thy pay, for Almaine freed,
For Faith restored Rome, shall be thy meed:
Let Heaven point at thy birth, serve in thy wars,
And blaze thy holy Arms with newborn stars:
Be thou the oppressed's Shield, the poores relief,
The Saints good Angel, and Christ's Herald chief,
Tremble ye guilty Tyrants to come on,
Upon the Sword of Christ and Gideon.
By Sa: Cr.

THE CHRISTIAN PART OF THE KING OF SVVEDENS DISCIPLINE.
The first Part.
IT is not without a mystery, I suppose, that the old Israelites had an Armory
in their Temple: they would show us, That these two cannot well be parted. And
truly, me-thinkes, that a Temple in an Army, is none of the weakest pieces of
fortification. How prevalent an Orator, the prayers of devout warriors have
been with the Lord of Hosts; the conquests and examples of the same old
Israelites, may abundantly inform us. How often has victory (and that almost
visibly too, I am sure, sensibly) come ryding down upon the triumphant wings
of devout prayer?

The Tabernacle carried about by that most Christian Emperor Constantine,
where ever his Camp went; and where, in stead of a Temple he celebrated his
daily devotions: conquered more, perchance, for him, than ten of his heathen
Legions. If Moses prays, whilst Iosuah fights, Exodus 17.
Amalek must needs be dung down. This our most pious Conqueror now, that he
might as nearly as might be, resemble that great Hebrew General, that first of
the nine Worthies and that ever-glorious Constantine, that first of the
Christian Emperors; has not courage enough (it seems) to adventure himself
into the field, till he first be impregnably fortified with this holy Spell,
this whole armor of God.

Upon the days of the Israelites March, when their Camp in the Wilderness
removed, and the Ark of God with it; Moses had prayers then twice a day: at
the Rising, namely, and at the Setting down of the Arc again, Number. 10. 35
had Israel a set form of prayer. And that this religious King, might not
seem to fight the Lords Battles, without the Lords direction, he has taken
order to have it called for, by most solemn and frequent prayers; twice aday
used throughout his whole Leaguer. And that not only when the Camp remoues;
but when it lies still too: not only before a battle, or a danger (as if he
were at Sea) but even when no enemy is at hand; even then he prays too. And
not only commands his Army twice a day; but himself, as I hear, uses to set
apart many whole days, to his own pious privacy, and his closest devotions:
upon which may no man then speak to him, because he then speaks with God.
Behold here are two swords; Fighting and Praying, and Praying and Fighting:
thus has the King of Sweden learned to conquer. It is none of the unpolitikest
parts of his Majesty's new Discipline, that I now present you with; which the
exemplary piety of that religious Prince, has taught me to put in the first
place of his Discipline; seeing in the following Articles of his civil
Discipline, himself gives the first place unto those Articles, which concern
God and his service.

To cross that Proverbiall Verse therefore which says that Soldiers have
neither Faith nor Religion in them, I will here afford you some of those Forms
of his daily prayer, frequented in every Quarter of his Leaguer, as I find
them in the Book called Arma Suecica, Page 77.

The Prayers.
In time of our Necessities, and for the Christian Church.
manfully to resist; and so enlighten them, that they may bring them to the
knowledge of thy self. Grant, merciful Father, thy Holy Spirit unto all
Christian and lawful Magistrates, that they may well and peaceably rule their
own Subjects; and that under them we all leading a quiet and a blameless life;
may with a true faith celebrate the riches of thy grace; and with a constant
mind in all holiness and righteousness, as may be pleasing; serve thee the
true God and Lord of Lords, thorough thy only beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Another Prayer to the same purpose.
the end, that they may be saved. Vouchsafe thy divine grace also, unto all
Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors; and especially the King our
Sovereign Lord: and to all their Counselors and chief Officers; that they
may so rule their Subjects, thy people, well and according to thy good
pleasure; as that peace, good dealing, and righteousness, may be cherished;
troubles, injustice, and all wickedness, may be banished, and quite taken out
of the way.

Look mercifully upon our enemies, and upon all those that persecute us: cause
that both they and we, may seriously repent us of our sins: grant them and us
and all the whole Christian world, such a mind to the love of peace, that we
may serve thee, O holy God, in all piety and honesty.

Comfort, moreover, all those that are afflicted, poor, sick, sorrowful,
distressed captives, troubled in mind, those that suffer persecution or
temptation; that they may bear the cross patiently, and obtain at last a
happy issue out of all their troubles. Bless the fruits of the earth also
unto us, for the necessary nourishment of our bodies; and preserve them from
all danger and ill weather. And especially be thou present with us in this our
expedition; pardon our sins, and mercifully turn away from us these
punishments which we have deserved.

Keep safe, moreover, our Lord the King from all dangers both of soul and
body; preserve all his Captains and Commanders, higher and lower together with
his whole Army, and our Fellow Soldiers. Grant us, O Lord our God, unanimous
and sincere minds, wise direction, happy proceedings, and our desired end, in
all our actions and endeavors: So as may best make to the glory of thy holy
Name, the quietness, peace, comfort, joy, and happiness, finally, both
temporal and eternal; of our selves, Country, and all these afflicted
Christians, which profess the Orthodox and true faith. Show us some token for
good, Psalm. 86. 17.
that they which hate us may see it and be ashamed: because thou Lord have
helped us, and comforted us. These blessings that thou would vouchsafe unto
us, we thy poor children entreat thee humbly, by the death and passion of thy
only Son Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee world without end.
Amen.

Another Prayer to the same purpose.
The Queen of Swedens name is Maria Eleonora; sister unto G^orge William, now
Marquess and Elector of Erandenburg. This young Lady their Daughter being the
only child of the King of Sweden, now l^uing, is named Christina: who was by
the States of Sweden in the Parliament of Stockholme, An. 1627. received for
their Queen, in case the King should dye without other Issue.
onr sovereign Lady the Queen, their royal Daughter, and all the regal
Family, unto the glory of thy Name, and the general comfort and protection of
us all. Grant us a good government in the Commonwealth, and whatsoever else is
necessary for our wel-being; Peace, namely, a happy government, with a good
and an honest neighborhood. Bless, finally, our counsels and our
enterprises: and that through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns
with thee and the holy Spirit, one God true and coequall. Amen.

Another Prayer to the same purpose.


Preserve we beseech thee pure and incorrupt, thine own holy Word and
Sacraments, in these dangerous times, against all Pereticks and false Teachers.
Especially against the Papists: who at this present with many bloody
slaughters, and inhumane tyranny, do like ravening Wolves and roaring Lions,
undeservedly scatter and devour thy poor Christian flock. Look down O Lord
upon the miserable condition of thy people, refrain the insolency of their
enemies, hinder thou their bloody purposes, that so they may perceive, that
thou thy self fightest for thy holy Church; nor wilt give it for a prey unto
them.

Next, O Lord, pray we for all those Deputies of thine, to whom thou have
committed the government of the Commonwealth, and the sword of justice. For
our own King first of all, whom thou in mercy have set over us, to be our head
and protector: Preserve his Majesty from all perils, as well secret as open:
grant prosperity of success unto him: victory and deliverance against the
enemies of his person and Kingdom. Defend him, Lord, with the strength of thy
right hand in this present and dangerous expedition; which for the safety of
his own Kingdom, and for the obteyning of a good Peace, he has undertaken:
and grant that the Wars being brought unto a happy end, both himself and
his whole Army, may safely return again into their own Countries.

Nor less earnestly do we recommend unto thee our Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty, with her royal Daughter: Bless Lord both him and her, and
keep them both with thy Fatherly goodness and mercy. We recommend unto thee
in like manner the Right Honorable the privy Counselors and chief
Magistrates of his Kingdom: so govern and direct them all with thy Holy
Spirit; that they may prefer thy glory before all; and with an honest and a
good heart, study the prosperity both of King and Kingdom. Pray we also for
his Majesty's Army, and Navy, and for all his Metal mines, and all things
else, which may be beneficial unto the Commonwealth, and commodious unto the
Subject. Turn away, for thy Christ's sake, what ever may either destroy or
endanger them: and give a blessing unto any thing, that may any ways advance
the truth of our Religion, and our Country in general. Look favorably, O
heavenly Father, upon all the Professors of the same true religion with us; who
being sorely at this present oppressed by the Papists, suffer the loss both of
their lives and fortunes: Succor them, Lord, that they may be delivered from
these troubles. Keep us in health from the noisome pestilence, from sudden and
unhappie death; from dearth, famine, scar-fires, mutinyes, disagreements
amongst our selves, and from hayle and tempest. Infuse into our hearts concord,
faithfulness, and mutual charity. Comfort all those that are afflicted,
sick, in prison or calamity. Succor and comfort all widows and fatherless,
women with child, and that give suck. Be thou guide unto all those that
travel either by land or by water: that they walking in thy right paths, and
having prosperously dispatched their own business, may safely return at
length unto their own families. Deliver us, Lord God, from all evil: and when
our fatal hour of death shall come, mercifully receive us into thy Kingdom:
translate our souls out of this vale of misery, into thy heavenly Paradise,
where we may laud and praise thee for it, world without end, Amen.

II.
A Prayer for forgiveness of sins.


Another Prayer to the same purpose.
Mary Magdalene, that penitent sinner, when lying at thy feet, she from the
bottom of her heart sincerely bewailed her own transgressions: and the
Publican in the Temple when he smote upon his breast, and implored thy favor:
and the Thief upon the Cross when he entreated and obtained thy pardon. Lord
grant us to receive the same this day from thee: absolve thou us in Heaven,
forgive us our sins, O God, thou author of all comfort. Cast us not away from
thy presence; but cause us so to walk in thy fear, that in faith and love we
may serve and please thee, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III.
For Peace and Concord.


Another.


Another.
thee: who together with the Son and Holy Ghost live and reignest one true
and eternal God. Amen.

IV.
For the King.


Another.
Psalm. 21.
exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation. Thou have given him his hearts
desire^ and not denied him the request of his lips* For thou have filled him
with the best of thy blessings; and have set a Crown of pure gold upon his
head* He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life, even for ever and
ever* His honor is great in thy salvation glory and great worship have thou
laid upon him. For thou have filled him with all kind o^ blessings for ever;
and thou shale make him glad with the joy of thy countenance. Psalm. 20. 1.
Hear him Lord in the time of trouble, let thy Name set him in a safe place.
Send him help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of (...) Remember
also all his offerings; and accept his burnt Sacrifice. Grant him his hearts
desire, and fulfill all his mind, Help Lord thine ^nointed, and hear him from
thy Sanctuary, through Jesus Christ* Amen.

Another.
life, in all devotion, and in honesty, Amen.

Another.
of our life* Comfort us according to the time thou have afflicted us; and the
years wherein we have suffered adversity. Remember not our former iniquities.
Have mercy upon us, and that soon; for we are brought very low. Help us, O
God our helper, for the honor of thy Name* Deliver us and forgive us our
sins, for thy Names sake; because thou art the Lord, the highest above all
the world: thou art long-suffering, of great goodness, and gracious: nor art
thou prone unto anger and to vengeance; seeing to those that repent, thou have
promised remission of all their sins. So shall we thy people, and the sheep
of thy pasture, give thee thanks for ever, and will speak of thy praise from
generation to generation. Amen.

V.
Against all evil.
make before thee in these our necessities: and grant that those evils which
the Devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and that by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed: that we being hurt by no
persecution, may give thee thanks in thy holy Church, and praise thee evermore
for the same, thorough Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord. Amen.

Another Prayer.


Another.


VI.
Against our enemies.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God; thou only art the true Soldier
and Captain, the Lord mighty in Battle: Behold, thine enemies rage mightily,
and those that hate thee rise up against us: they take subtle counsel together
against thy people, and lay their heads together against thy secret ones. Go
too, say they, let us cut the^ off that they be no more a people, and that the
name of Israel may be blotted out. For we put not our trust in our own
strength; for we know, that there is no King that can be saved by the multitude
of an Host; Psalm. 33. 15.
neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. An horse is counted but
a vain thing to save a man; neither shall be deliver any man by his great
strength: but our trust is in thee, that art our refuge, and a Tower of defense
against our enemies. Thou being our Captain, Psalm. 18. 29.
we shall discomfit an Host of men; and with the help of our God, we shall
leap over the wall. Thou being our aid, we shall do famous exployts; thou
art able to beat our enemies to dust: they compass us about; but in thy name
we will destroy them: they come about us like Bees, and smoke against us like
fire among thorns; but in thy Name we will destroy them. Thou overthrewest
Pharaoh and his Host in the red Sea; thou constreynedst Senacherib to turn
again into his own Country: thou overthrewest proud Haman; and threwest own
the haughty Holofernes. So Lord deal with our enemies: do unto them as thou
did unto the Madianites, and as unto Sisera and Iabin at the brook Kison.
Make their Princes like Oreb and Zeb; and their Leaders like unto Zeba and
Salmana. Let the mischief which they prepare for others, fall upon their own
heads; and their wickedness upon their own pates. So shall we sing of thy
power, and praise thy goodness betimes in the morning* For thou God art our
Protector, and our refuge in all our necessities. Amen.

A Prayer of King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11 etc.
AS A cried unto the Lord his God, and said; Lord, it is nothing with thee, to
help, whether with many, or with them that have no power. Help us O Lord our
God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name w^ go against this multitude. O Lord
thou art our God, let not man prevail against us.

A Prayer of Judas Macchabaeus unto his Soldiers, 1 Macchab 4. 8*
THen said Judas to the men that were with him, Fear ye not their multitude,
neither be ye afraid of their assault. Remember how our Fathers were delivered
in the red Sea, when Pharaoh pursued them with an Army. Now therefore let us
cry unto Heaven, if peradventure the Lord will have mercy upon us, and remember
the Covenant of our Fathers, and destro^ this Host before our face this day*
That so all the Heathen may know, that there is one, who delivers and saves
Israel.

A Prayer of Luther for Soldiers, found in the 3. Tome of the Edition at Iena,
fol. 330.
HEavenly Father, here am I by thy divine will in this external calling, under
the Command of my General, first to serve thee, as is fitting; and then for
thee to obey my Captain I give due thanks unto thy goodness and mercy, that
thou have called me unto this condition, and set me about that work, which I
assuredly know to be no sin, but a right action, and a service acceptable
unto thy will. And for that I have learned out of thy saving Word, that our
own good works do not profit us for the meriting of salvation; and that no
man is saved for that he is a Soldier, but for that he is a Christian; I will
not therefore put my confidence in this work and service of mine: but what
ever I do, I will do it with a good will, as to do thee a service: and I out
of the bottom of my heart believe, that I am redeemed and saved, only by the
innocent blood of thy beloved Son, my Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
thy will, he shed for me upon the Altar of the Cross. In this belief I
resolve to stand, in this will I live and dye; for this do I now fight and
take pains: O Lord God, heavenly Father, preserve and increase this faith in
me, through thy Holy Spirit. Amen.

Against the Plague, and other noisome Diseases.
A Almighty God, Lord and Father of all grace and consolation, have mercy upon
us, and upon thy Christian people. Consume us not in thy fury by this
contagious pestilence: but as in the time of David thou commaundedst the
destroying Angel to hold his hand, and give over killing: so cause, O most
gracious Lord, this terrible rod of thine anger to cease from us, and not to
destroy thine afflicted people. Strengthen us with the wholesome power of thy
Word, that we may be healthy both in soul and body; that we may laud and
praise thee here on earth for a time, and for ever in the Heavens. O Lord Jesus
Christ, succor us in this sickly time, for those bitter pains that for our
sakes thou sometimes enduredst: make intercession for us with thy heavenly
Father: defend us against the heavy wrath of God; forgive us our trespasses;
give thine innocence unto us. Call to mind in this grievous plague-time, how
much our Redemption cost thee, and suffer not that thy bloodshed for us, to be
lost, or become in vain. O Holy Ghost, vouchsafe thou to descend sweetly into
our languishing hearts* refresh thou and recreate our souls. And if it so fall
out that this plague strike us also, then take thou the cure of our souls in
that hour, in which we must depart out of this life: lay us in the most sweet
bosom of Christ our Redeemer, that we may be there partakers of eternal joy
and quietness. Fulfill all thy most sweet promises in us, which are in thy
Word made unto us. Take from us all unbelief, doubting, and impatience: make
us ever ready to obey the will of God, even thou, who with the Father and the
Son, live one God world without end. Amen.

Of forgiveness of Sins: and of the Lords Supper.
O Good Lord Jesus Christ: I am no way able either in words or thought,
sufficiently to make expression of thy great love, which thou have declared
toward me, at such time as thou receivedst me miserable sinner into grace, and
have made me to eat and drink of thy true body and blood, unto everlasting
life. Accept in the mean time this sacrifice of Thankesgiving of my heart and
mouth, which in this mortal body I am able to pay unto thee; until I come
home unto thee, where I shall for ever praise thee. Give thy Holy Spirit unto
me, who may teach me to know how much good thou have already wrought in me:
that so in faith, charity, hope, and patience, I may begin to lead a new
life; unto thy praise, mine own amendment, and the good of my neighbor. Grant
this for the merit of thy precious blood, and the redemption which thou thereby
have made. Amen.

And these be some of those devout prayers, with which this most pious Prince
teaches his Army, to call upon the Lord of Hosts and Victory. Now unto these
good prayers, let all religious Readers that wish well unto this King; add
this or the like, for a close unto the rest. The Lord hear thee in the time of
trouble, and the name of the God of Jacob defend thee; be unto thee a Shield,
and Buckler, against thine enemies: arm thee with the sword of Gideon: and the
Lord of Hosts go forth with thine Armies: that the Victories which God shall
give thee, may bring freedom and justice unto the innocent and oppressed,
enlargement to Religion, liberty to Germany: and the benefits of a sweet and a
lasting peace unto all Christendom. This grant us for the Prince of Peace his
sake, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ANd now that you may know that the King of Sweden does not only enjoyne
others to pray, but that in his own person he practices these devotions by
himself; I will here subjoyne you two several prayers, conceived, no doubt,
in his own^ more private and premeditated consideration; and uttered in
public, and extempore, as it seemed. The first was at his Majesty's first
landing upon the coasts of Germany; where so soon as ever he out of his long
boat set his foot upon the dry Land, he thus by prayer and thankesgiving, in
Gods Name took possession of the Country; himself whilst his men were
landing, stepping a little aside, and before them all, upon his knees, uttering
these words of devotion. O most great God, that commaundest what ever thou
please both in heaven, and earth, and in the surging Seas: what thankfulness
am I now bound to render unto thee, for that thou have preserved me thus
safely, in all this so perilous a voyage? Again and again do I from the very
bottom of my heart and soul, give thanks unto thee: and here I humbly
beseech thee, that seeing, as thou very well know, I have not undertaken
this expedition for any private end of mine own, but only for thine honors
sake; and to be some comfort and assistance unto thine afflicted Church: so (if
so be the time which thy self have appointed, be already come) thou would
now be pleased to favor and bless me hereafter also: and that, especially,
thou would send me a fair wind and a prosperous; that the Army yet left
behind, which out of so many people and Nations I have gathered together; I
may with joyful eyes shortly here behold, and with a happy beginning promote
with them the glory of thy holy name. Amen.

When his Counselors and Commanders then next his person, saw their devout
King thus on the bare ground upon his knees; and heard with what a fervencie of
spirit he uttered these devotions; an inward comfort and an holy joy they took
at it, wrought more with them than their enemies could yet ever do; that is,
even forced, and pressed tears out of their manly eyes. This his pious
Majesty then perceiving, Forbear to weep, says he to them, but heartily
conjoyne your prayers with me: for the greater the army of prayers is, the
greater and more assured shall the victory be. He that prays diligently, has
in part overthrown the enemy already, and already gotten the victory. Thus
having said, he out of two hundred long boats lands his men, then on the
shoares side, and then sends them to his ships to fetch more: and God so
heard him, and the wind so favored him; that according to his former prayers,
his whole Army very shortly, and very safely arrived.

I will not here compare this prayer of this pious and victorious Prince, unto
that of the great Iosuah; at whose request the Sun stood still, as the wind
here did at his: but that you may see that God did indeed hear the prayers of
this King too; I will now give you a more eminent example of it. The Papists,
had one of theirs done it, would undoubtedly have cried out, A miracle: and
well they might: for few such they have, but I will only think of it, as of a
present and a visible blessing sent from that great God, to whom the winds and
the Seas obeyed. And thus it was.

The King a little after this, having a design upon Stetin; and his Army now
ready upon the shore, and his boats ready upon the River to imbarke them;
the wind, behold, was contrary, and so had been for some days before. This
the King observing, turning a little aside, he before his Army with bended
knees, and hands lift up to Heaven, uttered these words.

O thou most just God! full well thou know, that this enterprise I did not
at first undertake, out of any rashness, or ambition, but for the glory of thy
most holy Name, and the defense of the truth of thy Word: here, therefore, now
call I upon thy Godhead, and most humbly do I beseech thee; that with the air
of thy favor, and with a prosperous wind, thou would vouchsafe to breath
upon this my undertaking. Amen.

No sooner was this prayer ended, but the wind suddenly, as a man might say,
chopped about, and swelled the Swedish sails with so hard a gale, that the whole
Fleet passing the Swing, or arm of the Oder, was in two hours space run
full six Germane miles (twenty of ours perchance if not more) and all on the
sudden, when they were little looked for, came to an Anchor within an English
mile of Stetin, to the great admiration of the beholders, and the greater
defeat of the hopes and purposes of the Imperialists; who had a design within
two days after, to have laid siege to the same Town, had not God thus
miraculously prevented them.

And thus much, though I now give you, out of a Latin Copy; yet, to confess
the truth, did I in the writing of my former Book, find mentioned in one of
the weekly Currantoes: how that the Kings Fleet was by a strong and a sudden
Northerly wind, strangely advanced through the Oder, even to the very walls
of the City. But this I durst not then write, upon the bare credit of a
common Curranto; nor durst I with this wind (though a strong one it were)
adventure to stem the tide of popular opinion; which I found not only to
run against, but (to use the language of the Sea) with a stiff current
strongly to be set against the credit of these weekly Currantoes. Which
wariness of mine, made me indeed to leave out many notable particulars, which
I since find reported, in the Book called Ar^^ Suecica.

God Almighty, that has so graciously both heard and granted, these two
prayers of this pious King; hear all the rest also: both those that himself
makes, and what other good Christians make likewise for him. And those
Englishmen that will not, I wish they would say Amen unto it.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART of the Swedish Discipline: Containing those Orders, and
Articles of War, which have been commanded by the King of Sweden, to be
under their several Penalties observed in his Majesty's Camp, Garrisons, or
elsewhere.
GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS By the Grace of God King of the Swedens Goths and Vandals,
Great Prince of Finland Duke of Esthonia and Carelia, and Lord of Ingria, etc.
Whereas the exactness of Ancient Di^cipline and Justice is now almost utterly
forgotten: and in place thereof many strange and enormous abuses, crept in
amongst our soldiers: We therefore taking the matter into our tender care and
consideration; will by the assistance of Almighty God endeavor to do our
uttermost, both for the reducing of the said form of Discipline, and the
rooting out the same abuses, using to that purpose the way of gentleness and
admonition unto some; and resolving to take the course and strictness of
Justice unto others That therefore our soldiers may the better be trained up to
the right use and handling of their Arms, so as may best enable them for our
service and defense of our native Country: and that every man in like manner,
may the better eschew what may fall out to be inconvenient: We have once
again overseene our former Articles of wars, calling our from thence these
following Articles; which we have thought most fit and expedient, both for our
service and their ordering. Straightly willing or commanding ^ll our soldiers,
both natives of our Kingdom as well as Strangers, serving both on Horse and
Foot; that from the time of their coming into our service, they do duly and
obediently observe these following Articles: unto which, if any upon
presumption do the contrary, he shall be Punished as here after follows.

1
Seeing therefore that all our welfare and prosperity, proceeds from Almighty
God; and that it is all men's duty to fear and serve him above all: We
straightly hereby charge all manner of Persons whatsoever, that they by no
meaues use any kind of Idolatry, Witchcraft, or Enchanting of Arms, by Devils
enchantment any manner of way whatsoever. And if any herein be found faulty he
shall be proceeded against according to Gods law and the Swedens: And so much
as the law in that case enjoyneth, shall be put in execution against them. And it
is further provided, that such manner of Malefactors shall by no means be
suffered to come in Company with any soldiers whatsoever.

2
If any shall blaspheme the name of God, either drunk or sober; and the thing
be by 2. or 3. witnesses proved against him, he shall be put to death without
all mercy.

3
If any shall presume to deride or scorn Gods word or Sacraments, and be taken
in the fault; they shall forthwith be convented before the Consistory or
Commission Ecclesiastical, to be in presence of the Commissioners examined: by
whom if he be found guilty and condemned; he shall lose his head without all
mercy. But if the words by him so uttered, were spoken out of have or
vnadvisednesse; he shall for the first offense be put in Irons for 14. days:
And give unto the next hospital one half Months pay. After which if he
presume again, he shall be shot to death.

4
He who in his anger shall swear by the name of God, and be taken therewith;
whither it were done in hastiness or not, or otherwise in the executing of his
office: he shall forfeit half a Months pay unto the poor. In like manner, if
any be in time of Prayers found drinking, or at any other evil exercise, the
shall give one half months pay unto the next Hospital, and at the next
Preaching or Prayers that is, he shall be brought upon his knees in the midst
of all the Congregation, there to crave pardon of Almighty God; and so continue
the whole time of Divine service and Sermon. This shall the Minister see
executed.

5
And to the end that Gods word be by no means neglected, our will is, that
public Prayers be every day said both morning and Evening throughout our whole
leaguer. For which purpose, shall some token or warning be given by our
General; and in his absence by our Marshall of the Field, or other chief
officer. Which token or warning, shall be made by sound of trumpet, playing the
tune of some Psalm: unto which the other trumpettors shall likewise answer in
the tune of a Psalm: and so shall the Drummers of every Regiment. Then shall
every Priest or Minister in our Army say Public Prayers in his own Quarter.

6
Whatsoever Minister shall neglect his time of Prayer (except by sickness or
other lawful occasion he be hindered) he shall for every absence forfeit one
half months pay unto the next Hospital.

7
Whatsoever soldiour shall neglect the time of Prayers, and is therefore once,
twice, or thrice admonished by his Captain, he shall lie in prison* 24.
hours: except he had a lawful occasion to be absent.

8
If any Minister shall be found drunken at such time as he should preach or re^de
Prayers; he shall for the second offense be gravely advised by (...) Consistory
or Commission to forsake his sin; but if he be found drunken the third time,
he shall be put out of the Leaguer.

9
Every Holyday, or every Sunday at least, shall be kept solemn with Preaching;
to be holden in the fittest place for such a purpose. This also to be done
twice every week if the time will permit. If there be any Holidays to come in
the following week; the Minister shall after such Sermon or Prayers publicly
bid them. Who so shall neglect the time appointed, unless he have some lawful
let or occasion; shall be punished as aforesaid.

10
All Merchants and Sellers of Commodities whatsoever: so soon as they hear
the token or call to be given shall immediately shut up their doors, and so
keep them during the said time of Prayers and of Sermon. They that presume in
that season to sell any thing; shall make forfeit of all things so sold:
whereof the one half to go to the General, and the other half to the next
Hospital. Over and above which, the offender shall for one whole day be put
into prison.

11
All drinkings and feastings shall in the time of Prayers be given over, upon
pain of punishment as is before mentioned in the 17. Article. If any soldier
herein offend, he shall forfeite 3. Rusticks to the poor: and if he be an
officer, he shall forfeite what shall be awarded.

12
For the explaining of this former Article: if there be none to complain of
these abuses, then shall the Minister himself give notice thereof unto the
Colonel or Captain: and if he shall suffer such abuses to go unpunished,
then shall he give the General notice thereof, who shall do him right.

13
All Priests and Ministers that are to be in our Camp or Leaguer, shall be
appointed by the Bishop of the same Diocese or Land from whence the Soldiers
come, whom he is to be among. No Colonel nor Captain shall take what Minister
he shall think good, but shall be content with whom the Bishop shall appoint him.

14
To the intent that all Church business, as well in the Field as otherwhere,
may have an orderly proceeding; we ordain, that there be one Ecclesiastical
Consistory or Commission in our Leaguer. The President or chief person whereof
shall be our own Minister when we our selves, are personally present in the
field. In our absence, shall the chief Minister to our General, be the man.
His fellow Commissioners or ordinary Assessors, shall be the chief Ministers to
every Regiment of Horse and Foot: unto whom we give full power and authority,
to be Judges in all Church affairs: according to the Law of God and the Holy
Church. What shall be by them decreed, shall be of as great force and strength, as
if it were determined in any other Consistory whatsoever.

15
No Captain shall have liberty to take in any Minister: without the consent of
his Colonel, and of the Consistory: neither shall he again discharge any, but
by permission of the Consistory; he having there first showed. that Minister
not to be worthy of his charge.

16
If any Minister be found ill inclined unto Drunkenness or otherwise; then may
his Colonel or Captain of Horse or Foot, complain of him in the Consistory:
and if his fellow-Ministers find him guilty; then may they discharge him of his
place. In such complaints, shall the whole Consistory and the President,
severely also reprehend him; that others of the same calling may thereby take
example, be warned of such gross errors, and give good example unto others.

17
And now, in like manner, as all our soldiers have made Oath to be unto us true
and obedient: so also shall they observe this following Article, hold up their
hands, and swear as follows.

The Oath of all Under-officers of Horse or Foot.
I. N. N. Do here promise and swear, that unto the High and mighty King
Gustavus, as also unto the Crown of Sweden, I will be a true and a faithful
servant and soldioru: every manner of way performing my best endeavor for his
Majesty's service, and the profit of his Kingdom. To my power also shall I
hinder all actions prejudicial unto his Crown: and if I have tidings of any
thing likely to be prejudicial, I shall give his Majesty present notice
thereof; or some one or other of his Council. Moreover I will do my best
endeavor to observe all these his Majesty's Articles of wars. Also, I shall
behave my self manfully in battle, skirmishes, and entryes of breaches, as well
by Water as by Land, in all times and places, when and where I shall be
commanded. I shall also keep watch and ward, and do all other duties
willingly, unto the best profit of his Majesty and his Kingdom; wheresoever I
shall be commanded, either by Land, or Water. Also, I shall bear my self
obediently toward my superior Officers, in all that they command me for his
Majesty's service. In like manner, as I shall answer it before God and every
honest man, I shall not fly from my Colors or Token whatsoever, that I am
commanded to follow; so long as I am able to go after them: and I shall be
willing to do this at all times; and by no mea^^^ absent my self from them at
any time. I shall lay down my (...) and goods for the advancing of his
Majesty's service, (...) all miseries that can possibly fall out in the wars:
(...) ^^^fully to the very last; so far forth as I am able, or that any true
soldiour ought to do. Furthermore, if hereafter I be put into any place of
charged by his Majesty; I shall do my best endeavor fairly to discharg my
duty therein: so as I ought to do according to my place. This Oath shall I
well and truly keep, as the Lord of Heaven and Earth shall help my soul at
the last Judgment.

18
All at this time present, or hereafter to come into our service, shall be bound
to keep these following Articles: as well in the Field, as in any Fort or Work
whatsoever, where they shall be commanded.

19
For that no Government can stand firmly, unless it be first rightly grounded;
and that the laws be rightly observed: We the King of Sweden do hereby make
known unto all our soldiers and subjects, noble and others; that in our
presence they presume not to do any unseemly thing: but that every one give
Us our due honor, as we ought to receive. Who presumes to do the contrary,
shall be punished at our pleasure.

20
Next, shall our Officers and soldiers be obedient unto our General and
Feild-Marshal, with other our Officers next under them, in whatsoever they
shall command, belonging unto our service: Upon pain of punishment as
follows.

21
Whosoever behaues not himself obediently unto our great General or our
Ambassador commanding in our abse^ce, as well as if we our selves were there
in person present; shall be kept in Irons or in prison, until such time as he
shall be b^ought to his answer before a Council of war: where being found
guilty; whether it were wilfully done, or not; he shall stand to the Order of
the Court, to lay what punishment upon him they shall think convenient,
according as the person and fact is.

22
And if any shall offer to discredit these great office^s by word of mouth or
otherwise and not be able by prooses to make it good, he shall be put to death
without mercy.

23
Whosoever offers to lift up any manner of Arms against them, whether he does
them hurt or not, shall be punished by death.

24
If any offers to strike them with his hand, whether he hit or miss, he shall
loose his right hand.

25
If it so falls out, that our great General in any Feast, drinking, or
otherwise, does offer injury to any Knight, Gentleman or other, which stands
not with their honor to put up: then may they complain to the Commissioners
for the Council of War; where he shall answer them, and be censured by them,
according to the quality and importancy of the fact.

26
As it is here spoken of our General; so also is it of all other our great
officers; as Field-Marshall, General of the Ordnance, General of the Horse,
Sergeant Major General, Quartermaster General, and Muster Master: all
which, if they commit any such offense, through Envy or other by-respect; they
shall answer it before the Court of War, as is before mentioned.

27
As every officer and soldiour, ought to be obedient unto our General and
other Great officers; so shall they in the vnder-Regiments be unto their
Colonel Leiftenant-Colonell, Sergeant Major, and Quartermaister: upon pain of
the said punishment aforementioned.

28
If any soldiour or, officers serving either on Foot or on Horseback, shall
offer any wrong or abuse unto his superior officer, either by word or deed; or
shall refuse any duty commanded him, tending unto our service: he shall be
punished according to the importancy of the fact.

29
If any Colonel, Leiftenant-Colonell, Sergeant Major, or Quarter Master,
shall command any thing not belonging unto our service; he shall answer to the
complaint before the Court.

30
In like manner, if any Inferior officer, either of Horse or Foot, shall for
their own particular end, command any thing that is not right: they shall
answer the complaint as is aforesaid.

31
If any Inferior officer either of Horse or Foot, does challenge anyo^mon
soldiour to be guilt^y of any dishonest action; the soldiour finding himself
guiltless, may lawfully call the said officer to make proof of his words
before the Court, as his equal.

32
If any soldiour either of Horse or Foot,, shall offer to strike his officer,
that shall command him any duty for our service; he shall first loose his hand,
and be then turned out of the Quarter. And if it be done in any Fort or
beleaguered place, after the watch is set, he shall loose his life for it.

33
And if he does hurt to any of them, whither it be in the field, or not, he
shall be shot to death.

34
If any such thing fall out within the compass of the Leaguer or the place of
Garrison, in any of the soldiers lodgings where many of them meet together;
the matter shall be enquired into by the officers of the Regiment; that the
beginner of the fray may be punished according to desert.

35
He, who in the presence of our General shall draw his sword, with purpose to
do mischief with it; shall lose his hand for it.

36
He who shall in anger draw his sword while his Colors are flying, either in
battle, or upon the march; shall be shot to death. If it be done in any strength
or fortified place, he shall lose his hand, and be turned out of the quarter.

37
He who shall once presume to draw his sword upon the place where any Court of
Justice is holden, while it is holden* shall lose his life for it.

38
He that draws his sword in any strength or Fort, to do mischief therewith,
after the watch is set, shall lose his life for it.

39
No man shall hinder the Provost Marshall General, his Lieftenant or servants,
when they are to execute any thing that is for our service: who does the
contrary shall lose his life for it.

40
Leave is given unto the Provost Marshall General to apprehend all whatsoever
that offends against these our Articles of war. All other offenders he may
likewise apprehend, by his own Authority.

41
If the Provost Marshall General shall apprehend any man by his own
Authority; he may keep him either in prison or in Irons: but by no means do
execution upon him after the Court of war is ended, without first giving the
General notice thereof.

42
The Provost Marshals of every Regiment, have also the same privilege under
their own Regiment and Company that the Provost Marshall General has in the
Leaguer.

43
Every Sergeant Major commanding in the whole Leaguer what appertains to his
office; shall be obeyed by every man with his best endeavor.

44
Whatsoever is to be published or generally made known, shall be proclaimed by
sound of Drum and trumpet; that no man may pretend ignorance in it: they who
after that shall be found disobedient, shall be punished according to the quality
of the fact.

45
No soldiour shall think himself too good to work upon any piece of
Fortification, or other place, where they shall be commanded for our service;
upon pain of punishment

46
Whosoever shall do his Majesty's business slightly or lazily; shall first
ride the wooden Horse, and lie in prison after that with Bread and Water:
according as the fact shall be adjudged more or less heinous.

47
All Officers shall diligently see that the soldiers ply their work, when they
are commanded so to do: he that neglects his duty therein, shall be punished
according to the discretion of the Court.

48
All soldiers ought duly to honor and obey their Officers; and especially,
being by them commanded upon our service: but if at any time they can on the
contrary discover, that they are commanded upon a service which is to our
prejudice any manner of way: then shall that soldiour not obey him, what charge
soever he receives from him: but presently give notice of it.

49
No Colonel nor Captain shall command his soldiers to do any unlawful
thing: which who so does, shall be punished according to the discretion of the
Judges. Also, if any Colonel or Captain, or other Officer whatsoever, shall
by rigor take any thing away from any common soldiour, he shall answer for it
before the Court.

50
No man shall go any other way in any Leaguer whatsoever, but the same common
way laid out for every man, upon pain of punishment.

51
No man shall presume to make any Alarm in the Quarter, or to shoot off his
Musket in the night time, upon pain of Death.

52
He that when warning is given for the setting of the watch by sound of Drum,
Fife, or Trumpet, shall wilfully absent himself without some lawful excuse;
shall be punished with the wooden Horse, and be put to Bread and Water, or
other penance, as the matter is of importance.

53
He that is taken sleeper upon the watch, either in any strength, Trench, or
the like; shall be shot to Death.

54
He that comes off his watch where he is commanded to keep his Guard; or
drinks himself drunk upon his watch, or place of Sentinel, shall be shot to
Death.

55
He that at the sound of Drum or Trumpet, repaires not to his Colors; shall be
clapped in Irons.

56
When any march is to be made, every man that is sworn shall follow his
Colors: who ever presumes without leave to stay behind, shall be punished.

57
And if it be upon mutiny that they do it, be they many, or be they few; they
shall die for it.

58
Who ever runs from his Colors, be he native or forreiner; and does not
defend them to the uttermost of his power, so long as they be in danger, shall
suffer death for it.

59
Every man is to keep his own rank and fly upon the march, and not to put
othres from their order, nor shall any Man cast himself behind or set himself
upon any wagon or horseback: the offenders to be punished according to the
time and place.

60
He that runs from his Colors in the field, shall die for it: and if any of
his Comrades kill him in the mean time, he shall be free.

61
What ever Regiment shall first charge the Enemy, and retire afterward from
them, before they come to dint of sword with them, shall answer it before our
highest Martial Court.

62
And if the thing be occasioned by any O^ficer; he shall be publicly
disgraced for it, and then turned out of the Leaguer.

63
But if both Officers and Soldiers be found faulty alike; then shall the
Officers be punished as aforesaid: If it be in the Soldiers alone, then shall
every tenth man be hanged: The rest shall be condemned to carry all the filth
out of the Leaguer, until such time as they perform some exploit, that is
worthy to procure their pardon: after which time they shall be clear of the
former disgrace. But if at the first, any man can by the testimony of ten men
prove himself not guilty of the Cowardice, he shall go free.

64
When any occasion of service is, he that first runs away, if any man kill
him, he shall be free. And if at that time he escape, and be apprehended
afterward, he shall be procl^^med Traitor, and then put out of the quarter,
after which whosoever kills him, shall never be called to account for it.

65
If any occasion be to enter any Castle, Town, or (...) by assault or breach,
he who retyres from the place before (...) has been at handy-blowes with the
enemy and has used (...) sword, so far as it is possible for him to do
service with it (...) before he be by maine strength beaten off by the enemy
shall be so punished as the Court shall censure him.

66
Whatsoever Ensign bearer shall fly out of any place of battery sconce or
redoubt before he has endured^ assaults, and receives no relief; shall be
pun^^^ed as before*

Whatsoever Regiment, troop or Company, is the beginner of any mutiny; shall be
punished as is aforementioned. The first Author to dye for it, and the next
consenter; to be punished according to the discretion of the Court.

68
Whatsoever Regiment, Troop, or Company refuses to advance forward to charge
the Enemy: but out of fear and cowardice stays behind their fellows, shall be
punished, as before.

69
If any Regiment, Troop, or Company, shall fly out of the Field or Battle;
then shall they 3. several times, (^6. weeks being betwixt every time,)
answer for it before the Court. And if there it can be proved that they have
done ill, and have broken their Oath; they shall be Proclaimed Traitors, and all
their Goods shall be confiscated; whither they be present to answer it before the
Court or not. If they be absent, they shall be allotted so many days as we
shall appoint them, for liberty to come in to answer it before the Court: where
if they clear themselves, well and good: if not, they shall have so many days
to retire themselves: after which if they be apprehended, then shall they be
punished according as the Court shall doom them.

70
Whatsoever Regiment, Troop, or Company, shall treat with the Enemy, or
enter into any conditions with them whatsoever, (without our leave, or our
Generals, or chief Commander in his absence) whatsoever officer shall do the
same, shall be put to death for it, and all his goods shall be confiscated. Of the
Soldiers every tenth man shall be hanged; and the rest punished, as is aforesaid.

71
Whosoever presuming to do the same, and shall be taken therewith; shall be
proceeded withal like those that fly out of the Field. Their Goods also
shall be confiscate.

72
If any that then were in company of such, can free themselves from being
partakers in the crime, and can prove that they did their best to resist it,
then shall they be rewarded by us, according as the matter is of importance.

73
They that give over any strength unto the Enemy, unless it be for extremity
of hunger, or want of Ammunition: the Governor, with all the Officers shall dye
for it; all the soldiers be lodged without the Quarter without any Colors; be
made to carry out all the filth of the Leaguer: thus to continue, until some
noble exploit by them performed, shall promerite pardon for their former
cowardice.

74
Whatsoever soldiers shall compel any Governor to give up any strength, shall
lose their life for it. Those, either Officers or soldiers that consent unto
it, to be thus punished: the Officers to dye all: and of the soldiers every
tenth man to be hanged. But herein their estate shall be considered: if they
already suffered famine, and want of necessaries for their life; and be withal
out of hope to be relieved; and are so pressed by the enemy, that of necessity
they must within a short time give up the Piece, endangering their lives
thereby without all hope of relief: herein shall our General with his
Council of War, either clear them, or condemn them, according to their
merit.

75
If any numbers of soldiers shall without leave of their Captain assemble
together, for the making of any convention, or taking of any Council amongst
themselves, so many inferior Officers as be in company with them; shall suffer
death for it; and the soldiers be so punished, as they that give up any
strength. Also, at no time shall they have liberty to hold any meeting amongst
themselves; neither shall any Captain permit it unto them: he that presumes to
suffer them, shall answer it before our highest Court.

76
If any being brought in question amongst others, shall call for help of his
own nation or of others; with intention rather to be revenged, then to defend
himself, he shall suffer death for it; and they that come in to help him,
shall be punished like mutiniers.

77
Whosoever gives aducie unto the Enemy any manner of way, shall dye for it.

78
Who ever upon any strength holds discourse with the Enemy, more or less,
without our leave, our Generals, or the Governor of the place; shall dye for
it.

79
If it be proved that they have given the Enemy any private Intelligence, by
letters or otherwise, without leave, as aforesaid; shall dye for it.

80
And so shall they, that give any token, sign or Item unto the Enemy.

81
Every man shall be contented with that Quarter that shall be given him, either in
the town or Leaguer: the contrary doer, to be reckoned for a mutinier.

82
Who ever flings away his Arms, either in the Field or other where; shall be
scourged through the Quarter; and then be lodged without it: be enforced to
make the streets clean: until they redeem themselves by some worthy exploit
doing.

83
He that sells or empawnes his Arms, or any kind of Ammunition whatsoever; or
any hatchets, spades, shovells, pickaxes, or other the like necessary
implements used in the Field; shall be for the first and second time, beaten
through the quarter: and for the third time punished, as for other theft. He
also that buys or takes them upon pawn, be he soldiour, or be he victualler:
he shall first loose his money, and then be punished like him that sold them.

84
He that wilfully breaks any of his Arms, or implements aforesaid; shall
again pay for the mending of them: and after that be punished with Bread and
Water, or otherwise, according to the discretion of the Court.

85
He that after warning to the contrary, shall either buy or sell; shall first
loose all the things so sold or bought; and then be punished for his
disobedience, as is aforesaid.

86
No man that has once been proclaimed Traitor, either at home or in the
Field: or that has been under the Hangmans hands; shall ever be endured
again in any company.

87
No Duel or Combat shall be permitted to be foughten, either in the Leaguer
or place of strength. If any offers wrong to others, it shall be decided by the
Officers of the Regiment. He that challenges the Field of another; shall answer
it before the Martial Court. If any Captain, Leiftenant, Ancient, or other
inferior officer, shall either give leave or permission unto any under their
command to enter combat, and does not rather hinder them; shall be
presently cashiered from their charges and serve afterward as a Reformado or
Common Soldiour. But if any harm be done, he shall answer it as deeply, as he
that did it.

88
He that forces any Woman to abuse her; and the matter be proved, he shall dye
for it.

89
No Whore shall be suffered in the Leaguer: but if any will have his own wife
with him, he may. If any unmarried woman be found, he that keeps her may have
leave lawfully to marry her; or else be forced to put her away.

90
No man shall presume to set fire on any Town or Village in our land: If any
does, he shall be punished according to the importancy of the matter, so as the
Judges shall sentence him.

91
No Soldiour shall set fire upon any Town or Village in the enemies land;
without he be commanded by his Captain. Neither shall any Captain give any
such command, unless he has first received it from Us, or our General: who
so does the contrary, he shall answer it in the Generals counsel of War,
according to the importance of the matter. And if it be proved to be
prejudicial unto us, and aduantageous for the enemy; he shall suffer death
for it.

92
No soldier shall pillage any thing from our subjects upon any march, strength,
leaguer, or otherwise howsomeuer, upon pain of death.

93
He that beats his Host or his household servants, the first and second time he
shall be put in Irons, and made to fast with bread and water, according as the
wrong is that he has done: if the harm be great he shall be punished
thereafter, according to the discretion of the Court.

94
None shall presume to do wrong to any that bring necessaries into our
Leaguer, Castle, or strength whatsoever, or to cast their goods down off their
horses, and take away their horses perforce: which who so does, shall die for
it.

95
They that pillage or steal either in our land or in the enemies, or from any
of them that come to furnish our Leaguer or strength, without leave; shall be
punished as for other theft.

96
If it so pleases God that we beat the enemy, either in the field, or in his
Leaguer, then shall every man follow the chase of the enemies, and no man give
himself to fall upon the pillage, so long as it is possible to follow the
Enemy, and until such time as he be assuredly beaten. Which done, then may
their quarters befallen upon, every man taking what he finds his own
quarter. Neither shall any man fall to plunder one another quarters, but rest
himself contented with that which is assigned him.

97
If any man gives himself to fall upon the pillage, before leave be given him
so to do, then may any of his Officers freely kill him. Moreover, if any
misfortune ensue upon their greediness after the spoil, then shall all of
them suffer death for it. And notwithstanding there comes no damage thereupon,
yet shall they lie in Irons for one Month, living all that while upon bread
and water: giving all the pillage so gotten, unto the next hospital. He that
plunders another quarter, shall also have the same punishment.

98
When any Fort or place of strength is taken in, no man shall fall upon the
spoil, before that all the places in which the enemy is there lodged, be also
taken in, and that the soldiers and Burgers have laid down their Arms, and
that the quarters be dealt out and assigned to every body. Who so does the
contrary, shall be punished as before.

99
No man shall presume to pillage any Church or Hospital, although the strength
be taken by assault, except he be first commanded; or that the soldiers and
Burgers be fled thereinto and do harm from thence. Who does the contrary,
shall be punished as aforesaid.

100
No man shall set fire upon any Church, Hospital, School, or Mill, or spoil
them any way, except he be commanded. Neither shall any tyrannize over any
Churchman, or aged people, Men or Women, Maids or Children, unless they first
take Arms against them, under pain of punishment at the discretion of the
Judges.

101
If any soldier happens to get freeboot, in any Castle, City, Town, Fort,
strength, or Leaguer; and moreover, whatsoever Ordnance, Munition for war,
and victuals is found there, shall be left for Our use; the rest shall be the
Soldiers: only the tenth part thereof, shall they give to the sick and maimed
Soldiers in the hospitals. All prisoners shall first be presented unto Us;
amongst which if there be any man of note, whom We desire to have unto Our
selves; we promise in lieu thereof, honestly to recompense the taker of him,
according to the quality of the person. Other prisoners of inferior rank, may
the takers keep unto themselves; whom by O^r leave or Our Generals, they may
put to their ransom, and take it to themselves: but without leave they may not
ransom them, upon pain of death.

102
If any be found drunken in the enemies Leaguer, Castle or Town, before the
enemy has wholly yielded himself up to our mercy, and laid down his arms;
whosoever shall kill the said drunken Soldiour shall be free for it: always
provided, that good proof be brought that he was drunken. And if that soldiour
escapes for that time with his life, and that it can appear that some damage
or hinderance has come unto Our Service, by his drunkenness; then wheresoever
he be apprehended, he shall die for it. But if no hurt ensued thereof; yet
shall he be put in Irons for the space of one month, living upon his pittance
of bread and water.

103
All Our soldiers shall duly repair unto the general Musters, upon the day
and hour appointed: nor shall any Colonel or Captain either of horse or
foot, keep back his Soldiers from being mustered at the time when Our Muster
Masters shall desire to view them: if any refuses, he shall be taken for a
mutinier.

104
No Colonel nor Captain shall lend any of their soldiers one to another upon
the muster-dayes, for the making up of their numbers complete: He that thus
makes a false muster, shall answer it at a Martial Court; where being found
guilty, he shall be proclaimed Traitor: after which being put out of the Quarter,
his Colors shall fly no more.

105
If any soldiour hires out himself for money to run Running the Gatelope is,
when he that has done the fault* is to run between the Regiment standing
half on one side, and, half on the (...), with W^ippes (...) their hands, to
la^h and cudgel the off^nder. which punishment many a shameless^ soldiour, will
be hired to undergo for drink or money.
the Gatelope three, several times; he shall be beheaded. And if any Captain
shall so permit or counsel his soldiour to do the same; he shall be actually
cashiered.

106
If any horsman borrowes either Horse, Armer, Pistol, Sadle, Sword, or
Harness to pass the Muster withal; so much as is borrowed shall be
escheated; and himself after that turned out of the Leaguer: as likewise he
shall, that lent it him. The one half of the Arms forfeited shall go unto
the Captain, and the other half unto the Perforce.

107
If it can be proved that any Horseman has wilfully spoiled his horse; he
shall be made Traitor; loose his horse, and be turned out of the Quarter.

108
All Soldiers both of horse and foot, shall be taken on at a free muster, but
not by any private Captain, neither shall their pay go on, before they be
mustered by Our Muster-masters.

109
No Soldiour either of horse or foot shall be cashiered by his Colonel,
Captain, or other inferior officer* Nor shall they, who being taken on at a
free Muster, have their men sworn to serve (if it please God) until the next
muster; except it be upon afree muster: at which time, the Muster-masters and
his Colonel, may freely give him his pass.

110
If any foreign soldiour shall desire his pass in any town of garrison
after the enemy be retired, he may have it: but by no means whilst there is
any service to be done against the enemy.

111
If any soldiour Our native Subjects desires to be discharged from the wars,
he shall give notice thereof unto the Mustermaisters; who, if they find him to
be sick, or maimed, or that he has served 20. years in our wars; or has
been ten several times before the enemy; and can bring good witness
thereof; he shall be discharged.

112
If any Colonel or Captain either of Horse or Foot, does give any Pass
otherwise then is before mentioned, he shall be punished as for other Felonies:
and he who has obtained the said Pass, shall loose three months pay; and be
put in Prison for one month, upon bread and water.

113
No Colonel or Captain either of Horse or Foot, shall give leave to his
soldiers to go home out of the Field, without leave of our General or Chief
Commander: whoeuer does the contrary, shall loose 3. months pay, and answer
it before the Court.

141
No Captain either of Horse or Foot, shall presume to go out of any leaguer
or place of Strength to demand his Pay, without leave of the General or
Governor: who so does, shall be cashiered from his place, and be put out of
the Quarter.

115
No Captain either of Horse or Foot, shall hold back any of his soldiers
means from him; of which if any complain, the Captain shall answer it before
the Court: where being found guilty, he shall be punished as for other felony.
Also, if any mischance ensue thereupon; as that the soldiers mutiny, be sick,
or endure hunger, or give up any Strength; then shall he answer for all these
inconveniences that hereupon can or may ensue.

116
If any Captain lends money unto his soldiers, which he desires to be paid
again; that must be done in presence of the Muster-Maisters; that Our service
be no ways hindered or neglected.

117
If upon necessity the case sometimes so falls out in the leaguer, that Pay be
not always made at the due time mentioned in the Commissions; yet shall every
man in the mean time be willing to further Our service; seeing they have
victuals sufficient for the present: and that they shall so soon as may be
receive the rest of their means, as is mentioned in their Commission.

118
Very requisite it is, that good Justice be holden amongst our Soldiers, as
well as amongst other our subjects.

119
For the same reason was a King ordained by God, to be the sovereign Judge in
the Field, as well as at home.

120
Now therefore, in respect of many occasions which may fall out, his single
Judgment alone may be to weak to discern every particular circumstance;
therefore it is requisite, that in the leaguer as well as other where, there be
some Court of Justice erected, for the deciding of all controversies: and to be
careful in like manner, that Our Articles of wars be of all persons observed
and obeyed, so far forth as is possible.

121
We ordeine therefore, that there be 2. Courts in our leaguer, an Higher
Court, and a Lower.

122
The Lower Court shall be among the Regiments both of Horse and Foot; whereof
every Regiment shall have one among themselves.

123
In the Horse-Regiments, the Colonel shall be President, and in his absence,
the Captain of Our own Lifeguards. With them are three Captanies to be
joined, three Leiftenants, 3. Cornets, and 3. Quarter Masters: that so together
with the President, they may be to the number of 13. at the least.

124
In a Regiment of Foot, the Colonel also shall be President; and his
Leiftenant-Colonell in his absence. With them are 2. Captains to be joined, 2.
Lieftenants, 2. Ancients, 4. Sergeants, and 2. Quarter Masters: that together
with the President, they may be 13. in number also.

125
In our Highest Martial Court, shall Our General be President: in his
absence, Our Field Marshall. When Our General is present, his Associates shall
be, our Field-Marshall first, next him. Our General of the Ordnance,
Sergeant-Maior general, General of the Horse, Quarter-Maister general. Next
to them shall sit Our Muster-Masters, and all Our Colonels; and in their
absence, their Leiftenant-Colonels. All these shall sit together, wheneuer
there is any matter of greater importance in controversy.

126
Whenever this Highest Court is to be holden, they shall observe this Order.
Our great General as President, shall sit alone at the head of the Table: on
his right hand our Field-Marshall; on his left hand the General of the
Ordnance, On the right hand next, our Sergeant Mayor general; on the left hand
again, the General of the Horse: and then the Quarter-Maister general on one
hand, and the Muster-Maister general on the other. After them, shall every
Colonel sit according to his place, as here follows. First, the Colonel of
our Life. Regiment, or of the guards for our own person. Next, the Colonel for
the Vplandish, the Colonel for the West-Goths, the Colonel for the Smollands,
the Colonel of the Ostro-Goths, the Colonel for the Dales and Northlands;
After them, the Colonels for the Finlanders, and Carelians, according to their
antiquity of service. If there happen to be any great men in the army of our
own true subjects, that be of good understanding; they shall cause them to sit
next these Officers aforesaid. After them shall sit all other Colonels of
strange Nations, every one according to his antiquity of service.

127
All these Judges both of our Higher and lower Courts, shall under the blew
Skies thus swear before Almighty God, that they will inviolably keep this
following Oath unto Us. I N. N. do here promise before God upon his holy
Gospel, that I both will and shall Judge uprightly in all things according to
the Law of God, of the Swedens, and these Articles of wars; so far forth as
it pleases Almighty God to give me understanding. Neither will I for favor or
for hatred, for goodwill, fear, ill will, anger, or any gift or bribe
whatsoever, judge wrongfully: but judge him free, that ought to be free, and
doom him guilty, that I find guilty; as the Lord of Heaven and Earth shall
help my Soul and Body at the last day, I shall hold this Oath truly.

128
The Judge ^f our highest Court, shall take this their Oath, in the first
Leaguer where our Camp shall be pitched. Our General, and the rest appointed
to sit with him, shall repair to the place where we shall appoint, before his
Tent, or otherwhere: where an Officer appointed by us, shall first take his
Oath, and then the others Oaths also.

129
When the Presidents of our lower Courts shall hear this foresaid Oath read
before them, then shall they hold up their hands and swear to keep it. In
like manner, so often as any Court is to be holden in any Regiment, the
foresaid Oath shall be read before all them that sit in judgment with him:
who shall also hold up their hands, and promise to keep the Oath aforesaid.

130
In our highest Court there shall be one sworn Secretary appointed, who
shall make diligent Record of all the proceedings, that fall out, either in any
pitched battle, skirmish, Leaguer, or any other piece of service whatsoever. He
shall take the note, both of the day, place, and hour, with all other
circumstances that shall happen. He shall also set his hand unto all sentences
signed by our General. He shall also have two Clerks or Notaries under him,
who shall engrosse all these passages, and keep a true Register of all
enterprises, that our General with his Counsel of war, shall give order to
have done: and likewise of what Lettets be either written or received.

131
In our highest Court there shall be one Vice President, who shall command the
Sergeant at Arms, whose Office is to warn in all the Judges of that Court,
that they may there appear at the time and place appointed: and also to give
the same notice, both unto the plaintiff and defendant.

132
In all lower Courts also there shall be one sworn Clerk, or Secretary, who
shall likewise hold the sam^ order, that is mentioned in our highest Court.

133
Our highest Court shall be careful also to hear and Judge all criminal
actions: and especially, cases of Conspiracy or Treason practiced or plotted
against us, either in word or deed. Secondly, If any gives out dishonorable
speeches against our Majesty. Thirdly, or consulteth with the Enemy to betray
our Leaguer, Castle, Town, Soldiers, Fleet, any way whatsoever. Fourthly,
Also if any there be partakers of such Treachery, and reveal it not. Fifthly,
or any that has held correspondency and intelligence with the Enemy. Sixthly,
If any has a spite or malice against us or our Country. Seauenthly, if any
speaks disgracefully, either of our person or endeauours. Eighthly, if lastly
intends treachery against our General, or his Under-officers, or that
speaks disgracefully of them.

134
All questions in like manner happening betwixt Officers and their soldiers,
if they suspect our lower Court to be partial any way, then may they appeal
unto our higher Court, who shall decide the matter.

135
If a Gentleman or an Officer be summoned to appear before the lower Court,
for any matter of importance that may touch his life, or honor, then shall the
same be decided by our higher Court.

136
All Civil questions that be in controversy in our lower Court, if the debt
or fine extends unto five hundred Dollars or above, if the parties complain of
injustice, they may thence appeal unto the higher Court, if so be they can
first prove the injustice.

137
All other occasions that may fall out, be they Civil or be they Criminal,
shall first come before our lower Court, where they shall be heard: and what
is there by good evidence proved shall be recorded.

138
Any Criminal action that is adjudged in our lower Court, we command that the
sentence be presented unto our General. We will not have it presently put in
execution, until he gives command for it in our absence. But Our selves being
in person there present, will first take notice of it, and dispose afterward
of it, as we shall think expedient.

139
In our higher Court, the General Perforce or his Lieutenant, shall be the
plaintiff, who shall be bound to follow the complaint diligently: to the end
he may the better inform our Counselors, who are to do Justice. If it be a
matter against our selves, then shall our own Advocate defend our action,
before our Court.

140
The same power has the Perforce of every Regiment, in our lower Court. Which
Perforce shall be bound also to give notice of every breach of these Articles
of war, that the infringer may be punished.

141
Whatsoever fine is by the foresaid Judges determined, according to our
Articles of war, and Escheated thereupon, shall be divided into three parts.
Our own part of the fine, We freely bestow upon the several Captains
either of Horse or Foot, which is forfeyted by their Officers and soldiers:
and the forfeytures of every Captain, we bestow upon their Colonel: and the
forfeytures of all Colonels, we give unto our General. The other two parts,
belonging either to the party to whom it is adjudged, or to the Court, those
leave we undisposed: the point of Treason only being excepted. And this gift
of ours unto our Officers, is to be understood to endure so long, as the Army
be in the field, upon any strength or Work, and till they come home again:
After which time, they shall come under the Law of the Land, like the other
natural Inhabitants.

142
Whenever our highest Court is to sit, it shall be two hours before
proclaimed through the Leaguer, that there is such an Action criminal to be
there tried, which is to be decided under the blew Skies. But if it be an
Action Civil, then may the Court be holden within some Tent or other where.
Then shall the Soldiers come together about the place where the Court is to
be holden: no man presuming to come too near the Table where the Judges are
to sit. Then shall our General come foremost of all, and the other his
Associates, two and two together; in which order, they all coming out of the
Generals Tent, shall set themselves down in the Court, in the order before
appointed. The Secretaries place shall be at the lower end of the Table, where
he shall take diligent notice in writing, of all things declared before the
Court. Then shall the General Perforce begin to open his complaint before
them, and the Contrary party shall have liberty to answer for himself; until
the Judges be thoroughly informed of the truth of all things.

143
If the Court be to be holden in any house or Tent, they shall observe the same
order in following the General in their degrees: where they shall also sit as
is before mentioned.

144
The matter being thoroughly opened and considered upon, according to the
importance of it; and our whole Court agreing in one opinion: they shall
command their Sentence concerning the same action to be publicly there read,
in the hearing of all men: always reserving, his Majesty's further Will and
Pleasure.

145
In our Lower Court, they shall also hold the same order; saving that the
particular Court of every Regiment, shall be holden in their own Quarter.

146
In this lower Court, they shall always observe this order; namely, that the
President sit at the boards end alone; the Captains, Lieutenants and Ancients,
upon either side: so many Inferior officers also upon each side; that so they
may the better reason upon the matter among themselves. Last of all, shall the
Clerk or Secretary sit at the lower end of the table: the one party standing
upon one hand, and the other upon the other.

147
So soon as the sentence is given, the President shall rise up, and all that
sit with him. But doom being given by our General that one of the parties
must loose his head, hand, or the like; then shall they Comaund the Perforce to
take him away to prison. Which done, the Perforce shall send unto the Minister,
to desire him to visit the party, and to give him the Communion. But if the
doom be passed in any Lower Court, it shall be signified up unto the General
in our absence: who shall either pardon the fact, or execute the sentence.

148
No superior officer, Colonel or Captain, either of Horse or foot, shall
solicit for any man that is lawfully convicted by the Court; either for any
Crime, or for not observing of these Articles of war: unless it be for his
very near kinsman, for whom nature compells him to intercede. Otherwise, the
solicitor shall be held as odious as the Delinquent, and cashiered from his
charge.

149
Whosoever is minded to serve Us in these wars, shall be obliged to the
keeping of these Articles. If any out of presumption, upon any Strength, in any
Leaguer, in the Field, or upon any Work shall do the contrary; be he native,
or be he Stranger, Gentleman or other: Process shall be made out against him
for every time, so long as he serves Us in these wars, in the quality of a
soldiour.

150
These Articles of wars we have made and ordained, for the welfare of our
native Country: and do command, that they be read every month publicly
before every Regiment: to the end, that no man shall pretend ignorance. We
further will and command all whatsoever officers, higher and lower, and all
our common soldiers; and all other that come into our Leaguer among the
Soldiers; that none presume to do the contrary hereof, upon pain of
rebellion, and the incurring of our high displeasure. For the firmer
confirmation whereof, we have hereunto set Our hand and Seal.

Signed, GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS.

THese above written Articles, are the standing and general Orders and
Polity, whereby his Majesty's Army is directed. They were in use, I perceive
Anno 1621. when He went to conquer Riga in Leiffland: for I find them written
in a Iournall book of that expedition, by a Scottish Gentleman then in that
service: the copy whereof was communicated unto me, by the Right Honorable the
Lord Reay: which I have since also compared with another Copy. To these, upon
occasion has his Majesty sometimes made addition of some others; as the last
year, 1631. he did: when upon the unruliness of his soldiers in the New
Mark of Brandonburg (of which his Majesty, as we told you in our former
book, much complained) He caused these new Articles to be published, which I
find in the book called Arma Suecica.

1
No Soldiour shall abuse any Churches, Colleges, Schools, or Hospitals, or
offer any kind of violence to Ecclesiastical persons nor any ways be
troublesome with pitching or enquartering, upon them: or with exacting of
contribution, from them. No soldiour shall give disturbance or offense to any
person excercising his sacred function, or ministry; upon pain of death.

2
Let the Billets and Lodging in every City, be assigned to the soldiers by the
Burgo-marsters; and let noe Commander presume to meddle with that office. No
Commander or Common soldiour shall either exact or receive of the Citizens,
any thing besides what the King has appointed to be received.

3
No Citizens nor Country Boores shall be bound to allow unto either soldiour
or officer, any thing but what is contained in the Kings orders for
Contributions and Enquarterings* that is to say, nothing besides House-roome,
firewood, candles, vinegar and salt: which yet is so to be understood, that
the inferior officers, as Sergeants and Corporals, and those under them, as
also all common soldiers; shall make shift with the common fire and candle of
the house where they lie, and do their business by them.

4
If so be, that Colonels and other Commanders have any servants or attendants,
they shall not be maintained by the Citizens or Boores, but by their own
masters.

5
No Commander shall take any house or lodging into his protection or at his
own pletsure give a ticket of freedom; when such ticket is not expressly
desired of him: nor shall he receive any bribe or present, to mend his own
commons withal; under any color or pretext whatsoever. If any man desire a
personal safeguard; let him be contented with that which is appointed in the
Kings orders.

6
To Commanders and Soldiers present, let the usual allowance be afforded by
the Citizens: but let no care be taken for such as are away.

7
New levied soldiers are to have no allowance, before they ^e enterteyned at
the Muster.

8
Nothing is to be allowed the soldiers in any house, but in the same where he
is billetted: if they take any thing otherwhere by force, they are to make it
good.

9
If either officers, soldiers, or Sutlers, be to travail thorough any
Country; the people are not to furnish them with wagons, Post-horse, or
victuals, but for their ready money, unless they bring a warrant, either from
the King, or their General.

10
No Soldiour is to forsake his Colors, and to put himself into entertainment
under any other Colonel or Garrison, or to ramble about the Country, without
he has his Colonels pass, or his that is in his stead: who so does; it shall
be lawful for the Boores or any other to apprehend him, and to send him
prisoner to Stetin, or the next garrison of the Kings: where he shall be
examined, and punished accordingly.

11
Whosoever have any lawful Passes, ought by no means to abuse the benefit of
them; or practice any cheates under pretense of them. If any be found with any
pilfery, or to have taken any man's cattle or goods: it shall be lawful for
the Country people to lay hands upon them; and to bring them to Stetin or other
the next garrison: special care being always had, that if the prisoner has
any letters of moment about him, they be speedily and safely delivered.

12
Our Curryers or Posts though they have lawful Passes to travel withal; yet
shall they not ride the Posthorses which they hyre, beyond the next stage; and
if they shall take away any horse from one or other, to tire out with hard
ryding and beyond reason; they shall be bound to return that horse again* or
to make satisfaction for him. The same order shall take place too, when any
regiments or troops of ours, shall remove from one quarter to another (namely
when they shall hyre Postillons or baggage-wagons for the carriage of their
valises Arms, or Ammunition.)

13
The houses of the Princes or nobility, which have no need to borrow our guard
to defend them from the enemy, shall not be pressed with soldiers.

14
Moreover, under a great Penalty it is provided, that neither officers nor
soldiers, shall make stay of, or arrest' the Princes Commissaries or Officers,
or any Gentlemen, Counselors of state, Senators or Burgers of any Cities, or
other Country people: nor shall give offense to them by any fact of violence.

15
Trauailers or other Passengers going about their business into any garrisons
or places of muster; shall by no means be stayed, injured, or have any
contribution laid upon them.

16
Our Commanders shall defend the Country people and ploughmen that follow
their husbandries, and shall suffer none to hinder them in it.

17
No Commander or Common soldiour whatsoever, either in any town of garrison
or Place of muster, shall exact any thing upon passengers; nor shall lay any
Custom or Toll upon any merchandise imported or exported: nor shall any be a
hinderance to the Lord of the Place, in receiving his due Customs or
Toll-gathering; but a furtherance rather.

18
If any of our officers having power of command, shall give the word for any
Remove or March to some other Quarter; those soldiers, either of horse or
foot, that privily lurk behind their fellows, shall have no power to exact
any part of the contributions formerly allotted for their maintenance in that
place: but shall severally be punished rather, for their lingering behind the
Army.

19
Whatsoever is not contained in these Articles, and is repugnant to Military
discipline; or whereby the miserable and innocent Country, may against all right
and reason be burdened withal: whatsoever offense finally, shall be committed
against these Orders; that shall the several Commanders make good, or see
severally punished; unless themselves will stand bound to give further
satisfaction for it.

20
According to these Articles, let every man govern his business and actions
and learn by them to take heed, of coming into the lurch or danger.

Signed in our Leaguer Royal, Anno, 1632. Gustavus Adolphus.

FINIS.
THE THIRD PART, of the SVVEDISH Discipline.
The Form of a Commission given out by his Majesty of Sweden, for the levying
of a Regiment.
We GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS, by the Grace of God, King of the Swedens, Goths, and
Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia, and Carelia, Lord of
Ingria; give notice by these Presents; That We have ordained and accepted Our
specially beloved and trusty N. N. to be our Colonel of eight ( English)
Foot-Companies, in manner and form following. That is to say; that the said
Colonel N. N. shall for Us and our behoof, levy eight Companies of good and
able Foot-Souldiers, each Company being reckoned 150. men by the Poll: together
with the superior Officers and Regiment (1) Staff: and shall appoint and
provide the Companies with experienced Officers and Soldiers in manner
following; against such a day, of such a Month, in such a year; and shall
deliver the same complete in our royal Camp, and where we then shall be. All
and every one of which, as well the Colonel with his superior and inferior
Officers, as also the Soldiers in general, shall be bound to perform unto Us
the bond and oath of Fidelity, so long as we shall stand in need of their
Military service: and shall suffer themselves to be mustered by our
Commissaries, where, when, and as often as it shall please Us: and also, shall
do and perform all such things, as may apperteine to the profit and good of
Us and of Our kingdom, and which our Articles of War shall requires and
which shall become good and honest Officers and soldiers to perform. On the
other side; We for the raising of the said 8. Companies, do allow and grant
unto the said Colonel, in the name of Levy and pass Moneys, nine Imperial
Dollars for every head. And to pay the Muster-month according to the Contents
of the List, and thence following Monthly (reckoning 30. days to a Month,) to
pay unto him and his Regiment, as certain pay and wages of their Military
service, in good and current Money, as follows, viz.

To the Colonel, 184 Ryxe Dollars. To the Lieutenant, Colonel 80. Ryxe
Dollars. To the Sergeant Major, 61. Ryxe Dollars. To the chief Quartermaster,
30. Ryxe Dollars. To the two Preachers, each, 18. Ryxe Dollars. To the (2)
Regiment Schults, 30. Ryxe Dollars. To the four Surgeons, each, 12. Ryxe
Dollars. To the 4. Prouost-marshals, each, 12. Ryxe Dollars. To the Clerk of
the Regiment, 30. Ryxe Dollars. To the Clerk of the Counsel of war, 18.
Ryxe Dollars. To the Gerichts Webell, or Sergeant of the Court of War. 18.
Ryxe Dollars. To the 2. Stock Knights, or Beadles, each, 3 Ryxe Dollars. To the
Hangman, 7. Ryxe Dollars.
Secondly to be given Monthly to every one of each Company.
To the Captain, 61. Ryxe Dollars. To the Lieutenant, 30. Ryxe Dollars. To the
Ancient, 30. Ryxe Dollars. To two Sergeants, each, 9. Ryxe Dollars. To the
Fuhrer, (5) Furryer, (6) Muster Schriber, and the (7) Rust master, each, 7.
Ryxe Dollars. To the Drummers and Pipers, each, 4. Ryxe Dollars. To six
Corporals, each, 6. Ryxe Dollars. To fifteen (8) Rot Masters, each, 5. Ryxe
Dollars. To 21. inferior Rot-Masters, each, 4. Ryxe Dollars. To each
common-souldiour three and an half. Ryxe Dollars. To 4. (9) Muster boys,
each, 3. Ryxe Dollars. To 14. (10.) Pass volants, each, 3. Ryxe Dollars.
But if their service requires (11) Lehnung, we will give them as a certain
Lehnung every Month, viz.
To the Colonel, 69. Ryxe Dollars. To the Lieutenant Col. 32. Ryxe Dollars. To
the Sergeant Major, 14. Ryxe Dollars. To the Chief Quartermaster, 11. Ryxe
Dollars. To the two Preachers, each, 7. Ryxe Dollars. To the Regiment Schultz,
11. Ryxe Dollars. To the four Surgeons, each, 7. Ryxe Dollars. To the four
Prouosts, each, 7. Ryxe Dollars. To the Clerk of the Regiment, 11, Ryxe
Dollars. To the Clerk of the Counsel of war. 7. Ryxe Dollars. The Gericht
webell, 7. Ryxe Dollars. To the two Stock Knights, each, 1. and a half, Ryxe
Dollars. To the hangman, 5, Ryxe Dollars.
And to every one of each Company as follows,
To the Captain, 14. Ryxe Dollars. To the Lieutenant and Ancient, each, 11.
Ryxe Dollars. To the two Sergeants, each 5. Ryxe Dollars. To the Fuhrer,
Furier, Clerk of the Band and Rust-master, each, 4. Ryxe Dollars. To three
Drummers and Fifers, each, 2. Ryxe Dollars. To six Corporals, each, 3. Ryxe
Dollars. To fifteen Rot-maisters, each, 2. Ryxe Dollars. To 21. inferior
Rot-maisters, each, 1. ^/2 Ryxe Dollars. To four Muster Boys, each, 1, Ryxe
Dollars. To fourteen Passe-volants, each, 1. Ryxe Dollars.
Moreover, as for their Arms, Weapons, entertainment, and Discharge; We will
at all times, rank and account the said Colonel and his Officers, equal with
our old levied Dutch-Soldiers: and if in the continuance of their service, one
or other of the said Regiment shall be fairly taken by the Enemy; or shall
happen to be otherwise maimed or disabled; they shall, according to their
several Conditions and carriages, be redeemed by ransom or exchange: and he
that shall be so hurt, if he be minded to stay in our Lands; shall for his
lifetime be provided of needful sustenance: but if he be desirous to depart,
we will graciously give our Pass unto him, and convenient money for his
expenses. Lastly, when we shall no further desire their service, and shall
graciously discharge them; we will fully and completely pay unto the said
Colonel, his Officers and Soldiers, their full Arriers and reckonings; with
the addition of half a Months pay, over and above. And if their discharge
shall happen to be in Sweden, we shall cause them to be transported in our own
Ships, into Dutch-land. All these Premises shall be performed upon Our Royal
word, by virtue of this Capitulation.

Signed with our hand and Signet, etc. GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS.

The Military terms explained.
(1) THe Regiment-Staffe, consists of such as are necessary people to the
Regiment, notwithstanding their office be not to fight: of which the
Quartermaster is the first, and the Hangman the last.

(2) The Regiment-Schultz, be the Examiners and Registers of Criminal matters,
brought before the Martial Court.

(3) The Stock-knights, be the Provosts or Perforces servants, that knock the
Irons on and off, and inflict other corporal punishments.

(4) The Fuhrer, is an Assistant to the Ancient, that sometimes caries his
Colors for him.

(5) The Furryers, be under Quarter Masters. They march sometimes with a
Halberd, or Partizan.

(6) The Muster-Schreiber, is the Clerk of the Musters.

(7) The Rust-masters, is the Captain of the Arms, that sees the soldiers
keep and wear their Arms duly.

(8) These 15. Rot-Masters, be Gentlemen of the Company, that have some
oversight over the Rotts.

(9) (10) The Muster-boyes, be allowed for servants to the Captain and chief
Officers: and so be the Passevolants.

(11) Lehnung, is Lending, in the payment of the soldiers means, for which
this is the Kings order. Whereas so much is due to them at the months end; the
King deivding the month into 13. equal parts; upon the first, eleventh, and
one and twentieth day of the month, pays them a third part of their means
beforehand as it were: which is called Lendings.

The King of Swedens Order for a private Company.
A Complete Company, ought to be 3. Corporalships of Musketeers; 4. Rotts or
Files make a Corporalship of Musketeers; But of Pikemen, 3. Rotts make a full
Corporalship.

So that 12. Rotts of Musk ettiers, and 9. Rotts of Pikemen, that is 21. Rots
in all, are a complete Band of men. Whereupon reckoning 6. men to every Rott or
File (for so many, and no more, he marches deep) a Complete company ought to
be 126. men, besides the Officers and Servants.

And if the Company be but weak, there must then be but 2. Corporalships of
Musketeers: and the remainder ought to be all Pikemen.

The Order the King of Sweden uses, in drawing up a complete Battaglia: which
is half a complete Regiment or Squadron, consisting of 504. Men.
A Complete Battaglia, ought to be 12. Corporalships, that is 32. Rotts of
Pikemen: and 8. Corporalships, that is 32. Rotts of Musketeers: which amounts
in all to 408. men.

So there remains still 4. Corporalships, that is, 16. Rotts of Musketeers
which continually march after the body, to be ready upon all occasions; either
to guard the baggage, or for any other Command. Which number of 16. Rotts,
being added to the number of 408. men, makes 504. men: which is a Complete
Squadron or half Regiment.

The Figure of a Battaglia.


^EN's NEW WAY, FOR THE DRAVVING UP A Musketeers. First practiced, in these
late VVarres of Germany: Communicated by my Lord Re^


The King of Swedens manner of drawing up a Brigade of Pikes, and Musketeers,
explained.
LEt the Reader be first pleased to take notice, that the ranckes of little
A'es are several Corporall-ships of Musketeers, consisting of 4. Rotts, each
6. deep, and the little P'es are three squadrons of Pikemen.

Secondly, it is to be known: That although every single Regiment may for a
shift, and upon some kind of service, stand for an entyre Brigade: yet because
the Regiments, usually consisting but of 1008. men, at the fullest of the list;
are not in a set battle strong enough for a Brigade: therefore 2. Regiments
commonly are taken in, to the making up of a strong and complete Brigade. This
foreknowne, the Letters and Arithmeticall figures, either over or under the
several bodies of Pikes and Musketeers, signify as follows.

A. The place of the Colonels in their place of Command before their own
Regiments. So that A1. is the first, eldest, or Right Hand Colonel: A 2. the
Left Hand Colonel. B. Shows the place of Command for the Lieutenant Colonells.
C. The Sergeant-Majors place. D. The Quarter-maister to the Regiment. E. The
Captaine-Lieutenant, or Colonell-Captaine. F. The Lieutenant-Colonels,
Lieutenant. G. The Sergeant-Majors Lieutenant. H1. H2. H3. H4. H5.
The several Captains in their order of Senioritie, or eldership: of which
there are but 5. besides the 3. great Officers of the Regiment; as Colonel;
Lieutenant-Colonels, and Sergeant-Majors; who also have Companies in the
Regiment, which are commanded by their Lieutenants: The Lieutenant to the
Colonel, having by the courtesy of Arms, the title of Captain: whose place
is above at E. L 1 L 2 L 3 L 4 L 5
The place for the Lieutenants of every Company^ according to the eldership of
their Captains. T 1 T 2 T 3 T 4 T 5 T 6 T 7 T 8
Sergeants of the several Bands, V. The Corporal of the Gentlemen, after their
Colors. X. The Sergeants in the Reere of their Pikes. Y. The Furryor for the
residue of the Ouertroupes. Z. The Captain of Arms, behind the Forlorn
troop. R. The Ancients following their Captains.
The former Figure concerning the manner of the Enquartering of every Regiment
of Foot, in the Kings Camp or Leaguer explained.
ON the head of the Quarter, you at first sight discern 9. larger Squares; at
either end of the Paper marked A. All which is called the Colonels or the
Captains ground, because there the Colonel lies, whereas you see the word
Colonest written: and the Captains in their seniority, as you see their Huts
or Cabbins marked, each on the head of his own Company.

The number over the Colonels Hutt, shows it to be 48. foot broad; that is
twice as broad as any of the Captains cabbins, which you see marked with 24.
At either end of this row of Squares, you see the number 30. marked: which
shows how many foot long, each of these greater Huts is.

Now whereas the King of Swedens Discipline is, usually to have but 8.
Companies to a Regiment, so many Huts you see on the top of the Quarter; 4. on
each side of the Colonels. And the reason of the King of Swedens having so few
men in a Regiment, as 1008. and so few men in a Company, as 126. (those 1008.
men being divided among 8. Captains) is, that he may both have the more
places of preferment, and the more Officers to command his few men. An
advantage which other Generals have not: who admit 3000. perchance, into a
Regiment, and 200. 250. or 300. into a Captainship.

The Rows of lesser Squares, marked on each side of B. are the Huts for the
Soldiers to lie in. Between the Front of which, and the Colonels ground, you
see a long void space or distance; which is 20. foot wide, as you see it at
each end marked.

The use of it is, for the drawing up of the Companies, or of some of them, or
for the meeting of Soldiers to speak with their Captains: and for fresher
air. This C.

Right under the Colonels Hutt you see another void space, as wide as the
Colonels Hutt is, and as long as all the Quarter for the Common soldiers is:
marked with D. The use of it is, for the Officers of the Regiment, commonly
called, the Officers of the Staff. Such be the Quartermasters of the Regiment,
the 2. Regiment-Schults; the Preachers, Clarke Surgeons; Prouost-Marshals;
Regiment-Weble, Stock-Knights, Drummer, Hangman, with others: as is to be seen
in the Kings Commission for the raising of a Regiment.

Of the Quarters for the Common Soldiers, on either side of this long void
space, these be the proportions. All the little Squares, be Hutts or Cabins of
wood. In the M. on the first Hutt, are the Musquettiers lodged; and in the
shorter P. be the Pikemen lodged; one row of Musquettiers, and one row of
Pikes, make up one complete Band, or Company of 126. Men. In the Musketeers
row, be 24. Huts; and in the Pikemens, but 18. The reason of which, see in the
King of Swedens Order for a private Company. Each of these Hutts is 9. foot
Square, that is, 3. yards every way: and whereas one row of Musketeers, and
one row of Pickes, belong to one Company; these therefore are nearer set
together then the rows of Pikes belonging to several Companies are; for the
Pikes and Musketeers of the same Company, are parted with a street, but 6.
foot wide; whereas betwixt the Pikes of several companies is a street of 18.
foot wide: and betwixt the Musquettiers of several Companies, a street of 12
foot wide. And so you see the several proportions marked. The length of the
Row of Pikes, is but 162. foot; as you see it marked betwixt the 2. first
Rows of their Hutts: and the length of the Musquettiers Row, is 216. foot; as
is marked in the Margent. Cast, now, the distances of Breadth, and they amount
to 360. foot: and so broad is the whole Quarter.

Below all this, in the Reere or lower end of the Quarter, you have avoid space
of 14. foot of ground, running all the breadth of the Quarter: serving again
for freedom E. And last of all may you behold another allowance of ground,
marked F. which is for the Marcketenters; that is, the Market-holders, Chapmen,
Victualers, and Sutlers of the Regiment. Add now, the distances of length
together, they come to 300. foot: which is the length of the whole Quarter, the
allowance of ground for one entire Regiment.

But the chief point of the Discipline, is in the number and order of the
placing of the Huts, and the men in them. Concerning the number, know, that
there be 3. men lodged in every Hutt, as well Pikes as Musketeers: so that in
the 24. Huts of Musketeers of one Company, there be 72. men: and in the 18.
Huts of Pikemen of one Company, there be but 54. men; which numbers added
together, come to 126; which is a complete Band or Company, in the Kings
Discipline.

These 72. Musketeers, again, be divided into 3. Corporalships: and the 54.
Pikemen also into 3. Corporalships. Of Musketeers, 4. Rotts or Files of
marching men, go to one Corporalship: And of Pikemen, there go but 3. Rotts
or Files, to a Corporalship. So that 24. Musketeers, go to one Corporalship;
and of Pikes 18. according to the number of either of their Cabbins. Whereas
again, the Kings Discipline is, ever to march 6. deep, or in File: therefore
in every 2. Huts, is there one Rot or File of men lodged, which presently know
how to put themselves into order. Thus has every Corporal of Musketeers, 8.
Hutts to look unto; and every Corporal of Pikes, 6. Cabins under him. This
certainty and disposing of the numbers, serves much for the private Government.

This order of lying, in the second place, does as much ^va^le for the
resisting of the Enemy. Whereas you see two Rows of Pikes, and two Rows of
Musketeers still together, with their Cabbindooers opening inward one toward
another, this is the use of it. Suppose the Enemy (in the night time perchance)
to be falling on upon the Leaguer or Quar^er, the Alarm being taken and given
in thereupon, by those that have the outter Guards, a good distance before
every Quarter: out step the two Rows of Pikes into the void ^^ace betwixt
them: and presently marching out between the Captains Hutts right before
them, they are instantly in ^aire order of battle. The Pikes gone, then the
two next Rows of Musketeers joining together, march also out on both sides of
their Pikes, where they are ready instantly to flancke them. Thus one Squadron
or half Regiment issuing out on one side of their Colonels Hutt, and the other
half on the other, presently draw themselves up into two complete Battaglias:
who still find their Colonel and Captain in the head of the Quarter (where
their Huts are) ready to conduct them. Thus so soon as the Alarm is given in
from the outter-Guards, the Soldiers shall be in fair Battaglia, every man
before his own quarter, upon which the Enemy falls; before he can possibly
(march he never so fast) come near to do any execution. If you desire to
hear how in that huddle and darkness, they can possibly find their weapons:
know that by the order of standing of them, eue^y man can at first coming most
readily clap his hand upon his own. To instance in the Pikes, for example. The
place where they all stand together, is upon a thing like a pair of Gallows
at the head of the Quarter, all along which they ^eane: So that after any
service or exercise done abroad, he that lies in the Reere of the quarter by
coming in first, sets down his Pike inmost; and he that comes in last, leaves
his outmost, which when he again goes first out, he finds foremost, and when
the last man comes, he finds his own left: every man still keeping the same
order that was at first appointed: So that the Foreman, the Right Hand man, or
the Bringer-vp, is the same ever, and his weapon therefore, ever in the same
place. Thus lie the King of Swedens men: in battle-array when they are in bed:
in battle-array when they rise up: and their Arms as ready as themselves; So
that if the Alarm be time enough given in, how shall any enemy surprise them?

The following Figure, for the layng of a Camp Royal, with the usual
Fortifications, explayned.
THe former Figure concerning the enquartering of a particular Regiment being
already explayned, this in hand, shall need the less labor: seeing that every
Regiment or Quarter, has here the same ground and order, as is before
described. Let it now suffice to tell you, what every Space and Fortification
about the whole Camp means: and for the understanding of that, we desire you
to look unto the Letters, that every of them is marked withal.

A Signifies the Parad^-ing place: whither the Soldiers be in their courses
daily called to be exercised, for the handling of their Arms. B The Kings
Majesty's own Quarter, where himself lies. C The place for the Artillery, and
the General of it. D The Common market place for the whole Army. E The
Felt-Marshals Quarter. G The place by him for his Guards and Servants. H The
General Major of the Army, his quarter. K The place for his Men and Guards. L
The several Regiments, to be divided as in the former Figure. M Squadrons, or
half Regiments. N The Streets betwixt the several Quarters: each 50. foot
void. O The space between the Front of the Quarters, and the Trench of the
Leaguer, being 200. foot wide: serving for the drawing up of the soldiers, and
for the Alarm place. P The space between the two innermost lines of the
Fortification is called the Parapett or Breast-worke. A Trench of earth it is,
cast up for the fortifying of the Leaguer to keep the Enemy off from the
quarters: being commonly five or six foot high, and some two Roodes over, or
in thickness. Q The Graffe or wet-mo^e unto the Parapet, which you see full of
little pricks: and is usually as broad as the Parapet. R And whereas you see
both Mote and Parapet on each side of the Camp three times led about, making
half Diamonds as it were; those be called halfe-Redoubts, or Ravelins, they
are marked with R. S The straight line of Moate and Parapet betwixt any of
these two, is called the Curtayne, and is marked with S. T Rights against the
sharp point of any of these half Redoubts, you see several passages through
the innermost Parapet, which serve for passage to those that are to guard them,
and are to fight in them: which passages, are perchance some 50. roods from one
another. They are marked with T. V Outmost of all* betwixt the halfe-Redoubts,
you see other like sharp and pointed works of Earth, with their Motes also
about them: which properly be called Rauelins. They are 2. on each side of the
Camp and each of them 20. Roodes distant from one another, and are marked with
V. W The faces or sides of them, be about 15. or 16. Roodes long: and are so
made, that a right line may on eytheriside or face be drawn to fall upon the
point, where the halfe-Redoubts and the Curtains meet. The use of them, is to
guard the 2. Avenues or Gates, which on either side of the Leaguer you see to
be open for common passages, both through the Parapet and the Mote: over which,
there must still lie little narrow bridges. These Avenues be marked with W.

This is the ordinary Fortification of a Leaguer; besides which, there be
Sconces and other works builded, according to necessity, and as the nature of
the place requires more or less.


The Figure for the Fortification of a (...)

Thus much is likewise further to be known. That the more Points these
Out-workes have, the stronger is the piece. This of ours, has but 6. points:
and one of 8. points, is stronger then this: one of ten, stronger then that:
and one of 12. points, strongest of all: then which, no stronger figure can
possibly be devised.

If here you look for the Gates and Ports to the Town; know, that those are
to be made thorough the Halfe-Moones; as you see it marked out in one of them
with little Touches or strokes; directing your eye out of one work into
another: which Gates are not to go out straight forward: but Winding and with
Nookes, as the Works be: which shall both be easier to defend by men placed in
every Corner: and shall keep the enemy from rushing directly forward upon the
Town.

FINIS.
THE FAMOVS Victory of Leipsich, now with several particulars enlarged; and
repeated from the beginning of the Union of the K of SWEDEN and the Duke of
SAXONY: from whence all that have written of it, do begin it.
The Reader is desired to look upon the two Mappes of the Battle, for the
better understanding of the story.
OVI ad pauca recipient, de facili pronuntiant, said the wise Historian: They
that consider but a few difficulties and objections, are still most ready to
deliver their opinion. It Is so common to be observed, that it may almost be
made the Character of a bad Scholar, to be most sudden and peremptory in
determining of the Question. And truly the same Indictment lies against our
overhastie State-Criticks, that at first dash think themselves wise enough to
direct the actions of a Prince, or to control the Consulta'es of a
Counsell-Table. Let such be pleased to know, that the resolutions of a State,
must like those of Justice proceed gravely and slowly, and full of Majesty.
Hasty Counsels, bring hasty ruins: rarely shall he that has once erred in
the wars, live to commit such another oversight. Seldom, again, is the
Inside and Reason of State, turned outward toward our vulgar Discoursers.
Princes know, that secrecy is the shell of business: the tenderness whereof
must not by an over-hastie or over-rough handling be rasht open, till the
preciousnesse of the life within, by a kindly ^^^uritie discloses of it self.

All this have I been bold to say, for that I the last year too often (me
thoughts) both read and overheard, the Protestant Princes of Germany to have
been blamed, by some such judgments as are before described. What does Saxony
and Brandenburg all this while, that they join not with the King of Sweden?
Others again (because they judge it fit) were as forward on the other side to
report, that they were already joined: and that full 10. Months before ever
themselves resolved upon joining. Plainly, the Princes of Germany (though they
satisfied not these men's expectations) showed themselves neither fools nor
cowards, in keeping the same distance both with the Emperor, and the King of
Sweden, that they did. Nor has it fallen out the worse for the King. An excuse
of the Germane Protestants, for not joining sooner with the King of Sweden.
No man knows, whither by their apparent making the King stronger, at the
first, they should have more set forward his business; or have endangered the
putting of him back, by bringing the united forces of the whole Empire at once
upon him: whereas he being thus single and secondlesse, insensibly thrived in
his design; before he was observed by the Emperor, to be more then a weak
and a despised enemy. Perchance too, their Defensive League amongst themselves
a musing of the Emperor; gained more time and advancement to the King of
Sweden, then if they had openly at first sided in with him. Besides these
private reasons therefore, which have not come so low as to men of my Form;
these (me thinks) which my simpleness could allege for them, might very
fayrely excuse them.

1 Their Resolutions in the Diet of Leypsich were, sincerely to continue their
loyalty and obedience toward their Lord the Emperor; till themselves should
for not ayding him, be invaded by him.

2. It had been no wisdom much sooner to have joined with the King, till
either he were strong enough to relieve them, or the Emperor so weak, as not
to annoy them: neither of which they could yet discover. All the Summer time
were the 3. Imperial Generals Furstenberg, Altringer, and Fugger, yet in
their Countries: nor had the King as yet beaten his way thorough unto them: for
that Tilly still kept in the wind of him, betwixt Pomeren and Saxony.

3. Had Saxony by declaring with the King, sooner provokt Tilly to fall upon
him, (either before the taking of Magdenburg, or after) never had the
Protestants been able to have assisted the King of Sweden.

4. If the maine of their objection still lies against the Duke of Saxony,
(the chief Engine indeed of all the motion:) they shall find him to have been
the less too blame, if they consider how strongly he was by the other party
laid at: so wrought he was by another finenesse, that notwithstanding he had
been earnestly enough solicited by the King, in time to provide for himself,
by a seasonable declaring on his side; had been foretold, what would one day
come of it: yet besides the difficulty that was in it, for him to discover the
Toil he was already gotten into: it had seemed a discourtesie against all the
civilities of Courtship, to have upon such terms, broken short off with the
Emperor. Flattery and Protestation (the two Court-Iuglers in ordinary) had
cast such a mist before the Dukes eyes, that it was not easy for him to
discover how the Leger-demain was conveyed against him. The Emperors
Ambassador all this while resident with him, had much courted and smoothed him
up, that his Highness services and endeerments to the Emperor, were too many
ever to be forgotten. Flattered up besides he was with that glorious style, of
being the Pillar of the Empire, and the Achilles of Germany. And as much plied
with warm clothes by some of his own Council he was: who though his
servants, were yet the Pensioners of the house of Austria. But for all this,
could those of other Nations by broad daylight discern, that the Elector of
Saxony was likely another day to find no other favor at the Emperors hands,
then what Ulysses, of old, requested of the Giant Polyphemus, to be the last
man that should be eaten. This error and danger of his own, the Duke at
length (by the light of his own Country now all on a flame about his ears.)
came to have the sight of: which with a just indignation he in some high terms
represented unto the Emperors Ambassador, at his final dismissing him from his
Court. Then could he discern, that the kiss which the Ambassador at parting
offered to his hand, was but a Judas kiss, and so was he bold to call it.

Then did he remember also, how little either his own former intercessions, or
those of other Protestant Princes, for a good peace, had hither to been
respected by the Catholics: and that a many of them had all this while been
of the Duke of Bavaria's opinion, who in the year 1620. suffered (and
perchance with applause too) this following passage, (and that in public
Oration then made before him, by way of Congratulation for the taking of
Prague, and the Proscribing of the Prince Palatine,) to be put upon our most
peaceable Solomon, our well-meaning Nathaniel, King James; Intercesserat pro
Palatino filio, idque Oratorum fuco, magnae Britanniae Rex: quos spernendos
esse, optimo exemplo docuit serenitas vestra. For the Palatine his son had
the King of great Britain interceeded by some counterfeit pretenses of his
Ambassadors: which Ambassadors that they ought to be despised, your Highness
has taught by an excellent example. Thus much (Isay) did the Duke of Bavaria
not only suffer to be audibly pronounced before him, but publicly to be
imprinted also: as if they little cared who knew it, so be they had power to
maintain it. The Duke of Saxony beginning now to be more apprehensiue of all
this, and perceiving at the same time the General Tilly to pinch upon him; to
be already with fire and sword fallen into his Country: Sergeant Major
General Altringer to be coming against him by the way of Duringen: and
Diepenbach the Field-Marshall, to be advancing out of Silesia; both intending
to join with Tilly: away is the Lord Arnheym disp^^ded toward his Majesty of
Sweden; to make humble demand of his royal assistance. The King now prizing
his own power, and the Dukes need of it, at higher rates then himself when he
had formerly made proffer of it, would have been content to have afforded it
for: delivers these five demands unto Arnheym, to be carried to his Master.

1. The union betwixt the D. of Saxony and the King.
That the Elector should consigne over the Town of Wittenberg into his
Majesty's hands; both for his passage and retreat.

2. That he should send his Son to remain for hostage in the Kings Army.

3. That the Elector should presently advance 3. months means aforehand, for
the payment of the Kings Army.

4. That the Dukes false Counselors should be delivered to the King, or be
punished by himself according to their demerits.

5. That the Elector should engage his Faith and Honor to the King, ever to
stand pressed to adventure both his life and fortunes, yea and his Electorate it
self in defense of the Reformed Religion.

To see how men's present necessities can prevail over the stiffenesse of their
former resolutions. He that would at no hand treat with the King before, now
sends him more satisfaction then he expected. This was the Dukes answer.

1. That not his Town of Wittenberg alone, but his whole Country was from
thence-forth at his Majesty's devotion.

2. That he would not only send his Son, but himself in person would wait
upon his Majesty's Army.

3. As for making the three months pay down upon the nail; that he professed
himself at the instant not able to satisfy his Majesty in: but one months
means he would presently make tender of; and security for the other two.

4. Were but those false Counselors once named unto him, he would himself see
condign punishment inflicted upon them.

5. That he was not ready to expend his fortunes, and what ever else he had; but
to engage his life for the Religion: promising from that time forth, to stick
most closely unto the King.

This answer being cheerfully, and with much assurance delivered by the
Ambassador, the King says, That he would try the Duke, whither he were in
good earnest or not. Passing his Army therefore over the Bridge of Wittenberg,
and leaving a Garrison of his own within the Town: to Dieben he goes to meet
the Electors of Saxony and Brandenberg; as in our other book we before told
you. There was it in private consultation betwixt these three Princes
deliberated; A consultation, wherein the King seems to dissuade the Battle.
whither it were best presently to bid the enemy battle, or to make a longer
war of it. The votes were a little divided at the first. The King (to try
what metal the Duke was made of) frames some reasons to draw the war out
into length: against which the Duke makes use of these two Arguments.

1. Saxonies Arguments for the Battle.
That it concerned himself speedily to fight, that he might free as soon as
might be, his Subjects and Dominions of the enemy.

2. That it also as much concernd the King too: for that the Country now half
taken by the enemy, was not long able to maintain two such armies.

That the Duke sourged to the battle, was not, I suppose, because his courage
was more then the Kings; but because his necessities were more personal, and
more pressing. If he sought not, all were lost; and if he were overthrown,
all were out lost then: much more honorable besides it was, to dye for his
Country, in the field, in a brave battle; then to live the Emperors Bandite or
Almes-man for a while; and either to die without an Epitaph, or have that of a
coward, branded, rather then engraven upon his Tombstone. This hanging off of
the Kings, drew, no doubt, the Ties something the straighter, which he before
had upon the Duke: engaged him (perchance) into some new promises, and privater
obligations. Thus did the wise King finely suffer himself to be drawn into
the hazard, chiefly upon the opportunity of the Duke: keeping to himself the
inward contentment that he found, to see Saxony now so forward; and concealing
the reason of war withal, The Battle agreed upon.
which privately called upon him to hasten the encounter, as much as it did Tilly
to defer it: whom these of his own side (now the battle is lost) condemn
for fighting. Well the Duke of Saxony that had been thus forward in the advice, would also be as forward in the enterprise: For I find him the first
man in the field; which the King was willing to permit also: for besides that
it was an honor to the Duke to be the forwardest in fighting for his own
Country, the King who (as the proverb is) knew well enough how to lead his
men; though he drove not the Saxons before him, yet was he the surer of them by
having them thus before him.

Much about this time (as the report goes) did the General Tilly (out of the
fatal bravary of a confident Soldier, and the inevitableness of his own
destiny) invite his own overthrow, Tilly invites the King to fight with him.
by a Trumpet sent unto the King, with a message to this purpose: That as he
was a brave Cavalier, he should come and give him a Battle. This low term of
Cavalier, the Kings heroical spirit receiving with a just disdain, (as it is
said) trampled upon the Letter, thus replying withal unto the Trumpet: What!
does your General think me worthy of no better a style then of a Cavalier? I
am a King; and tell him I shall well find him out. Tilly upon receipt of this
message, prepares his Army, as if to accept of a victory, rather then to fight
much for it; and very welcome to his men, was the tidings of a pitched battle:
so confident they were of their own strength (which they counted invincible)
and so glad of the opportunity. What says the Count of Pappenheym, (Field
marshall unto Tilly,) when he saw the blood prodigiously dropping from the
houses at Hall, where he then was; must we bleed? will the King of Sweden
bear us? that is impossible. Proclamation hereupon is through every Quarter of
the Leaguer made, that upon the hearing of certain warning pieces, every man
should repair to his colors and to his order. Some of Tillyes Council of
war were of opinion, that having fortified their leaguer, it were best to
expect the Swedens falling on upon it, as they had done them at Sweds and
Werben. But the most voices and courages prevailed, that it were more honor to
meet the enemy in the field, whom perchance they might take unprovided. Upon
the fatal 7. of September therefore being Wednesday; the General Tilly with
full 44000. brave men, first advances from his Leaguer into the field. The
place of the battle.
The place, was a goodly fair plain field, (part whereof had been ploughed)
about a mile from the Town of Leipsich. Part of Tillyes Leaguer was near unto
the common burying place without the City walls, usually in Germany called
Gods Acre Some have affirmed it to have been the very same place, where the
Emperor Charles the 5th. did heretofore overthrow Maurice then Duke of
Saxony. But this conjecture of theirs, seems to be contradicted by Sleidan;
who assigns the place of that former victory to be, ad silvam Lochanam, the
wood of Lochan: which they of the Germane Nation, affirm to be nearer unto
Hall: 18. or 20. English miles from Leipsich. Upon this plain aforesaid, there
is a rising ground, a little hill and a wood likewise toward the West:
whereabouts (with a fatal Omen) the place of execution also is; as you may
perceive described in the first Map. Here had Tilly (like a prudent General
that was careful for all advantages) at first placed himself; the Hill,
besides that it served him commodiosly to plant his Canon upon; was very easy
withal for him to descend: but very troublesome on the other side, for the
Swedes to climb up unto. The wood served him, both to hide his men in at
first, and for a retreat afterward for them, if they should be put unto it.
The watch word for his Army was Sancta Maria; or as some High Dutch Relations
say, Mary the Mother of God. The token to know one another by, was white
strings, or ribbands, about their arms and in their helmets: as if they had
been Diademes, and that that day would have made them all Kings.

The union being thus made, and the battle concluded upon, betwixt the Kings
Majesty of Sweden, and their Highnesses the Electors of Saxony and
Brandenburg; the King having first over-viewed the Armies, upon Tuesday Sept.
6. commands a Bid-day, or day of more solemn prayers throughout every
Quarter. The devotions ended; the Army in fair array moved that night from
Dieben, (4. Dutch miles from Leipsich) till they came within 2. Dutch miles
(some 6. or 8. English miles) of the enemy: where putting out good Guards and
watches, they for that night rested. That same night had the King a strange
dream, The King of Swedens dream.
(a divine one no doubt) thus. His Majesty thought in his sleep, that he had
his enemy Tilly fast by the hair of the head, which for all his struggling, he
would not let go, until Tilly seemed to bite him by the left side. This upon
the success of the battle was thus interpreted. That the King should have the
upper hand of his enemy; and that Tilly should defeat the Duke of Saxony,
who had the left side and hand of the King in the day of battle. The next
morning (being the fatal day Wednesday Sept. 7. (which the Germane Writers
call diem Reginae) they before day light were upon their march again. The
Armies in view one of another.
Being come near to the Village called Scholcka, marked in the Map with the
letters Ee: they might there discrie the Enemy upon the advantage of the
rising ground, which we before spoke of. Tilly was at first a little deceived
by his skowtes and Espialls: who upon the first discovering of the Saxon forces
in the gray morning, had brought him too hasty word, that the Duke of Saxony
was only then a coming. By 8. or 9. of the clock had the Imperialists a full
view of both the Protestant Armies: and Tilly full well knowing of a
troublesome passage they were to have through the bushes and dirt at the
foresaid Town of Scholcka; thither sent he some lighter Troops to disturb
them. Tilly sends to disturb their passage; and the stratagem used.
These Vant-Curriers, besides the skirmishing with which they entertained them;
did by setting fire to certain trains of Gunpowder, purposely scattered on
the ground, seek by the smoke thereof (which the wind at that time blew full
into the Protestants faces) to blind and trouble their putting of themselves
into order. But neither did this powder plot take effect, neither force nor
stratagem^ could at that time serve their turns; for in despite of both
these, is the passage gained: which being once made, the Protestants
immediately begin to marshall themselves into that order, which they had
before agreed to fight in. Perceiving the Tillians therefore, to present
themselves in a mighty large Front; and the wings of their battle to be
extend^d full 2. English miles in length: they to prevent hembing in, (as not
willing to accept the kindness of an Enemy, to be brooded under his goodly
wings, he being a bird of another feather) divide themselves into two Armies.
The Duke of Saxony takes his way toward the left hand, and the King toward
the right. The Protestants divide into two Armies.
The Duke stretched his left wing as long out, as Tilly had done his right;
which was as far as the Town of Ietzschlitz, in the Southern edge of the
Map marked with Ff: the end of Tillyes right wing being betwixt him and the
Village of Schausen, here marked with Gg: His right wing he in like manner also
stretched out quite over the high way, till it almost touched with the Kings
left wing. The King wheeling more about to the right hand, gat the Village of
Podelwitz at his back, here marked with the letter O. Still as the Armies
advanced toward the Enemy, their Ordnance (the loud music of a battle)
went playing on before them. The Dukes Ordnance, are in the Map marked with
Hh: The Kings smaller field-peices with P: And his Demie-Canon with Q: which
were commodiously planted before every Division.

The Army of the Catholike-Leaguers having by a warning piece been drawn
together, before the standing Camp near Leipsich; were after half an hours
pause upon the place, fair and softly caused to advance into the open field.
Passing therefore beyond the Villages of Lindenthal, (usually called Linckell)
in the right hand upper corner of the Map, marked with B: And little Wiederwitz
marked with C: And great Wiederwitz marked with D: Tilly advances into the
field.
And Breitenfield marked with A: From which last Town some more light horse
Troops being sent abroad for intelligence, the whole Army fairly followed to
the little wood marked with E: and the Gallows marked with F: Here Tilly
making a stand had word brought him, that both the King and Duke were already
gotten over the durtie passage, and were in divided Armies, both upon their
march toward him. Tilly hearing of this news; Now fellow Soldiers (says he)
we must look for blows. Resolving therefore to keep the advantage of that
higher ground to fight upon; he first of all in several places causes his
Ordnance to be planted, which are here marked with G: disposing in the next
place of the order of his battle. Making choice therefore of the old form of
fighting in great square Bodies, (of which the Map shows you the mighty
Fronts only; so much, namely, as at the joining of the battles presented it
self unto the Swedens view:) he thus marshalls his formidable forces. The
whole Army he divides into three usual parts, the maine Battle namely, and
the two wings. The right wing was commended unto Eggon Count of Furstenberg,
His order of battle.
with those conquering Italian Troops; which since their coming out of
Italy, had brought the Circles of Schwaben and Franconia under contribution.
This right wing is marked with L: and by Furstenberg himself, stands the
letter M: The left wing, consisting most of the Germane Nation, was commanded
by the Count of Pappenheym; he whose memory is yet so dear unto those of
Magdenburg. This wing is known by the letter H: and Pappenheyms self by the
letter I: Upon this wing was the flower of the Horse placed: because they were
to confront the King of Sweden himself; with whom they supposed, would come
the bravest Soldiers of the Army. The maine Battle or middle-ward was led by
the gallant Tilly himself; wherein were his old Wallons and Burgundians, and
braver Germane Troops. These were the credit and strength of his foot-forces.
You may know Tillies own place, by the letter K: set over his head, near the
high ways side, about the middle of the Map. And in this array stood this
(by themselves supposed) Invincible Army, expressing a great deal of desire
to be at it.

The King of Sweden upon the first full view of the Imperial Army, (now
within a league of him:) showing them unto his own men, rides from Regiment to
Regiment, and from rank to rank, with a loud voice asking of his Soldiers;
Come on, Comrades, will you fight to day for the name of Jesus Christ! This
question was by the whole Army presently answered with the Echo of this
joyful acclamation, Vivat Gustavus Adolphus, vive, vive, vive. The King
observing the brave resolution of his Soldiers, calls immediately a Trumpet
unto him: to whom he openly delivering a Letter, alowd commanded him to carry
it unto the General Tilly. The King sends a Letter unto Tilly.
This Letter having been that morning written in the Field, had the King
communicated the Contents of, unto his great Officers: which were; That he
desired to see the General Tilly in the Field; and to that purpose he now
attended for him.

Tilly upon receipt of this Letter, Tillyes answer.
bad the Trumpet to assure the King his Master, that he for his part had never
refused to fight with him; that he would now meet him half way: and that the
King well knew where to find him. These two last passages concerning the Kings
speech unto his Army, and his Letter unto Tilly; are written by Chaimaries a
French Captain, that day serving the King of Sweden.

Now began the King to dispose of the array of his Army. Those 18. or 20000.
men which he led along with him; he devides, like his enemy, into three parts:
and each of these again into the Vantguard and the Arrierguard. The Kings
order of Battle.
The Van or Fore-ward of the Right wing, marked with the letter R, his
Majesty's self commanded: whose place in the Battle you may perceive by the
Letter S. Here were the bravest and best armed Horsemen: and these well lyned
with Musketeers, and guarded with some pieces of Ordnance also before them.
The proportion of the Musketeers that lyned the Horsemen, was about 100, to 8
troops of Horse, says Chaimaries, one with another. The Reere or Hinder-ward
of the same Right wing, marked with the Letter Z; was committed unto Sir John
Bannier, General of the Foot: by whom stand the Letters A a. The left wing,
marked with X, was led by the brave Gustavus Horn, Feild-Marshall unto his
Majesty: whom you may find out by the Letter Y. The Arrier-guard of the same
wing was left unto Colonel Hall: whom you may see at the Letters D d. His
troops were those three Horse-Regiments which you see under him; marked with
the numbers 87, 88, 89. The Van of the maine Battle or middle-ward, whose
character is the Letter T, was committed unto the sober and valiant Gentleman,
the Baron Dyvell: whose place is by the Letter V. This Van consisted of Foot
altogether: which being divided into four Brigades of Pikes and Musketeers,
were ordered by So do several High Dutch Relations name him: but whether
rightly or no, I cannot learn. I rather think it should be Axel Oxenstiern.
Acko, Oxenstiern, Erick Hand, and Winkell, all Colonells. Before this part,
you see the Ordnance placed, and immediately behind it (for the greater
strength) are there three Divisions of Scottish Musketeers placed; mingled
among twice five troops of Horse, of the Kings own Guards. The Reere of the
same maine Battle known by the Letters B b: consisting of three Brigades of
Foot, was committed unto the well tried Sir John Hepburne, (commonly called
Hebron:) who fought in person in the middlemost of those three Brigades: and is
to be found at the Letters C c. The Brigade on the right hand, was led by the
young Count of Turn: and that on the left hand, by Colonel Vitzthimb, a brave
Soldier.

These three Brigades, (wherein some English and many Scots were) were
accounted among the best and surest men of the Army: and called The Reserve of
the Battle. Behind these, are two half Regiments of Horse, of five troops
apeice; commanded by Colonel Schaffman, and Col. Cochtitsky.

And this was the Kings admirable order of Embatteling: which you shall much
the better please your self in the reading of; if you will take the pains but
to look for every thing in the Map, as you go along. A new kind of
Marshalling was this unto Tilly, which as much helped to beat him, as the
valor of the men did, that fought in it. Every part of it, consisted of
several Maniples and small Bodies of men: of which if any one were
overthrown, there was nothing so much hurt done, as when one of Tillyes
greater Battaglions were broken: and they might much easier, (by reason of the
nimblenesse of their motion, and the small space of ground which they took up
to move in) be supplied by one another. And if the thinness of the Files (as
being never above six deep) were not able (it is true) to bear off any great
shock or impression; yet by bringing, by that means, more hands to fight at
once, then the enemies order possibly could do; they were able on the sudden
to do the more execution. Upon the sight of it in the Map, you will r^^dily
make this judgment: That one part so fences, so backs, so flancks one another:
is so ready to second, to relieve one another: so apt, either to send out
succors; or to receive into their hinder-wards or rancks, any of their former
fellows that shall happen to be over-layd: that the whole Army looks like
some impregnable City, with its Bastiles, its Towers, its Bulwarks, and
several Retreates about it. So that well may the men be killd; but very hardly
shall the whole order be rowted. And of this we have experience in this Battle:
where there was not (that I can find) any one Regiment put to flight, but
Collenbachs Horse only. The less marvel then it is if God with us, and this
order of Embatteling, invented by this new (but royal) Captain: gave so full
an overthrow to the eldest and best General of the world. And yet has the
King more of these Forms of Battle invented by himself: every one to fit the
enemy, the ground, and the occasion.

The Duke of Saxonies Army consisting of 14000. men, and no more, as I am since
informed, (the two Regiments of the Count of Solmes, and the Baron Hoftkirck
being sent Toward Bohemia as I suppose: for I find them to be Governors of
Prague afterward. To which place they were thought fittest to be sent; as having
been there in the former wars and in the Battle of Prague also: where they
then served on the King of Bohemiaes side.
away:) was also divided into the Battle and the two wings. The Body or maine
Battle, was directed by his Highness the Duke himself: whose place you know
by the Letters K k. Before him stand his great Ordnance; marked with H h. The
right wing was led by the valiant Lord John George Arnheym; whose place you may
see at the Letters M m. The left wing is to be known by the Letters I i: but
who commanded there, I find not expressed. Perchance it might be either
Bindhauff, Sergeant Major General to the Duke; or Swalbach, that day General
of the Ordnance: for these two were the greatest Officers of the Field, next
unto Arnheym the Felt-Marshall. The Duke of Saxonies order.
And this was the Saxons order: being the ancient and usual manner of
Embatteling.

What the several Numbers, Letters, and Arithmeticall figures in both Mappes
mean; we shall anon tell you, after the description of the victory.

The Watchword for both these Protestant Armies, was, GOT MIT VNS, God with
us: and their Tokens, Green Branches in their hattes or helmets; with which
ere night their brows were crowned, as with victorious Lawrells. Advancing in
this equipage into the place of Battle; upon the said Plain, which Tilly had
fayrey left for them: behold an Omen, which a Roman Augur would have esteemed
for a most fortunate abodement. Upon that empty place of ground whereon the
King was to fight, there sat a flock of birds (which had indeed been
observed there some days before, by the Countrymen; and to have fought there
too, with another flock, A lucky Omen to the King.
then beatten away by them) which birds being sprung by the Kings Vantcurryers,
took their flight directly toward Tillyes Army: and there fetching a circle
about (and that also would the Romans have accounted for a happy presage)
they turned again toward the Kings Army: as who would say, we went to fetch
you victory. and Another to the Duke of Saxony.


The Duke of Saxony had another good encouragement to his Army also: a
milke-white Dove, namely, hovering very low, and almost sitting upon a Cornet
or Horsemans Ensign: which also setcht a circuit afterward, about the Dukes
Army. But the King had a better Augury on his side, then a flight of birds: His
Motto or Watchword, God with us: and that which the Roman General sometimes
preferred before the birds, Romano milite dignus, Ensis adest augur: his
valor* namely, and his Sword.

Being now ready to come unto the shock, The Battles join.
Army to Army; some struggling there was at first for the wind: which then
blowing from the West, was full in the Imperialists back, and the Protestants
faces. This advantage the King being desirous to recover, and the enemy as
eager to keep, and both sides wheeling about for that purpose; not only the
Horsemen had some Skirmishes together, but the Foot also came to push of Pike.

In this heaving and shoving too and again, Some struggling for the wind.
the King with some part of his right wing wheeling about from O toward A;
that is, from the village of Podelwitz, toward Breitenfeild; edging still
along to recover some point of the West: had with much ado gotten up the hill,
something nearer toward the little wood, where part of Pappenheyms men lay:
who in striving to keep the wind, was forced to come under the command of
the Kings Ordnance. The Imperialists every where had very commodiously also
planted some pieces of Canon upon the hills-side: which made it a desperate
piece of service for the Swedes, directly in the enemies faces, to ascend; yea,
the higher ground it self was something troublesome to mount also: which they
made the less have to do, because they were not fully yet in order. The Fight
was about twelve a clock begun with their great Ordnance. Tilly on his side
gave fire to the first three pieces: which did little or no hurt unto the
Swedens: The Fight begun with great Ordnance.
and the King (as his manner is) put his Linstock to the two first pieces:
which notwithstanding it was done at something a far distance, and therefore
laughed at by the enemy, as if the Royal Canonier durst have come no nearer:
yet (as the Kings own Printed Relation says,) they undoubtedly hit their
mark. Tilly from his Battle played hard upon the King, with three half
Curtoes or half Canons especially: which were again answered with as much
fury. The hideous roar of the Canon on both sides, made the very earth to
tremble; and continuing for two hours together, made many a brave man to
groan his last. The Imperialists shot diverse artificial fireworkes, and
Grenades also; whereof some being old, and their touch-holes rustie, did not
break in the fail: so that having done no hurt, they were taken up whole
afterward. Tillyes Ordnance (whereof he had some very great pieces) did most
hurt upon the Kings left wing, where Gustavus Horn commanded.

The thunder of the Canon about two a clock gave quite over. At which time the
Count of Pappenheym with the Horse of his left wing, gives the first charge
upon the Kings right wing.

The Duke Adolphus of Holsteyn was the first that seconded the Horse,
Pappenheym charges the King in the right wing.
with his Regiment of Foot: who, whilst together with the Horse, he wheeled
too hastily about to recover the whole advantage of the wind from the King,
(one point whereof the King had with much ado gained:) both Horse and Foot
were so far advanced before their fellows, that they were even parted from
the rest of their left wing. These having too rashly engaged themselves by the
ears with the Kings Horse, found themselves so galled by the Musketeers, with
which the Kings Horse-troupes were lyned, (which they there little looked for: by
reason the Musketeers being our-commanded men could not at first be discerned,
because they had no Colors with them) that they were quickly made to get them
further off. Traversing thereupon their ground about to the left hand; and
thrusting in betwixt the Kings right wing, The D. of Holstein charges Bannier
in the Reere of the right vving.
and the maine Battle; they there fell foul upon the Reere of the Kings right
wing, where the General Bannier commanded. After them, the King immediately
sent some able troops; which both utterly separated them from the rest of
their fellows, and cloased them in withal: so that betwixt them and Bannier;
they were (as the Baron of Cronenberg writes) utterly cut in pieces. The Duke
of Holsteyn receiving a shot in the knee, The Duke of Holstein taken prisoner.
was at that instant taken prisoner: of which wound he within few days after,
dyed at Eilenburg.

The rest of Pappenheyms Foot being thus deprived of the most of their Horse,
and not succored time enough by Tilly with his Battle; was with the less
trouble afterward defeated by the Kings Right wing. Pappenheyms left vving
defeated.
Here was Pappenheyms self wounded; made to forsake the Field, and to leave
all his Ordnance behind him.

The King in the beginning of the fight perceiving the enemy to charge very
hardly upon his men; The King alights to pray.
alighting (as Dan. Heinsius in his Panegyric affirms) from his horse; prays
upon his bended knees unto God for the victory: imitating herein the godly
Emperor Theodosius, who did as much in a day of Battle.

The General Tilly perceiving it to go hard with his left wing, Tilly charges
Gustavus Horn in the left wing.
draws with his Battle from about the little Wood; and down the hill he
comes. With him was the chief strength of the Foot; old Soldiers the most of
them: though never so well beaten Soldiers, as that day they were. Sixteen
brave Regiments there were of them; and those divided into four great Spanish
Brigades; their Horsemen also, on both sides, proudly prancing upon their
flancks. Right opposite unto him, was Gustavus Horn with his left wing: upon
him therefore General Tilly instantly sets; upon him he twice or thrice
charges with great bravery: which charges, Horn with as much resolution both
endures and returns. Tilly at length finding himself shrewdly rubbed
thereabouts with the lyning of the Swedish Horse-troupes, and some smaller
Drakes and Feild-peices withal: begins on the sudden to turn his whole
order; so that leaving a part of his Battle of Foot, and the most of his
Horse to hold Gustavus Horn play: he converts all his fury upon the Duke of
Saxony. With Tilly and his Battle, Tilly and Furstenberg both together fall
upon the Saxons,
did the Count of Furstenberg at the same time piece in, with his left wing
also: so that all the Duke of Saxonies Army (excepting some few of Arnheyms in
the Right wing, which stood next unto the Swedens left wing:) were at once
engaged. Two or three Charges the Saxons endured well enough; but the westerly
Wind carrying the smoke and dust full into their eyes, and Tillyes weighty
bodies of his Spanish Brigades, falling too heavily upon the new-levyed Saxons:
and upon the Dukes own Guards especially (amongst which himself fought) that
not able longer to endure the fury of the old Wallons, Germans, and
Burgundians; they begin to give ground a little at the first: and to run
quite away a little after. Furstenberg in like manner pressed so hard upon the
Dukes left wing; that they presently followed the example of their Countrymen;
and rowt them.
and distrusting their Arms, committed themselves as fast as could be unto
their heels. Steynau a Saxon-Colonell of a Horse-Regiment, was with four
Cornets there taken prisoner by Furstenberg, who at last when his keepers
began to be overthrown, apprehending the presentnesse of the advantage brake
loose, and assisted those of his own side. And here was the Lord Bindauff
Sergeant-Major General unto the Duke of Saxony slain, before the Baron of
Cronenbergs Regiment: as that Baron writes. Thus the most of the Saxon Foot,
and many of their Horse, were either slain, taken prisoners, or fled the
Field: leaving all their fair Ordnance to the mercy of the enemy: who
presently after, began to turn those Pieces upon the Swedens. But as if it
had not been shame enough, thus fowly to have left the Field; they were no
sooner out of the reach of the enemy, but they fell to pillage their own
Wagons by the way: that so they might at least seem to be Conquerours; in
carrying home the Spoils of the wars, though not of their enemies.

The Imperialists now seeing the Saxons fleeing, News of the Victory carried
to the Emperor.
cry, Victoria, victoria, follow, fellow, follow: but the old Lad their
General quickly countermaunded that, saying, Let them go, we shall overtake
them time enough: but let us beat the Swedes too, and then all Germany is our
own. But so good was this news, that some Posts are presently dispeeded away
toward the Emperor at Vienna, with the most welcome tidings of Victory: Some
Cornets of the Saxons being there showed, and some scornful and disgraceful
words among, being added against the Duke of Saxony.

The most of the Saxons being thus rowted; Arnheym (as it is said) still made
good the place. With him, were the best of the Dukes Horse; and the best of
them too, the Dukes own Horse-guards, that day commanded by
Leiftenant-Colonell Tauben, a valiant Gentleman. Eight troops he had besides,
of Duke William of Saxon-Altenburg: together with some of the
Countrey-Gentlemens, and of his own.

The most of these (as I said) had Tilly slipped by, with a touch only upon
them. Hereabouts fell there out a pretty encounter, worthy not to be
overpassed. A single Combat.
Thus* A gallant Imperial Cavalier perceiving a Saxon, Rit-maister or Captain
of a troop of Horse, to behave himself bravely in the head of his troops;
presently putting spurs unto his Horse and ryding up unto him, bends his
Pistol upon him; and engages him in a single combat. The Saxon would not give
it off neither: but there their Horses being shot under them, too it on foot
they go with sword and pistol. Both (to be brief) are there slain; and
both, (as their destinies directed it) fell down dead together, one upon
another: and Death, who having been at so many Duells, knowing himself now
able enough to judge who had best done; gave the honor of it unto the
Saxon-Champion, by laying him uppermost in the fall. And there still lay he
upon his enemy; as if he meant to follow him into the next world, and to fight
with him there too: and even the pangs of death fluttering their arms about,
and their dying pulses punching one at another; made that seem like another
combat. The loss of blood having also made their faces look pale; that color
of anger made a show, as if their unappeased spirits had been yet at it.

While Tilly and Furstenberg were in action with the Saxons, those Horse which
he (as has been said) left in fight with Gustavus Horn; came not so
victoriously off from the Swedes, as their General had done from the Saxons.
This action, Gustavus Horn himself, thus writes of. All their Horse (says
he) fell upon my left wing; Gustavus Horn defeates those that chargd him.
who were soon dispersed and put to flight: and contrarily the Duke of
Saxonies Foot, almost left the Field.

Whilst yet the enemy pursued the Saxons, our left wing charged into their
flanck, and upon their two troops of Reserve: and in this posture we fought a
long time, and lost many of our Horse. But finally after I had soundly charged
the enemies Battle with that Regiment of the Gothish Horse, which his Majesty
sent me for assistance: together with the commanded Musketeers which had
been placed by the King in the left wing: the enemy began to grow thin and
to fall away; whereupon their Battle presently broke; being all put to
flight, excepting four Regiments: who by reason of the smoke and dust were so
shadowed from our sight, that they saved themselves. Thus far this conquering
pen writes.

Those that Horn thus overthrew; were one or two perchance, of those four
great Brigades belonging to Tillyes maine Battle. So that there yet remains
the rest of them which were peiced in with Furstenbergs left wing; whom we are
next to enquire after.

The Earl of Furstenberg having sorely raked the Saxons, and charged quite
thorough them; was with his own Regiment thus in the heat of blood and
valor, quite parted from the rest of his own wing. Supposing therefore his
days work to be done with the Saxons, whom the rest of his men had put to
flight: he with his own Regiment of foot, flies amain upon the Swedens
again. Furstenberg charges the Reere of the Swedens left vving:
It was the Reere of the left wing, which was then next before him, that he now
chanced upon. There did Colonel Hall, a brave Gentleman Command. Hall having
there a Regiment of twelve troops of his own Horse (whose place in the Map
is at 88.) Charges (says Chaimaries; Is defeated and wounded by Hall: who is
slain himself also.
that was one of his Captains in another Foot. Regiment that Hall had) into
the Imperial Foot; and with not much labor, cut them all in pieces. And
here, I suppose, it might be, that the Count of Furstenberg was wounded: whence
being carried off sorely spoiled, he was reported to have been slain: but of
that, we are otherwise since informed. Nor did Colonel Hall come off clearly
with his victory; for by default of his breast plate (which was not of full
proof) he was slain by a Musket-Bullet upon the place.

It seems that Hall had followed Furstenberg, even unto the point of the left
wing of the Kings Army: because that Chaimaries presently subjoynes, That his
Colonel ( Hall) was separated in this fight from the rest of the Army;
excepting from the brave Cavalier Colonel Collenbach; with whom (says he) I
was. Now Collenbachs place in the Battle, the Map shows to be in the end of
the left wing: where he has five troops of Horse, at the number 57. and five
more, at the number 59: So that Chaimaries place must needs be at the number
58: where he was one of those Foote-Captaines that led those 360. Musketeers
of Halls men, which at that time lyned Collenbachs Horse, which were 800. in
number: in which very place, Chaimaries sets himself, in a Map of the
Battle drawn by his own hand; which came over with his Letter. This inquiry
helps us to know, whereabouts the chief of the Encounter at that time was:
wherein you may satisfy your self, by looking into the Map. No sooner were
Furstenbergs Foot defeated; but 7000. or 8000. of those Imperialists that had
discomfited the Saxons; were discovered upon the place where the Saxons had
been lately Marshalled. The dust and smoke were so great, that they were upon
Collenbach ere he was aware: and yet as near him as they were, not being able
to discern their Colors; he knew not whether they were friends or foes. The
same doubt possesses the Imperialists also; who being so near Collenbach,
never offered so much as to charge him: imagining, perchance, that he might be
some of their own maine Battle, which Gustavus Horn had thereabouts of late
defeated. At last (says Chaimaries) my mind gave me that they were enemies;
yea I told Collenbach that they were not our men. And by this time had the
enemy disc^rned us too: whereupon turning two pieces of Ordnance upon us, which
they had taken from the Duke of Saxony; they let fly amongst us. Just at this
time came the King ryding up unto us, crying to Collenbach, Charge, man, a Gods
name: whereupon his Majesty's own self led us on against the enemy; saying,
That he must finish the work that we had begun: Collenbach thereupon
advancing, (and the King going away to look to other places) is presently
encountered with ten Cornets of Horse, who at the first or second Charge, slew
all his Officers and Cornets, that commanded before four of his troops upon
the right hand of his Regiment: Col Collenbach slain by the Imperialists.
yea the Colonel Collenbach himself was there shot dead upon the place; all
his Horse of the four troops aforesaid, fleeing thereupon. The Imperialists
who had the smoke in their eyes, discerned them not: but I (says Chaimaries)
discerning the enemy, commanded all my Musketeers to give fire at once upon
them. The same Imperialists rowted by other of Collenbachs men.
They thereupon wheeling about to the left hand, were entertained by the other
four Cornets of Collenbachs Regiment: who gave them so courageous a Charge,
that they drove them even to the gates of Leipsich. Thus much writes Chaimaries
of the actions of that part of the Battle, where himself served.

The King of Sweden having (as has been said) set on Collenbach; goes, (like
a noble General, who thinks it his office to see to all) to visit his three
Brigades of Reserve in the Reere of the maine Battle; where the valiant
Hebron commanded. Bringing therefore some 100. or more of the better sort of
prisoners, which himself with the right wing had before taken* he for the
encouragement of his men, makes a show of them; still crying That is, lustily,
valiantly.
Allegremente as he rode along: vive, cry the Soldiers. At which
cheerfulness of his men the King very heartily laughing; led them on toward
those 7. or 8000. of the enemy, before mentioned; not making a stand, until he
came within half Musket of them. These were part of those men, who, as I said,
had defeated the Duke of Saxony. Toward whom the King now ryding very near;
comes back unto his men with news, That he saw the Burgundian Cross. Sending
therefore the Baron Dyvell unto Sir John Hebron to command him to fall on with
his three Brigades of Reserve; himself hasts away to the nearest part of the
maine Battle, where Colonel Winckle with the Bl^w Regiment stood, to send
him to aid Hebron also. Scarcely had this brave Baron Dyvell delivered the
Kings message; Baron Dyvell slain.
but he was shot stark dead, when he was gone a little to the right hand, even
before Hebrons eyes, and feet, as it were. Upon this command of the King, Sir
John Hebron with the middlemost of the three Brigades, Sir John Hebron charges
Tilly.
and Colonel Vitzthimb with his other on the left hand; moved forward toward
the enemy. But the young Count of Turn, who had the third and right hand
Brigade (which was the furthest from the danger) he (as I am informed) stirred
not. Whether he misunderstood the message, or what else should be the reason of
it, I know not. Thus much only can I inform my Reader; that he is not son
to the brave old Bohemian Count of Turn, nor like unto him. On the right hand
of Sir John Hebrons Brigade, was the valourous Scottish Colonel Lumsdell: who
with the Lord Reayes men, and his own, helped to make up Hebrons Brigade
complete: the most of the other part of it (of Sir John's own Regiment) being
of the Germane Nation. On the right hand of Lumsdell again, had the King
caused Sir James Ramsey with his chosen or outcommaunded Musketeers, also to
fall on. The first of Lumsdells Musketeers, were led on by his Lieutenant
Colonel Muschamp, our daring and valiant Countryman: who with much courtesy
related this whole passage, thus unto me. First (says he) giving fire unto
three little Feild-peices that I had before me, I suffered not my Musketeers
to give their volleyes, till I came within Pistoll-shot of the enemy: at which
time I gave order to the three first rancks to discharge at once; and after
them the other three: which done, we fell pell mell into their rancks, knocking
them down with the stock of the Musket, and our swords. The enemy,
notwithstanding we were already within their ranckes, gave us two or three
Salvees with their Muskets: and at our first falling on, four gallant troops
of Curiassiers advancing themselves before their own foot, and coming close
up to the head of our Pikes; at one volley or two of their Pistolls, shot all
the Scottish Ancients dead upon the place; Diverse Scottish Ancients slain at
once.
So that strange it was to see, how so many Colors fell at one instant into
the field. And our men, I think, paid theirs as wel^ home again.

A brave Commander of theirs, all in scarlet and gold-lace there was right
before us; whom we might discern to lay on upon his own men's pates and
shoulders; to cut and slash diverse of them with his sword, because they would
not come on upon us. This Gentleman maintained the fight a full hour, and
more, against us; but he being slain, we might perceive their Pikes and
Colors to topple down, to tumble and fall cross one over another: Lieutenant
Colonel Muschamp with the Scots of my Lord Reayes and Colonel Lumsdel men,
defeats those that they were sent against.
whereupon all his men beginning to flee, we had the pursuit of them, even
until the night parted us. Few of the Imperial Officers and Commanders
escaped either killing or spoiling; as one Captain Onyon an Englishman (who
had the leading that day of 1000. Musketeers on the Emperors side,) affirmed.
Onyon himself was thrice shot the same day; taken and carried prisoner into
Leipsich: where he afterward related this unto Lieutenant Colonel Muschamp:
to which Lieutenant-Colonels courtesy for my understanding of this part of the
service of the day, (wherein himself was a principal Leader) the Readers are
beholding.

Sir John Hepburn, Sir James Ramsey, Colonel Vitzthimb, and Colonel Lumsdell
with their foot; and the Bohemian Colonells Schaffman and Cochtitsky with
their horse; all wheeling about in manner of an half moon, (as the second
Map shows you,) so well at the same time plied their business; charged with
so much bravery and resolution at first; and maintained the fight with so much
courage and manhood to the last; that in this part also, though the
Imperialists behaved themselves right valiantly; yet were they forced to yield
unto the fortune of the day, as in other places of the field, their fellows
had done before them. For at this time, the Lord Arnheym with his Saxon-horse
fell so resolutely on upon their Reere, and the Scottish and Germane foot,
upon their Van; and those other troops which the King sent in from the left
wing and maine Battle, upon their flanck: that the remainder of Tillyes great
Spanish Brigades, and of Furstenbergs left wing, were gotten into a Toil, as
it were; and so jumbled and jolled together, that wanting room to fight and
order themselves to their best advantage in; Hebron defeats Tilly.
they were miserably cut in pieces, put to as great a slaughter themselves, as
they before had made among the Saxons. Nor was there a greater fell of men, any
wherethat day made throughout the Army, nor any piece of the service, better
on both sides maintained. And here (I suppose) was that famous stratagem put in
practice by the Musketeers; who all on the sudden doubling of their rancks,
making their Files then but three deep: and the first rank, falling upon
their knees, the second stooping forward, and the third standing upright; and
all giving fire together* they powered so much lead in at once amongst the
enemies, that their rancks were much broken by it This report made here at
first by a Gentleman that was sent by the King of Sweden, unto our Kings
Majesty; I have since found to be confirmed in Dan: Heinsius his Panegyric
written unto the King of Sweden: who says that the Foot that did this
service, advanced them selves before their own Horse; who it seems charged
presently in upon it, upon the enemy. Yea the King himself uses to exercise
his Soldiers to these postures.
. Arnheym on the other side, with his Saxon-horse, did much execution upon the
enemies foot: who had few or no Horse at this time and in this place left, to
oppose against him. And here by all probability it was, that the General
Tilly received his wounds: and was supposed (though unknown) to have been
prisoner for a while unto the Kings Army. But this I cannot affirm.

Among other Commanders of the Imperialists that fought at this time, in this
very place; these three I find particular mention of. The Earl of Schomberg,
that day General of the Ordnance; the Baron of Cronenberg, and the Lord of
Baumgarten: so that these surely, were none of the meanest troops, that were
led by such honorable personages. Something also of what was here done by the
Imperialists; we may learn by the said valiant Baron of Cronenbergs Letter. In
four hours (says Cronenberg) I charged the enemy four times with my
Regiment: judge you whether we were not at hot service, in so much that I
verily believed that I had defeated my enemy, and that the victory was ours: I
not knowing that our left wing was so miserably defeated. And this mistake was
by reason of the great smoke; for we could not possibly see above four paces
before us. The enemy had possessed themselves of the place whereon our left
wing was defeated: I then went up into the very face of them, even in that
quarter where they brought many fresh Cornets of Horse, and some Regiments of
foot to charge me. The whole Army does know, yea and our General himself
will witness it, that but for me, our General had been lost: whom I
perceiving grievously hurt, Tilly wounded and thought to be prisoner.
carried safely off in despite of all the enemies. There was a Duke of Saxony
that day serving on the Emperors side, who behaved himself like a Lion: who
when all was lost, came with our General, and two or three Horsemen only in
his company, into my Regiment, I being then in full battle.

Thus much writes the Baron of himself, modestly: for from other hands we
have also received it, how that when Rodolph Maximilian Duke of
Saxon-Lawenburg, Tilly rescued, and carried out of the field.
had by his valor and hardiness rescued and fetched off his General; that the
valiant Cronenberg carried them both out of the field, in the midst of his
own, now flying troops.

Thus by knowing of Cronenbergs place; we find where the General Tilly at
this time was: and that it was Sir John Hebron that overthrew him. For this
valor and faithfulness to their General, was the Baron Cronenberg much
honored: and the Duke afterward entrusted with the keeping of the key of
Bavaria; the Town of Donawaert I mean: from whence the King of Sweden did of
late days beat him.

The King having set on Sir John Hebron upon Tilly; The King with his right
wing, charges those in the Wood.
and returned by this time to his own Right wing; presently advances forward
with that toward the wood upon the hill, which Tilly had before appointed for
the Retreat of his men: because that hereabouts some Regiments had all this
while stayed, and others, that had been rowted in other places, had hitherto
resorted; here to r'allee and conjoyne themselves together again. To conjoyne
themselves together I say: for whereas I find four of these Regiments now
gotten about the Wood, to be those of Goies, Blanckhart, Chesui, Balderon and
Diderichsteyn, (which last two made up one Regiment:) any man may by the
numbers in the Map perceive, that these four were placed very far asunder
in the beginning of the Battle: even as far as the numbers 8, 12, 15, and
19, are one from another. And this is an argument of the great confusion they
had been put unto in the battle; as others likewise had been in the former
fight, which Tillies self had made: where Baumgartens Regiment which had been
at first marshalled near the very end of the left wing, at the number 4; was
now conjoined with Schomberg and Cronenberg, whose first place was in the
further end of the right wing, at the numbers 26, and 27: and both these from
the ends of both wings, conjoined with Tilly, in the middleward or
mayn-battayle. But to the story. The King now-in person setting upon these new
reunited forces, with such courage and success charges in upon them; that at
the first onset cutting in pieces those troops that had the guard of the
Ordnance, and then turning the Canon upon the residue: he had the slaughter of
a great many of them; and the rowting of as many more. Yet all fled not: for
the Goiesish, Blanckhartish, Chesuish, and Balderonish Regiments, before
mentioned; stood to their Arms bravely. Old Lads they were, and experienced
Soldiers too; such as feared not an enemy with an iron face, and that cared
not for a halfepenny chop in their own flesh. These, to their great praise (as
the Kings own description of the Battle says) made good the wood for a long
time against his Majesty, killd him a many of brave fellows. and overthrowes
them.
Nor would they budge a foot; for notwithstanding they were now desperate and
out of hope to be either seconded or fetched off, (all their Army being by this
time overthrown, and they knwoing of it) yet did they fight it out almost to
the last man: a few of them only (whom it had been pity to have killed)
retrying themselves when no more could be done; under the benefit of a mixed
Cloud, of smoke, and dust, and darkness. For by this time it was near upon
seven a clock at night: by which hour the Imperial Army every where was
altogether in disorder, flight, and confusion.

Thus after five hours hard fight, The victory.
the victory fell unto his Majesty of Sweden: whose Horsemen so long continued
the chase; until the darkness made it dangerous to pursue the enemy any
further. The Tillians fled every way; some to Leipsich; others to Eilenburg,
and the Towns thereabouts; and others toward Hall: every man glad to hide his
head any where. The joyful retreat being sounded thereupon, the Kings Army,
as Masters of the Field, kept their possession of it; though but by lying upon
the bare ground, and under the blew Skies for that night. Conquerours, surely,
had been worthy of a better harbourough; but the universal joy, suffered no
man (but the wounded) to complain of the want of a featherbed.

The next morning was the chase begun again; The Chase.
when the over-taken enemies, wanting either Leaders, or Arms, or hearts; must
suffer the Law of Arms to pass upon them: either to beg quarter, or endure
the slaughter.

And this was the end of that formidable Army of his Imperial Majesty, and
of the Catholic Leaguers; which for eleven years together before the coming
of the King of Sweden, had given the Law unto all Germany, had made the name of
Tilly so renowned. All the ill-gotten wealth, and fore-gotten glory of it, was
in poor five hours space, (such is the fortune of the wars) now quite lost
and confounded. This, I say, was the end of it. Nine or 10000. men, were left
dead in the field and chase; many thousands sorely wounded; whereof some
shortly after dyed, and others thereby utterly made unserviceable: Diverse were
taken prisoners; and 6000. forsaking the side, took oath and pay, for the
Kings service; not a few, besides, running quite away, and never more returning
to their Colors.

Thus of 44000. marching men, Tilly never came to Muster 16000. again:
perchance not so many; yea perhaps not half so many of the self same men; at
leastwise not half so many of the Foot; who could not so fast follow their
fleeing General, toward the Weser. The King this morning marching toward
Leipsich; there seized upon the enemies whole standing Camp. Here were found
full 3000. Wagons, with all their baggage, tents, and pavilions: a great number
of Cattle, Horses, Oxen, Sheep, Asses, Poultrie, Bread, Wine, meat upon the
Spits, with other necessary provisions: much costly stuff, with some gold and
silver; both in vessel and ready money. There were many above 100. Ensigns
and Cornets brought unto the King, with 14. great pieces of half Curtoes, or
Demicanon; and 16. smaller feild-peices, of 8. or 10. pound ball: some whereof
had the Arms of the Emperor upon them; others of the Duke of Bavaria, of
Wallensteyn, the Palsgraue, the Elector of Brandenbnrg, the Duke of Brunswicke,
etc.

And thus have we told you something of what was done in every part of the
Battle. The four great Brigades of Foot in the Van of the Kings mayn
Battle, were thought too strong to be meddled withal; the Imperialists
therefore never fell on there. Nor did any part of them, nor of their
after-troupes, (those I mean, betwixt the Battle and the Reserues of it)
once moove: only the King commanded some troops to go and aid Hebron once.
Nor did the Count of Thurne stir. Nor was the further end of Banniers people
meddled withal; else the whole Army was in action.

The King of Sweden lost but Septing^ntorum.
700. men (as Gallobelgious reports) and the Duke of Saxony, 2000. The men of
note slain on the Kings side, Slain on the Kings side On the Saxons.
were the gallant Baron Dyvell, Hall, Collenbach, and Corville, all Colonells.
Slain on the Duke of Saxonyes part, Sergeant-Major-Generall He was Feb. 29.
following, very honorably buried at Torgau.
Bindhauff, Colonel Starschedel: with diverse other Officers and Captains,
both of Horse and Foot.

On Tillyes side, these great personages slain; Adolphus, Duke of Holsteyn,
Otho Frederick, Count of Schomberg, that day General of the Ordnance;
Theodore Othmar of Erwitte, Sergeant-Major-Generall of the Army; the Lord
Baumgarten, Baron of Grotte; together with Coloredo, Gallas, Wallensteyn, On
Tillyes.
Lobell, and Zabilli, all Colonells: with diverse other Lieutenant-Colonells,
Sergeant-Majors, Rit-maisters, and Captains; slain either upon the place, or
dying within a few days after, or their wounds. Taken prisoners, the
Generall-Adjutant Zinzindorff; the two Imperial Comissaries-Generall, Walmerde
and Graff; with Coronino, Blackhart, Barcelli, Kratz, Hazelung, Larme, Klinzi,
and Winckleman, all Colonells: together with Bernard, that was Secretary and
Treasurer unto Tilly; diverse Captains, and some Jesuits; who (no doubt) came
thither to bless the Army.

And this was as complete a victory, The completnesse of the Victory.
as possibly could be gotten. Not stolen by night; which Alexander scorned: but
without stratageme, by fine force and true prowess, achieved in the broad
daylight, betwixt twelve and seven in the afternoon. No advantage of place
to give it away: it was upon a fair level, and in Campagnia. No casual
advantage but was against the King: the wind, the wood, and the higher ground,
all on the enemies side. No advantage in numbers, or reputations of men,
neither; Tillyes were the more, the older Soldiers; and their Army by
themselves accounted Invincible. Nay, one disadvantage the King had, as great
as possibly almost could be; which was, in sight, not only a wonderful
encouragement to the enemy, but a most main weakening of the one half of his
Majesty's Army, and an evident disheartning to the rest: for seeing it is the Eye
that is first overcome in any battle, if the sight of the Saxons defeat would
have discouraged the Swedens; that had given a sore onset to the victory. So
that all the advantages lay on the enemies side; and the disadvantages on the
Kings. But yet even thus can the Lord of Hoasts give away the victory.

Tillyes manly heart, Tilly excused.
it is said, could not refrain his tears, when he saw his brave old Soldiers
thus going to ruin. The whole fault, he laid upon the Crabats and Imperial
horse: who after a few hard charges, cowardly ran away, and never made head
again. No General could have done more, than the valiant Tilly that day did;
nor would any wise man (that were no more than truly valourous) have stood one
minute longer upon the place, from whence the General Tilly ran away. But
there is no Battle against the Lord; So that this old Conqueror, still used
to see the backs of his enemies; is now glad to show them his own heels: and
thus wounded as he was, to flee that night toward Hall, seven Dutch miles from
the place of Battle. Hither did the Earls of Furstenberg, and Pappenheym,
both sorely wounded, also come unto him: Tilly flees.
where having dressed their wounds, the two Ea^les the next day fled away in a
hackney Coach, hired at Hall, and Tilly by himself in a Horse-litter: all
taking their way toward Ascherleben and Halberstadt first; and thence onwards
toward the River of Weser; where the Emperor had given him some Lands; and
whereabouts he had formerly been, when he first advanced against the King of
Sweden. Tilly had in the fight received two (some say, three) several wounds
upon his body; besides a shrewd brush or counterbuff with the stock of a Musket
given him by a common Soldier; which being aimed full at his head,
notwithstanding that the old man bare off as well as he could with his feeble
arm; yet so rudely for all that, did it light upon the side of his neck,
shoulder, and arm, that the poor man complained more of that blow, than of
any of his other wounds. Tilly again excused.
The Soldier that reached it him, was immediately beaten down dead upon the
place: that so mean a man might never live to glory, what he had done to the
gallant General Tilly. Sure it is, that Tilly had his wounds dressed by the
Towne-Barber of Hall: In the Book called Arma Succi^a, p. 163 it is affirmed,
That Perus^, Governor of Gripswald had his body hardened with such charms: and
that the first bullet did not pierce him: yet the second paid him home. It Is so
familiar a practice, that Soldiers make no question of it. See, if you please,
what we have before written in the description of this Battle, in our First
part of the Intelligencer.
and a report was raised upon it, that the fellow should have afterward
discovered unto the King, at his coming unto Hall, that Tillyes body was as
hard as the wall; that he was hard-shot, or shot-free; and that the Bullets had
not peirced the flesh, but made bruises rather in it: and that to his horrible
torture, he was feign to endure the cutting out of the bruised flesh, unto the
very hard bone. Indeed thus much have I seen in a High Dutch printed
Relation, That Tillyes wounds did not pierce the flesh. But this (in charity)
had I rather ascribe unto his bruise, than unto the Pistoll-shots that he
received: or rather, that the report was raised upon some misprision or
misunderstanding of the Barbers words. Very loath I am to leave so base an
imputation upon so honorable a Commander; as to owe his life, all this while,
unto a devilish enchantment: which is practiced by none, but the reprobate
raskalitie of the Army; such as the meanest common Soldier that respects his
credit, but will scorn to keep company withal. A common practice, indeed,
it is in Germany: which you see the King of Sweden has upon pain of death
forbidden, in the first of his Articles of War. Tilly after this, was said to
speak of nothing but of Peace, and of making a good Peace, which is, indeed,
far more happy than victory.

The news of this overthrow being carried unto Rome, the Pope (as it is
reported) aloud pronounced, Salva Roma, Salva est Eoclesia: Rome is safe, and
the Church is safe. The man, perchance was afraid, that if the House of Austria
should ever arrive at their expected Monarchy; they would put in practice that
design of the Founder of their greatness, Charles 5. Emperor; which was,
That when he beseigning Rome heard news that his General the Duke of Burbon
was slain before the walls of it; he by his These letters were intercepted by
the Pope and seut over hither unto Cardinal Woolsey.
Letters appointed Hugo a Moncado to go on with the siege, and to take the
Pope prisoner: and I (says the Emperor) will come down with the rest of the
Army from Barcelona, and bring Friar Angelo with me: whom I will make Pope,
and reduce the Pope into the order of another Archbishop.

The Italians of Mantua, Montferat, and those places, hearing also of this
Victory; openly protested that it was justly fallen upon the Emperor for their
sakes: by whose Armies they had been so miserably handled the last year. The
Protestants, every where, took it for the beginning of their hopes and
comforts. The Popishly affected in all Countries, that honor the House of
Austria more then they do the Pope; and that prefer Catholic, before
Roman; they gave out brave words after it, saying, Let the King of Sweden do
what he pleases this Winter time; but when Summer comes, he must be put to
another Battle. The King of Sweden, his Army, and well-wishers; they gave God
thanks for it. And thus was the news of this famous victory, by several
people, severally entertained.

Here follows the Explication of the several Numbers and Arithmeticall
Figures, in the two Mappes of the Battle of LEIPSICH. By which Figures, the
numbers of every Regiment or Division, with the names and places of the
Commanders in all the three Armies, may readily be found out; for the better
understanding of the Story.
IN the Army of the Count of Tilly, the number 1, signifies the Renconish
Regiment, 2 the Merodish. 3 the new Saxish. 4 the Baumgartish. 5 the
Piccolominish. 6 the Strotzish. 7 the Duke of Holsteins. 8 the Chesuish. 9 the
Gallafish. 10 that of Sas and Furstenberg. 11 Monte-Cuculies. 12 that of
Balderon and Diederickstein. 13 of Tilly. 14 of Coronino. 15 the Goiesish. 16
of Coloredo. 17. of Erwitz. 18 the Duke of Savelli. 19 Blanckharts. 20
Pappenheyms. 21 Harecourts. 22 the Grottish 23 the Italian. 24 Wanglers. 25
Bernsteyns. 26 Schombergs. 27 Cronenbergs. 28 the old Saxonish. 29 the
Wingerskish. All these were Regiments. 30 some troops of Crabats commanded by
Isolan. 31 some troops of Dragoniers, old exercised and well appointed men.

In his Majesty of Swedens Army. 32, 33, eight troops of Finlandish Horse,
commanded by Wunsches. 34 an hundred and eighty commanded Musketeers of
General Banniers. 35, 36, 37, Twelve troops of General Tots Horse. 38 An
hundred and fourscore commanded Musketeers of Genesis Bannier aforesaid. 39
eight troops of West-Gothish Horsemen, commanded by Soops. 40 An hundred and
eighty Musketeers of Genesis Banniers. 41 eight troops of Smalandish Horse, of
the Lord Stenbocks. 42 An hundred and fourscore Musketeers of Colonel Hall.
43 Four troops of East-Gothish Horse. 44 Four foot companyes of Colonel
Axel Lillies. 45 Four companyes on foot of Axel Oxenstierns. 46 Four
foote-companies of Hastfers. 47, 48, 49. Twelve companyes on foot of his
Majesty's own Guards, commanded by the Baron Dyvel. 50 Four companyes on
foot of Erich Hands. 51 Four companyes on foot of Col: Halls. 52 Four
companyes on foot of Hohendorffs. 53, 54, 55. Twelve companyes on Foot of Col.
Winckles. 56 Two troops of Horse of his Excellency the Lord Feild-Marshall
Gustavus Horn. 57 Five troops of Horse of Collenbachs. 58 Three hundred and
sixty Musketeers. 59 Five troops of Horse of Collenbachs. 60 Two hundred and
eighty Musketeers of Axel Oxenstierns. 61 Three troops of Horse of Col.
Baudissen. 62 Three hundred Musketeers of Erich Hands. 63 Three troops of
Horse of Col. Baudissens. 64 Three hundred Musketeers of Erich Hands. 65 Three
troops of Horse of Col. Baudissens. 66 Two hundred and threescore Musketeers
of Hamiltons. 67 Five troops of Horse of his Majesty's own Guards, commanded
by Col. Vsler. 68 Four hundred Musketeers of Monroes. 69 Five troops of
Horse of Col. Vsler. 70. Three hundred and fifty Musketeers of Ramseys. 71,
72, 73. Twelve troops of Horse of the Lord Colonel the Rhinegraves. 74 Four
troops of Lifflandish Horsemen. 75 Four troops of Curlandish Horsemen. 76
Three troops of Horse of Col. Damitzens. 77 Four troops of Horse of Colonel
Sperreuters. 78 Four companies on Foot of Col. Wallensteyns. 79 Four
companyes on foot of Col. Hall and the Count of Thurne. 80 Four companyes on
foot of Col. Damitzens. 81 Four companyes on foot of Col. Dargitzens. 82
Four companyes on foot of Colonel Hebrons. 83 Four companyes on foot. 84
Four companyes on foot of Colonel Michefals. 85 Four companyes on foot of
Col. Vitzthumbs. 86 Four companyes on foot of Redwens. 87, 88. Twelve troops
of Horse of Col. Hall. 89 Four troops of Horse of Col. Corvills. 90 Five
troops of Horse of Col. Schaffmans. 91 Five troops of horse of Col.
Cochtitsky.

In his Highness the Elector of Saxonyes Army, 92, 93. Some troops of Horse
of Colonel Steins. 94, 95. Eight troops of Horse of Sergeant-Major-Generall
Bindhauffs. 96 Some troops of Horse of the Gentlemen of the Country. 97 His
Excellencies the Lord Feild-Marshall Arnheyms troops of horseguards. 98, 99.
Ten foot companyes of the same Lords. 100, 101. Ten companyes on foot of Col.
Swalbach, General of the Ordnance. 102 Ten companyes on foot of Col. Losers.
103 Six free companyes on foot of the Dukes own Guards. 104, 105. Ten foot
companyes of Col. Glitzings. 106, 107. Ten companyes on foot of Col.
Starschedels. 108. Some Horse-troupes of the Country Gentlemen's. 109, 110.
Eight troops of Horse of his Highness William Duke of Saxon-Altenberg. 111,
112, 113. The Duke of Saxonyes own Horse-Guards, commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Tauben.

And this is the List both of Horse and Foot, together with the Commanders of
all three Armies. Tillyes are here set down in general, and by the Regiments
only, so far forth as the Swedish Describer of these Mappes could learn
from the prisoners. As for the Kings, they (you see) are set down most
exactly. Which will be worth the Readers pains to examine.

A SOLEMN THANKES-GIVING FOR THE VICTORY, Appointed in the Electorate of
SAXONY.
THat work is well gone thorough, which is begun with Prayer, and concluded
with Thanksgiving; and so is this Swedish Discipline: which even herin
resembles ye rest of this Princes actions. This glorious Victory being so
admirably thus achieved; if not beyond the hopes of the Protestants, yet
surely clean besides the fears or doubts of the Catholics: who besides the
confidence they had in their own Forces, which they esteemed Invincible; had a
General withal, who amongst the three Boasts he was wont to make, had this
for one; That he never lost Battle. But now has he lost both Game and Lurch
too. Now has he lost such a Battle, as Leipsich has fully made amends for
Prague; Saxony for Bohemia. And yet so far were our Protestant-Warriours from
ascribing this unto their own strength or swords; that they decreed to have the
Thanks for all, publicly returned unto that Lord of Hoasts; whom the King in
answer to his former Prayers, had now found so mighty in Battle. No sooner
therefore were the Swedish Conquerours come together again from pursuing of
the fleeing enemy; but they were summoned to a Bid-day, proclaimed throughout
all the Saxon Dominions, for a public and solemn Thankesgiving unto GOD, for
this so glorious a Victory. And that the Form of it might not be left to every
newfangled invention, but that the Devotion might be doubled by the
Uniformity: the Ministers had this Form of Thankesgiving prescribed unto
them, to be in all their Churches rehearsed out of the Pulpit.

O Lord God, all-puissant and invincible; we here give thanks unto thee, for
that by thine Anointed, the King of Sweden, and the Elector of Saxony; thou
have wrought so great salvation for thy people, and these Provinces: because
thy mercy endures for ever.

Thou O Lord God of Sabbath, foughtest for thy people: it is thou that
deliveredst us from our cruel enemies: because thy mercy endures for ever.

The enemy had threatened us, that he would ruin and lay waste all our Country
with fire; massacre all the men with the sword; and lead our young men and
maidens into Captivity. But thou, O God Almighty, have withheld them; thou
have put them unto flight; thou have defeated them with thine own Army:
because thy mercy endures for ever.

Thou, Lord, have revenged thy people, because thy mercy endures for ever.

From the very bottom of our hearts do we give thee thanks, O Lord, we tell
forth all thy wonderful works: in thee do we rejoice, and praise thy Name, O
thou most High, for that thou have thus repulsed our enemies. They are fallen
and perished in thy sight: thou, Lord, have pleaded our cause, and thou have
executed the Judgment; that thou might manifest thy self to be a just
Judge: because thy mercy endures for ever.

Thou remembredst us, O faithful God, that we were sorely oppressed: because
thy mercy endures for ever.

The waters had gone over our souls, but thou O Lord God, gave us not over
for a prey unto the teeth of the enemy: because thy mercy endures for ever.

Our soul is escaped, like a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is
broken, and we are delivered: because thy mercy endures for ever.

Furthermore, we here invoke, and from the very bottom of our hearts we
beseech thee, O most merciful God; that with thy temporal and eternal
blessing thou would reward, that faithful agreement so duly performed
between his Majesty the King of Sweden, and the Elector our Gracious Lord: be
present in time to come with them, and with their Armies: let thy right hand
potently assist them: grant a long life unto them both, that their years may
endure for ever; that so they may sit upon the Throne for ever together before
thee: afford thy goodness and faithfulness unto them, which may preserve
them.

Heap victories upon them, O merciful God; and rowse and lift up thy self
against the fury of our enemies: refrain thou their malice; cause them to fall
into the pit which they have dug for us.

Be mindful of our blood, O Lord; throw down the wicked headlong into hell;
suffer not men to have the dominion over us: manifest thy wonderful goodness,
O thou preserver of them that trust in thee, against those that are enemies
unto thy right hand. Keep us as the apple of thine eye: protect us under the
shadow of thy wings: even against the wicked that destroy us, against our
enemies that on every side lie in wait for us. Arise, O Lord, and scatter them
yet more and more; deliver our lives from the wicked, which is a sword of
thine. Turn, moreover, our enemies unto flight; scatter them like the dust,
and put them away like the clay in the streets. Remember, Lord, that the
Enemies (the Pope and his followers) do reproach thee; and that the foolish
people speak ill of thy Name.

Revenge now thine own honor, O Lord; why should thine and our enemies say,
Where is now their God? Arise up, Lord, and overturne the Antichristian
Papacy: and maintain, on the other side, thine own Word, which is the very
joy of our hearts. We verily, O Lord of Sabbath, are called after thy Name;
thou know that for thee alone we suffer persecution. Deliver us therefore
out of the hand of the wicked; and free us from the power of Tyrants: and the
more they oppose us, the vayner let their undertakings be. Be with us, and stay
still with us; that thou may help us and deliver us. Bless, O God of peace,
this thy people: and grant thy peace especially, unto this whole Electorate of
Saxony; thou have promised, O God, that thou will give peace unto thy people.
Let righteousness and peace kiss each other. Grant us a good peace: conceive
thoughts of peace upon us: procure thou and preserve a sweet peace within our
gates.

And we on the other side will give due thanks unto thee for the same: we will
laud and praise thee for it: in this world for a time, and in the next unto all
eternity. Even thee, we say, who live and reignest one, true, highly to be
praised, and blessed GOD, from this time forth and for evermore, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

