THE Sweet Milk Of CHRISTIAN Doctrine: In a plain and natural Method, by
Question and Answer, for their better understanding, for whom it is chiefly
written.

1. PET. 2.2. As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you
may grow thereby.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Hodges. 1617.

To my Well-beloved friends and Neighbors, the inhabitants and people of Leigh,
in Essex; grace, mercy and peace be multiplied, from God the Father, through
our Lord JESUS CHRIST. (**)
AS there is not any one thing, whereof he, that is in hand to build any great
and magnificent building, should be more careful, then that he do lay the
foundation thereof firm and sure; otherwise, he shall not only lose his cost and
travel spent about it, but also endanger his life in it, by the unexpected
tumbling of it down upon his head: so likewise, that Christian, who would so
build up and rear the great and lusty frame of the work of his salvation, that
he may not in the end both lose his labor and charges, and also himself be
crushed under it, and utterly perish by the dreadful fall thereof; as it befell
to him, who built his house upon the sand: Math. 7.27
has need to look to lay the foundation thereof certain, sure, and
proportionable in the undeceivable and steady principles and grounds of
Christianity; which do virtually comprehend and sustain the huge and weighty
burden of the whole building of religion, wherein he does repose himself.

Which grounds, though they ly low in the building, are not therefore the more
to be neglected or despised of any, but rather the more to be regarded and
carefully preserved, for the necessary use and abundant profit, which thence
does arise to a sound Christian: for this foundation being once well laid and
continued, it is a strong fortress against error and heresy: for though a
man be not so expert in the Scripture, as to know the true and natural meaning
of all the texts thereof, yet may he boidly reject that doctrine, 2. Ioh. 10
which does not proportionably agree with the frame and analogy of faith, Romans
12.6
summarily comprised in the grounds of religion for the simple truth coming
all from the same Spirit, cannot be contradictorie to it self.

Again, by the knowledge of the principles of religion, a good Christian may
be both an understanding and judicious Reader and hearer of the word: for there
is not any truth delivered concerning our salvation, which he may not plainly
see both to arise from, and agree with some of the grounds and principles of
religion, whereunto he may refer it: for the truth is uniform.

Finally, a man furnished with the sound understanding of these grounds, 1.
Pet. 3.15. 2. Tim. 2.2
is able to render a good and sufficient reason of his faith; and to inform
and establish others in the same things, not confusedly only in some good notes
here and there scatteringly gathered, but orderly and with judgment in the
whole frame of Christian Religion, briefly compact in one entire body.

Further, that these Principles of Religion should be set down by way of
Question and Answer, it is without question the most profitable way for the
simpler sort of people; the which course of catechizing, is both largely
commended by the learned, and straightly urged by authority, of which kind of
teaching there be models and methods almost infinite: which in my judgment is
not to be blamed as a vice, but rather commended as a virtue; when they do all
agree in the same substance of truth, though differ in the manner of contriuing
and handling thereof, according to the variety and multiplicity of the gifts of
Gods Spirit: 1. Cor. 12.4.
for thereby a more irrefragable testimony is publicly given to the truth, when
all writings apert, and after several manners, do all agree in one and the
same verity. And whereas the disposition, manners, and opinions of several
people, in several places and ages do differ; for the rectifying thereof, these
several and differing forms and methods of teaching are well (by Gods
providence) fitted.

Now, seeing that after that Catechifme set down in the book of Common prayer,
whereby children are prepared for confirmation, we are not by authority tied
only to use al any one certain form of Catechism, for the edification of them
of riper years: therefore taking the benefit of that common liberty, for the
further building up of that part of Gods Church committed to my charge, I do
by the long and earnest importunity of many of you (my loving friends, to who^
I am not only willing cheerfully to impart my travels, 1. These. 2.8
but even also mine own self for your good) suffer this brief and plain
draight to be wrung from me, to come abroad amongst multitudes of the same
nature: not hereby to find fault with, or disparage any of them, but that
thereby with my greater ease I may the better benefit and help you, both by
catechizing and preaching: for when both catechizing and preaching come framed
out of the same mould, the one orderly agreeing with the other; the one does
both confirm and illustrate the other to the hearers: as when the foundation
and walls of a house are both of one proportion, it is most strong and sightly:
and also the Church being by this little public taste satisfied and contented
touching the same doctrine, Gal. 2.9
which you are ordinarily taught in private, her approbation and allowance
thereof, may be a strong motive to cause you the more to regard it: for my
part, I have no greater joy then that you walk in the truth. 3. Ioh. 4


Take this as a forerunner and pledge of a larger Treatise, which some of you
have much expected, to wit, the body of practical and case divinity, which
longer time, by further experience and study, must first better perfect and
polish. In this method, I have sought to be both short and plain, for to help
the memory and understanding of the meanest amongst us; the proofs I have
quoted with the Answers, the words whereof I pray you to search, for the
benefit both of your selves and families: that your faith being built, not upon
man's word but Gods, 2. Tim. 1.12.
it may remain sure, knowing whom you have believed.

And so I pray you, my good friends, give all diligence to make your calling
and election sure, 2. Peter 1.10, 5
by adding unto your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge
temperance, to temperance patience, to patience godliness, to godliness
brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness love: and so being careful that
both you and yours be fearers of the Lord, Psalm. 115.11, 12, 13, 14.
you may be assuredly persuaded that God will be your help and shield, he will
bless you both great and small, the Lord will increase you more and more, you
and your children, as he has done your virtuous forefathers in this place,
who have proved it true, that Godliness is great gain. 1. Tim. 6.6
Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout; and I pray God your whole
spirit, and soul, 1. These. 5.23.
and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
AMEN.

Your loving and careful Minister and Pastor, JOHN SYME.

A PRAYER.
We do humbly thank thee, (O Lord our God and heavenly Father) for thy
manifold and gracious mercies continually bestowed upon us, for the good both
of our souls and bodies; whereof we do humbly confess our selves to be most
unworthy, in regard of our unthankfulness, and manifold and grievous sins,
whereby we do always offend thy sacred Majesty, and vex thy holy Spirit: but
thou (O Lord) who art the infinite fountain of mercy, have pity and
compassion upon us, poor sinners, to illuminate the blind eyes of our minds,
that we may see our sins and wretched estate; so soften our flinty and hard
hearts, that we may therefore relent and melt before thee, under the sense and
feeling of the grieuousnesse of the same: and so to frame our affections, that
we may ever loath and abhor them. And gracious Father of heaven, forgive and
pardon unto us our sins, save and deliver us from this our miserable
condition, through the only merit and mediation of thy Son, our Savior
JESUS CHRIST: And grant unto us a true and saving faith to believe in him, that
we may thereby be grafted into him, and may be by his blood washed from all our
sins, and clothed with his righteousness, that so we may have in our
consciences the sweet testimony and assurance of thy love and favor in him:
and give unto us thy holy Spirit, whereby in the virtue of Christ Jesus, we may
grow up in newness of life, that we may thereby glorify thee. For this
purpose, Lord, bless unto us al good means, that we may know thy will, that we
may remember it, that we may love it, and delight in it, and give us grace so
to express the power of it in our lives, in all godly wisdom and discretion,
that we may ever keep the faith and a good conscience to the end. Lord
preserve and keep us from all dangers of soul and body; provide and bless
for us al things needful, and grant us comfortably to be contented therewith.
Lord fit us for our callings, make us faithful in them, and bless our travels
and labors therein: Give us grace ever to have our conversation with thee in
heaven, for the which Lord keep us and prepare us, and bring us thereunto in
thy good time, that so we may reign with thee for ever in happiness; through
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior: To whom with thee and thy holy Spirit
be all honor, glory and praise, for ever and ever, AMEN.

THE SWEET milk of Christian doctrine; in a plain and natural method; by
Question and Answer.
Question.

WHat is the chief and principal end of our being, and of the whole course of
our lives, whereat we ought always to aim, in every thing which we do or
undertake?

Answer, That we may glorify God, 1. Cor. 10 31. Ephesians. 1.6. Phil. 2.12
and work out our salvation in fear and trembling.

Q. What sure light, and infallible rule are we to observe and follow, for our
certain direction and guide, in our choice and use of that course and means,
whereby we may verily attain and come to that our intended purpose and end?

A. The divine and sacred word of God only, 2. Pet. 1.19 2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.
contained in the holy Scripture of the old and new Testament; containing
perfectly and plainly all things needful to make the man of God perfect.

Q. What things are necessary for us, that we may thereby indeed glorify God,
and work out our own salvation?

A. Sound knowledge and holy obedience. Ioh. 13.17


Q. What things are we principally to know?

A. God, Ioh. 17.3 2. Cor. 13.5. John 1.18
and our selves.

Q. How are we to know God?

A. As he has revealed himself unto us.

Q. How has he reucaled himself unto us?

A. He has revealed himself unto us; Romans 1.19 20. John 5.39 Heb. 1.3 Ioh.
14.9
first, by his works: secondly, by his word: thirdly, in his Son our Savior,
Jesus Christ.

Q. What is God?

A. He is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.24 1. Tim. 6.16. Romans 11.35. Job. 11.7 Exo. 34.6
infinite, having his being of himself, in whom is infinite perfection and
happiness, and from whom all things do flow and proceed, and in him and for
him have their being: he is one in essence, three in persons; Iam. 1.17 Ro^.
11.36 Mat. 10.29 1. Tim. 2.5 1. John 5.7 1. Cor. 15.47.
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Q. How are we to know our seluess?

A. We are to know our selves, both as we be of our own natures, and also as
we be by the special saving grace of God.

Q. How are we to know our selves as we be of our own natures?

A. We are to know our selves, Eccles. 7.29.
as we be of our own natures, both as we were by nature, vncorrupt in the
estate of innocence, and as we are by nature, corrupt in the estate of misery.

Q. What were we by nature vncorrupt in the estate of innocence?

A. In the estate of innocence or nature vncorrupt, we were created by God
male and female, consisting of soul and body, in Adam and Eve perfect,
according to the Image of God in wisdom, righteousness, and true holiness;
enjoying all things needful for our happiness in that estate: Genesis 2.7 Eccl.
7.29 Genesis 1.27 Col. 3.10 Ephesians. 4.24 Psalm. 8.4.
in which condition we were able always so to have continued, but changeable
according to our own mutable free will, either to stand or fall, as we should
choose.

Q. What are we now by nature corrupt in the estate of misery?

A. We are the children of wrath and disobedience, cast out of Gods favor and
protection, through our transgression in our first parents Adam and Eve; who
did, Ephesians. 2.3 Esaias 59.2 Romans 5.18, 19. Genesis 3.6 Romans 2.5.
contrary to Gods command, eat of the forbidden fruit, at the devils
persuasion: which miserable condition we have ever since, by our personal and
actual sins confirmed and augmented.

Q. What things do make us, in this corrupt estate, to be so miserable?

A. Our sin, Esaias 6.5 Pro. 11.21 Romans 5.12
and the punishment of our sin.

Q. What is sin?

A. Sin is the transgression of the Law of God.

Q. Which be the parts of sin?

A. The corruption and guilt thereof,

Q. What kinds of sin are we defiled with and guilty of?

A. We are both defiled with, 1. Ioh. 3.4 Romans 5.14 Romans 3.23
and guilty of Original and Actual sin.

Q. What is Original sin?

A. Original sin, is the common sin of our nature corrupt, which we have
from our first conception, in and through our sinful Parents, by natural
propagation and descent; which consists first, Psalm. 51.5 Romans 5.19 Job. 14.4
Romans 3.10, 11, 12. Genesis 8.21. Genesis 6.5.
in the guilt of ye our rebellious act in Adam: secondly in corruption thence
lineally derived, in full want of al saving grace, and deprauation of all the
faculties and powers of soul and body, and pronenesse of the same to all evil
continually.

Q. What is actual sin?

A. Actual sin is our own personal transgression, continually issuing out of
the living spring of our original sin; Iam. 1.14 Mat. 15.19 Romans 1.32. Luke
12.47. 1. Cor. 13.3
and does consist in doing that which is forbidden; and in omitting, or doing
amiss what is commanded.

Q. What is the reward and punishment due to us for these our sins?

A. The certain wages due to us for our sins, Ephe. 5.9. Isay 59.2 Romans 1.24
Heb. 3.11 Deu. 28.15 Tit. 1.15 Romans 2.8. Reave. 21.8 Mat 25.41 Reu. 18.6.
is to be forsaken and given over of God; to be utterly deprived of grace and
happiness: and to be wholly in every respect subject to the vengeance and curse
of God, both in this life present, and also in the life to com, to ye suffering
both of the first and second death, in manner and measure, according to the
number and nature of our sins.

Q. What use ought we to make of the knowledge of this our miserable estate? A.
We ought by ye knowledge thereof first, to rouse up our selves out of our carnal
security, and thoroughly to have our hearts affected with deep humility and
contrition, in detestation and loathing of our selves in this wretched
condition: secondly, Ephe. 5.14 Isa. 66.2 Romans 7.24 Acts 2.37 Job. 42.6
to stir up our selves most earnestly to endeavor how we may be delivered out
of this estate, and be brought into the special grace and favor of God
again.

Q. What are we by the special saving grace of God?

A. We are the children of God, and heirs of heaven, by the free mercy of God,
Romans 8.16, 17. Ephe. 1.5. 2. Tim. 1.9 1. Pet. 2.9 Romans 5.20. 2. Cor. 4.6.
chosen and called out of our estate of misery, into the estate of grace and
favor of God; so made now (by the infinite mercy of God bringing good out of
evil) more happy then ever we were before.

Q. By whom are we brought into this so gracious an estate?

A. By our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ only. Gal. 1.4. Ephe. 1.11


Q. What things chiefly are we to know, touching Jesus Christ?

A. We are to know his Person and his Office. Ioh. 17.3 Phil 3.8 1. Cor. 2.2.


Q. What manner of person is Jesus Christ?

A. He is God the Son, the second person of the Trinity, become man for us
by an inseperable and vnfused union of his divine and humane natures, Romans 9.5
Mat. 2.17 Ioh. 1.14
and properties, and so is both God and man in one person.

Q. Why was it needful that Jesus Christ should be man?

A. It was needful that Jesus Christ should be man, Heb. 10.5
first that he might have a body of the same nature that had sinned, to offer
up in satisfaction for sin.

Secondly, Col. 1.21.22.
that in that body he might do, and suffer all things needful for our
redemption.

Thirdly, that we may lawfully claim, 1. Cor. 1.30. Ioh. 1.12.
and apprehend the benefit of all his merits done in that body, which he has
common with us in nature, as personally our own.

Q. Why is it needful that our Savior should be God?

A. It is needful that our Savior should be God, first, that he might be able
to overcome ye powerful enemies, Col. 2.15
and fully finish the great work of our salvation.

Secondly, that the personal union of the God head with his humanity might so
dignifie the same, that it might be a sufficient and worthy sacrifice for all
our sins, and make all the actions and sufferings of that person who is God,
Heb. 7.26 28. Act 20 28.2. Cor. 5.19. Ioh. 6.63
to be of infinite desert and value.

Thirdly, that he may ever by his eternal Spirit communicate and apply
himself and his graces unto us; that they may truly be counted ours indeed.
Romans 8.15


Q. What is the office of our Savior Jesus Christ?

A. The office of our Savior Iesns Christ is to be the redeemer and head of us
poor sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15 Acts 4.12 Col. 1.18
his Elect and chosen people; his Church.

Q. What duties does our Savior Christ perform for the due executing of that
his office?

A. He does execute the duty, Heb. 1.1. Luke 1.73
first of a Prophet teaching us in his truth.

Secondly, Heb. 4.14
the duty of a Priest, by the sacrifice of himself reconciling us unto his
Father.

Thirdly, Mat. 2.2. Psalm 2.
the duty of a King, by ruling and defending of us, by the power of his might
and Spirit.

Q. How may our knowledge of these and all other good things be profitable unto
us?

A. By adding unto our knowledge holy obedience. Ioh. 13.17


Q. Wherein does this holy obedience consist?

A. It does stand in a voluntary yielding and giving up of our selves to be
ordered in all things by Gods holy will, Mat. 6.10. Gal. 1.16.
without further reasoning with flesh and blood.

Q. What kinds of obedience are we to perform?

A. We are to perform both active obedience by our doing of his will, Act.
10.35 1. Pet. 2.20
and also passive obedience, by suffering his will to be done upon us.

Q. Which be the kinds of our active obedience, which we are to perform?

A. Our active is both Evangelical, commanded in the Gospel for us to do, for
ye attaining of Grace, which we want: Ioh. 3.18 Ioh. 6.40. Iam. 2.8.


And also Legal, commanded in the Law, which we are to do, that we may
manifest, and continue in us, the Grace of God received.

Q. Which be the parts of Evangelical, or the obedience of the Gospel?

A. Faith and Repentance. Mark. 1.15 Mat. 3.2


Q. What is true saving faith?

A. It is a true knowing, sincere approving, Ioh. 6.69 Phil. 1.10. Heb. 10.22
Acts 4.12.
and certain relying upon the gracious promises of GOD in Jesus Christ only,
for salvation and happiness.

Q. Where is the sum of that doctrine briefly contained, which we are
necessarily to believe?

A. In the Creed, commonly called the Apostles Creeds.

Q. How many Articles does that Creed consist of?

A. It consists of twelve Articles, according to the number of the Apostls,
the supposed makers thereof.

Q. What is the subject matter of the contents of them Articles?

A. It is first of God the Father; in these words: I believe in God the Father
Almighty, etc.

Secondly, of the Son; beginning at these words, and in Jesus Christ his only
begotten Son, etc.

Thirdly, of the holy Ghost, in these words: I believe in the holy Ghost.

Fourthly, of the Church, beginning at these words: the holy Catholic Church,
etc. to the end.

Q. By what notes may a man certainly know, that he has true saving faith?

A. A man may know that he has true faith: Mark 9.24
first, by the habit and internal act thereof, by believing, knowing himself
to believe.

Secondly, by the inward testimony of Gods Spirit to our spirits, according to
the outward testimony of his word. Romans 8.16


Thirdly, by the inward sincere disposition and affection of our hearts to
goodness, and against evil. Psalm. 139.21, 22.


Fourthly, by the good fruits of our faith, in a conscionable practice of al
holy duties, in the whole course of our lives. Iam. 2.17, 18.


Q. What benefit and use are we to make of this saving faith?

A. We are thereby, by believing in our Savior Jesus Christ, to live in ye happy
estate of regeneration in righteousness. Romans 1.17 Gal. 3.11


Q. Which is that righteousness wherein we are to live by faith?

A. It is the righteousness both of justification and sanctification. Romans 4.5
Tit. 2.12.


Q. Wherein does the righteousness of Justification consist?

A. It does consist in the forgiveness of our sins, Romans 4.7, 8. 1. Cor. 1.30
Phil. 3.9
and in the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

Q. Wherein does the righteousness of sanctification consist?

A. It consists in the renewing of us, in all our actions, dispositions,
faculties, and powers of soul and body, Col. 3.10. 1. These. 5.23. Romans 8.2
sincerely in some measure, by the virtue of the holy Spirit, in the death and
resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ powerfully working in us. Romans 6.4,
5.6. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24.


Q. What is true repentance, which is the second part of the obedience of the
Gospel?

A. It is a true change of the whole man from all his former wicked
disposition, Ier. 31.19 2. Tim. 2.25. 2. Cor. 7.10. Acts 2.37. 1. Ioh. 1.9.
Ezekiel. 18.27.28. Jude 23. Esaias 59.2.
purposes and sins, with godly sorrow of heart for them, confessing and
forsaking them with unreconcilable hatred of them, especially for that they are
offensive to our gracious God, and do make division between him and us.

Q. What is our Legal obedience commanded in the Law? Ia^. 2.8.10. Exodus 20.
Psa. 34.14 1. The. 2.12


A. It is the conscionable performance of all that which we are commanded by
the Moral Law of God, briefly comprised in the ten Commandments, the
perfect rule of our sanctification; whereby carefully avoiding all evil
forbidden, and doing all duties commanded, we manifest and retain in faith
and love the grace and virtues of God received.

Q. Into how many tables is this Law of the ten Commandments divided?

A. Into two. Exodus 34.1


Q. What things does the first Table contain?

A. Our duty to God, in the first four Commandments, Thou shall have no other
Gods before me. Mat. 22.38


Q. What is the brief sum of all our duty to God?

A. The sum of our duty to the Lord our God is, that we love him with all our
heart, with all our soul, Mat. 22.37
and with all our mind.

Q. What things does the second Table contain?

A. It does coutaine our duty to our neighbor in the six last Commandments,
Honor thy Father and Mother. Thou shall not kill, etc.

Q. What is the brief sum of our duty to our neighbor?

A. That we do love him as our selves. Mat. 22.39


Q. After what manner should we do all these duties commanded in the Moral
Law?

A. We are to labor to do them in number, Iam. 2.10 Mat. 5.48. Romans 14.23
and every one of them in degree of perfection of faith, and love, in obedience
to God, and care of his glory.

Q. Having hitherto spoken of active obedience, what is now our passive
obedience, which we are likewise to perform?

A. It is a patient and cheereful yielding of our selves, Romans 5.3. Iam. 1.2
Psalm. 39.9 1. Pet. 2.20 Heb. 12.5, 6, 7.11. 2. Cor. 1.8 1. Pet. 3.14, 17. 2.
Tim. 3.12.
without discontent and murmuring to endure and make good use of whatsoever
afflictions it shall please God for his glory, and our trial or chastisement to
lay upon us; either immediately by himself, or mediatly by any other means,
how great or unjust and injurious soever it may seem to us.

Q. Touching this course of our Christian obedience, what dangers are we
especially to take heed of?

A. We should most carefully take heed, that after we yt have begun in this
course, we do not either again, by the deceitfulness of our own hearts, and
temptations of sin, the devil, and the world, make apostacy and fall away
to sin: 2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Ier. 17.9. 2. Tim. 3.7.
or else, through our natural security and sloth, not grow up and go forward
toward perfection, in that course of obedience and grace.

Q. By what means then may we both stand firm, and grow up in the estate of
grace and obedience?

A. By the conscionable and continual use and help of the word of God, the
Sacraments, prayer and discipline.

Q. How are we to use the Word of God, that we may thereby both be kept and
built up? 1. Tim. 4.13. Heb. 2.11 Deuteronomy. 6.7 Psalm. 1.2 Iam. 1.22. Isay 66.2 2.
King. 22.19. He. 4.2 2. The. 2.10


A. We are duly to read it, hear it, confer of it, and to meditate upon it,
with a reverent and conscionable regard thereof, in believing and embracing the
same in love and obedience.

Q. How do the Sacraments stay and strengthen us in this gracious estate?

A. They do it by a more sensible, affectuall and particular signifying,
applying and sealing up unto us, by convenient and fit visible and earthly
elements, Romans 4.11
our Savior Jesus Christ with his benefits, thereby represented and offered,
by his own ordinance in the due administration thereof; than it can be done
by the word alone.

Q. What things do make a Sacrament to be really a Sacrament?

A. The words of the institution, and the consecrated elements, 1. Cor. 11.23,
24.
conioined in the administration of a Sacrament, do make it to be indeed a
Sacrament.

Q. Which are the substantial parts of every Sacrament, which we are to
receive?

A. They are the earthly visible elements, the signs and seals: and Jesus
Christ with his graces signify inuisibly and spiritually offered and sealed up
unto us. 1. Cor. 10.16.


Q. Which be these Sacraments?

A. They are Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Mat. 28.19. Mat. 26.26.


Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is the Sacrament of our regeneration or new birth, in the due
administration thereof representing, offering, and sealing up unto us, by the
outward washing of water purifying the body, the spiritual purifying of the
whole man by Jesus Christ, Tit. 3.5 1. Pet. 3.21 Heb. 10.22
and his blood shed for us, and sprinkled upon our consciences by faith.

Q. What is the Supper of our Lord?

A. It is the Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment, in the lawful
administration thereof, representing, offering, and sealing up unto us, by the
eating and drinking of bread and wine, which does nourish us to live this
temporary natural life, Jesus Christ by virtue and merst of his body and his
blood broken, Ioh. 6.53 1. Cor. 11.26.
shed, and given for us, and by faith received of us, nourishing us to live a
spiritual and eternal life.

Q. How are we to prepare our selves before we come to receive this Sacrament
of the Lords Supper?

A. We are first to examine and try our selves, that we may see our great and
manifold wants both in knowledge and obedience, and in the conscience thereof
to humble and purge our selves by hearty repentance.

Secondly, we are to whet our stomach and affections by prayer and meditation,
that we may come to that spiritual feast with an ardent desire and hungry
appetite after the graces there offered, 1. Cor. ^^.28. Mat. 5.6.
whereof we stand so in need.

Q. What must we be most careful of in the very act of our receiving?

A. We must be careful that we do receive worthily. 1. Cor. 11.27.


Q. How may we receive worthily?

A. That we may receive worthily, we must first receive the outward elements
of bread, and with due reverence and respect of the Lords body and blood, 1.
Cor. 11.29.
whereof they are Sacraments.

Secondly, we must in the same instant act of receiving the elements, lift up
our hearts, by a lively says to apprehend and lay hold upon Christ and his
blessings, then and there verily offered unto us with the signs thereof.

Q. What must we be careful of after that we have received?

A. After that we have received, Mat. 26.30
we should first with fresh cheerfulness be truly thanfull to God for his
blessings there given to and received of us.

Secondly, we should by the virtue of them be strengthened to continue firmly,
and to proceed constantly in the ways and conrse of godliness.

Q. How may we be vpheld and carried on in the course of grace and goodness
by Prayer?

A. By having, Iam. 5.16 Iam. 1.5 1. Tim. 4.5.
by fervent, faithful, and effectual prayer, all needful graces bestowed
upon us, and blessed unto us from God, according to his word.

Q. How should we come prepared to pray?

A. With hearty and feeling affection of what we are to pray for; and with
faith, that we shall be therein heard of God.

Q. After what form and manner should we pray?

A. We should pray according as our Savior Christ himself has taught us in
that form of prayer, Mat. 6.9
called the Lords Prayer.

Q. What things are we thereby to pray for?

A. We are to pray first, for such things as do immediately concern the glory
of God; Mat. 6.9, 10
contained in the first three Petitions of that Prayer.

Sercondly, for such things as do immediately concern our own good,
temporal and eternal; contained in the last three Petitions of that Prayer:
Mat. 6.11, 12, 13.
Give us this day our daily bread, etc.

Q. How should we behave our selves before God in our Prayers?

A. With attention, reverence, Iam. 5.16
and zeal.

Q. How may we be kept and built up in the estate of grace and obedience, by
the exercise of discipline?

A. By having, by the lawful and conscionable execution thereof, 1. Cor. 5.5
1. Tim. 5.20.
our sins redressed or prevented; and our virtue maintained and cherished.

Q. What things should we principally be careful of, in the ordinary use of
these means of the Word, the Sacraments, Prayer, and Discipline?

A. We should be most careful in the ordinary use of them, that we do not
use them only customarily, but conscionably: Luke 8.18.
and that we do not put our confidence and rest in the only very dse of them;
but in God, who gives the blessing by them. 1. Cor. 3.7.


Q. What profit shall we have by a constant preseuering in this estate and
course unto the end?

A. We shall thereby certainly bring glory to God, Ioh. 15.8 1. Tim. 4.8.
and to our selves eternal salvation and happiness.


